URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/79.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:46:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
L'Huillier v State of Victoria [1996] VicRp 79; [1996] 2 VR 465 (4 March 1996)
L'HUILLIER v STATE OF VICTORIA
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA COURT OF APPEAL
BROOKING, CHARLES and CALLAWAY JJA
26, 27 July, 14 December 1995, 29 January, 04 March 1996
Brooking JA
I am pleased to adopt the statement by Callaway JA of the circumstances out of which this appeal arises. I agree with his Honour's
view that the primary judge rightly rejected the defence that offer and acceptance did not correspond, so that no contract came into
existence, and the alternative defence that the contract was discharged by agreement. Certain of the respondent's other arguments
were premised upon the erroneous basis that the contract sued on was a contract of employment, not a contract that the appellant
would be appointed to the offices in question. In my opinion, putting to one side for the moment the defence of "executive necessity",
the judge was right in rejecting all the defences raised.
The primary judge considered that the contract contained a number of implied terms, summarised in the judgment of Callaway JA. I
would prefer to say that the respondent's promise was to appoint the appellant, or cause him to be -
appointed, to the offices of chairperson and chief executive officer for a further term of five years - I do not summarise the promise
as regards remuneration - and that the express language of the contract required the appellant to do the acts the subject of the
suggested implied terms. On this view, the suggested implied terms are no more than a statement of what the express promise required
of the respondent if it was to perform that promise.
Having said that, I wish only to deal with the defence on which the respondent succeeded, that of "executive necessity". This was
not a defence that had been pleaded by the respondent, nor were the pleadings amended when his Honour raised the question. No point
was taken by the appellant, either below or before us, about the state of the pleadings. The failure to plead the matter does have
the result that how the respondent put its case in this regard cannot be ascertained from its written defence. His Honour used the
expression "the doctrine of executive necessity" and held that the result of the doctrine was that the contract was not binding upon
the respondent. The basis of his Honour's conclusion - reached only with hesitation and with evident regret - was that "the agreement
is specifically an agreement by the Crown to exercise statutory powers in the future in a particular manner".
The respondent conceded that at the time of the making of the alleged contract in October 1989 the appellant held office as chairperson
and chief executive officer for a term ending on 6 October 1990 and that it was a condition of his employment as chairperson and
chief executive officer that if he was not to be re-appointed for a further period he should be given "formal notice" of that 12
months prior to the end of his term of employment and that if this notice was not given he should be paid a lump sum to cover the
period during which he was not in government employment, subject to a limit, which was the equivalent of six months' salary. The
validity of this condition of the appellant's employment was not attacked by the respondent and the respondent had given notice in
accordance with the condition that it would not re-appoint the appellant at his then salary.
I say that the validity of this condition had not been attacked by the respondent because of a possible argument that, since the
power to appoint a director conferred by
Transport Accident Act 1986
is a power of appointment for a term not exceeding five years, a condition of the appointment like that just mentioned is invalid
on the ground that the condition indirectly makes the appointment one for a term exceeding five years, with the suggested consequence
that at all events the condition if not the appointment is bad, and because of a further possible argument that the condition is
invalid as indirectly fettering the discretion conferred by the Act, in that when the Crown is considering the making of a further
appointment it is embarrassed by the circumstance that it has bound itself by a condition of this kind. Whether arguments along these
lines would have prospects of success I need not consider. Whatever might have been argued with regard to the former appointment,
by which I mean the appointment of the plaintiff in September 1985 as chief general manager of the Department of Health, when the
term was incorporated by reference in March 1989 so as to become a term of the initial appointment of the plaintiff as chairperson
of the commission, that appointment was for a term of only about 18 months, so that the first argument - the argument that the condition
made the appointment indirectly one for a period in excess of five years - would not be open. But the important consideration for
present purposes is -
that the defendant has never contended that the condition in question was not a binding condition of the appointment of the plaintiff
as chairperson of the commission.
, the respondent had power to appoint the appellant chairperson of the commission by Order in Council. By
, the respondent had power to direct the commission to appoint the appellant (under
as its chief executive officer; this is accepted by the respondent. Thus the respondent had power to appoint the appellant, or cause
him to be appointed, to both offices. By the terms of his existing appointment as chairperson, the appellant was to be given notice
by October 1989 if he was not to be re-appointed in October 1990. If he was not given this notice, he was entitled to be paid what
may loosely be described as up to six months' salary in lieu of notice if he was not in government employment after 6 October 1990.
Where the Crown has by statute power to appoint a person to an office, or to cause the appointment to be made, and there are no statutory
provisions which regulate the exercise of the power, for example by requiring the advertising of the position, or consultation before
the appointment is made, can a contract by the Crown whereby it promises to appoint a particular person to the office in the immediate
future be said to be invalid by reason of the suggested doctrine of executive necessity or on the ground (if this be a distinct ground)
that the contract fetters the discretion given by statute to the Crown? If there are, as I have assumed, no statutory provisions
regulating the exercise of the power, it cannot be said that the contract is or may be invalid as an embarrassment to the exercise
of the discretion, in that it requires an appointment to be made notwithstanding that the statutory preliminaries have not been observed.
In the absence of any statutory requirement of steps to be taken before the appointment, the contract might be said to fetter the
discretion in a sense, but does it do so impermissibly? The discretionary power in the present case is, as regards the chairperson,
one of appointment, but no appointment will be of practical use, and so no appointment will be made, unless the person appointed
has signified willingness to accept the post at the proposed remuneration and on the proposed other terms. The power of the Crown
as regards the position of chief executive officer is one to procure the appointment of a chief executive officer under
An appointment under
, unlike the appointment of a chairperson under
, is not a unilateral act: it is an engagement by means of a contract. As regards the engagement of a chief executive officer, that
will itself be by the making of a contract of employment: the power of the Crown is to direct the commission to make such a contract.
The distinction between the power to appoint and the power to cause an appointment to be made is unimportant. The fact of the matter
is that no person will be appointed, as the appellant was appointed, chief executive officer and chairperson without first having
agreed to accept appointment on certain terms as to remuneration and otherwise. This means that negotiations will have preceded the
appointment, as they did in the present case.
To take a simple case, it seems to me that the making of a contract by the Crown with a candidate for office whereby the Crown promises
to appoint the candidate chairperson and to cause the commission to appoint the candidate chief executive officer, and the candidate
promises to accept those appointments, for a term to commence in the immediate future, does not constitute a clog on the discretion
to appoint but rather facilitates the exercise of that discretion. In a real world, with senior appointments of this kind at substantial
remuneration, it is in the interests of sound public administration for the Crown to be able to bind -
itself, and bind the candidate for office, by the making of a contract which precedes the actual appointment. The candidate may well
have to give notice terminating an existing contract of employment. The candidate may well have some offer of employment from a person
other than the Crown under consideration, or have been offered a position in the public administration of some other State or the
Commonwealth. The "head hunting" of employees as a modern phenomenon has come to sustain a minor industry. The State for its part
may well wish to secure the services of a given person. It may be under pressure to choose between rival candidates, neither of whom
wishes to see a decision deferred, since each has alternative employment available. In a fast moving modern world, where the public
and private sectors compete for employees, and the public sectors within the Federation compete with each other for employees, it
is not inimical but conducive to sound public administration for the State to be able to bind itself, and the applicant for employment,
by contract pending the formal steps necessary for appointment. It might take only a fortnight for those steps to occur, but that
fortnight might be critical in the sense that practical business considerations required that each side be able to act at once on
the footing that the appointment would undoubtedly be made. In a case where the Crown promises to appoint a person to an office for
a term to commence in the immediate future, so that the promise is intended to precede the appointment by only a short time, it may
be wrong to treat the exercise of the discretion as taking place when the power of appointment is exercised. The better view may
be that the discretionary determination is made at, or shortly before, the time of the promise.
In the present case, the additional term of employment was to commence, not in the immediate future, but 12 months after the contract
was made. It may be that in a case with different facts the making of a contract whereby the Crown bound itself to appoint a particular
person to some office at some relatively remote future time could be successfully attacked as inconsistent with the sound exercise
of a statutory discretion. Such a case may be left for consideration until it arises. The present case was unusual, in that the appellant's
existing terms of employment - the validity of which was not challenged by the Crown - were such as to make it desirable for the
Crown to decide, 12 months in advance, whether it would renew the appellant's employment when the existing term came to an end, and
if so on what terms. If the Crown did not do this, it ran the risk that the commission would become liable to pay the appellant up
to six months' remuneration under the "special condition" earlier mentioned. I do not think that the bringing of matters to a head
by the taking of a decision and the making of a contract in October 1989 was inimical to the sound exercise of statutory discretions
so as to make the contract invalid. One of the matters to be taken into account in the exercise of those discretions was the rights
and obligations which had come into existence in consequence of the terms on which the appellant already held office.
What happened in this case may be regarded in either of two ways. It may be said that the contract made in October 1989 required
the Crown's discretion to be exercised in a certain way but that this contractual fetter upon the free exercise of that discretion
was not in the circumstances of this case obnoxious to the principles of public law which will in some cases invalidate a contract
which impinges upon a discretion of the Crown. This approach looks to the discretionary powers, powers exercised when the Governor
in Council makes the appointment and the Minister gives a direction to the commission. It may, on the -
other hand, be said that the discretion is really being exercised in October 1989, when the contract is made, in that the Crown is
then determining how it will in the future exercise its discretionary powers. On the second approach, the taking of the decision
is the exercise of the discretion, and, notwithstanding that the decision is taken a considerable time before the powers will actually
be exercised, the exercise of the discretion is not regarded as premature in the sense that it offends against some principle of
public law.
The distinction is not in my view of significance. On either approach, the conclusion reached is that the Crown was not prevented
by the principles of public law from determining, in October 1989, how it would later exercise the powers in question and from binding
itself by contract, in October 1989, to give effect to that determination. The case is not one in which, in making the contract sued
on, the Crown disabled itself from, or hindered itself in, exercising a statutory discretion to be exercised in the public interest,
by binding itself to exercise the discretion in a particular way in advance of the exercise of the power: Attorney-General (NSW)
(1990) 170 CLR 1
at 17 per Mason CJ. More than this I do not think it is necessary to decide in order to dispose of the point now under consideration.
Callaway JA has in the end founded his judgment on the view that the Crown retained the right not to take the discretionary steps
necessary to secure the appellant's appointment to the two offices if a proper exercise of the discretions dictated that course in
1990. In arriving at this conclusion his Honour begins by distinguishing provisions in contracts which purport to prevent the free
exercise of the discretion at the time required by law: such provisions are void. Unless a contract has that meaning on its true
construction, the relevant provision will not be void; instead it will be read subject to the reservation of a right to decline performance
where public duty so dictates. The reservation is viewed as a term implied by law in contracts of this kind. The present contract
is in the view of Callaway JA. subject to an implied term in this sense, but, since the Crown did not on the primary judge's findings
exercise its right conferred by the implied term, it had no defence to the action for breach of contract.
With respect, I have very considerable reservations about analysing the matter in this way. In the first place, I should wish to
give further consideration to the distinction drawn between contracts which do and contracts which do not on their proper construction
purport to prevent the free exercise of a public law discretion. In the second place, I should wish to give further consideration
to the proposition that the law will imply the term mentioned into contracts of a certain kind. One must first consider what class
of contract will attract the term. The view taken is that the term is to be implied into all contracts which in some sense affect
the future exercise of a common law or statutory discretionary power of the Crown or some public authority but which on their proper
construction do not purport to prevent the free exercise of the discretion at the time required by law. This way of identifying the
class of contract itself depends on the validity of the distinction between contracts which do and contracts which do not on their
proper construction purport to prevent the free exercise of a discretion. Then I should wish to give further consideration to the
term itself, and in particular to its suggested possible effect in the present case.
We are concerned with a contract that the Crown will appoint a particular person, the appellant, or cause him to be appointed, to
two offices. The suggested implied term is that the promise need not be performed if performance would be inconsistent with a proper
exercise of the statutory powers to appoint a -
chairperson and to direct the commission to appoint a chief executive officer. The power of appointment conferred by
is contained in a statute which prescribes no criteria governing the exercise of the power. The power must be at large if its exercise
is to answer the purpose for which it is conferred - to advance the public interest. The Governor in Council is entrusted with authority
to decide who is best fitted to fulfil the duties of the office: cf Attorney-General (NSW) v Quin
(1990) 170 CLR 1
Quin's case at 33 per Brennan J (as his Honour then was). In the same way the power to give directions conferred on the Minister
is a broad discretionary power. I should wish to consider in what sense performance of the promise to appoint or cause to be appointed
would, for the purposes of the implied term, be inconsistent with a proper exercise of the statutory discretions. Let it be assumed
that Cabinet and the Minister administering the
Transport Accident Act 1986
actually determined, after the making of the contract in this case, that it was in the public interest that a particular person,
not being the appellant, should be appointed chairperson and chief executive officer of the commission. Would performance of the
promise then be excused on the ground that performance would be inconsistent with a proper exercise of the discretion? I am not postulating
a case in which some circumstance had arisen or become known showing the appellant to be unsuitable for appointment to the offices.
The hypothesis is only that it is determined by Cabinet and the Minister that it is in the public interest that a particular person
other than the appellant be appointed. If the implied term would operate to excuse non-performance in these circumstances, the value
of the contractual promise might be thought to be slight. But I need not pursue these questions.
Judgment should have been given for the appellant. The primary judge went on to assess damages against the possibility that the appellant
was entitled to succeed. The assessment was in the sum of $51,000. The claim was for a very much larger sum, $467,096. The appellant
has sought to persuade us that the judge's assessment is far too low and that $308,716 should be awarded. The respondent says that
no loss has been sustained.
Before I examine the appellant's claim in more detail, I should mention what the term of the contract concerning remuneration was
in the view of the judge. The allegation in para3 of the re-amended statement of claim is that it was agreed: ... that the plaintiff's
classification and salary for the further term would be determined by the defendant after it considers the recommendation of the
Remuneration Review Committee after the receipt by the Remuneration Review Committee of a study by Cullen Egan and Dell, an independent
assessor. His Honour accepted that such a term did form part of the contract, considering also that by the contract the defendant
was to make its determination by 6 October 1990. The case for the appellant as presented on appeal seemed to me to treat the pleaded
term as subject to the qualification that the classification and remuneration as determined by the respondent were not to be lower
than those offered in the letter from the chairman of the Public Service Board to the appellant dated 4 October 1989. Whether his
Honour was of this view is not, I think, clear, but nothing turns on whether the term concerning determination of remuneration was
subject to the suggested qualification.
It was not clear whether the appellant, on appeal, was contending for the qualification just mentioned or was arguing that the term
concerning remuneration was that the appellant's remuneration should be that of a Chief -
Administrator Level 6 (that being the classification mentioned in the letter of 4 October) or such greater amount as the Government
might determine in consequence of a review by the Remuneration Review Committee following upon an assessment by Cullen Egan and Dell,
the Government being bound to make a determination by 6 October 1990. Again, the distinction is of no importance.
It has at no stage been suggested, as I understand the position, that the term concerning remuneration, however it was to be formulated
in other respects, was a term which obliged the Government to adopt the recommendation of the Remuneration Review Committee. It should
be emphasised that it has at no stage been suggested that a promise that someone would be employed at a salary to be determined by
the promisor, after considering the recommendation of a third person (the promisor not being bound to accept that recommendation),
was not binding and enforceable, and so I say nothing about that point. It may in addition be noted here that senior counsel for
the respondent, on the hearing of the appeal, expressly disclaimed any suggestion that the assessment of damages should be affected
by the power of the Governor in Council, conferred by
, to remove a director of the commission from office at any time.
I return to an examination of the figures. I have said that the appellant's contention before us was that $308,716 should be awarded.
This claim falls under two heads. The first is loss of income and the second is reduced lump sum superannuation entitlement. As to
the first head of claim, $159,765 is claimed for loss of income, representing the gross sum of $519,285 for loss of remuneration
less an amount of $364,520 said to represent what the appellant will in fact earn for the period 1 January 1993 to 6 October 1995.
The gross sum, $519,285, is put forward as what he would have received as remuneration for that period if the contract had been performed.
The principal component of the gross sum is salary; smaller amounts are claimed for use of a car and driver and for telephone expenses
defrayed. Crucial to the estimate is the figure adopted as the salary that would have been payable to the appellant if the respondent
had caused his salary to be determined by 6 October 1990 as required by the contract.
The argument on damages, both below and before us, was mainly directed to what determination in point of amount the Government would
have made with regard to the appellant's salary had it made such a determination by 6 October 1990. His Honour found that if such
a determination had been made it would have been that the appellant be remunerated by receiving the salary and expense allowance
of a CE 4 level officer. His Honour found that as at 31 December 1992 (the day immediately preceding the commencing date of the period
in respect of which damages were to be assessed) the salary of a CE 4 level officer was $116,590 and that the expense of office allowance
was about $6250. His Honour allowed an average annual increase of 3% in salary and allowance for each of the years 1993, 1994 and
1995, rejecting the appellant's contention that an average annual increase of 7.7% should be allowed. Before us, the appellant did
not challenge his Honour's allowance of only 3%.
Having regard to the extent to which the judge's findings were accepted by the appellant, I say nothing about the findings made with
regard to the components other than salary which went to make up the gross sum put forward by the appellant as what he would have
received as remuneration. It is in addition unnecessary to say anything about the rate used by the judge by way of discounting in
order to arrive at present value as at the time of the trial. Nothing -
need be said about the allowance made by the judge for what the appellant would in fact earn for the period 1 January 1993 to 6 October
The real dispute on appeal related to the judge's finding that, if the respondent had determined the appellant's salary and allowances
by 6 October 1990, it would have determined that he be remunerated at a CE 4 level and accordingly that his salary and allowance
would have been $116,590 and about $6250 by 31 December 1992. It was argued on his behalf that, in arriving at his conclusion about
what the respondent's determination made by 6 October 1990 would have been, the judge erred in failing to give sufficient weight
to the amounts actually paid to the appellant, to the desire of ministers of the Crown to see his services retained and to the influence
which those ministers would have had with regard to the determination to be made.
In particular, it was submitted that the judge ought to have found that, if the determination required to be made by 6 October 1990
had in fact been made, it would have been one fixing the appellant's salary and allowances in the total sum of $156,785. In particular,
the appellant relied on the Order in Council of 4 June 1991 re-appointing the appellant as director and chairperson from 7 June 1991
to 31 December 1992 at a total remuneration, including expenses of office allowance, of $156,785. At the time his employment came
to an end the appellant's salary, including expense of office allowance, had risen from $156,785 to $159,885 as a result of a determination
by the Public Service Board that salaries be increased by 2.5%.
The appellant argued that what had actually happened with regard to the determination of remuneration after the making of the contract
sued on bore heavily on what would have been determined with regard to the appellant's remuneration if the determination had been
made, as required, by 6 October 1990. This argument was pressed upon the judge, as was the submission that the appellant had, justifiably,
the support of influential ministers, who were anxious to see his services retained and with that in view to see him suitably remunerated.
The matters upon which reliance is placed by the appellant - and I have mentioned some only of them - certainly merit consideration.
The case is, however, not one in which it can be said that the court should not speculate about what would probably happen when it
has the benefit of evidence about what happened in fact. For the events which actually occurred after the making of the contract
were none of them the event contemplated by the contract. The question for his Honour, so far as presently relevant, was what determination
with regard to remuneration would have gone forward from the Government to the Governor in Council if the respondent had complied
with its promise and so taken steps to have the appellant's remuneration determined by 6 October 1990. What the respondent was likely
to do as regards the appellant's remuneration seems to have been a chancy business. The Minister for Transport signed a memorandum
to Cabinet dated 30 May 1991 recommending the re-appointment of the appellant for a term of three years from 7 June 1991 at a remuneration
of $98,757 with an expense of office allowance of $4907. The Minister gave evidence and had no recollection of the memorandum. That
the memorandum actually went to Cabinet is supported by a file note of 31 May 1991, which refers to re-appointment papers submitted
by the Minister as being with the Cabinet office. Yet notwithstanding the recommendation the re-appointment by the Order in Council
of 4 June 1991 already mentioned was made. The amount of $156,785 determined as remuneration by that Order in Council appears to
have been arrived at by including director's fees of $23,870 and an allowance of $1200 per annum -
received by the appellant as a director of Health Computing Services Pty Ltd, a company of which he had been made a director in consequence
of holding office as chief general manager of the Department of Health. How the appellant came to retain his position as director
of that company long after he ceased to be connected with the Department of Health is not clear. The file note of 31 May 1991 already
mentioned suggests that the continued holding of the directorship was not widely known. His Honour formed the view that it was unlikely
that, if a determination had been made by 6 October 1990, it would have incorporated remuneration being received by the appellant
from the company. His Honour added that the circumstances in which that remuneration became incorporated in June 1991 were not explained
and gave reasons for the conclusion which his Honour reached, namely, that this later development should not be treated as reflecting
the likelihood of what would have happened at an earlier time. More generally, near the outset of his consideration of the matter
of damages his Honour said this: Salary and allowances in fact fixed after 6 October 1990 were much relied upon by counsel for the
plaintiff. No doubt the amounts fixed might cast some light upon what would have happened had a relevant determination been made
by 6 October 1990; but, for reasons hereafter discussed, I doubt that their evidentiary value is high. I shall not summarise the
ensuing passage, in which his Honour gave reasons for concluding that a determination made by 6 October 1990 would have been at the
level of CE 4.
I am not persuaded that his Honour erred in reaching this conclusion. I agree with the judge's view that what happened after October
1990 may not be a reliable guide to what would have happened by 6 October 1990. Both at the trial and on appeal the appellant's counsel
urged the view that full weight must be given to the influential position of ministers who were anxious to retain the appellant's
services. As against that, an important consideration seems to me to be that by early October 1989 the Remuneration Review Committee
(which comprised the chairman of the Public Service Board, the Premier and the Minister for Labour) had decided that the appellant
should be offered re-appointment only at a substantially reduced remuneration - that of Chief Administrator Level 6 - and that this
recommendation of the committee had been accepted by Cabinet, which had authorised the chairman of the Public Service Board to send
the letter of 4 October 1989 notifying the appellant of the terms on which the Government was willing to offer him re-appointment.
The sending of that letter with the authority of the Government was a very significant step and, although the letter went on to accept
the suggestion that a review be undertaken, the letter showed that the Government contemplated as a real possibility that, notwithstanding
the review, the appellant's remuneration would not be increased beyond that proposed in the letter.
I am not persuaded that we should differ from the judge's view that $51,000 was the appropriate sum to award as damages for loss
of remuneration. If the attack on the finding with regard to remuneration fails, that goes a long way towards disposing of the attack
made on the finding that the respondent's breach of contract did not result in a loss of superannuation benefits to the appellant.
I am not persuaded that we should differ from the judge's view on this latter question, and I would allow the appeal and substitute
for the judgment below judgment for the plaintiff for $51,000. I would hear argument on the question of -
interest. In addition, senior counsel for the appellant told us that, regardless of the outcome of the appeal, he would wish to be
heard on the question of costs.
I agree with Callaway JA.
Callaway JA
On 27 January 1993 the appellant instituted proceedings against the respondent in the Supreme Court claiming damages for breach of
contract. The pleadings were to be amended on more than one occasion and ultimately comprised a further amended statement of claim,
further amended defence and further amended reply, all amended pursuant to leave granted on 21 January 1994, together with a rejoinder
dated 26 November 1993. The rejoinder pleaded to the allegations in the amended reply dated 24 November 1993 but stands as the respondent's
answer to the further amended reply. See r36.06(2). After a trial occupying 10 days judgment was given in favour of the respondent
on 9 February 1994. It is from that judgment that the present appeal is brought.
By an Order in Council dated 17 September 1985 the appellant was appointed for a period of five years beginning on 7 October 1985
to the office of Chief General Manager, Department of Health. Special condition 1(4) in the schedule to the Order in Council provided:
In the event that the appointee is not re-appointed for a subsequent period of up to five years, the appointee shall be given formal
notice of this twelve months prior to the end of the term. Where notice is not given the appointee shall be paid a lump sum to cover
the period during which he is not in Government employment subsequent to a maximum payment of the equivalent of six months' salary.
It was common ground at the trial that "not re-appointed" should read "not to be re-appointed" and that "subsequent" where secondly
appearing should read "subject".
In March 1989 the appellant was transferred to the Transport Accident Commission ("the commission"), becoming a director and the
chairman as well as chief executive officer. His appointment as director and chairman was made by the Governor in Council pursuant
Transport Accident Act 1986
as it then stood. His appointment as chief executive officer was made by the commission itself, with the approval of the Minister,
pursuant to
Both appointments were for the balance of the five year period that would expire on 6 October 1990. His remuneration was unchanged.
In formal terms it was paid only in respect of his position as director and chairman with nothing being attributed to the position
of chief executive officer. It greatly exceeded the amount that would ordinarily have been payable to a part-time director and chairman
and in truth reflected the work that was to be performed as chief executive officer.
The Order in Council that had been made in 1985 contemplated the possibility of a transfer. The parties acted on the footing that
the notice requirement in special condition 1(4) should be treated as extending both to the office of director and chairman and also
to the office of chief executive officer. If the Government did not wish to re-appoint the appellant, notice had to be given not
later than 6 October 1989. In fact it wished to re-appoint him at a much lower level of remuneration. Discussions which began in
September 1989 culminated in an exchange of correspondence on 4 October 1989. Mr Keppel, the chairman of the Public Service Board,
wrote to the appellant as follows: -
Dear Mr L'Huillier
ISSUE OF RE-APPOINTMENT TO YOUR PRESENT OFFICE
I understand that a condition of employment connected with your current office is that the Government must give you twelve months'
notice if it does not intend to offer to re-appoint you. That would also apply if the Government wished to vary the terms of your
employment if it was to offer you re-appointment. I have been advised that your current appointment expires on 6 October 1990 and
I have been requested, on behalf of the Government, to advise you that it is not willing to renew your appointment at your present
remuneration of $103,430 per year plus expense of office allowance of $5,870 per year which was carried over from your previous office
of Chief General Manager, Health Department. The current evaluation for the office of Chairman and Chief Executive of the Transport
Accident Commission is Chief Administrator Level 6 ($82,370 per year plus expense of office allowance of $4,907 per year) and I have
been requested to advise you that the Government is willing to offer you re-appointment in your present office at that Chief Administrator
Level 6 rate of remuneration from 7 October 1990 for a term of five years. I have noted your oral advice that Minister Kennan and
you are of the view that the level of Chief Administrator 6 for the combined office of Chairman and Chief Executive, Transport Accident
Commission, should be re-evaluated by an independent assessor and that the Commission is willing to pay for such an assessment. It
has now been agreed that Mr Peter Muir of Cullen Egan and Dell will consult with you and the Office of the Public Service Board about
the classification value of your present office and, after that evaluation, the Board will report to the Remuneration Review Committee
who will consider the issue of the classification to be applied to the office. Of course, should the Remuneration Review Committee
confirm the level of the office at Chief Administrator 6, that would be the level which would apply if you accepted re-appointment
from 7 October 1990.
Yours sincerely,
The plaintiff replied on the same day as follows:
Dear Mr Keppel
I refer to your letter of 4 October 1989 and our previous telephone conversations. I confirm my view expressed in these conversations
that the scope and responsibilities and personal characteristics required for the position of Chairman and Chief Executive of the
Transport Accident Commission have changed significantly from that in the documentation provided to me by Government in 1988 and
early 1989. The comments made by Fergus Ryan in his report on the VEDC are also worthy of consideration. I have discussed the subject
with my Minister, Mr Jim Kennan who has requested my re-appointment to my current position and confirm that he is of the view that
it would be helpful if the remuneration level was reassessed by an independent assessor. I have also discussed the matter with Mr
David White, who negotiated on behalf of the Government the terms, conditions and remuneration in my contract. Mr White has publicly
rated my work in health as outstanding and is supportive of my re-appointment and the assessment process. Previous work for the Government
and the Minister's assessment of such is, in my view, a relevant factor. I confirm that I am pleased to accept the offer of the Government
of re-appointment under the terms and conditions of my contract with the remuneration to be changed from its present level after
1990. In this respect, I will accept the decision of the Government after it considers the recommendations of the Remuneration Review
Committee after the receipt of the study by the independent assessor. I also confirm that the TAC will pay for this assessment by
Cullen Egan. I look forward to meeting Mr Muir after October 25th. -
Yours sincerely,
Leon L'Huillier
The learned trial judge found that Mr Keppel was acting with the authority of the Premier and that those letters constituted a contract
with the respondent. The substance of the contract was that the appellant would be re-appointed as director and chairman and as chief
executive officer for a further five year term beginning on 7 October 1990 and that his remuneration would be that of Chief Administrator
Level 6 or such other amount as the Government might decide following the evaluation by Messrs Cullen Egan and Dell. His Honour considered
that there were terms implied in fact to the effect that the respondent would take such steps as were necessary to determine the
appellant's classification and salary in accordance with the exchange of letters on or before 6 October 1990 and to appoint him,
or procure his appointment, to the relevant offices. Those steps would include an appointment by the Governor in Council as director
and chairman pursuant to s15(2)(a), a ministerial direction pursuant to s15(2)(e) that the appellant would also be chief executive
officer and, if it were needed in the light of s15(2)(e), a ministerial direction pursuant to s14 requiring the commission to appoint
the appellant pursuant to s25.
The appellant's case at the conclusion of the trial was that, in breach of that contract, he was not re-appointed as director and
chairman or as chief executive officer for a five year term beginning on 7 October 1990. Instead a series of appointments to the
office of director and chairman was made by Orders in Council dated 2 October 1990, 6 December 1990 and 4 June 1991, the last of
those appointments being for the period beginning on 7 June 1991 and ending on 31 December 1992. The appellant was not formally re-appointed
as chief executive officer at all, although he continued de facto to perform the duties of that office. The incoming Government elected
on 3 October 1992 declined to re-appoint him, or to procure the making of a further appointment, after 31 December 1992. Although
he sought and obtained other employment, he claimed to have suffered a net loss in terms of remuneration and superannuation entitlements.
The implied terms relating to the appellant's appointment presupposed or assumed that certain decisions would be made in October
1990. Each of those decisions was discretionary in the sense that it had to be made in the public interest and subject to any requirements
expressed by, or implicit in, the
Transport Accident Act
. The appellant's appointment as director and chairman required that ministers would give the required advice to the Governor. Appointment
as chief executive officer required at least one direction by the Minister. The learned trial judge would have decided the case in
favour of the appellant were it not for the fact that the contract appeared to fetter in advance discretionary powers which, if they
were to be exercised in favour of the appellant in October 1990, would have to be exercised by reference to the public interest at
that time. Compare Attorney-General v Goldsbrough (1889) 15 VLR 638 at 649-50 and Rederiaktiebolaget Amphitrite v R ("The Amphitrite")
[1921] 3 KB 500 at 501.
One of the issues in Goldsbrough's case related to an alleged understanding with the responsible Minister that certain land should
be put up for sale on particular terms. Higginbotham CJ. said that the Crown would not be legally bound by such an understanding.
His Honour continued: -
The duty of a Minister of the Crown is to advise the Representative of the Crown. But he has no implied authority to bind himself
or his colleagues as to advice to be hereafter given by him or by them to the Crown, or to bind the Crown beforehand by a promise
that certain advice will hereafter be given to it. The Crown is only legally bound by its acts and by the acts of its Ministers done
by its express or implied authority; it is free from all legal obligation in the nature of a contract until Ministers have given
their advice, and the Representative of the Crown has accepted it. The Amphitrite concerned an undertaking given by the British Government
during the First World War that a vessel would be permitted to leave the United Kingdom. Rowlatt J held that it was not "competent
for the Government to fetter its future executive action, which must necessarily be determined by the needs of the community when
the question arises". Although his Lordship referred to there not being "an enforceable contract" or "a contract for the breach of
which damages can be sued for in a Court of law", is clear from the tenor of the judgment that he considered there was no contract
at all. That follows from the reasoning and was expressly stated at 503.
Apart from the question of damages, the appellant's case in chief before us was directed to what counsel described as "the Amphitrite
doctrine". First, it was submitted that the doctrine is completely unsound and that there is, at most, a prima facie rule of construction
that a contract with the Crown is not intended to fetter the exercise of a discretion in the public interest.Compare Ansett Transport
Industries (Operations) Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1977] HCA 71
(1977) 139 CLR 54
in the dissenting judgments of Barwick CJ at 61-2 and Aickin J at 113. Alternatively, it was submitted that the discretion was properly
exercised when the contract was made in 1989, the role of the Governor in Council in 1990 being purely formal. Reference was made
to FAI Insurances Ltd v Winneke
[1982] HCA 26
(1982) 151 CLR 342
at 352-5, 364-5, 373, 382-3 and 401. It was also submitted that the agreement fell within the "commercial contract" exception mentioned
in The Amphitrite at 503 and that the appellant's appointment as chief executive officer fell within another exception referred to
by Mason J in the Ansett Transport Industries case at 76-7. Counsel adopted the suggestion, to which his Honour referred in that
passage, that the discretion is sufficiently protected if the contract is enforceable only by way of an action for damages. See also
Hogg, "The Doctrine of Executive Necessity in The Law of Contract"
(1970) 44 ALJ 154
; Rose, "The Government and Contract" in Finn (ed), Essays on Contract, 1987, p242-p2423 and Suttling v Director-General of Education
(1985) 3 NSWLR 427
at 446 and 449, affirmed on other grounds: Director-General of Education v Suttling
[1987] HCA 3
(1987) 162 CLR 427.
Although it is convenient to refer to "the Amphitrite doctrine", the problem with which that case was concerned is not restricted
to contracts entered into by the Crown and discretions conferred by the common law. It arises whenever the repository of a discretion
exercisable in the public interest makes a contract that inhibits, or appears to inhibit, the exercise of that discretion at a future
time. As Mason CJ said in Attorney-General (NSW) v Quin
(1990) 170 CLR 1
The Executive cannot by representation or promise disable itself from, or hinder itself in, performing a statutory duty or exercising
a statutory discretion to be performed or exercised in the public interest, by binding itself not to perform the duty or exercise
the discretion in a particular way in advance of the actual performance of the duty or exercise of the power: ... -
No doubt the principle gains some of its force from the circumstance that the discretion has a legislative foundation and it is not
readily to be supposed that the legislature intended that a proper exercise of the discretion in the public interest was to be frustrated,
hindered or circumvented by executive action. Nonetheless there is no reason why the same principle should not apply to common law
powers and functions of the Crown or the Executive when they involve the making of decisions in the public interest.
See also Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Kurtovic
[1990] FCA 22
(1990) 21 FCR 193
at 196, 200-1, 208-10 and 214-16.
I would unhesitatingly reject counsel's first submission that the doctrine is wholly unsound as a matter of principle or that it
can be reduced to a rule of construction. What Aickin J said about "an aid to construction" in the Ansett Transport Industries case
was directed to the distinction between discretionary powers to be exercised for the public good and the executive power to enter
into "commercial contracts". In any event the commercial character of a contract is not determinative. Many such contracts have no
bearing on the exercise of public law discretions but, where they do, the availability of a remedy against the repository of the
discretion does not turn on the character of the contract but on the character of the discretion and whether it has been exercised
by entering into the contract or has been impermissibly fettered.
In the end the present case does not turn on the fact that the appellant's appointment as chief executive officer may fall within
the exception referred to by Mason J in the Ansett Transport Industries case at 76-7, where the Government is a party to the contract
but the officer whose duty it is to exercise the discretion is not. I simply note that his Honour did not endorse the suggestion
that the free and unfettered exercise of a discretion may be sufficiently protected by restricting the plaintiff to an action for
damages, except where there was a statutory foundation. I should have thought that there would be at least some cases where the risk
of such an action would impede, or threaten to impede, that exercise. It would depend on the relationship between the Government
and the repository of the statutory discretion. Even if that person had the required courage and independence to make the right decision
in the public interest irrespective of the Government's exposure to a claim for damages, those affected by the decision might not
feel confident that that was so. As justice must not only be done but be seen to be done, so too there should be no reasonable grounds
for suspecting that administrative decisions are made for extraneous reasons.
The appellant's other submission has more force. There are some common law powers, and many statutory powers, where a discretion
is properly and finally exercised at the time a contract is made. The analogy in private law is with the consideration by directors
of the interests of their company at the time they enter into a long-term contract. In the ordinary course it cannot be argued that
the contract is voidable because they have impeded their freedom to act in the best interests of the company when the contract comes
to be performed. See, for example, Thorby v Goldberg
[1964] HCA 41
(1964) 112 CLR 597
at 605. In the field of public law the time-frame will often be decisive. Granted that an appointment to high office involves the
exercise of a discretion in the public interest, it does not follow that the Crown or the Executive cannot make a binding contract
in the last week of June to appoint a person to such an office on 1 July. Subject to any applicable statute, the question is whether
the discretion was properly exercised at the time the contract was made, not whether the contract would impede the due exercise of
the discretion a few days later. Whether a power is of that kind, and how far -
in advance it may be exercised, depend upon the nature of the power, its purpose and the terms of any relevant statute. The power
exercised in The Amphitrite is an example of a power that could be exercised only when the time arrived for the release of the ship.
It is far removed from the appointment of a senior public servant. The ability to conclude a binding contract, which ex hypothesi
is in the public interest or otherwise a proper exercise of power at the time, confers benefits not only on the other contracting
party but also on the repository of the power. If governments had no such capacity, it would often be impossible to secure the services
of those best qualified. They would choose a binding and lucrative engagement in private enterprise in preference to an unenforceable
promise by the Crown.
Special condition 1(4) in the schedule to the Order in Council dated 17 September 1985 explains the desirability of an agreement
being reached between the Government and the appellant in October 1989 if the former wished to re-appoint the latter on different
terms and conditions. There is much to be said for the view that in those circumstances the provisions of the
Transport Accident Act
were not so inflexible as to prevent the public interest from being considered, and the relevant discretions from being exercised,
a year in advance; but there is an alternative basis on which to decide this appeal, arising out of unchallenged findings made by
the learned trial judge. His Honour found that the respondent's failure to perform the agreement did not indicate any unwillingness
on its part and was "positively satisfied that, had the Minister known that an agreement had been made, and its terms, he would have
taken the necessary steps to bring about the appropriate appointments". Those findings, which are expressed in emphatic terms, appear
at 855, 858, 859, 861, 868 and 871 of the appeal book. In 1990 the Government was more than satisfied with the appellant's performance
and suitability for office.
They are important because of what I conceive to be the true view of the Amphitrite doctrine, or more correctly the law that applies
when the repository of a public law discretion enters into a contract that impedes, or appears to impede, the exercise of that discretion
in the future. It will be apparent from what I have written that I do not treat the Amphitrite itself as standing for a doctrine
of "executive necessity" in the sense that the Government may break any contract, or any non-commercial contract, if it believes
that to be in the public interest. The decision must be read in the light of its facts. The difference between the doctrine the subject
of this judgment and "executive necessity" may be illustrated by a contract involving a discretion duly exercised when the contract
was made. The Amphitrite doctrine would not enable the Government to refuse performance of the contract on public interest grounds.
The doctrine of executive necessity would. Other examples could be given. The difference is important too in considering the controversy
over damages. Compensation to a party detrimentally affected would be a corollary of executive necessity. It is not a corollary of
the non-fettering doctrine of which The Amphitrite is an illustration. A contract by the Government to exercise, or to procure the
exercise of, a public law discretion in a particular way, irrespective of the circumstances, is per se unlawful and could not give
rise to a claim for damages. A contract on the part of the Government that a third party will (without procurement) so exercise the
discretion does not give rise to the same conceptual problems but to the practical issues concerning sound administrative decision-making
to which I have earlier -
referred. That is not to deny that there may be restitutionary rights when the repository of a discretion takes advantage of the
implied term to which I turn next.
I put to one side cases where the discretion is properly exercised in advance at the time the contract is made. What I am about to
say relates only to contracts where the discretion must be exercised in the future in the light of the public interest at that time
or whatever other factors may be made relevant by the nature of the power, its purpose or any applicable statute. In such a case
a provision of the contract will be void if it purports to prevent the due exercise of the discretion at the time required by law.
Goldsbrough's case and The Amphitrite were both cases of that kind. See also Ayr Harbour Trustees v Oswald (1883) 8 App Cas 623 at
634, 638 and 640 and South Australia v Commonwealth
[1962] HCA 10
(1962) 108 CLR 130
at 141. Unless a contract has that meaning on its true construction, the relevant provision will not be void. Instead it will be
read subject to the repository's right not to perform the contract in the future if performance would be inconsistent with a proper
exercise of the discretion. In other words there is a contract, but the repository of the discretion reserves the right not to perform
it if performance is inconsistent with his or her common law or statutory duty when the time for performance arrives.
That approach is preferable to saying that the contract, or the relevant provision, is void. Neither the Crown nor the repository
of any other public law discretion should be privileged in its dealings with the other party to a contract beyond the extent necessary
or expedient to preserve the integrity of the discretion, to serve the purposes for which it is conferred or, in the case of a statutory
power, to comply with the statute. All that is necessary or even expedient may be implied, but no more. The implied reservation of
a right to decline performance where public duty so dictates does not render the contract illusory, for the right is not unqualified.
Compare Meehan v Jones
[1982] HCA 52
(1982) 149 CLR 571
at 589-90. Indeed the purported exercise of the right reserved to the repository would often be examinable on grounds familiar to
administrative lawyers, such as improper purpose, taking irrelevant considerations into account or non-compliance with the express
or implied requirements of the statute itself. It may be that such a reservation could be implied in fact, but it is preferable to
regard it as a term implied by law in contracts of this kind. Compare Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority of NSW
[1982] HCA 24
(1982) 149 CLR 337
at 345-6 and Castlemaine Tooheys Ltd v Carlton and United Breweries Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 468.
Applying that analysis to the facts of the present case, there was a contract but the respondent retained the right to decline to
take the discretionary steps necessary to secure the appellant's appointment to the two offices if a proper exercise of the relevant
discretions dictated that course in 1990. The findings to which I have referred clearly show that the respondent did not exercise
that right and accordingly does not enjoy the defence that that would have afforded to an action for breach of contract. It was obliged
to re-appoint, and procure the re-appointment of, the appellant for five years beginning on 7 October 1990 and did not do so. Accordingly
it is liable in damages unless one of the submissions made on its behalf, apart from those relating to the Amphitrite doctrine, can
be sustained. I turn to the submissions before considering the appellant's challenge to his Honour's assessment of the damages that
would have been payable if the contract had been enforceable. -
The respondent contended that no contract had been concluded between the parties but that, if it had, it was later discharged by
agreeFent. The first submission in support of that contention was that the appellant's letter of 4 October 1989 did not accept the
offer made in Mr Keppel's letter of the same date. It was said that the only offer contained in the latter was to be found in the
third paragraph and that the appellant's reply constituted a counter-offer: in particular the appellant had referred, but Mr Keppel
had not, to the other terms and conditions of his existing contract and the appellant had not accepted Level 6 remuneration but had
stipulated for a level of remuneration to be decided by the Government following an independent assessment. Reference was made to
authorities including Whitlock v Brew
[1968] HCA 71
(1968) 118 CLR 445
at 456, but consensus ad idem, to which Kitto J referred in that passage, is established by comparing what is offered with what is
accepted rather than concentrating on the language of lay letters divorced from the context in which they were written.
There was no difference between the parties concerning the other terms and conditions of the appellant's continued service, so that
nothing turns on the reference to those terms and conditions in one letter but not the other. In my opinion both letters reflect
an agreement that the appellant will be paid Level 6 remuneration or such other remuneration as may be decided by the Government
following the independent assessment to which both Mr Keppel and the appellant referred. That conclusion makes it unnecessary to
consider the circumstances in which a contract may come into existence without any formal offer and acceptance or whether it is significant
that Mr Keppel did not respond to the appellant's letter. Compare Australian Broadcasting Corporation v XIVth Commonwealth Games
(1988) 18 NSWLR 540.
Mr Keppel's silence would be relevant, if at all, to whether a contract was concluded as opposed to its interpretation. See FAI Traders
Insurance Co Ltd v Savoy Plaza Pty Ltd [1993] 2 VR 343. The precise language in which his Honour expressed the terms necessary to
give efficacy to the agreement may be open to criticism, but their general tenor as I have described them earlier in this judgment
conforms with the test in Shirlaw v Southern Foundries (1926) Ltd [1939] 2 KB 206 at 227, to say nothing of more recent authorities.
The second submission was founded on what was said to be the common law rule that "the Crown is not contractually bound to persons
whom it takes into its military or civil service, and may at its will dismiss them or refuse to pay them": Commonwealth v Welsh
[1947] HCA 14
(1947) 74 CLR 245
at 262. See also at 257, 260, 264, 268-269 and 274; Commonwealth v Quince
[1944] HCA 1
(1943) 68 CLR 227
; Kaye v Attorney-General for Tasmania
[1956] HCA 3
(1956) 94 CLR 193
especially at 198; Marks v Commonwealth
[1964] HCA 45
(1964) 111 CLR 549
and Coutts v Commonwealth
[1985] HCA 40
(1985) 157 CLR 91.
The submission did not rely on the Crown's common law ability to dismiss at pleasure but on the view that there is no contractual
relationship at all between the Crown and its servants. Compare Reilly v R
[1934] AC 176
at 179-80; Suttling v Director-General of Education
(1985) 3 NSWLR 427
at 450; Director-General of Education v Suttling
[1987] HCA 3
(1987) 162 CLR 427
at 437 and Hogg, Liability of the Crown, 2nd ed, Law Book Co, 1989, p175, n 72. Counsel for the respondent submitted that, although
most public servants have contractual rights against the Crown pursuant to legislation, the appellant's appointment as a director
and chairman of the commission would not have been of a contractual character. Even if
contemplated a contractual appointment of the chief executive officer, which was not conceded,
did not exclude and perhaps reflected the common law. Compare Marks's case at 586. -
The short answer to that submission is that the appellant was not suing on an alleged contract of service with the respondent but
on a contract that the respondent would appoint him, or procure his appointment, to certain offices on 7 October 1990. Even if one
or both of the appointments themselves would not form part of, or give rise to, a contract with the respondent or even the commission,
no authority was cited to us that would deny the contractual character of the agreement constituted by the exchange of letters. In
other words the Crown may enter into an antecedent contract to appoint to a non-contractual office. The capacity of the Crown or
the Executive to make a contract is not in doubt. See, for example, New South Wales v Bardolph (1934) 52 CLR 455 at 462, 495-6, 501-3,
505-8 and 517-21. There was nothing in the
Transport Accident Act
inconsistent with the antecedent contract on which the appellant relies.
That conclusion makes it unnecessary for me to consider whether the Crown's right at common law to dismiss its servants at pleasure
is part of the Amphitrite doctrine, as Rowlatt J said in a passage at 503-4 to which Latham CJ referred with approval in Fletcher
[1938] HCA 25
(1938) 60 CLR 55
at 67-8, or is sui generis or reflects a refusal by the common law to recognise any contract at all between the Crown and its servants;
whether that right can be bargained away by contract without statutory authority, as the majority of the Court of Appeal considered
in Suttling's case despite its being conferred not pro bono regis but pro bono publico; or whether
contemplate, or at least authorise, a contractual appointment when they are construed in the context of a modern public sector where
senior administrators more and more approximate to senior executives in private enterprise in regard both to the roles they are expected
to perform and the terms on which they are engaged. It is also unnecessary for me to deal with the submissions filed, by leave, after
the close of argument as to whether the commission is within the shield of the Crown or to consider the provisions of the
Crown Proceedings Act 1958
The third submission in support of this branch of counsel's argument was that, if a contract were made in 1989, it was discharged
by agreement. That submission was based on the documents continuing the appellant's appointment as director and chairman from 7 June
1991 to 31 December 1992. It was said that not only did they specify a period different from that contemplated by the exchange of
letters but they also provided for different terms and conditions. In particular the Order in Council dated 4 June 1991 referred
to travelling and other expenses in accordance with public service determinations but did not refer to the terms and conditions of
the appellant's contract mentioned in his letter of 4 October 1989 and reproduced in previous Orders in Council. It was contended
that, viewed objectively, the appellant accepted appointment on those terms in lieu of the appointment for which the exchange of
letters had provided. In my opinion the evidence does not permit of that inference and there was, at most, a variation of terms and
conditions not relevant to the claim litigated in this proceeding.
I return briefly to the reason the respondent is liable in damages. It is important to stress that in this judgment I have used "the
Amphitrite doctrine" as shorthand for a much wider principle and the rules that it generates. Rowlatt J was concerned only with the
Crown and a prerogative power relating to defence that could be exercised only when the occasion arose. The wider principle is that
the repository of a public law discretion must exercise it at the time required by law. -
That time is discernible from the nature of the relevant power, its purpose and, in the case of a statutory discretion, the terms
of the statute. Three cases may then be distinguished:
1. Some discretions may be exercised by making a contract, in which case the discretion is not fettered by the contract but duly
exercised when it is made. The present appeal could be decided on that basis if one were confident that
did not require the decision as to what advice to tender to the Governor, or the decision to give a Ministerial direction, to be
made at or about the time of the appointment to which the Order in Council or direction related. Compare The Watson's Bay and South
Shore Ferry Co Ltd v Whitfeld
[1919] HCA 69
(1919) 27 CLR 268
at 277 and Cudgen Rutile (No 2) Pty Ltd v Chalk
[1975] AC 520
2. A contractual provision to the effect that the repository of a public law discretion will, at a future time, exercise it in a
particular way is void if, and only if, on its true construction it means that the repository will exercise the discretion in that
way in any event. Such a provision is void because it amounts to a promise to exercise the discretion in a particular way even if
that is in breach of the repository's duty to exercise the discretion according to law. That is so unlikely that it follows that
a provision is not to be construed that way unless its language is intractable.
3. In other cases the provision is not void but there is an implied reservation to the effect that the repository need not perform
the contract if performance would be contrary to a proper exercise of the discretion when the time for performance arrives. See,
for example, Commissioner of Crown Lands v Page [1960] 2 QB 274 at 287 and 291-2. The reservation does not give an unqualified excuse
for non-performance, which would render the contract illusory. It affords a defence to an action for breach only where performance
of the contract would be contrary to the proper exercise of the discretion and the right reserved is exercised.
The present case is of the third description. The appellant's claim succeeds because the respondent did not avail itself of the implied
term that would have enabled Ministers to decline to give the required advice to the Governor, or the Minister to decline to give
the required direction, if they had considered that his appointment as director and chairman or as chief executive officer was no
longer appropriate in the public interest in October 1990. The respondent would have had a defence, in my opinion, only if a positive
decision had been made not to appoint the appellant. No such decision was made. It was not suggested that the appellant was precluded
by the course of the trial from relying on the findings to which I have referred in order to show that the respondent could not take
advantage of the Amphitrite doctrine as I have explained it. The appellant's case is exceptionally strong because the learned trial
judge found not only that the breach occurred in October 1990 by inadvertence but also, as I have already mentioned and as his Honour
said on three occasions, in circumstances where the Government would have made a decision in favour of the appellant if the Minister
had been aware of the contract. As Mason CJ said in Quin's case at 18, the public interest necessarily comprehends an element of
justice to the individual. No public interest would be served, and that aspect of the public interest would be denied, by refusing
relief in those circumstances. To adapt what his Honour said in the same passage concerning estoppel, to hold the respondent accountable
for a promise that it would have performed but for inadvertence does not hinder the exercise of the relevant discretions significantly
or at all. -
I turn to the quantum of damages, gratefully adopting the description of the issues in the judgment of Brooking JA. I agree with
his Honour that damages should not be assessed on the footing that, if the contract had been performed, the appellant would have
been receiving the same salary and allowance on 31 December 1992 as were in fact being paid to him pursuant to the Order in Council
made on 4 June 1991 and the subsequent Public Service Board determination. It will be recalled that that was an amount of $159,885.
Prior to 7 June 1991 the appellant had been receiving comparable remuneration from two sources. The Orders in Council made on 2 October
and 6 December 1990 both provided for a salary of $123,994 and an allowance of $5870. In addition the appellant received $23,870,
and a further allowance of $1200, as a director or prime member of Health Computing Services ("HCS"). It is unlikely that such high
levels of remuneration would have been determined in October 1990 if the contract had been performed. On the other hand I think there
is much force in the submissions made on behalf of the appellant to the effect that the learned trial judge gave insufficient weight
to the fact that it was ultimately the Government, not public servants, who would decide his remuneration, to the evidence that the
Government was well satisfied with his performance and to his actual emoluments after 6 October 1990.
Counsel did not analyse the facts of this case in terms of a lost opportunity. Compare Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum NL
[1994] HCA 4
(1994) 179 CLR 332
especially at 355 and 368. As Brooking JA has mentioned, senior counsel for the respondent expressly disclaimed any reliance on
Transport Accident Act
, which provided that the Governor in Council might at any time remove a director from office. The appellant asked us to assess the
remuneration and allowances that would probably have been paid to him if the agreement had been carried out and he had continued
as director, chairman and chief executive officer until 6 October 1995. The respondent asked us to affirm the learned trial judge's
assessment. Doing the best I can with an intractably hypothetical question, I consider that the respondent would probably have received
a salary and allowance equivalent to those established by the Order in Council made on 2 October 1990, that those amounts would have
increased by 2.5% compound at the beginning of each of the second, third, fourth and fifth years and that he would not have received
any remuneration in respect of HCS. I would give counsel an opportunity to address us on the mathematical consequences of that assessment
and its implications for the component of damages relating to superannuation. It was accepted that all his Honour's other findings
in relation to damages should be affirmed.
4 March 1996
Brooking JA
It is inappropriate for me to say anything about the matters dealt with in the judgment about to be published by Callaway JA, beyond
expressing my agreement with what is said on the subject of costs.
I agree with Callaway JA.
Callaway JA
On 29 January 1996 we heard argument concerning the orders that should be made to reflect the reasons for judgment I published on
14 December 1995, in which Charles JA concurred. -
Mr Kaye, QC, who appeared with Mr Martindale for the appellant, informed us that the parties had been in dispute concerning four
issues but had since agreed on two of them, the ruling of the court being sought on the other two.
The first two issues related to the quantum of damages for lost remuneration and interest thereon. The parties had agreed on the
quantum of damages, that interest should be calculated at 13.2% per annum and on the way in which that calculation should be effected.
The third issue related to the way in which superannuation should be treated and the fourth issue was whether the court should make
an order excluding the operation of r63.24 if the resolution of the third issue led to the appellant's recovering an amount not exceeding
After 31 December 1992 the appellant left the moneys to which he was entitled in an account with the State Superannuation Board.
The interest earned down to 24 January 1994 was $47,719.61. Mr Kaye submitted that that was no different from any other investment
by the appellant and should not be brought to account in calculating his damages. The appellant could have withdrawn the moneys to
which he was entitled and invested them elsewhere. As it happens, he chose to invest them by leaving them in the account. In my view
that submission should be accepted.
A question then arises whether an adjustment is required because, or on the hypothesis that, those moneys included an element in
respect of the appellant's position as a director or prime member of HCS. I do not think that an adjustment is called for on that
account. In the first place, the appellant's duties as such a director or prime member were nominal. In truth he was rewarded for
his services to the commission.
Secondly, if the contract had been performed the appellant would have received a superannuation benefit, A. Instead the respondent
provided him with other benefits, B and C, where C represents the benefit in respect of HCS. In my reasons for judgment published
on 14 December 1995 at 485 said that the appellant would not have received any remuneration in respect of HCS. That is equally true,
of course, of superannuation.
The next question is whether lost remuneration and superannuation should be segregated. Not to segregate them will reduce the appellant's
damages, because he received greater superannuation benefits than those to which he would have been entitled if the contract had
been performed in accordance with its terms. Accordingly it is convenient to speak of superannuation being "set off" against lost
remuneration.
Mr Kaye submitted that the damages for lost remuneration should not be reduced in that way. He advanced two reasons. The first was
that no such entitlement on the part of the respondent had been asserted before the learned trial judge or on appeal. The second
was that the appellant's superannuation entitlements were analogous with payments of the kind considered in National Insurance Co
of New Zealand Ltd v Espagne
[1961] HCA 15
(1961) 105 CLR 569.
In my view neither of those reasons should be accepted. Mr Phipps QC, who appeared with Mr Clarke for the respondent, informed us
that the figures the subject of debate in the court below did not call for any submission on what for convenience I am referring
to as a "set off" point. That was so notwithstanding the judge's references to the matter at 871 and 880 of the appeal book. In this
court the point was not debated, but neither was it conceded or waived.
Espagne's case and the other cases to which we were referred are distinguishable. None of them was concerned with two components
of a single -
employment related package. Mr Kaye conceded that, if the package had included a pension that the respondent contracted to pay itself
out of its own funds, the relevant benefits would have had to be taken into account in the assessment of damages. It would be a sacrifice
of substance to form if we regarded the interposition of a trustee and a superannuation scheme as making any difference.
The principal difficulty remaining in calculating the damages is to compare like with like: remuneration was forgone during different
periods between 1 January 1993 and 6 October 1995; the appellant became entitled to a superannuation benefit on 31 December 1992;
he should have become entitled to a different superannuation benefit on 6 October 1995.
In all the circumstances of this case the appropriate course is to discount all the principal amounts to the date of breach which,
as I pointed out during the hearing of further argument, was 7 October 1990. The appellant should then receive interest at 13.2%
per annum on the net principal amount from the date on which the writ was filed, which was 27 January 1993, to the date of the judgment
pronounced by this court.
It follows that the appellant will recover an amount not exceeding one-half of the amount to which the jurisdiction of the County
Court is limited. Prima facie he is therefore entitled only to the costs to which he would have been entitled if he had brought the
proceeding in that court, less an amount equal to the additional costs properly incurred by the respondent by reason of the proceeding
having been brought in the Supreme Court. Mr Phipps submitted that this was a relatively simple contract case, governed not by the
Amphitrite doctrine but by an exception to it and that the ordinary rule should apply.
Provided the discretion is soundly exercised it is inappropriate to elaborate the reasons for an order excluding r63.24. The public
law issues discussed by the judge, by Brooking JA and by me, the other submissions made on behalf of the respondent at the hearing
of the appeal and the nature of the evidence, including that relating to remuneration levels and superannuation, all show that the
proceeding was appropriately brought in the Supreme Court.
Should the parties be unable to agree, it will be necessary to decide an appropriate discount rate. The discount rates used in the
respondent's calculations were not in respect of a period going so far back as 7 October 1990.
Subject to the resolution of that matter, I would propose that the parties be given leave to bring in short minutes of appropriate
orders in conformity with these reasons.
Appeal allowed.
Solicitors for the appellant: Holding Redlich.
Solicitor for the respondent: RC Beazley, Victorian Government Solicitor.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter