URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/265.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Allen v The King [2025] VSCA 265 (31 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCR 2025 0028
EMERTON P and KAYE JA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
7 October 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
31 October 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 265
JUDGMENT APPEALED
DPP v Allen
[2024] VCC 1919
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal – Sentence
– Dishonestly obtain financial advantage by deception from Commonwealth
– Knowingly use false document to dishonestly influence the
exercise of a duty or function of Commonwealth public official
– Applicant
initially sentenced to 3 years and 6 months’ imprisonment to be released
after 20 months pursuant to recognizance
release order – Judge substituted
recognizance release order with non-parole period of 20 months –
Whether judge erred
in substituting recognizance release order with non-parole
period – Whether
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) operates to
specifically exclude failure to make non-parole period in circumstance where
judge made recognizance release order
but had no power to do so –
applicable therefore
section 19AH(1)
not available to judge –
Judge erred in substituting recognizance release order with non-parole period
– Appeal allowed
– Applicant resentenced to 3 years and 6
months’ imprisonment with non-parole period of 17 months.
Sentencing Act 1991
ABC v The King
[2023] VSCA 280
Putland v The Queen
[2004] HCA 8
(2004) 218 CLR 174
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
(2010) 242 CLR 520
DPP (Cth) v Wallace
[2011] WASC 286
(2011) 213 A Crim R 420
[2014] ACTCA 37
, considered.
Ms M J Brown
Respondent:
Mr J O’Connor
Law & Advocacy Centre for Women
Respondent:
Mr S Bruckard, Commonwealth Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
25 June 2024, the applicant pleaded guilty to two charges of dishonestly
obtaining a financial advantage by deception from a Commonwealth
(charges 1 and 4), one
charge of attempting to dishonestly obtain a financial advantage by deception
from a Commonwealth entity
2) and one charge of knowingly using a false document to dishonestly influence
the exercise of a duty or function of a Commonwealth
(charge 3).
20 November 2024, the applicant was sentenced to a total effective sentence of
three years and six months’ imprisonment to
commence from the day of
sentence, with the applicant to be released pursuant to a recognizance release
order after having served
20 months’ imprisonment.
21 November 2024, following a further short hearing, the sentencing judge
replaced the recognizance release order with a non-parole
period of 20
Accordingly,
the applicant was sentenced as
Commencement
Dishonestly
obtain a financial advantage by deception from a Commonwealth
years’ imprisonment
years 6 months’ imprisonment
20 November 2024
dishonestly obtain a financial advantage by deception from a Commonwealth
years’ imprisonment
years’ imprisonment
Knowingly use a
false document to dishonestly influence the exercise of a duty or function of a
Commonwealth public official
years’ imprisonment
year imprisonment
Dishonestly
obtain a financial advantage by deception from a Commonwealth
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
Effective Sentence:
3 years and 6
months’ imprisonment
Pre-sentence
Detention Declared:
Section 6AAA
Total Effective
Sentence 6 years’ imprisonment.
Period 4 years.
Relevant Orders:
order requiring payment of $354,490 to the Australian Taxation
applicant now seeks leave to appeal the sentence on the following
Ground 1: The learned sentencing judge erred in imposing a head sentence and
non-parole period in circumstances where his Honour
had initially imposed a
recognizance release order that was impermissible at law.
Ground 2: The total effective sentence is
manifestly excessive when considering the impact the applicant’s
incarceration will
have on her dependants.
Ground 3: Fresh evidence should be admitted as to
the effect the applicant’s incarceration has had on her dependants and the
applicant re-sentenced in light of that evidence.
the reasons that follow, the application for leave to appeal will be granted and
the appeal allowed on ground 1. The applicant
will be resentenced to a total
effective sentence of 3 years and 6 months’ imprisonment and a non-parole
period of 17 months
will be fixed.
Summary of offending
offending occurred between January 2019 and May 2020, when the applicant was
still living with her ex-husband, Barry Allen. The
applicant and Barry have
seven children together, including Rodney, who was 19 years old at the time of
the applicant’s offending.
December 2019, the applicant and Barry started a business together called
‘Flowers Horse Stud’. On 3 January 2020,
the applicant registered
Barry for GST using the contact email address barrystallem@gmail.com
(‘Barry email address’).
6 February 2020, the applicant registered Rodney for GST as a sole trader using
the contact email address rodneycharlesallen@gmail.com
(‘Rodney email
address’). Rodney was not working as a sole trader and was unaware that he
had been registered for an
ABN and GST.
applicant nominated herself as the authorised contact with the Australian
Taxation Office (‘ATO’) for both Barry and
Rodney. She used the
email address liv2980@gmail.com.
18 January 2019 and 27 April 2020, the applicant filed a total of 23 Business
Activity Statements with the ATO declaring total
sales, GST collected on sales,
GST on purchases made by the businesses and total GST refunds said to be owed to
Barry and Rodney.
Based on those
Statements, the ATO paid out a total of $446,179, including amounts received as
credit on Barry’s ATO account.
Excluding the amounts received as credit,
the applicant was paid $351,490 in GST refunds. The GST refunds were paid into
accounts: an ANZ bank account opened on 8 January 2020 in the name of
Barry Stephen Allen; an ANZ bank account opened on 22 November
2012 in the name
of Barry Stephen Allen; and a Commonwealth Bank account opened on 6 February
2020 in the name of Rodney Charles
27 January and 28 April 2020, the applicant lodged a further seven Business
Activity Statements with the ATO declaring total
sales, GST collected on sales,
GST on purchases made by the businesses and total GST refunds said to be owed to
Barry and Rodney.
The total refund
claimed in the further seven Statements was $236,528. The ATO did not pay the
13 March 2020 and 16 March 2020, the ATO sent numerous emails to the Rodney
email address asking Rodney to provide particular
documents for the purpose of a
review that it was conducting.
26 March 2020, the applicant, posing as Rodney, sent three invoices and a copy
of an ANZ bank statement in Rodney’s name
to the ATO from the Rodney email
address in response to the ATO’s request for documents. The ATO attempted
to contact the suppliers
named in the invoices in order to verify the
transactions, but could not locate two of them and determined that the suppliers
not exist. On 6 April 2020, the ATO received information that the account
number on the bank statement did not exist. The ATO determined
that the invoices
and bank statement were false documents designed to deceive the ATO into
believing that Rodney was conducting a
business in order to lodge the claims for
GST refunds.
4 May 2020, the applicant lodged with the ATO a JobKeeper registration form and
an application for JobKeeper payment in Rodney’s
name, seeking two
fortnightly payments for a total of $3,000. The registration form stated that
Rodney, operating as a sole trader,
was eligible for the payment as his business
had had a 30 per cent fall in turnover. It requested the payments be deposited
the bank account referred to at [11] in the name of Rodney, and gave the
May 2020, the
application was processed and on 14 May 2020, $3,000 was paid to the
ATO investigation and
January 2020, the ATO commenced a review into Barry’s business records and
in February 2020, issued a Notice of Audit letter
addressed to Barry. On 5
February 2020, the applicant sent an email to the ATO from the Barry email
address asking that all correspondence
take place by email. The applicant,
posing as Barry, emailed the ATO complaining about the audit and threatening to
make complaints.
The ATO completed its audit on 30 October 2020 and concluded
that Barry was not conducting a business and was not entitled to any
ATO carried out a similar investigation in relation to Rodney. In March 2020,
the ATO commenced a review into Rodney’s business
records. The ATO
exchanged numerous emails with the applicant, posing as Rodney via the Rodeny
email address, requesting the provision
of documents. The ATO received a number
of complaint emails from the applicant posing as Rodney, but none of the
requested information.
On 30 October 2020, the ATO completed its audit and
concluded that Rodney was not conducting a business and was not entitled to any
of the GST refunds.
applicant participated in a record of interview on 28 January 2021, during which
she made full admissions. She said that she committed
the offending out of
desperation as she did not want her parents to find out that her various
businesses has failed. She used the
money to buy horses and horse feed, to lend
money to her children and her parents, and to run the business.
Procedural history
20 November 2024, following a plea hearing that took place in June of the same
year, the sentencing judge imposed a term of imprisonment
of 3 years and 6
months and ordered the applicant be released on a recognizance release order
after serving 20 months of the sentence.
His Honour gave careful and
detailed reasons for sentence which are summarised below.
pursuant to
Crimes Act 1914
) and this Court’s reasoning in
pseudonym) v The King
recognizance release order is not an available sentencing option where the head
sentence imposed is greater than three years’
imprisonment.
the same day, the Director notified the sentencing judge’s chambers of the
error in the sentence. The matter was listed for
a mention the next day.
21 November 2020, parties made submissions about the sentencing error. The judge
advised the parties that, pursuant to
proposed to ‘substitute’ the 20 month recognizance release order
with a non-parole period of 20 months.
for the applicant objected to the proposed course, and the following exchange
COUNSEL: In my respectful submission, Your Honour, that would work a
significant unfairness on Ms Allen.
HIS HONOUR: Why?
COUNSEL: Who was sentenced yesterday on the basis that she had certainty around
a release date, certainty of release after 20 months
minus six days in
circumstances where she had the conditions of the recognizance release order
explained to her and she signed into
that order and she received ...
HIS HONOUR: But hold on, if the sentence that I imposed was unlawful, if I
wasn’t able to do it then, its nothing. It’s
a nullity and its got
to be corrected and there’s power under the
correct that.
COUNSEL: What I say, Your Honour, though is that Your Honour is essentially
today proposing to impose a fundamentally different
disposition to that which
was Your Honour’s stated intent yesterday.
HIS HONOUR: Why is it fundamentally different?
COUNSEL: Because a non-parole period, by fixing a non-parole period, there is
no certainty of any release date for Ms Allen and
Your Honour must assume that
she would serve every day of the head sentence.
Ultimately,
the judge sentenced the applicant to a head sentence of 3 years and
6 months’ imprisonment and fixed a non-parole
period of 20 months. In
supplementary sentencing reasons his Honour said:
It was put to me that Ms Allen should have a period of certainty and that such
a sentence substitution would be an injustice on
her. There is no injustice in
correcting an unlawful sentence, so I do not accept that submission by [defence
counsel]. The principles
for setting a non-parole period in the face of a head
sentence, or a recognizance release order are similar. They are designed to
serve the interests of the community by allowing an offender to serve part of
their sentence in the community, in the event that
they are allowed conditional
release by the Parole Board.
Record of Orders dated 21 November 2024 records:
Pursuant to
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), the sentence order of
20/11/2024 is amended by the substitution of a non-parole period of 20 months
for the recognizance release
Sentencing reasons
sentencing judge described the offending as serious, having regard to the very
considerable sum of money fraudulently claimed
and attempted to be claimed. The
offending was persistent, taking place over a period of some 16 months. It
involved the use of false
identities, impersonation and the manipulation of
email addresses and bank accounts.
The judge found that the offending was ‘motivated by greed rather than
judge described the conduct the subject of charge 3 (knowingly using a false
document) as ‘calculated conduct in the face
of the investigatory action
by the ATO’ and the offending the subject of charge 4 as a ‘blatant
grab for cash under the
newly created covid emergency
applicant has a prior conviction for obtaining property by deception, for which
she was fined $1,000 in June 2022. The judge considered
that this had some minor
relevance to her prospects of rehabilitation. He ignored the convictions that
she received as a child and
found dishonesty offending in 2001 to be of little
relevance given that she was 21 years old at the time of the
judge had regard to the reports of Carla Lechner, clinical psychologist, in
respect of the applicant’s personal circumstances.
The judge noted that
the applicant had reported to Ms Lechner that throughout her childhood she
experienced physical and sexual abuse
at the hands of her father and that this
destroyed her life. She was in an abusive relationship in her late teens and
early twenties.
She later met Barry and the pair married when she was 21. She
also experienced physical and emotional abuse in the relationship with
She was the sole breadwinner in the family and worked in a range of jobs,
including in a piggery, managing a local hotel and
judge noted that the applicant and Barry have seven children together aged
between seven and 25. The children suffer behavioural
and a variety of mental
health issues, including anxiety, an eating disorder and an intellectual
disability. For her part, the applicant
has been engaging in self-harm and
experiencing suicidal
applicant also has a three-year-old daughter who ‘is in the custody of her
father and [the applicant’s] new
judge was satisfied that a sentence of imprisonment would have a very
significant impact on the applicant’s psychological
health and would be
more burdensome given her mental health
conditions.
Not only have you had a traumatic childhood yourself, but it is clear from what
you have put to Ms Lechner that the various conditions
of your children ... has
had a major impact on you. Thus, your separation from your children will have a
major impact on you as well
as on them. The separation of you from your
three-year-old daughter is also a major consideration. It will impact on you and
impact on your daughter.
judge also referred to Ms Lechner’s initial report which indicated that
the applicant was suffering from major depressive
disorder at the time of the
offending and that her medication regime was not improving her symptoms. She
also experienced symptoms
of post-traumatic stress disorder. Ms Lechner found
that the applicant was severely psychologically distressed and at risk of
judge noted that Ms Lechner’s later reports contained similar conclusions,
but also that the applicant’s mental health
had deteriorated as the matter
had moved to resolution. The applicant had begun to show symptoms of borderline
personality disorder.
judge referred to Ms Lechner’s finding that the applicant’s
depressed mood ‘undermined [her] judgment and decision-making
at the time
of the offending’.
to the relationship between the applicant’s mental health and her moral
culpability, the judge accepted the prosecution submission
that the persistence
and sophistication involved in the offending had to be considered when
determining whether there was a causal
link between the offending and the
applicant’s mental impairment. However, he accepted that the
applicant’s ‘depressed
mood and sense of failure’, together
with her desire to gain approval, might provide an explanation for her
persisting with
the misguided business venture and the offending to finance that
considered the competing submissions, the judge found that there should be some
reduction in moral culpability by reason of
the applicant’s underlying
mental health conditions.
judge also considered it appropriate to ‘lessen the considerations of
general deterrence’ given the applicant’s
upbringing’, including sexual and physical abuse, her abusive marriage and
the vicissitudes that she faced
He found the
considerations of specific deterrence had some relevance given the persistence
of the offending.
to the applicant’s prospects of rehabilitation, the judge found that if
the applicant availed herself of the specialised
treatment and assessment
recommended by Ms Lechner, her prospects could be considered to be
reasonable. The judge also took into
account the salutary impact of the
proceedings and any sentence on the applicant, her prior work history, her
concern for the welfare
of her children, her early plea of guilty and her
insight into her offending.
judge accepted that the applicant was remorseful for the offending and gave this
weight in the sentencing synthesis, as he did
for her plea of guilty and
cooperation with the police. He also took into account the fact that the
applicant had had the matter
hanging over her head since January 2021 and that
she had not re-offended during this
the principles set out in
DPP (Cth) v
held that in sentencing the applicant for the relevant offences, ‘general
deterrence, although tempered, must play
a prominent role’ and
‘[p]ersonal circumstances carry less weight but ... are not to be
The judge also
had regard to comparable cases which showed that ‘the quantum of offending
is a significant matter, and personal
considerations are given less prominence,
and denunciation plays an important
1 is that the judge erred in imposing a head sentence and non-parole period in
circumstances where his Honour had initially
impermissibly imposed a
recognizance release order.
ground concerns the judge’s decision to set aside the recognizance release
order and in lieu fix a non-parole period. It
raises the issue of whether
, or alternatively
Sentencing Act 1991
, provides a mechanism enabling the sentencing judge
to correct an error by setting aside an unlawful recognizance release order and
replacing it with a non-parole period.
observe that although the judge purported to correct the error and make the
substitution under
, it was common ground
was inapplicable, as it is limited to the correction of
technical errors and defects in form, and to clearing up ambiguities. The
in question was neither technical nor a defect in form. There was no ambiguity
in the order that was made.
enables the Court to hear an application to set aside any
non-parole period or recognizance release order that was not properly fixed
made and fix a non‑parole period or make a recognizance release order. It
is in the following form:
Failure to fix non-parole period or make recognizance release order
(1) Where a court fails to fix, or properly to fix, a non-parole period, or to
make, or properly to make, a recognizance release
order, under this Act:
(a) that failure does not affect the validity of any sentence imposed on a
person; and
(b) the court must, at any time, on application by the Attorney‑General,
the Director of Public Prosecutions of the person,
by order, set aside any
non-parole period or recognizance release order that was not properly fixed or
made and fix a non-parole
period or make a recognizance release order under this
(2) A court shall not, for the purposes of subsection (1), be taken to have
failed to fix a non-parole period in respect of a sentence
or sentences in
respect of which it has made a recognizance release order or to have failed to
make a recognizance release order
in respect of a sentence or sentences in
respect of which it has fixed a non-parole period.
div 4 of the
, which provides for the fixing
of non‑parole periods and the making of recognizance release orders.
Sections 19AB
form part of that regime.
November 2015,
has required a single non-parole period to be fixed
in respect of any federal sentence that exceeds, or federal sentences that in
aggregate exceed, three years. A court may decline to fix a non-parole period if
it is satisfied that it is not appropriate to do
so, but must state its reasons
for declining and cause the reasons to be entered in the records of the Court.
Prior to November 2015,
the Court could fix a non-parole period
recognizance release order where there was a term in excess of three
requires a single recognizance release order to be made where a court
imposes a federal sentence that does not exceed, or federal
sentences that in
aggregate do not exceed, three years. The Court must not fix a non-parole period
when required to make a recognizance
release order.
, this Court held that the
enables a recognizance
release order to be made only where the sentence to be imposed is less than
three years’ imprisonment.
Recognizance release orders and non-parole periods are therefore mutually
is plain that the judge, having imposed a term of imprisonment in excess of
three years, failed to fix a non-parole period as required
The question is whether the error could be cured by the sentencing judge under
, having regard to
, which appears to limit the
availability of the mechanism provided in
respondent relies, in the alternative, on
Sentencing Act
State provision that would need to be ‘picked up’ and applied as a
law of the Commonwealth by the operation of
Judiciary Act 1903
104B relevantly provides:
Court may reopen proceeding to correct penalties imposed contrary to
(1) This section applies in a criminal proceeding (including an appeal) in which
a court has—
(a) imposed a penalty that is contrary to law; or
(b) failed to impose a penalty that is required to be imposed by law.
(2) The court may, at any time, reopen the proceeding on its own motion or on
application by a party and, after giving the parties
an opportunity to be
(a) may impose a penalty that is in accordance with the law; and
(b) if necessary, may amend any conviction or order.
Applicant’s
submissions
applicant submits that
did not permit the judge
to correct an error of the type that was made, and that a non-parole period is
not a ‘substitute’
for a recognizance release order. The error made
by the sentencing judge did not fall within the scope of
specifically excludes the situation that arose in this matter.
applicant submits that sub-ss (1) and (2) of
anticipate scenarios in
which a sentencing court has imposed a recognizance release order and not a head
sentence; or, in the alternative,
a head sentence that needs a non-parole
period. It provides, however, that where a court has imposed one release
mechanism, it cannot
be taken to have failed to impose the other release
mechanism. This is because there is no proper exercise of federal sentencing
power in which both a recognizance release order and a non-parole period could
be imposed — the two sentencing scenarios are
mutually exclusive.
for the proposition that a non-parole period can be imposed as a
‘substitute’ for a recognizance release order, the
applicant submits
that recognizance release orders are not simply an alternative way to impose a
term of imprisonment when sentencing
a federal offender. The difference between
the imposition of a recognizance release order and the imposition of a
non-parole period
is ‘more than a matter of mere form’. When
imposing a head sentence and non-parole period, the applicant submits, a
judge must proceed on the basis that the offender may, or will, serve
the entirety of the head sentence, and should not speculate
as to the prospects
that an offender might be granted parole at the completion of their non-parole
period. On the other hand, under
a recognizance release order, a sentencing
judge determines the precise period of time an offender must spend in
applicant submits that the sentence imposed on 20 November (with the
recognizance release order) reflected the judge’s intention
applicant spend 20 months in custody. The sentence imposed on 21 November
(with the non-parole period) was such that the
applicant could spend the full 36
months in custody.
distinction, the applicant submits, between a recognizance release order and a
non-parole period is the manner with which
breaches are dealt with. An offender
who breaches a recognizance release order will return to the sentencing judge,
who will determine
which of the five options prescribed by
are appropriate. An offender who breaches parole by further
offending will have parole revoked, and an offender who breaches the
of parole (otherwise than by offending) may have parole revoked, be arrested and
brought before a ‘prescribed authority’,
who may then direct that
the offender be imprisoned for the unserved part of the sentence.
applicant further submits that
Sentencing Act
assistance to the respondent. In determining whether
Judiciary Act
operate to ‘pick up’ a State or Territory law,
it is necessary to consider whether the Commonwealth law has the effect
excluding the application of the State or Territory law. A State or Territory
law will not be picked up if a Commonwealth law
expressly or by implication
makes a contrary provision or if there is a Commonwealth legislative scheme
which is complete upon its
face and leaves no room for the operation of the
State and Territory law. According to the applicant, the most obvious example of
the latter in a Victorian context relates to the imposition of combination
sentences. That sentencing option has been held not to
have been picked up by
the operation of the
Judiciary Act
because the provisions in the
are said to cover the field for the imposition of terms of
imprisonment.
The applicant
submits that the reasoning that operates to exclude the use of combination
sentences for federal crimes applies in
the instant case. That is because there
are two specific provisions,
, which provide for the correction
of sentencing errors. Furthermore, the fact that a State law that relates to
procedure or sentencing
may have a broader operation than the provisions under
the federal regime is not, in itself, a reason to conclude that that State
that has broader application is necessarily picked up by the
Respondent’s
submissions
respondent submits that the course taken by the sentencing judge in substituting
a non-parole period for the recognizance release
order was authorised by both
Sentencing Act
— or by at least one or other of those sections. Section 19AH(1) applies
where ‘a court fails to fix, or properly to
fix, a non‑parole
period, or to make, or properly to make, a recognizance release order, under
this Act’. An application
having been made under this section, the judge
was required by s 19AH(1)(b) to set aside any recognizance release order
not properly made and to fix a non-parole period.
respondent submits that contrary to the applicant’s submission, s 19AH(2)
does not exclude the application of s 19AH(1)
in this matter. There is no basis,
the respondent submits, to construe the words ‘recognizance release
order’ in sub-s
(2) as including a recognizance release order that was
made contrary to law. Such a construction would not achieve any apparent
purpose and would stand in the way of the correction of clear
respondent submits that s 19AH(2) simply defines the scope of s 19AH(1) without
purporting to limit the scope of any available
general power of correction. The
sentencing judge therefore acted within power to re-open proceedings, recall the
orders of 20 November
2024, and ‘substitute’ a non-parole period
(being a sentence in accordance with s 19AB(1)) for the recognizance release
order initially made.
to the difference between a recognizance release order and a non-parole period,
the respondent submits that the correction of the
error necessarily involved
substantive amendment of the original sentencing orders. The sentencing judge
was not required to artificially
reduce the head sentence below the point he
considered appropriate to reflect the objective gravity of the offending and to
general deterrence in order to allow a recognizance release order to be
imposed. Although there are practical differences between
a recognizance release
order and a non-parole period, both types of orders require the sentencing judge
to determine the minimum
period justice requires the offender to serve.
Sentencing Act
, the respondent submits that it
provides an independent and sufficient statutory basis for the substitution made
by the judge, even
if s 19AH is held not to have authorised such an
approach. The respondent submits that
Sentencing Act
is picked up and applied as a law of the Commonwealth by
Judiciary Act
Martin CJ in the
Supreme Court of Western Australia determined that
Sentencing Act
(WA) — a provision analogous to s 104B — applied as it was
picked up in this way. His Honour held that no provision of
was inconsistent with the operation of the general power of correction
provided by the Western Australian
A similar approach
was adopted by the Australian Capital Territory Court of Appeal in
in relation to a
correction power in similar terms to s 104B.
respondent submits that the term ‘contrary to law’ in
s 104B(1)(a) encompasses a penalty that is ‘beyond the
power of the
court to impose because some precondition for its imposition is not
satisfied’.
recognizance release order in this case is such a penalty. The sentencing judge
therefore had the power to reopen the proceedings
and impose the non-parole
is convenient to begin with the amendment power in the Commonwealth legislation:
serves: (a) to protect the validity of a sentence that has been imposed;
and (b) to require the Court, on application by nominated
persons, to set aside
any non-parole period or recognizance release order ‘that was not properly
fixed or made’ and fix
a non-parole period or make a recognizance release
only applies where the Court has failed to fix, or properly to fix, a
non‑parole period; or the Court has failed to make, or
properly to make, a
recognizance release order.
this case, the judge failed to fix a non-parole period as he was required to do
provides, relevantly, that for the
purposes of
, a court shall not be taken to have failed to fix a
non-parole period in respect of a sentence in respect of which it has made a
recognizance release order. In other words, where the Court has made a
recognizance release order, it shall not be taken to have
failed to fix a
non-parole period.
judge made a recognizance release order, or at least purported to do so, in
respect of the sentence of 3 years and 6 months’
imprisonment that he had
imposed. Therefore, by reason of
, the judge did not fail to fix a
non-parole period for the purposes of enlivening
Furthermore, he
did not fail to make, or properly to make, a recognizance release order, because
he was under no obligation to do
so. Indeed, he had no power to do so. It
follows that, on the plain meaning of the text of
was not available to the judge to enable him to substitute a non-parole period
for the recognizance release order that he had made.
the respondent submits that the words ‘in respect of which it has made a
recognizance release order’ in
must be understood, in light
of the remedial purpose of the legislation, to refer only to a recognizance
release order that was made
in accordance with law. In this case, the
recognizance release order made by the judge was made without power and in
contravention
Section 19AH(2)
does not operate in
respect of an invalid recognizance release order such as the one imposed here.
It does not deem the judge’s
failure to fix a non‑parole period not
to be a failure to fix a non-parole period for the purposes of enlivening
Section 19AH(1)
applies and the judge was required, upon
application by the respondent, to set aside the previous — incorrect
and make a new — correct — one.
do not accept this submission.
Section 19AH(2)
can have no application where the
recognizance release order that is sought to be set aside pursuant to
s 19AH(1)(b)
is a valid order. Given the scheme of
div 4, it is not
possible to fix a valid non-parole period in lieu of a valid recognizance
release order. If the recognizance release
order is valid, that is because the
sentence imposed does not exceed three years. For the non‑parole period to
be valid, the
sentence imposed must be more than 3 years. They are mutually
is somewhat opaque. However, in our view, by its terms,
serves to prevent the substitution of one form of release
mechanism for the other, notwithstanding that the form of release mechanism
imposed may have been imposed contrary to law.
question then arises as to whether s 104B of the
Sentencing Act
could have been used to correct the judge’s mistake. In our view, it could
Putland v The Queen
High Court considered whether
excluded the
operation of part of the sentencing legislation of the Northern Territory.
Gleeson CJ stated that
Judiciary Act
would not pick up and
apply a state law if a federal law ‘expressly or by implication made
contrary provision’, or if
there were a federal legislative sentencing
scheme which was ‘complete upon its face’ and could ‘be seen
left no room’ for the State
While dismissing the
proposition that
‘covered the
field’ with respect of sentencing for federal offences, Gummow and Heydon
JJ observed that
intended to make exhaustive provision on
particular subjects, an example of which was div 4 of
In support of this
proposition, their Honours referred to the Explanatory Memorandum to the
Legislation Amendment Bill (No 2) 1989
(Cth), which introduced
stated that
div 4 established ‘a separate regime for fixing federal
non-parole periods rather than relying on applied State or Territory
legislation’.
Hili v The Queen,
the High Court confirmed that
div 4 of the
exhaustive provision for the fixing of non‑parole periods and the making
of recognizance release orders:
[I]t is to be observed that State and Territory provisions relating to the
fixing of the period an offender must serve in prison,
before being released, or
eligible for release, are not picked up by s
. Division 4 of Pt
concerning the fixing of non‑parole periods and the making of recognizance
release orders with respect to federal offenders,
makes exhaustive provision for
the subject with which it deals. Because it makes exhaustive provision for that
subject, State or
Territory laws relating to the fixing of non‑parole
periods are not picked up by, and therefore are not applied by, s
those principles, it is clear that s 19AH, in particular, is a provision
enacted by the Commonwealth legislature to deal
particularly, and we consider
exhaustively, with the power of the sentencing judge to revisit a non-parole
period that has been fixed
or a recognizance release order that has been
this context, we observe that neither of the authorities relied on by the
respondent concerns pt 1B div 4 provisions. They are
of no assistance.
follows that both the order made on 20 November 2024 and the order made on
21 November 2024 were made contrary to law. Those orders
must be set
applicant therefore stands to be resentenced.
Resentencing
resentencing the applicant, we have taken into account both the submissions made
by the applicant and the respondent in relation
to the ground of manifest
excess, and the materials sought to be relied upon by the applicant as new or
fresh evidence. We observe,
however, that the new or fresh evidence tells us
very little about the actual circumstances of family hardship in this case.
, the sentencing court must have regard
to the non-exhaustive list of matters set out in that section, one of which is
the ‘probable
effect that any sentence or order under consideration would
have on any of the person’s family or
dependants’.
There is no
requirement that hardship to family and dependents be exceptional.
take into account the hardship visited on the applicant’s dependents by
her imprisonment. We understand from Ms Lechner’s
reports that three of
the applicant’s children have special needs or vulnerabilities: they
suffer variously from anxiety, an
intellectual disability and an eating
disorder. Most importantly, the applicant’s youngest child is only three
years old. It
is uncontroversial that separating a young child from his or her
primary caregiver is sub-optimal and may cause significant detriment.
be hoped that the child can be re-united with her mother in custody.
resentencing the applicant, we have also taken into account in a general way the
applicant’s own disadvantaged upbringing
and her fragile mental health. We
have taken into account in mitigation her early pleas of guilty and her evident
remorse. The applicant
has a limited history of prior offending. Ms Lechner has
opined that the applicant is unlikely to engage in such offending again
accept that evidence. We consider her prospects of rehabilitation to be
the applicant’s offending was objectively serious. It involved a large sum
of money, brazenly stolen from Australian
tax payers. Her offending was
protracted and persistent, and motivated by greed rather than need. The
applicant forged documents
and made unsubstantiated complaints, or threatened to
make unsubstantiated complaints, against investigating officers. We therefore
consider the applicant’s moral culpability for the offending to be high.
Furthermore, the sentencing judge was correct to state
that general deterrence
remains a prominent sentencing consideration, as the GST system, which involves
self-assessment, is a ‘soft-target
for the dishonestly
Sentences for
offending of this type, involving submitting multiple false Business Activity
Statements over a significant period
of time, routinely attract lengthy periods
of imprisonment.
Accordingly,
the applicant will be resentenced as
Commencement
Dishonestly
obtain a financial advantage by deception from a Commonwealth
years’ imprisonment
years 6 months’ imprisonment
November 2024
dishonestly obtain a financial advantage by deception from a Commonwealth
years’ imprisonment
year 6 months’ imprisonment
Knowingly use a
false document to dishonestly influence the exercise of a duty or function of a
Commonwealth public official
years’ imprisonment
year imprisonment
Dishonestly
obtain a financial advantage by deception from a Commonwealth
years’ imprisonment
months’ imprisonment
applicant is therefore sentenced to a total effective sentence of 3 years and
6 months’ imprisonment.
non-parole period of 17 months’ imprisonment will be fixed.
is declared that but for the applicant’s plea of guilty, the Court would
have imposed a total effective sentence of 6 years’
imprisonment, with a
non-parole period of 4 years.
Contrary to s 134.2(1) of the
Criminal Code
Contrary to ss 11.1 and
134.2(1) of the
Criminal Code
Contrary to s 145.1(1) of the
Criminal Code
Each statement covered a
one-month period and some statements were amendments made to the original
statement for that month.
Each statement covered a
one-month period and some statements were amendments made to the original
statement for that month.
[2023] VSCA 280
[2023] VSCA 280
[40] (Priest, Niall and Kaye JJA).
DPP v Allen
, 89 [4] (‘Reasons’).
Reasons, [30]–[33].
Reasons, [38].
Reasons, [48].
Reasons, [52].
Reasons, [61].
Reasons, [63].
Reasons, [67].
Reasons, [68].
Reasons, [70].
Reasons, [89].
Reasons, [72].
[2011] VSCA 145
(2011) 34 VR 1
[52]–[54] (Warren CJ, Redlich JA and Ross AJA);
[2011] VSCA 145
Reasons, [81].
Reasons, [83].
at 26 November 2015.
[2023] VSCA 280
[40] (Priest, Niall and Kaye JJA).
Atanackovic v The
[2015] VSCA 136
, 35 [82] (Weinberg, Kyrou and Kaye JJA).
(2011) 254 FLR 254
[2011] WASC 286
, [30]–[31] (Martin CJ).
[2014] ACTCA 37
(Refshauge, Penfold and Gilmour JJ).
Achurch v The Queen
(2014) 253 CLR 141
, [32] (French CJ, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ);
That case concerned a New South Wales statute in effectively the same terms
as s 104B (noting that s 104B was based upon that New
South Wales
provision).
(2004) 218 CLR 174
[2004] HCA 8
, 179–80 [7] (Gleeson CJ);
[2004] HCA 8.
(2004) 218 CLR 193, [52] (Gummow and Heydon JJ);
[2004] HCA 8
Explanatory Memorandum,
Crimes Legislation Amendment Bill (No 2) 1989
(2010) 242 CLR 520
[2010] HCA 45
(2010) 242 CLR
, 527–528 [22] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ);
[2010] HCA 45.
Hooimeyer v The King
[2025] VSCA 37
, [29] (Orr JA and T Forrest AJA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (570 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter