URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1580.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DPP v Fred [2025] VCC 1580 (31 October 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
Case No. CR-24-01183, CR-24-01184,
CR-25-00495
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
TEREAPII JAKE FRED
DATE OF HEARING
16 October 2025
DATE OF SENTENCE
31 October 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1580
REASONS FOR
Subject: CRIMINAL LAW
Catchwords: Handling stolen goods, use false document, burglary, theft of
firearms, theft, possess traffickable quantity of firearms,
armed robbery,
prohibited person possess firearm
Legislation Cited:
Sentencing Act 1991
Cases Cited:
Bugmy v The Queen (2013) 249 CLR 571, R v Verdins [2007) VSCA
Sentence: TES: 8 years 9 months NPP: 5 years 3 months
APPEARANCES
For the DPP
Ms T Stokes
Ms A Hogan, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
For the Accused
Ms K Ballard
Stary Norton Halphen
HER HONOUR:
Fred, you have pleaded guilty before me on the first indictment, Indictment
number Q11890520 (CR-25-00495) to handling stolen
goods, 2 charges of using a
false document, burglary, theft of firearm, theft and possess traffickable
quantity of firearms. On
the second indictment, indictment number C2416737
(CR-24-01182/CR-24-01183) you have pleaded guilty to armed robbery, prohibited
person possess firearm, handling stolen goods, unauthorised possession of a
traffickable quantity of firearms and 2 related summary
offences being summary
charge 10 on CR-24-02282, a Commonwealth charge of unlawful possession of a
radio communications device and
summary charge 5 on CR-24-01183, a charge of
possess cartridge ammunition without a licence.
maximum penalties are 25 years imprisonment for armed robbery, 15 years
imprisonment for each of the charges of handling stolen
goods and theft of
firearms and 10 years for each of the charges of prohibited person possess
firearm, possession of a traffickable
quantity of firearms, use false document,
burglary and theft. The maximum penalty for the related summary offence of
possess radio
communications device is 2 years imprisonment and for possess
cartridge ammunition the maximum is 40 penalty units.
robbery here is a category 2 offence, the meaning of which I will return to.
CIRCUMSTANCES OF OFFENDING
circumstances of your offending were comprehensively outlined in 2 summaries of
prosecution opening on plea, one for each indictment,
the first dated 15 October
2025 (Indictment number Q11890520: CR-25-00495) and the second dated 18 June
2025 (Indictment number C2416737:
CR-24-01182/CR-24-01183). I shall summarise
those circumstances here.
First indictment - Indictment number Q11890520 (CR-25-00495)
23 September 2023 you were in receipt of a stolen
drivers licence (charge 1). You used that licence
to hire a white Mitsubishi Triton from a Coles Express ‘Move
vehicle hire kiosk in Collingwood (Charge 2).
29 September 2023 you hired a white Toyota Kluger SUV through Facebook
marketplace. You used the stolen drivers licence, which
had been altered to
depict your image, and a Medicare card in the same name, as ID when hiring the
vehicle (Charge 3).
9 October 2023 you drove the Kluger to a Burwood East carpark and left the scene
in an uber. An unknown person smashed the rear
window. At 1.55am the next
morning police attended in relation to the smashed window. You called Forest
Hill Police from your phone,
giving the name on the stolen licence and advising
that there was no issue with the vehicle. At 1.30pm that day you drove the
away from the carpark.
11 October 2023 you sent messages over the Signal application planning a
20 October 2023 at 1.30pm you attended a street in Koo Wee Rup.
next day, 21 October 2023 at 11.55am, you parked in an alley behind the same
street. After conducting google searches you made
an 8 minute phone call to the
victim, who was unknown to you, from your own number. Your purported to be a
police officer by the
name of Constable Tottem from Pakenham Police Station and
requesting your victim’s attendance at the Pakenham Police station.
1.05pm and 1.46pm that day, you made 5 phone calls to your victim’s
daughter, again identifying yourself as Constable
Tottem from Pakenham Police
Station and requesting her attendance at the police station.
victim’s daughter collected him at 1.43pm and they made their way to the
police station as requested.
1.46pm you drove the Kluger into your victim’s address and entered the
house and rear shed (charge 4) from where you stole
7 firearms (charge 5) and 2
CB radios, a GMC radio and thousands of rounds of ammunition (charge 6). The
property was valued at
just over $16,500.
3.15pm your victim returned form the police station, where he had been informed
that there was no Constable Tottem, to find his
house and shed had been
3.18pm on 21 October 2023 and 12.35am on 22 October 2023, you took the stolen
firearms to an associate’s property and
photographed them inside the
garage (charge 7).
seized and found to bear the same number you had
called your victim from.
were interviewed and declined to comment, as was your right.
21 November 2023 a search warrant was executed at your associate’s
address. Police located one of the rifles and a CB radio
taken from your
victim’s address. You associate was arrested and revealed that 2 of the
firearms were buried on Scotchman’s
Creek Trail in Mount Waverley. Both
of these firearms were recovered.
Second indictment -
Indictment number C2416737 (CR-24-01182/CR-24-01183)
or around 28 October 2023 you came into possession of a stolen black 2016
Porsche Macan (charge 3).
to the Vale Hotel in Mulgrave. You were dressed
in black with your face covered
and armed with a handgun. Your co-accused also carried a handgun.
female staff member was working behind the
male security guard was standing near the bar. You and your co-accused raised
your firearms towards your victims. You
approached the 2 staff members and
demanded that they get on the ground and open the safe. Your co-accused
remained in the entry
area with his handgun raised.
female victim got on the ground while your male victim remained standing with
his hands up. He informed you that the safe was
locked. You asked
‘where’s the till?’ and demanded your female victim get the
money. She opened the gaming bar
cash register and removed the drawer and
placed it on the bar in front of you. You took $600 while still holding the gun
this occurred your co-accused continued to point his handgun at the victims, the
red laser dot moving around the area. After
1min and 15 seconds you and your
co-accused returned to the stolen car and left the scene. A number of patrons
were in the venue
but did not witness your offending.
stolen Porsche was recovered on 9 November 2023.
21 November 2023 police attended at an address in Oakleigh to arrest you. You
were observed moving to the laundry from the lounge
area. Police forced entry
and located a Nike bag containing a black .22 calibre pistol with magazine
(Charge 4), a homemade pistol
with 4 rounds of ammunition (Charge 4), a zip lock
bag containing .22 calibre ammunition (summary charge 5) and an electronic
(summary charge 10).
were arrested and provided a DNA sample which was linked to DNA taken from the
trigger of one of the pistols and the steering
wheel of the Porsche.
Gravity of the offending
is particularly serious offending. Indictment one involves a planned burglary
on a targeted victim. You obtained your victim’s
phone number, contacted
him pretending to be a police officer, contacted his daughter with the same
story, albeit from your own phone,
and burgled his house, taking the firearms
you knew were there from the gun safe, after having interrupted the power supply
safe. The offending involved a substantial degree of planning and
sophistication. You then photographed the firearms at another
second indictment relates to a serious armed robbery. In the early hours of the
morning you and your co-accused entered the venue
wearing disguises and
brandishing handguns which you pointed at your victims while making demands. It
was brazen and no doubt terrifying
for those involved, all for the paltry sum of
$600. You had been driving the stolen Porsche used in the armed robbery for
a week. You were arrested with 2 pistols, separate to the 7 firearms
stolen in the earlier matter.
offences are all too often seen by this court, with those weapons often used in
crimes such as the armed robbery you were
involved in. The seriousness of your
offending cannot be underestimated.
Plea of guilty
pleaded guilty to the first indictment after a committal at which only the
informant was cross-examined. You pleaded guilty to
the second indictment at an
early stage. As such you have saved your victims the trauma of giving evidence
and you have saved the
court and the community the time and expense of running
trials on these matters. You have facilitated the course of justice and
also entitled to a discount for the utilitarian value of your plea.
your plea of guilty you have taken responsibility for your offending and
expressed remorse. Psychologist Daniella Kocic, whose
report I shall return to,
opined that you presented as remorseful and reflective. You stated “I
can’t understand why
I took $600 form a till,” and expressed that
the armed robbery was a turning point, a ‘stupid’ act you knew would
result in imprisonment.
Victim Impact statements
received victim impact statements from the victim of the burglary and gun theft
and from his daughter who was also a target of your
planning. They did not wish
for their statements to be read aloud so I will not quote directly from them,
however the impact on
them has been significant and remains ongoing.
did not receive victim impact statements from either of the victims of the armed
robbery, however it takes little to imagine the
sheer terror they must have felt
when confronted by you and your co-accused, wearing disguises and pointing
firearms at them.
Personal circumstances
turn now to your personal circumstances.
are now 30 years of age, having been born in July 1995 in Melbourne, of Cook
Islander heritage. You have an older brother, a
younger brother and a younger
sister who died by suicide in 2017 after experiencing difficulties with
substance abuse and mental
health. You entered custody shortly after her death.
parents separated when you were aged 7 or 8. Prior to this you witnessed family
violence perpetrated against your mother by
your father. Once in the care of
your mother as a single parent, your family experienced periods of homelessness
and financial instability.
Your father spent several periods in custody over the
years before he died in 2021 from natural causes. You were in custody at the
time of his death.
attended several schools until completing year 10 at which point you ceased
formal education. You were often bullied and were
expelled several times. You
undertook some factory work but have remained largely unemployed.
began using cannabis at the age of 13. Your drug use escalated to include
ecstasy, methamphetamine, GHB and Xanax. You overdosed
on GHB in your early
20s. You report a diagnosis of drug induced psychosis in about 2017, having
experienced auditory hallucinations.
the age of 16 you were injured in an altercation with a group of peers during
which you were struck to the head with a bottle,
requiring hospitalisation and
a later occasion you were in a car with your brother when he was shot in the
arm. He suffered ongoing physical and mental difficulties
as a consequence of
this incident. You have also been impacted psychologically.
were in a relationship after your last release from custody but it broke down
after 8-9 months. At this time your mental health
deteriorated and your drug use
increased. You were living transiently and committing crimes to fund your drug
habit. Your mental
health and drug use have remained largely untreated in the
custody you secured a hands on work experience role with YMCA ReBuild until the
program ended. You have since undertaken barista
training and work 4 days per
week at the coffee cart in the visitor centre at Ravenhall. The work gives you
purpose and something
to concentrate on and will stand you in good stead for
employment upon your release from custody. You plan to enrol in further
educational
opportunities once you are sentenced.
are also a staff nominated peer listener, a position you have held for some 3
mother and your older brother visit you in custody and you have regular phone
received a psychological report from Ms Daniella Kocic dated 9 July 2025. She
diagnosed you with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder,
major depressive disorder
(although I note she found you to have mild depressive symptoms, moderate
anxiety, and normal stress) and
poly substance use disorders in sustained
opines that your opportunities for prosocial development have been constrained
and your “strained family relationships,
tumultuous intimate relationships
and association with antisocial peers compounded this trajectory, leaving [you]
with limited perceived
social support and reduced coping capacity when faced
with distress.”
Ms Kocic stated that your capacity to engage in rational decision making was
impaired, she also noted that your “intoxication
would have heightened
[your] risk -taking behaviour, impulsivity and behavioural disinhibition.”
She found that you have a
motivation for change and a capacity for
Sentencing principles and considerations
Fred, this was most serious offending. Quite plainly, you need to address your
mental health and drug use and stay away from firearms.
deterrence is an important sentencing factor given the prevalence of firearms in
society. Others in the community minded
to steal, possess and use firearms in
armed robberies must understand that lengthy sentences of imprisonment will
necessarily follow.
have an extensive criminal record including offences of driving, weapons,
affray, trafficking, cultivation and breaches, together
with particularly
relevant aggravated burglary (firearm) and armed robbery convictions from 2017.
In that instance you were not
said to be aware of the firearm before entering
the house where the armed robbery took place but you assisted and encouraged
co-accused, who was in possession of the firearm, by your presence. I note
that matter went to trial. In the instant matter, you
were yourself armed and
personally made demands of your victims.
you of course do not fall to be resentenced for those matters, they inform your
prospects of rehabilitation and matters of specific
deterrence and community
protection.
consider that specific deterrence has a substantial role to play. You must see
by the sentence I impose that the courts and the
community will not tolerate the
possession of firearms, let alone their use in violent crimes such as armed
counsel submitted that the principles in
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR
apply in your case in a general sense. These principles contemplate
a background of deprivation that may compromise a person’s
capacity to
mature and to learn from experience. It was submitted that this is applicable
to you given your exposure to family violence
and alcohol abuse, financial and
social hardship, dislocated and incomplete schooling, early exposure to
criminality and imprisonment
through your father and your early drug use.
accept that you did suffer from deprivation during childhood and your moral
culpability is moderated as compared with an offender
whose childhood was not so
marred. The cycle of dysfunction, immaturity and criminality, as your counsel
put it, continues to impact
in turn, however, increases the need for community protection. Your willingness
to steal and possess firearms and use them to
engage in violent crimes such as
this armed robbery places members of the public at ongoing risk from you.
was submitted, without great force, that limbs 5 and 6 of
R v Verdins
(2007) VSCA 102
which take into consideration whether imprisonment
will weigh more heavily on you than it would on a person in normal health and
imprisonment will have an adverse effect on your mental health, have
application in your case.
the prosecution submission that these limbs apply, I do not find a basis for
either of them in your case. You clearly suffer
from several conditions, which
I take into account in a general way as relating to your imprisonment, but Ms
Kocic put it no higher
than these conditions “would
more heavily on [you] than on a person without [your] trauma history. The
volatile nature of the prison environment
lead to an exacerbation
of [your] existing symptoms...” (emphasis added).
Kocic found you to be a moderate risk of future violence. Your prospects of
rehabilitation are guarded, contingent on you remaining
abstinent from drug use
and addressing your mental health. You are motivated and clearly capable of
holding a job which would keep
you occupied and away from negative peers and
substance use.
robbery is a category 2 offence where it is involves the use of a firearm or is
committed in company. Both are applicable here.
In sentencing for a category 2
offence the court must impose a period of imprisonment, other than a sentence in
combination with
a community corrections order, unless one of the exceptions
applies. There is no suggestion any such exception applies here.
parties submitted that the only available sentence involves a head sentence and
non-parole period. Neither party provided any
comparable sentences or
indicators of current sentencing practices.
apply the principle of totality, noting the number and seriousness of the
matters before the court. I have moderated the cumulation
imposed to ensure
your sentence is proportionate to your overall criminal conduct
Disposition
First indictment - Indictment number Q11890520 (CR-25-00495)
charge 1, handling stolen goods, on charge 2, using a false document and on
charge 3, using a false document you are sentenced
to an aggregate 4 months
imprisonment.
charge 4, burglary, on charge 5, theft of firearms and on charge 6, theft you
are sentenced an aggregate 3 years 6 months imprisonment.
charge 7, possess traffickable quantity of firearms, you are sentenced to 18
months imprisonment.
Second indictment - Indictment number
C2416737 (CR-24-01182/CR-24-01183)
charge 1, armed robbery, you are sentenced to 5 years imprisonment.
charge 2, prohibited person possess firearm, you are sentenced to 12 months
imprisonment.
charge 3, handling stolen goods, you are sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.
charge 4, possess traffickable quantity of firearms, you are sentenced to 18
months imprisonment.
the related summary offence of possess cartridge ammunition without a licence,
you are sentenced to pay a fine in the sum of $1000,
with conviction.
the related summary Commonwealth offence of unlawful possession of a radio
communications device, you are sentenced to pay a fine
in the sum of $1000,
with conviction.
Global total effective sentence and non-parole period
direct that charge 1 on the second indictment be the base sentence.
direct that 3 months of the sentence on charge 2, 6 months of the sentence on
charge 3 and 6 months of the sentence on charge 4
on the second indictment and 2
years of the aggregate sentence on charges 4, 5, and 6 and 6 months of the
sentence on charge 7 on
the first indictment be served cumulatively on the
sentence imposed on charge 1 on the second indictment and on each other.
the avoidance of doubt there is no cumulation on the aggregate sentence on
charges 1, 2 and 3 on the first indictment.
makes a global total effective sentence across the 2 indictments of 8 years 9
months imprisonment.
direct that you serve a minimum non-parole period of 5 years 3 months before
being eligible for release on parole.
Pre-sentence
Sentencing Act 1991
I declare that you have served 705
days of pre-sentence detention excluding today.
Section 6AAA
declaration
Sentencing Act 1991
I declare that had you not pleaded
guilty, the sentence I would have imposed would have been 11 years imprisonment
with a non-parole
period of 7 years.
Ancillary orders
grant the firearms forfeiture orders as sought by the prosecution, noting they
were not opposed by the defence.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (182 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter