URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICCAT/1998/1321.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Allan Powell Pty Ltd v Port Phillip CC Allan Powell Pty Ltd v Port Phillip CC [1998] VICCAT 1321 (31 December 1998)
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
REASONS FOR ORDER
i. Increased setbacks on upper floor facing Carlisle Street.
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
APPEAL NO. 1998/45799
APPLICATION NO.
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON 21 DECEMBER 1998 AND
I R Marsden, (Presiding Member)
Jane Osborn, Member
Applicant for Review/Permit Applicant Allan Powell Pty Ltd.
Responsible Authority City of Port Phillip
NATURE OF APPLICATION
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
Act) for review of a decision to refuse to grant a permit.
Demolition of buildings and development and use of shops, offices and
residential apartments.
17 Carlisle Street & 6 Irwell Street
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING
Port Phillip Planning Scheme - Business 1 Zone
- Heritage Overlay Control Area.
APPEARANCES
Mr R Schuster, Town Planner, represented the Responsible Authority.
Mr G Peake of Counsel instructed by Clark Rushford, Solicitors, appeared on
behalf of the Applicant for Review.
Mr G Lombardi, Respondent/Objector, appeared in person.
REASONS FOR ORDER
1. The Appeal Site and its Environs.
In evidence given on behalf of the Applicant by Mr A Clarke, a Town Planning
Consultant the following description appears:-
The site area is approximately 917m
, having frontage to
Carlisle Street of 19.9 metres and to Irwell Street of 28.6 metres.
No. 17 Carlisle Street is occupied by a single storey red brick dwelling.
No. 6 Irwell Street is occupied by a single storey weatherboard
The land is situated in a mixed use area on the periphery of the Acland
Street shopping centre. Nearby land uses in Carlisle Street
include offices,
shops, cafes, a motel, a theatre, attached and detached dwellings, older
dwellings converted to flats and more modern
blocks of flats. Immediately to
the east of No. 17 Carlisle Street is a two-storey dwelling located on the
corner of Carlisle Street
and Irwell Street. This building has been converted
into four residential units. Immediately to the west is a modern two storey
office building fronting Carlisle Street.
Also to the west of No.6 Irwell Street is No. 4 Irwell Street, which is
occupied by a renovated two storey Georgian style block of
On the opposite side of Irwell Street are four single storey attached
dwellings. On the south-east corner of Irwell Street and Carlisle
Street is a
modern commercial building consisting of a number of small retail shops and an
associated rear car park.
Uses on the north side of Carlisle Street, in proximity to the subject site,
include the National Theatre, a three storey block of
flats, three detached
houses and the Cosmopolitan Quality Inn.
2. The Proposal.
In its written submission the Responsible Authority described the proposal as
It is proposed to demolish the existing buildings and to develop the land
with two highly contemporary buildings, one primarily fronting
Carlisle Street
and one facing Irwell Street as follows:
Basement: 22 car spaces (4 tandem) in a basement carpark with access from
Irwell Street.
Ground level: Three Office/shop tenancies, two facing Irwell and one
facing Carlisle Streets, reflection pool and three boarding
house rooms.
First floor: Office floor space in building facing Carlisle. Ten
boarding house rooms in building facing Irwell.
Second floor: Five boarding house rooms in Carlisle building, ten in
Irwell building.
Third level: Ten boarding house rooms in Irwell building, two in Carlisle
The building facing Irwell Street would be a contemporary glazed structure
similar in some respects to a conventional office building.
The building fronting Carlisle would comprise primarily of a highly
contemporary design incorporating a red glass curtain wall.
3. Processing of the Application.
The proposal was advertised and 68 objections were received. These were
predicated on the following grounds:-
* the design is inappropriate;
* parking and traffic problems will be exacerbated;
* the height of the building is excessive;
* the proposal is an overdevelopment;
* the amenity of neighbouring properties will be affected through loss of
* there will be a loss of heritage buildings;
* there will be prolonged noise during construction.
On 3 June 1998 the Responsible Authority resolved to refuse the application on
the following grounds:-
1. Inadequate parking would be provided for the uses as submitted,
particularly the commercial component.
2. The proposal is unsatisfactory with reference to the neighbourhood
character element of the Good Design Guide.
3. The architectural design is considered inappropriate, particularly with
reference to the Irwell Street streetscape.
4. Appropriate vehicular access to the site has not been properly
considered.
5. There has been no justification provided for the loss of buildings Graded
(Now graded "significant" and "contributory" under Amendment C5).
6. The proposal is not considered sufficiently site responsive.
7. The proposal represents an overdevelopment of the site.
4. Amendments to Application.
By correspondence dated 4 December 1998 the Applicant for Review gave notice to
all parties that it proposed to seek leave at the
hearing to substitute amended
plans for the plans which had accompanied the application.
At the commencement of the hearing Mr Peake duly sought and was granted leave
to substitute amended plans. These have been placed
on file and signed by the
Presiding Member for the purposes of identification.
The changes were described by Mr Swansson, the architect for the proposal, in
the following terms:-
Carlisle Street Building
i. Increased setbacks on upper floor facing Carlisle Street.
ii. Introduction of a staggered section adjacent 15 Carlisle Street allowing
4 levels and relocating accommodation areas from Irwell
iii. Window arrangement on façade facing Irwell Street
i. Increase in carpark size from 20 to 22 spaces.
ii. Removal of ramp from east side of Irwell Street Building, single in/out
ramp on west side of Irwell Street Building.
Irwell Street Building
i. Removal of 50% of level 4. Providing substantial setback at level
ii. Redesign of Irwell Street façade:
deletion of continuous `eggcrate façade'
deletion of balconies to two rooms
increase of setback from west boundary (1930's flats) from 3m to 4m
decrease in setback from east boundary (red brick flats) from 3m to
introduction of central tiled element to match composition of adjacent
iii. Details on rubbish location, mailboxes, etc.
Mr Peake also sought leave to amend the description of the proposal by
substitution of the following words:-
Develop and use the land for multi-storey buildings comprising shops,
offices and residential boarding rooms with associated car parking.
Again there was no objection and accordingly leave was granted.
5. Planning Controls.
At the time the application was lodged, the appeal site was situated in a
Restricted Business Zone. On 29 October 1998 the new Port
Phillip Planning
Scheme came into operation. Under the provisions of the new Scheme, the land
is situated in a Business Zone 1 in
which both "shop" and "dwelling" are as of
right uses, provided that the Planning Scheme requirements for parking are met.
is a use requiring a planning permit. The use of the land for the
purpose of "residential buildings" including "boarding house"
unspecified, permit required use.
At the time the application was lodged, and at the hearing on 21 December 1998,
no permit was required for demolition. Despite this,
the issue of the
demolition of the two dwellings was discussed in both submissions and evidence.
Subsequent to that hearing, but
prior to the Tribunal's determination, advice
was received that there had been further amendments to the Planning Scheme
introduced by the Minister on 31 December 1998. Those amendments
made no substantial difference to the planning controls affecting
other than to make the demolition of the existing dwelling subject to
On 21 January 1999 the hearing was reconvened. Mr Peake sought leave to
further amend the application by seeking a permit for the
demolition of the
existing dwellings. There was no opposition to this course and accordingly
leave was granted.
There are many planning controls and policies affecting the subject site.
These were comprehensively set down at pages 4-9 of the
Responsible Authority's
written submission. In addition, the proposal is subject to the provisions of
The Good Design Guide. The
Responsible Authority's submission also records a
detailed analysis of the proposal measured against the requirements of that
In the interests of brevity the Tribunal does not intend to set down all this
material in detail. The proposal has been assessed
against all relevant town
planning controls and policies.
6. The Hearing.
On the hearing each of the parties tabled and read written submissions. Mr
Peake called evidence from the following:-
* Mr R Swansson, the Architect responsible for the proposal.
* Mr A Clarke, a Town Planning Consultant.
* Mr B Raworth, an Architect and Heritage Consultant.
* Mr S Hunt, a Traffic Engineer.
All the witnesses tabled and read written statements. This material has been
retained on file and, in coming to a decision, the
Tribunal has had careful
regard to all the matters put to it.
7. The Planning Issues.
Having regard to the amendments made to the original proposal, Mr Schuster
conceded that several of the Responsible Authority's grounds
of refusal were no
longer relevant. In particular:-
(a) the Responsible Authority was satisfied that the parking provision was now
(b) changes to the Irwell Street streetscape were satisfactory;
(c) vehicular access was now appropriate.
The Responsible Authority's principal concerns can be discerned from the
concluding passage to its written submission:-
The application is opposed because it would lead to the loss of heritage
The presentation of the building to Carlisle Street is not acceptable and
requires variations including proper consideration of height,
recessive upper
levels and the colours used. The second building as it presents to Irwell
Street fails to adequately address the
Irwell Street streetscape and the
interface with the residential buildings on either side, either in appearance
or in minimising
the impacts on residents of those buildings. This is
considered a key concern of the proposal.
Higher density can be supported in this location with reference to Council
Policy relating to provision of low cost housing and the
location of the site,
and the setback from Irwell Street may be acceptable with reference to the
neighbouring buildings.
In response to this, Mr Peake called evidence from Mr Raworth, a respected and
experienced Heritage Consultant whose statement of
evidence provides a thorough
analysis of the history of the sites. On the question of demolition, Mr
Raworth said this:-
The existing buildings on these two parcels of land are of low significance
and medium integrity at best. They do not contribute
to valued and consistent
historic streetscapes. The sites are located in streets which have seen
considerable redevelopment and
are of low integrity only. There are no extant
heritage controls over the land, and the proposed heritage overlay in the
precinct seems founded on weak or hasty analysis. The demolition of
these buildings should not be considered an issue on heritage
As to the replacement buildings, Mr Raworth stated:-
The proposed redevelopment responds in a positive and dynamic manner to its
environment. It respects the scale and articulation of
adjacent buildings in
order to enhance and reinforce the urban character and scale of the area, as is
appropriate. It adopts an
articulate and whimsical architectural expression
which draws in an intelligent and creative manner upon the architectural
of the key buildings in its immediate environment and of iconic
buildings within the broader St Kilda area.
The Tribunal agrees with this assessment. It is important to note that the
subject land is situated in a commercial zone. There
is an inherent conflict
between, on the one hand, the Responsible Authority's stance in this matter as
expressed in the passage previously
set down, and the purpose of the zone which
is stated to be:-
To encourage the intensive development of business centres for retailing
and other complementary commercial, entertainment and community
Mr Clarke put it this way:-
However, properties fronting Irwell Street are within a Business 1 Zone.
The introduction of the Business 1 Zone has been a direct
application of Council's Local Planning Policy Framework for this area. There
is an inconsistency between Council's statutory
land use policies and the
Business 1 Zone which implements them, and Council's third ground of refusal
which implicitly contemplates
a residential rather than commercial streetscape
The Tribunal agrees.
The built form in the immediate area of the site contains an eclectic mix of
buildings, many of a commercial nature. Moreover, the
Responsible Authority
has itself seen fit to demolish a number of dwellings to make way for much
needed car parking. The area is
one undergoing considerable change. Neither
of the buildings which will be demolished is in any way "special" or "unique"
respective gradings demonstrate. The scale of the replacement
buildings and the materials to be used are, in the Tribunal's view,
with others in the surrounding area.
Mr Lombardi relied to a great extent on what he argued was
significant
non-compliance with The Good Design Guide. It must be said
however that it is notoriously difficult to use the Guide in assessing
buildings of this kind which are, in a sense, institutional in nature. To the
extent that Mr Lombardi relied on the argument of
"neighbourhood character",
the Tribunal prefers the assessment provided by Mr Raworth.
Mr Schuster expressed some concern regarding the external finishes of the
building and, in particular, the red vitronite material
with which it is
proposed to treat the Carlisle Street frontage. However, having been provided
with a sample of that material the
Tribunal is satisfied that this approach,
given the context of the site, is an appropriate and creative response which
will add life
and vitality to the precinct.
The building will have very little impact on neighbouring residential
developments. Mr Clarke provided a thorough assessment on
this issue,
particularly in relation to overshadowing and privacy. Basically the Tribunal
agrees with Mr Clarke's analysis. The
proposal represents a mixed use
development in a Business Zone. Residential amenity issues are minimal and the
development will
satisfy a demonstrated need for low income housing.
The Tribunal regards the car parking arrangements as satisfactory. It accepts
Mr Hunt's evidence that parking generation for boarding
houses and low cost
residential accommodation of this kind is low. Moreover, the peak generation
time for shops and offices is during
the day when there will undoubtedly be
spare residential capacity. While Mr Lombardi expressed great apprehension
regarding the
number of spaces to be provided, a number he regards as
inadequate, the Tribunal believes the quantum is sufficient in the
circumstances
having regard to the mix of uses. It is satisfied that the
requirements of the Planning Scheme are satisfied.
For all the foregoing reasons the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that the
application should be allowed. It directs that a
permit be granted for the
demolition of the existing dwellings and to develop and use the land for
multi-storey buildings comprising
shops, offices and residential boiling rooms
and associated car parking. The permit shall be subject to the following
conditions:-
1. Before the use and development starts, plans to the satisfaction of the
Responsible Authority must be submitted to and approved
by the Responsible
Authority. When approved, the plans will be endorsed and will then form part
of the permit. The plans must be
generally in accordance with the plans
submitted to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal on 21 December 1998 but
modified to show:
(a) a schedule of external materials and finishes;
(b) the display area projecting over the Carlisle Street footpath reduced to
500mm in width and comprising translucent glass;
(c) alterations and modifications to the car park layout and access design to
achieve compliance with the provisions of the Planning
(d) security gate and fencing of the car park;
(e) directional traffic signs not exceeding 0.6m
indicating the access to the basement car park and availability of casual
parking for customers during normal business hours;
(f) no obstructions or services within 1.5m of the proposed crossover.
2. The use and development as shown on the endorsed plans must not be altered
without the written consent of the Responsible Authority.
3. The Applicant/Owner shall do the following things to the satisfaction of the
Responsible Authority:
(a) Pay the costs of all alterations/reinstatement of Council and Pubic
Authority assets necessary and required by such authorities
for development.
(b) Obtain the prior written approval of the Council or other relevant
Authority for such alterations/reinstatements.
(c) Comply with conditions (if any) required by the Council or other relevant
Authorities in respect of such alterations/reinstatements.
4. All external lights must be of a limited intensity to ensure no nuisance is
caused to adjoining or nearby residents and must be
provided with approved
baffles, so that no direct light or glare is emitted outside the site.
5. The development of the site shall not cause nuisance or be detrimental to
the amenity of the neighbourhood by the emission of
noise. In this regard
noise from construction and/or demolition activities should comply with the
Environment Protection Authority
guidelines for "Construction and Demolition
Site Noise".
6. Drainage shall be provided to the satisfaction of the relevant Building
Surveyor. All building drainage and site works must be
completed to the
satisfaction of the Building Surveyor prior to the occupation of the
building(s).
7. This permit will expire if one of the following circumstances applies:
* the development and use is not commenced within two (2) years from the date
of issue of this permit;
* the development is not completed within four (4) years from the date of this
The Responsible Authority may extend the periods referred to if a request is
made in writing before the permit expires or within
three months afterwards.
8. All piping and duct work shall be concealed.
9. Prior to the occupation of the premises for the new use, areas set aside for
parked vehicles, loading bays and access lanes as
shown on the endorsed plans
and approved engineering plans must be:
(a) constructed to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority;
(b) properly formed to such levels that they may be used in accordance with the
(c) surfaced with an all weather seal coat to the satisfaction of the
Responsible Authority;
(d) drained and maintained to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
Car parking shall be kept available for these purposes at all times.
10. Without the written consent of the Responsible Authority no equipment,
services and architectural features other than those shown
on the endorsed plan
shall be permitted above the roof level of the building.
11. No buildings or works shall be commenced until a landscape plan prepared by
a suitably qualified and experienced person or firm
has been submitted to and
approved by the Responsible Authority. Landscaping in accordance with this
approved plan and schedule
shall be completed before the building is
12. The garden areas shown on the endorsed plan and schedule shall only be used
as gardens and shall be maintained in a proper, tidy
and healthy condition to
the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority. Should any tree or shrub be
removed or destroyed it may
be required to be replaced by a tree or shrub of
similar size and variety.
The Council's Planning Inspector shall be advised of the completion of the
landscaping so that a site inspection can be carried out.
A further inspection
will be carried out six (6) months after the completion of the landscaping to
ensure that species have been
adequately maintained.
13. The car park shall be kept common to all occupiers of the site at all times
except with the further written consent of the Responsible
14. The occupation of the buildings hereby permitted shall not detrimentally
affect the amenity of adjacent residential premises
by way of emission of
15. Any new crossover shall be constructed in accordance with a permit issued
by Standard Roads on behalf of the Responsible Authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of
Section 85(1)(b)
Planning and
Environment Act
the Responsible Authority is directed to issue a
permit in accordance with this decision.
Application for review allowed.
I R MARSDEN
PRESIDING MEMBER
JANE OSBORN
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter