URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2021/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Caswell Nominees Pty Ltd at Funfields Theme Park premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2021] VCGLR 24 (5 August 2021)
Decision and reasons
for decision
In the matter of an application by Caswell Nominees Pty Ltd under
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for internal review of a decision
to refuse to grant a renewable limited licence and permanent approval to permit
underage persons
on a licenced premises for the premises located at 2365 Plenty
Road, Whittlesea, trading as Funfields Theme Park.
Commission:
Ms Helen Versey, Deputy Chair
Ms Danielle Huntersmith, Commissioner
Mr Andrew Scott, Commissioner
Date of Hearing:
20 July 2021
Date of Decision:
Date of Reasons:
5 August 2021
Appearances:
Mr Colin Mann, Colin Mann & Associates for the
Ms Marilina Dinardo, for the Applicant
Ms Swati Bhim, as Counsel Assisting the Commission
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the Delegate and, in substitution, grant the application for a renewable
licence subject to the conditions set out in Appendix One.
The Commission has determined to refuse the application for permanent
approval to permit underage persons on a licenced premises,
Helen Versey
1. On 24 September 2020, Caswell Nominees Pty Ltd (
) lodged an application with the Victorian Commission for
Gambling and Liquor Regulation (
) for a renewable
limited licence (
) and permanent approval to permit underage
persons on a licenced premises (
) (together
Application
) under the
Control Reform Act 1998
) for the premises located at 2365
Plenty Road, Whittlesea, trading as Funfields Theme Park (
2. The Premises is described as a family entertainment theme park, which
includes various water-related and other activities. It includes
a barbeque area
and two food outlets.
3. The Applicant sought to supply liquor to patrons from one of the food
outlets, within what it described as “the upper level”.
upper level, the Applicant proposed the following areas for liquor
consumption:
Shack Café (the general food and drink area on the upper level);
4. For the Beach Shack Café area, the Applicant requested underage
approval to accommodate unaccompanied patrons under the
age of 18 entering the
area to purchase soft drinks and food items for consumption. The Applicant
proposed that any liquor purchases
at the Beach Shack Café would be
consumed seated at tables only and patrons would not be permitted to take the
liquor outside
of the Beach Shack Café.
5. For the Bali Huts and Days Beds, the Applicant proposed that liquor would
be supplied to patrons by table service carried out by
staff who have completed
the required responsible service of alcohol training. The Applicant described
the Bali Huts and Day Beds
as VIP areas within the upper level, which are gated
and hired by patrons for day use. The Applicant proposed that liquor ordered
either the Bali Hut and Day Bed areas would not be permitted to be taken outside
of the Bali Hut or Day Bed area. The Applicant
sought underage approval for this
proposed licenced area, to accommodate patrons under the age of 18 to be within
the VIP areas.
6. On 25 September 2020 a copy of the Application was served on both Victoria
Police and the City of Whittlesea (
), in accordance with section
33(3) of the LCR Act.
7. On 19 November 2020, the Council informed the Commission that they were
not aware of any recent liquor licence planning permit
applications for the
8. On 16 October 2020, Victoria Police lodged an objection to the grant of
the Application, providing the following submissions in
of sufficient controls to ensure underage persons do not consume alcohol;
of unaccompanied minors at an all-ages entertainment venue is contrary to
community expectations; and
approval is not necessary, due to sufficient exemptions under the LCR Act for
underage persons to be on a licenced premises.
9. Victoria Police informed the Commission they would withdraw the objection
to the grant of a licence if the Applicant was to withdraw
the approval for
underage authority.
10. On 28 October 2020, in response to the submissions from Victoria Police,
the Applicant informed the Commission it did not accept
the proposal from
Victoria Police to withdraw the application for underage approval, and made the
following submissions in support
of the Application:
approval is sought specifically to allow underage persons using the wave pool
and beach area to access the Beach Shack Café,
which is located within
the upper level;
food and soft drink purchases must be consumed either within the general food
service area, including the Beach Shack Café,
or on the beach area;
staff serving customers at the Beach Shack Café will have completed
responsible service of alcohol training and strictly
checking identification
where required;
consumption
of alcohol in the presence of underage persons is normalised in society;
proposed licenced areas at the Premises are separate from the beach area and the
wave pool and will be effectively managed by
supervisors and management to ensure underage persons do not consume alcohol.
11. On 27 November 2020, Victoria Police provided further written submissions
to the Commission in response to the Applicant’s
submissions, in summary
restating their previous views on the Application and raising concerns that
underage approval would not comply
with the ‘National Alcohol
as well as water
safety policy.
12. On 18 December 2020, a delegate of the Commission (
refused to grant the Application on the grounds that it did not meet the
requirements of section 26(1) of the LCR Act and that a
licence could not be
granted because the Premises would be captured by section 22(ca) of the LCR Act
Original Decision
Application for Internal Review
13. On 13 January 2021, the Commission received an application for internal
review from the Applicant, requesting the Commission set
aside the Original
Decision and grant the renewable limited licence and underage approval for the
Application
14. On 28 January 2021, Victoria Police informed the Commission that they
maintain the objection to the Licence with underage authority
approval, based on
the risks associated with underage persons in licenced areas and around water.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
15. Division 2 Part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications.
The Original Decision is a reviewable decision under section
152, and the
Applicant is an eligible person to apply for a review of that decision. The
Review Application is made under section
153 of the LCR Act.
16. Pursuant to 157(1) of the LCR Act, the task before the Commission with
respect to the Review Application is to make a fresh decision
or varies the reviewable decision; or
aside the reviewable decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers appropriate.
17. Under the LCR Act an application for licence may be contested or
uncontested. Pursuant to section 3(1) of the LCR Act a contested
application
“an application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation of
a licence or BYO permit in respect of which any objections
are received under
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in the Division for those
objections (or that period as extended
under section 174)”.
18. Victoria Police maintains an objection to the Review Application,
therefore the Review Application is a contested application.
19. Accordingly, the Commission on internal review stands in the shoes of the
original decision maker and must make a fresh decision
with respect to the
Variation Application. The Commission must either:
the application (and may do so subject to
conditions);
to grant the application.
20. In doing so, the Commission must consider all the information, material
and evidence that was before the original decision
The Commission may also
consider further information, material or evidence in making a
Exercising the internal review power
21. Section 9(3) of the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation Act
) provides:
“The Commission must, when performing functions or duties or
exercising its powers under the Gambling Regulation Act 2003, the
Liquor Control
Reform Act 1998
Casino Control Act 1991
Racing Act 1958
or any other
Act, have regard to the objects of the Act conferring functions on the
Commission”
22. Accordingly, in exercising its discretion to either grant or refuse a
contested application under section 47(1) of the LCR Act,
the Commission must
have regard to the objects of the LCR Act.
23. The objects of the LCR Act are set out in section 4(1), which provides:
“(1) The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes
to, and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products;
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and
reducing risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.”
24. Section 4(2) of the LCR Act provides further that:
“It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority,
discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or imposed by this
Act must be
exercised and performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks
associated with the misuse and abuse of alcohol.”
Determination of a contested application
25. Where an application is a contested application, pursuant to section
47(1) of the LCR Act:
“Subject to Division 3, the Commission must, after the period for
making an objection under Division 5 has expired, including
any extension of
time granted for making an objection, grant or refuse a contested
application.”
26. Section 47(2) of the LCR Act provides that the Commission may refuse to
grant a contested application on any of grounds set out
in section 44(2).
27. Section 44(2)(b)(1) of the LCR Act provides the
following grounds for refusal –
“that the granting of the application would detract from or be
detrimental to the amenity
of the area in which the premises to which the application relates are
28. Section 44(4) of the LCR Act provides that before granting or refusing a
contested application under subsection (1), the Commission
“(a) ...have regard to any matter the Commission considers relevant;
(b) make any enquiries the Commission considers appropriate but is not
required to give any person an opportunity to be heard concerning
application.”
29. The Court of Appeal of the Victorian Supreme Court has made it clear in
Kordister Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
harm minimisation is a fundamental principle of the LCR Act and can properly be
regarded as
“the primary regulatory object of the Act and therefore the
primary consideration in liquor licensing
However, as
was also noted by the Court of Appeal
, “this is not to say ... that it
[harm minimisation] is to be taken into account, or given such weight, to the
exclusion of
30. The Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in
section 44(2) are relevant considerations, the ultimate
determination of a
contested application is to be made pursuant to sections 44(1), 47(1) and 157(1)
at the discretion of the Commission
with reference to the objects of the LCR
31. Under section 49 of the LCR Act, the Commission may impose any condition
it thinks fit on the grant of an application.
Certain premises not to be licenced
32. Section 22(1)(ca) of the LCR Act provides the Commission must not grant a
licence in respect of –
“premises that, in the opinion of the Commission, are intended by
the occupier of the premises to be primarily used by people
under the age of 18
years, unless the Commission is satisfied that the grant of a licence or permit
would not present a specific
risk of supply of liquor to a person under the age
of 18 years;”
33. Subsection 22(3A) provides factors that the Commission may consider in
making its assessment under section22(1)(ca) these include
but are not limited
“(a) whether the proposed licence or permit authorises supply of
liquor at a time when the premises will not be used primarily
by persons under
the age of 18 years; and
(b) whether the proposed licence or permit provides that any person under
the age of 18 years must be accompanied by a responsible
adult at all times
during which the proposed supply of liquor is to occur.”
Allowing minors on licensed or authorised premises
34. Section 120(1) of the LCR Act provides:
“(1) If a person under the age of 18 years—
(a) is on licensed premises or any authorised premises; and
(b) is not—
(i) in the company of a responsible adult; or
(ii) on the premises for the purpose of partaking of a meal; or
(iii) in the case of a licence under which accommodation is provided, a
resident of those premises—
the licensee or permittee is guilty of an offence.”
35. Subsection 120(2) provides that section 120(1) does not apply, inter
(e) to the presence on licensed premises or authorised premises of a
person under the age of 18 years in accordance with the approval
Commission and any conditions to which that approval is subject.”
Conduct of an inquiry
36. Section 34 of the VCGLR Act provides that subject to that Act, gambling
legislation or liquor legislation, the Commission may
conduct any inquiry in any
manner it considers appropriate. During the conduct of an inquiry, section 25(3)
of the VCGLR Act provides
that the Commission is not bound by the rules of
evidence, however, must comply with the rules of natural justice.
Material before the Commission and public hearing
37. The Commission on review had before it, and considered, all materials
received by the Delegate. In addition, the Commission received
and considered
the following:
Decision and reasons of the Delegate, dated 20 March 2020;
Application
for Internal Review and submissions in support, submitted by Colin Mann on
behalf of the Applicant;
submissions from the Applicant, dated 16 June 2021 regarding clarification of
lines of liquor proposed for supply, trading
hours, maximum limits on liquor
supply and the proposed Beach Shack Café area; and
written submissions from the Applicant, after the public hearing, providing
clarification and a draft venue management plan,
dated 26 July 2021.
38. On 20 July 2021, the Commission conducted a public hearing, by video
conference, in relation to the Review Application (
the Hearing
Applicant was represented by Mr Colin Mann. Ms Marilina Dinardo, a shareholder
in the Applicant and the Premises food and beverage
manager, was called as a
witness and gave oral evidence at the Hearing.
39. Prior to the Hearing, Deputy Chair Versey and Commissioner Scott visited
the Premises for the purpose of conducting a visual inspection.
Reasons for decision on review
Issues for determination on review
40. In deciding whether to affirm, vary or set aside the Original Decision
and in turn grant or refuse the Review Application, the
key issues to be
determined by the Commission in this matter are:
identification of the “premises” for the purpose of the Review
Application;
the Premises are intended to be used primarily by people under the age of 18
to grant an approval for underage persons on the Premises under section
120(2)(e) of the LCR Act; and
the supply of liquor proposed pursuant to the Licence is limited in scale and
41. In exercising its ultimate discretion to grant or refuse the Application,
the Commission must have regard to the objects of the
LCR Act, with particular
regard to the object of harm minimisation.
Identification of the “premises”
42. In order to make a determination on whether
licensing the Premises would be prohibited under the LCR Act, the Commission
first consider whether the Premises for the purpose of the Review
Application, is the redline area or the whole Funfields premises.
43. The Commission refers to the decision of the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (
and is of the view
that reference to “premises” is different to, and distinct from, the
term “licensed premises”
as used in the LCR Act. In
VCAT also found that it is possible for a single site to comprise more than one
premises, depending on how the land is being used.
In that case, VCAT found that
the petrol station and the restaurant were operating as sufficiently different
uses on the land as
to constitute different premises.
44. The decision of
was then referred to and followed in the
Danz Management
In that case, VCAT considered an application for an on-premises licence by the
operator of an entertainment centre for the café
that was collocated
within the entertainment centre. VCAT rejected the operator’s claim that
the games area and the licensed
area should be treated as different
“premises”, and ultimately found that the whole of the entertainment
centre comprised
the “premises” for the purposes of section
45. In the Application form, the Applicant stated a licence was sought for a
specific area of the Premises. At the Hearing, when the
Commission put the
matter of identifying the premises for the purpose of the Review Application to
the Applicant’s representative,
Mr Mann stated that for the purpose of the
Review Application Funfields Theme Park as a whole was considered the
“premises”.
Mr Mann went on to state that the Applicant would give
evidence that the intended primary use of the Premises was a family-oriented
theme park, and not primarily for underage persons.
46. In evidence at the Hearing, Ms Dinardo affirmed that the Premises is a
family-oriented theme park, a small portion of which the
Applicant was seeking
be licenced for liquor to be consumed within. Ms Dinardo also affirmed that the
whole Premises is owned by
the Applicant, is run as one business and has shared
facilities. Certain parts of the Premises are then sectioned to create various
themed areas.
47. On the evidence provided, the Commission finds that for the purpose of
the Review Application the entire Funfields premises should
be treated as the
“premises” for the purposes of considering section 22(1)(ca) and
determining the intended primary use
of the Premises.
48. The Commission has turned its mind to the fact that the Applicant has
proposed two separate red line areas within the upper level
at the Premises. For
completeness, the Commission considers that it is not unlawful for staff members
to carry the liquor from the
Beach Shack Café to the VIP area for those
patrons using the Bali Huts and Day Beds to consume liquor within that red line
area. However, patrons are not permitted to consume liquor outside of the red
line area or to take the liquor outside the redline
area in which the liquor has
been ordered. Accordingly, there is an obligation on a licensee to ensure that
patrons remain in the
designated red line area when liquor is being consumed.
Whether the Premises are intended to be used primarily by
people under the age of 18 years
49. Under section 22(1)(ca) of the LCR Act, the
Commission is prohibited from granting a licence for premises that, in the
of the Commission, are intended by the occupier of the premises to be
primarily used by people under the age of 18 years, unless
the Commission is
satisfied that the grant of a licence or permit would not present a specific
risk of supply of liquor to a person
under the age of 18 years.
50. In determining this issue, section 22(3A) of the LCR Act provides that
the Commission may consider:
the proposed licence authorises supply of liquor at a time when the premises
will not be used primarily by persons under the
age of 18 years; and
the proposed licence provides that any person under the age of 18 years must be
accompanied by a responsible adult at all
times during which the proposed supply
of liquor is to occur.
51. In relation to the first factor, at paragraph 50(a), the Commission
refers to the Applicant’s proposed trading hours and
notes the Applicant
intends to supply liquor in the ordinary course of business, at times when the
proposed licenced area will not
be used primarily by patrons under the age of
52. In relation to the second factor, at paragraph 50(b) the Applicant has
provided the following relevant evidence:
the Bali Huts and Day Beds can only have underage patrons if they are in the
company of a responsible adult; and
is no age limit for entry into the Premises, tickets are sold based on height
categories with some rides requiring an adult
(or person over a certain height)
to accompany younger people.
53. The Applicant has stated, in both written submissions and at the Hearing,
that the Premises is family-oriented and accordingly
most patrons of the
Premises are families, some of which will have children under the age of 18.
These are the patrons who are likely
to be on the Premises during ordinary
business hours.
54. At the Hearing, further questions were put to Ms Dinardo to try and
establish the intended users of the Premises. Ms Dinardo
gave evidence that the
business was intended to be “family-oriented” as opposed to
primarily for use by people under
18 years. In summary, Ms Dinardo gave the
following relevant evidence to the Commission:
are specific “kids’” areas at the park which consists of rides
of mostly for children, who are under 130cm
ticket sales for entry into the park are for families;
rarely attend the Premises without accompanying adults;
Bali Huts and Day Beds are in a VIP area of the Premises, which patrons must
pre-book and pay a fee to use for the day. Usually
Bali Huts are booked out by
families and the Day Beds are for use by two adults and can be shared with
children if the adults have
children with them;
Applicant caters to group bookings at the Premises, which include birthday
parties and school holiday programs but also includes
general group bookings and
corporate events;
is a barbeque and picnic area at the Premises, for families who wish to attend
the Premises for the purposes of having a picnic
or a barbeque.
55. At the site visit, Deputy Chair Versey and Commissioner Scott noted a
variety of rides and facilities that did not appear to be
primarily intended for
use by people under the age of 18, but rather for the use and enjoyment of
adults. This includes the picnic
areas, barbeque areas, the wave pool and the
volcano beach area.
56. On inspecting the website, the Commission took into consideration the
following additional relevant points to make the assessment
on the intended
primary use of the Premises:
are concession tickets for seniors to enter the park;
under the age of 16 need to provide identification before entry into the
Premises is permitted; and
images and reviews on the website, show a range of age groups, and as given in
evidence by Ms Dinardo, mostly families, enjoying
the various facilities at the
57. The Commission, having considered all the evidence, is satisfied that
there are many areas and attractions at the Premises which
adults enjoy, and
that adults do not attend the park merely to supervise children.
58. The Commission is of the view that the Premises is relevantly different
from the venue that was considered in
Danz Management
. On balance, the
evidence given in this matter is more indicative that the Premises is a
mixed-market, family venue rather than that
which was presented in
. Specifically, the Commission consider the following points
differentiate the Premises from the venue in
Premises is a large outdoor area with various facilities and rides, not just
indoor games;
rides at the Premises are targeted towards adults, or older
Premises sells tickets as family bookings, corporate events and to seniors,
which indicate a broad customer base that uses the
Premises and the usage is
reflective of the intended use of the Premises;
attend the Premises for the use and enjoyment of the facilities and rides, not
merely as supervisors;
the evidence given by the Applicant indicates the facilities at the Premises are
designed to cater to all age groups, compared
Danz Management
the owner had conceded was targeted to people under the age of 18.
59. After considering all evidence before it, the Commission is satisfied
that the intended primary use of the Premises is not primarily
for people under
18 years old and that the Premises is a family-oriented venue which caters to
people of all ages.
Approval for underage persons on the licenced premises
60. The Application subject of the Review
Application included an application pursuant to section 120(2)(e) of the LCR
Act, for the
Commission to approve persons under the age of 18, not in the
company of a responsible adult, to be present on the proposed licenced
61. The Applicant sought this approval specifically to allow persons under
the age of 18 to enter the Beach Shack Café area
of the upper level to
purchase soft drinks and food, without a responsible adult accompanying them.
There would be liquor supplied
for consumption within this area. Under the
Review Application the Applicant did not seek the underage approval for the Bali
or Day Bed areas on the Premises.
62. Under the LCR Act, unaccompanied minors are only permitted on licenced
premises for partaking in a meal or in the company of a
responsible adult.
Generally, the Commission will only grant an approval under subsection 120(2)(e)
to allow unaccompanied minors
on licensed premises in specific circumstances,
and for particular events with clear plans and strict controls to ensure that
cannot obtain or consume alcohol at the licensed premises.
63. The Review Application seeks a generic approval for the proposed licenced
areas at the Premises, rather than an approval for specific
occasions. The
Commission is of the view that this is not consistent with the objects of the
64. The Commission finds that the Review Application does not contain
sufficient detail for the management of the risks associated
with allowing
unaccompanied minors on a licensed premises and, accordingly, is not satisfied
that the risks of harm to minors on
the Premises, including the risk of supply
and secondary supply of liquor to minors, have been appropriately mitigated.
65. On the evidence before it, the Commission is of the view that the
Applicant has not made a satisfactory case for the Commission
to approve the
application under section 120(2)(e) of the LCR Act.
66. In particular, the Commission is not satisfied that the Applicant would
sufficiently manage the risk of secondary supply of liquor
that arises where
approval under section 120(2)(e) of the LCR Act is granted. Nor is it satisfied
that additional works to establish
a separate point of sale of soft drinks and
food to unaccompanied minors within the upper level would be impractical.
67. The Commission considers granting the application under section 120(2)(e)
of the LCR Act would be conducive to or encourage the
misuse or abuse of alcohol
and would be contrary to the harm minimisation object of section 4(1) of the LCR
68. The Commission agrees with Victoria Police submissions that the Applicant
can operate the Licence, with underage persons only
permitted within liquor
consumption areas in the company of a responsible adult.
69. Section 3 of the LCR Act defines a responsible adult as:
responsible adult
, in relation to a person who is under the
age of 18 years, means a person who is of or over the age of 18 years and who
(a) the younger person's parent, stepparent, guardian or grandparent; or
(b) the younger person's spouse; or
(c) a person who is acting in place of a parent and who could reasonably
be expected to exercise responsible supervision of the younger
70. Section 120(1)(b)(i) of the LCR Act allows for minors to be on a licenced
premises in the company of a responsible adult.
71. Accordingly, the Commission refuses to grant the application for underage
Limited scale and scope
72. Section 14 of the LCR Act provides that a
renewable limited licence “
authorises the licensee to supply liquor at
the times determined by the Commission and specified in the licence
However, unlike other categories of licence, limited licences are subject to the
additional restriction found at section
26 of the LCR Act, “
scale and scope of the supply of liquor the subject of the licence is limited in
the Scale and Scope Requirement
73. There are no statutory signposts which prescribe specific factors for the
Commission to consider in determining whether the Scale
and Scope Requirement is
met. On previous occasions the Commission has considered
the nature,
location, duration or frequency of the hours of operation of a licence in
as relevant to the Scale and Scope
Requirement.
74. Section 26(1) of the LCR Act gives the Commission a wide discretion to
determine, as a question of fact, whether the Scale and
Scope Requirement is
met. In the decision of
, VCAT considered that there was no warrant
for an interpretation that the limitation in question need to “contemplate
substantial
significant
restriction”,
however this
does not mean that the Commission cannot consider whether a limitation is
substantial
significant
in the exercise of its discretion to
determine whether the Scale and Scope Requirement is met.
75. The Applicant has offered the following limitations on the Licence:
will be limited to a total of 6 drinks per person per day;
liquor for supply:
light strength beer, one mid-strength beer both produced by Carlton &
each of prosecco, white wine, red wine;
margarita and daiquiri; and
supplied at the Beach Shack Café must be consumed whilst patrons are
seated at a numbered table;
supplied to the Bali Hut and Day beds, must be consumed within the allocated
“VIP” area;
will be delivered by staff to the patron for consumption; and
licensed trading hours.
76. After the Hearing, the Commission requested further written submissions
from the Applicant to provide clarification on the trading
hours sought as well
as the maximum number of drinks per person per day.
77. On 26 July 2021, the Applicant in written submissions requested the
following amended licenced trading hours:
September to November and February to April between 12 noon and
December and January between 12 noon and 5.30pm
78. The Applicant informed the Commission that regular business hours for the
Premises are:
September (school holiday period usually last 2 weeks in September): 10am
October (Saturday and Sunday only): 10am – 5pm
November (Thursday – Sunday inclusive): 10am – 5pm
December (every day up to December 24): 10am – 5pm
From 26 December (every day): 10am – 6pm
January (every day up until January 26): 10am – 6pm
January (every day from 26 January): 10am– 5pm
February (from Friday – Monday inclusive): 10am – 5pm
March (Saturday and Sunday only): 10am – 5pm
April (From 1 April to end of the Easter holiday break): 10am – 5pm
79. The Applicant has informed the Commission that the licenced area will be
closed 30 minutes prior to close of business, on each
day it is operating.
80. As stated in paragraph 75(a), the Applicant confirmed that patrons would
be limited to purchase a total number of six drinks per
day, and that this would
be monitored with the use of wristbands on patrons purchasing liquor.
81. The Commission has considered the limitations set out above, as well as
the size of the proposed licenced area within the Premises.
In this instance the
Commission is satisfied that the Scale and Scope Requirement is met.
Objects of the Act
82. In determining this Review Application, the
Commission has had regard to the objects of the LCR Act, in particular harm
minimisation.
83. The Commission has taken into account the evidence and submissions made
by Victoria Police regarding the harm of secondary supply
of alcohol as well as
a need for the Applicant to have sufficient practices to monitor and manage
alcohol related harm at the Premises,
specifically that the Applicant as a
first-time licensee will need to submit a venue management plan for approval by
the Commission.
84. The Commission notes the proposed licenced areas at the Premises are
small (relative to the size of the whole Funfields premises)
defined areas which
sit above a wave pool. At the Hearing, Ms Dinardo gave evidence that the Beach
Shack Café has an artificial
barrier which delineates it from the general
upper level area and that any liquor purchase will be required to be consumed at
table. Ms Dinardo further gave evidence that the Bali Huts and Day
Beds, being a VIP area are fenced off and cannot be accessed by
patrons who have
not pre-booked to be in the area and that liquor will be delivered to patrons by
staff at the Premises and cannot
be removed from the VIP area. Ms Dinardo also
gave evidence that wrist bands would be used to identify patrons who were
as 18 years or older and therefore permitted to purchase liquor, and
that the wrist band would be used to tally the total number
of drinks that had
been purchased throughout the day.
85. The Commission is of the view that proof of age, daily limits on the
number of drinks purchased by patrons and keeping liquor
within the designated
red line areas could be satisfactorily monitored, if there was a clear plan in
place to manage the obligations
associated with holding a liquor licence.
86. As the Applicant has not held a liquor licence previously, the Applicant
would need to provide a satisfactory venue management
plan, as to be approved by
a delegate of the Commission. On approval of a satisfactory venue management
plan, the Commission would
then be satisfied that the grant of the Licence would
not be conducive to or encourage the misuse or abuse of alcohol and would not
contrary to the harm minimisation object of section 4(1) of the LCR Act.
87. Accordingly, on considering all the evidence before it, the Commission is
satisfied that, together with the conditions imposed
at Appendix A and an
approved venue management plan, the risk of the misuse and abuse of alcohol in
this instance will be minimised.
Decision on review
88. Based on the reasons detailed above and having
regard to the objects of the LCR Act, the Commission has determined to set aside
the Original Decision and grant a renewable limited licence for the Premises,
subject to the conditions as detailed in Appendix A.
89. The Commission has determined to refuse the application under section
120(2)(e) of the LCR Act, for permanent approval to allow
underage persons on
the licenced premises, without a responsible adult.
The preceding eighty-nine (89) paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Decision of Ms Helen Versey (Deputy Chair) Ms Danielle
Huntersmith
(Commissioner) and Mr Andrew Scott (Commissioner).
This licence is a renewable limited licence and authorises the licensee to
supply liquor on the licensed premises for consumption
on the licensed premises
during the trading hours specified below.
Conditions of approval
This licence is not effective until a Venue Management Plan has been
submitted to and approved by the Commission.
Responsible service of alcohol
At all times staff selling, offering or serving liquor are to have completed
an approved Responsible Service of Alcohol training course.
Period of licence – section 50(2)
The licence is only in force during September to April inclusive.
Special conditions
(a) The licensee must have clear signs stating that liquor must not be
removed from the licenced areas.
(b) The licensee must place signs at the Bali huts, Day Beds and the Beach
Shack Café reminding patrons that people under the
age of 18 must be
accompanied by a responsible adult.
(c) Liquor must be supplied by RSA trained staff member and delivered to the
patron at the VIP area (the area consisting of the Bali
Huts and Day Beds).
(d) Liquor supplied in the Beach Shack Area must be delivered to the relevant
numbered table by RSA trained staff and must only be
consumed by patrons seated
at the table.
(e) Liquor supplied to the VIP area must only be consumed within the VIP
(f) Liquor supplied may only be served in plastic containers or cans.
(g) Liquor supplied must be limited to a maximum of six (6) drinks per person
per day, each person purchasing, or consuming liquor
must wear a wristband which
records the number of drinks as they are being purchased
Trading hours
September (Monday to Sunday inclusive, during the Victorian school holiday
period only): 12pm – 4.30pm
October (Saturday and Sunday only): 12pm –
November (Thursday – Sunday inclusive only): 12pm – 4.30pm
December (Monday – Sunday inclusive): from 1 December to December 24
–12pm – 4.30pm; from 26 December to 31 December
January (Monday to Sunday inclusive): from 1 January to 26 January –
12pm – 5.30pm; from 26 January to 31 January: 12pm
February (Friday – Monday inclusive only): 12pm – 4.30pm
March (Saturday and Sunday only): 12pm – 4.30pm
April (Monday to Sunday inclusive, during the Victorian school holiday period
only): 12pm – 4.30pm
Supply of liquor
The type of liquor supplied is limited to one line each of the following:
light beer, medium strength beer, prosecco, red wine, white
wine and frozen
margarita, frozen daiquiri and spritz.
The supply of liquor is limited to no more than 6 drinks per person per day.
Commonwealth of Australia,
Department of Health,
National Alcohol Strategy 2019 – 2028
Sections 44, 49 and 157 of the
Sections 44 and 157 of the LCR
Section 157(2) of the LCR Act.
See section 157(3) of the LCR
There are no objects specified
in the VCGLR Act itself.
, at [19] per Warren CJ and Osborn JA; [188] per Tate JA.
, at [188] per Tate JA.
Gaghan v LLC
[2000] VCAT
(30 September 2000)
Danz Management Pty Ltd v
Director of Liquor Licensing
[2010] VCAT 536
(4 May 2010)
See decision
Fynix Pty Ltd at 36A Vickers Street, Sebastapol
(Liquor-internal review) [2016] VCGLR 19 (25 July 2016) At
Club 8 Pty Limited v
Director of Liquor Licensing (Occupational and Business Regulation
[2009] VCAT
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (53.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter