URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/262.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re Nguyen [2025] VSCA 262 (30 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCI 2025 0141
IN THE MATTER
of a proposed
judicial direction, on the application of HUA THI NGUYEN
HUA THI NGUYEN
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
Determined on the papers
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
30 October 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 262
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE – Filing –
Power to direct Registrar to accept documents for filing – Registrar
accept documents for filing – Application for Judge of Appeal
to direct Registrar to accept documents for filing – Proposed
seeking leave to appeal against orders of judge at directions hearing – No
finding or determination made by judge
– Direction to accept documents not
Supreme Court Act 1986
Supreme Court (General
Civil Procedure) Rules 2025
rr 28.03, 64.43.
Staats v United States of America
(1992) 66 ALJR 793
considered.
Not applicable
Respondent:
Not applicable
No applicable
Respondent:
Not applicable
14 October 2025, the Registrar of the Court of Appeal (‘the
Registrar’) refused to accept documents for filing from
Ms Nguyen in
respect of a proposed application for leave to appeal (‘the proposed
Application’). That application relates
to interlocutory orders of
Matthews J made 27 August 2025 and 6 October 2025 in respect
of a proceeding listed for trial on 6 November
proceeding’). The applicant has now sought a direction from a judge to the
Registrar to accept the documents
of the proposed Application for filing
pursuant to r 64.43(5) of the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure)
(‘the Rules’).
matter has been referred to me to determine on the papers. I have determined not
to call for further submissions in light of the
material already filed. For the
reasons that follow, I refuse to make such a direction.
Background facts
this proceeding, the ANZ Bank Group Limited (‘the ANZ Bank’) has
(a) to recover monies allegedly advanced by way of loan to Ms Nguyen together
with interest and costs pursuant to an agreement made
(‘the Letter of Offer’);
(b) possession of property mortgaged by Ms Nguyen in favour of the ANZ Bank
(‘the Secured Property’) pursuant to a deed
of mortgage dated
20 June 2016 (‘the Mortgage’) to secure the advance.
Summary Judgment
application
13 March 2024, ANZ Bank sought summary judgment against Ms Nguyen
for the amounts said to be owed by her pursuant to the Letter
of Offer and for
repossession of the Secured Property. The matter was heard by
Steffensen AsJ on 18 June 2024. Ms Nguyen was assisted
husband, Mr Trajkovski, who appeared with leave as a ‘
and made submissions.
In addition, Mr Trajkovski affirmed an affidavit opposing the summary
judgment application.
summary judgment application was determined by reasons delivered and orders made
on 25 June 2024 (together, ‘the Summary
determination’). Steffensen AsJ made orders for summary judgment in
favour of ANZ Bank for the principal owing (being
$298,000). This is
notwithstanding that her Honour concluded she was not satisfied that
Ms Nguyen agreed to the terms in the Letter
of Offer. However, her Honour
was satisfied that the money was advanced and was owing. She said:
It is apparent from Mr Trajkovski’s evidence and oral submissions
that the defendant does not deny that the bank advanced
the principal to the
defendant which was used to purchase the [Secured] Property, and that this
amount ought to be repaid to the
bank. This submission was also made by the
defendant herself, who submitted to the Court that she understood that the bank
to take the property because she doesn’t have money to pay the bank.
She said that she is now allowed to work, so she can try
to repay the
her Honour dismissed ANZ Bank’s application for summary judgment as it
related to:
(a) the quantum of interest said to be payable;
(b) the fees and charges levied in facilitating the loan; and
(c) the claim to repossess the Secured Property.
was because her Honour was:
not satisfied that the bank has established that the defendant agreed to the
terms set out in the letter of offer ... It is unexplained
as to how the
defendant could have agreed to the terms set out in a letter of offer which
post-dates her signature by nearly one
month ... For this reason, I am not
satisfied that the letter of offer sets out the terms of a binding agreement
between the plaintiff
findings were made in a context where Ms Nguyen also alleged that the ANZ Bank
had engaged in ‘unconscionable conduct’
which affected the
enforceability of the Letter of Offer and/or the Mortgage. Relevantly,
Steffensen AsJ said in respect of Ms Nguyen’s
The defendant raises a number of arguments that Mr Trajkovski described as
part of a ‘conspiracy’ with a view to explain
why the bank engaged
in the alleged unconscionable conduct. For example, the defendant submits that
it was in the bank’s interest
to enter into the loans which are
unaffordable so that they may foreclose and obtain the benefit of real property,
without having
to meet the obligations of property ownership, such as payment of
capital gains tax and land tax. Further, it was alleged that the
bank loaned
funds to the defendant so as to ensure that the obligations that it was owed by
the former registered proprietor of the
Property were discharged. The defendant
alleges that the bank engaged in fraud ‘when it merely adjusted numbers on
the vendors
account’. These allegations and explanations were made without
an evidential foundation and are farfetched. They are also irrelevant
unconscionable conduct defence that the defendant has outlined. I will therefore
not consider them any further, and for the
sake of completeness, note that any
defence founded upon them has no reasonable prospect of
has been no application to appeal from the 25 June 2024 orders made by
Steffensen AsJ pursuant to the Rules. The time for any
such appeal has now
well expired.
Orders made
27 August 2025 and 6 October 2025
27 August 2025, there was a directions hearing before Matthews J.
Once again, Ms Nguyen was assisted by her husband, Mr Trajkovski,
friend. Orders were made which, amongst other things, fixed a
trial date (being 6 October 2025), granted leave to ANZ Bank to file
second further amended statement of claim, and granted leave to Ms Nguyen
to file an amended defence and counterclaim.
opposed the ANZ Bank’s application to file its amended statement, which
included new particulars of the Letter of
Offer and its terms.
Mr Trajkovski opposed these amendments because ANZ Bank’s
‘claim is based on a forgery ... the whole
claim collapses due to that
fact’. Further, Ms Nguyen sought to strike out the ANZ Bank’s
existing statement of claim
on the same basis.
judge allowed the ANZ Bank’s amendment application on the basis that the
facts underlying the Letter of Offer were matters
to be determined at trial. The
judge also refused Ms Nguyen’s application to strike out the existing
statement of claim. The
reasons were made plain in the following
: That’s the claim that they’re making. The
defendant can deny signing it. She can deny signing that version of it. She
plead whatever she wants in response to that, but it’s – I’m
not going to strike it out because you say it’s
a forgery. That’s a
matter for me to consider at trial.
Mr Trajkovski
: The reason why we want it struck out because it was
backed [sic] by any evidence and it’s contrary to the evidence
already on record which is that email that shows clearly that it
couldn’t have been signed on that date.
: It’s not a basis to strike out, Mr Trajkovski. These
are claims and defences that need to be the subject of evidence at trial
argument at trial.
judge also indicated that she would make orders referring the issue to the
Victorian Bar’s Pro Bono scheme, such that an
amicus curiae could be
appointed to assist the Court.
to Ms Nguyen amendment application, not all the amendments proposed by
Ms Nguyen were allowed. This was because Matthews J concluded
many of the proposed amendments related to issues already addressed in the
Summary Judgment determination, most relevantly proposed
amendments to the
effect that:
(a) no principal was in fact advanced to Ms Nguyen, but rather that
‘only accounting entries were made, unsupported by lawful
consideration or
regulatory clarity’;
(b) Ms Nguyen became ‘a lessee under a disguised financing
arrangement’ with the result that the ‘so-called loan
was a sham or
constructive trust device enabling unjust enrichment through deceitful
(c) the ANZ Bank had ‘created a book-entry loan without transferring real
funds to Ms Nguyen’.
27 August 2025, Ms Nguyen made an application for a stay against
ANZ Bank repossessing the Secured Property, and to strike out
amended statement of claim. Each of these applications were refused by
Matthews J. As to her stay application, Mr
Trajkovski submitted that
Ms Nguyen intended to ‘prevent [ANZ Bank] from the use of [the Letter
of Offer] which is not authentic,
to proceed and ... give orders to sell the
property under those conditions’.
judge explained to Mr Trajkovski that no orders would be made to permit ANZ
Bank to repossess the Secured Property until after
trial. In the course of
argument, there was the following exchange:
: But isn’t that a matter for trial? Isn’t that
for me to determine at trial whether or not the bank’s proven its
Mr Trajkovski
: Well, to me, as I understand it, there’s no doubt
that the document’s forged because there’s a second letter of
that’s now appeared that is different. So there shouldn’t be two
letters of offer. So that basically confirms that
– that that one that
they used to file their case is a forgery without doubt. The experts also come
to that conclusion, our
expert. So now we’re not – we don’t
have access to further evidence to try to provide more – more evidence
from the expert because it doesn’t exist. So what I’m saying is
basically we’re just trying to protect –
protect our interest and
preventing the plaintiff from using what – what looks to be more than
likely a forged letter of offer.
: Whether or not the document is a forgery is a matter for me
to determine after – at the trial. All right? It’s not for
determine now.
Mr Trajkovski
: So formally it has to be done at trial?
: Well, yes, it’s – I can’t determine this
when I haven’t seen any of the evidence.
Mr Trajkovski
also appeared for Ms Nguyen as her
friend at the first day
of the trial on 6 October 2025. Due to Ms Nguyen’s
inability to organise an interpreter, the trial
was unable to proceed on that
day. As a result, Matthews J made orders to (amongst other things) adjourn
the trial until 6 November
2025, and to require that Ms Nguyen
confirm the witnesses she would be calling at trial. No other relevant orders
The proposed
Application
10 October 2025, Mr Trajkovski sought to file the following
documents in support of the proposed Application:
(a) an application for leave to appeal dated 10 October 2025, signed
by Ms Nguyen (‘the 10 October 2025 Application’);
(b) an application for leave to appeal dated 2 October 2025, signed by
Mr Trajkovski on behalf of Ms Nguyen, which had been rejected
filing by the Registry of the Court of Appeal (‘the Registry’) on
3 October 2025 (‘the 2 October 2025
Application’);
(c) a written case dated 10 October 2025, signed by Ms Nguyen;
(d) a draft application book index;
(e) a draft summary;
(f) a list of authorities;
(g) the orders of Matthews J made 27 August 2025 and
6 October 2025; and
(h) an affidavit affirmed by Mr Trajkovski on 3 October 2025,
with exhibits.
10 October 2025 Application contains 14 grounds as set out in
attachment A to these reasons.
14 October 2025, the Registry emailed Mr Trajkovski (as the
filer) to inform him that these documents had been rejected for filing
following reasons:
(a) Matthews J did not make any of the ‘findings’ which were
the subject of the proposed Application
(b) the affidavit of Mr Trajkovski was substantially irregular because it
was unclear on what basis the affidavit was being submitted
(given he was not a
party) and because the exhibits were, in part, illegible.
(c) to the extent that an application was made for leave to appeal from the
orders of Matthews J made on 27 August 2025, that application
out of time and was not supported by an extension of time application.
a result the Registrar wrote that the documents relating to the proposed
Application were rejected on the following bases:
• pursuant to rule 28.03(2) of the Rules on the basis that, if sealed,
[the proposed Application] would be substantially irregular,
or constitute an
abuse of process; and
• pursuant to r 64.43(2) of the Rules on the basis that [the documents]
are incomplete, and the filing was not accompanied
by all the documents required
to be filed pursuant to Order 64 of the Rules and the Practice Note.
his email in response dated 16 October 2025, Mr Trajkovski wrote
to dispute that determination and requested ‘administrative
that the documents be sealed nunc pro tunc.’ In an email from the Registry
dated 20 October 2025, the Applicant
was informed that the email dated
16 October 2025, would be treated as an application under
r 64.43(5) of the Rules. I note that,
under r 28.03 of the Rules, the Court
of Appeal constituted by a single Judge of Appeal also has the power to direct
the Registrar
to seal a document where the Registrar has rejected a document.
Determination
provisions of the Rules that are relevant in this case to the Registrar’s
power to refuse or reject documents for filing
are rr 28.03(2), and
64.43(1). They provide that:
28.03 Powers of the Prothonotary or Registrar
(2) Prothonotary or the Registrar may reject a document if the Prothonotary or
Registrar considers that:
(a) a document, if it were sealed, would ... constitute an abuse of process; or
64.43 Further powers of Registrar
(1) The Registrar may refuse to accept for filing any application, including for
leave to appeal, notice of appeal or other notice,
written case, written case in
response, affidavit or other document if the Registrar considers that the
document is frivolous or
vexatious on its face or by reference to any materials
already filed or submitted for filing.
reviewed the documents comprising the proposed Application (set out in [
] above), the transcript of the
hearings on 27 August 2025 and 6 October 2025, and the
Summary Judgment Reasons, I refuse to direct
the Registrar to accept these
documents for filing.
is because I consider that the proposed Application does not relate to any
‘determination’ by the judge which can
be subject to appeal. This is
consistent with the Registry’s conclusion that Matthews J did not
make any of the ‘findings’
which were the subject of the proposed
Application.
17(2) of the
Supreme Court Act 1986
(‘the Act’) provides
that, unless otherwise expressly provided by the Act, ‘an appeal lies to
the Court of Appeal
from any determination of the Trial Division constituted by
a Judge of the Court’.
McLeish JA noted in
(a) the scope of the right to appeal from a single judge of the Trial Division
is generally determined by reference to s 17(2) of
(b) the word ‘determination’ under s 17(2) (which is not to be
given a narrow construction) has been held to mean those
that are ‘made by
some order or declaration which is sufficient in its own terms to resolve a
matter, being a controversy or
dispute between
respect, the proposed grounds of appeal in the 10 October 2025
Application are extensive, far from clear and there is much overlap.
best I can to understand them:
(a) grounds (a), (c) to (n) relate to whether the
judge erred:
(i) in admitting the Letter of Offer and the Mortgage into evidence; or
(ii) in finding that those documents were validly executed by Ms Nguyen,
and enforceable against her;
(iii) in failing to consider Ms Nguyen’s expert evidence; and
(b) grounds (b) and (i) relate to whether the judge erred by proceeding to
determine issues of criminal offences (that is, ‘forgery
and criminal
deception’) within a civil recovery proceeding.
is evident, these proposed grounds of appeal proceed on the basis that the judge
has admitted the Letter of Offer and/or Mortgage
into evidence, or has found
that they were validly executed and binding. That is not correct. As set out
above, nothing said at the
hearings on 27 August 2025 or
6 October 2025 (nor included in the orders that were made on those
days) had the effect of making any
findings about the admissibility of evidence
or any findings of fact in relation to these matters.
as is evident from the factual summary set out above, Matthews J made plain
that, save for the issue of the loan amount that
was outstanding pursuant to the
Summary Judgment determination, Ms Nguyen is at liberty at trial to
challenge by admissible evidence
whether the Letter of Offer and/or the Mortgage
were executed by her, and whether they are valid and enforceable. I pause to
that no application has been filed to challenge the Summary Judgment
determination.
the proposed grounds of appeal do not relate to any ‘determination’
for the purposes of s 17(2), as these issues
were not resolved at the
27 August 2025 nor at the 6 October 2025 hearing.
a result, I consider that the proposed Application is frivolous or vexatious,
including in the sense described by Deane J in
Staats v United States of
I refuse to direct
that the documents be accepted for filing by the Registrar.
the extent it is necessary to give separate consideration to the
2 October 2025 Application (which was rejected by Registry for
on 3 October 2025), it contains four grounds of appeal which are set
out in attachment B to these reasons.
four grounds relate to issues raised at the hearing on 27 August 2025.
Once again, those grounds are far from clear. However,
it is clear that many of
the grounds relate to the subject matter of the 10 October 2025
Application set out in [
including, most relevantly, the first and fourth grounds.
is difficult to ascertain the subject matter of the second and third grounds,
particularly the second ground which, in my view
and with respect, is
unintelligible. However, they appear to raise issues relating to errors by
Matthews J in refusing the defendant’s
amendments including in relation to
allegations of ‘forgery and misrepresentation’.
Nguyen’s application to amend her defence and counterclaim were decided by
Matthews J in light of the Summary Judgment determination.
To the extent these
proposed grounds assert that Ms Nguyen will be prevented from raising issues of
unconscionable conduct or whether
the Letter of Offer and/or Mortgage were
validly executed by Ms Nguyen, Matthews J made plain that these issues can be
Ms Nguyen at trial, subject to and in accordance with the Summary
Judgment determination. Finally, I note that, in breach of the
Rules, no other
documents were filed with the application.
all these circumstances, I refuse to direct the Registrar to accept the
2 October 2025 Application for filing, either alone or
with the other
documents making up the proposed Application.
I note that any application for leave to appeal from any decision made on
27 August 2025 had expired by the time that the
10 October 2025 Application was submitted for filing. No application
for an extension of time was made at the time.
Annexure A: Proposed Grounds of Appeal
to 10 October 2025
Application
6. Grounds or proposed grounds of
appeal and (where required) question(s) of law:
Error of Fact and Law – Reliance on Forged Instruments
The learned trial judge erred in finding that the
Letter of Offer
dated 20 July 2016 and the
Mortgage Security
dated 20 June 2016 were
validly executed by the Defendant, when uncontroverted forensic and
contemporaneous evidence establishes that
the Defendant’s signatures on
those documents were
Civil Jurisdiction
The learned judge proceeded to determine issues amounting to
(forgery, obtaining property by deception) within a civil recovery
proceeding, contrary to law and beyond the Court’s proper
Denial of Procedural Fairness
The learned judge failed to consider or address the Defendant’s
evidence (including forensic report and email metadata) disputing
authenticity of the documents, thereby denying procedural fairness and natural
Error in Admitting or Relying on Inadmissible Evidence
The Court erred in admitting into evidence copies of the
Letter of Offer
Mortgage Security
without proof of execution, contrary to the
Evidence Act 2008
Failure to Consider Material Evidence
The Court failed to consider material evidence demonstrating that the
Letter of Offer
Mortgage Security
contained inconsistent
dates, signatures, and alterations inconsistent with genuine execution.
Misapplication of Equity and Law
The Court erred in granting relief to the Plaintiff despite the absence of
clean hands, valid consideration, or lawful standing, contrary
to s 12CB of the
ASIC Act 2001 (Cth)
and equitable principles.
Error in Proceeding to Judgment on Defective Pleading
The Court erred in proceeding to judgment where the Plaintiff’s
pleadings were defective, contained false averments as to execution,
to disclose a cause of action based on genuine contractual instruments.
Manifest Unreasonableness and Injustice
The judgment is against the weight of evidence and results in manifest
injustice, as it enforces obligations derived from forged and
(i) Whether a court exercising civil jurisdiction may lawfully determine and
enforce rights or liabilities founded on
documents alleged to be forged
without first determining the authenticity of those documents or referring the
matter to the proper criminal jurisdiction.
(j) Whether an instrument that has
not been executed by the named borrower or
can give rise to a valid and enforceable contractual obligation or
mortgage under Victorian law.
(k) Whether reliance on a
forged Letter of Offer and Mortgage
constitutes
a fundamental jurisdictional error rendering the judgment void
(l) Whether the trial judge’s failure to address forensic and
contemporaneous evidence of forgery amounts to a
denial of procedural
and breach of the duty to give adequate reasons.
(m) Whether the enforcement of orders based on forged or unexecuted instruments
unconscionable in equity
and contrary to the
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission Act 2001
and the equitable maxim
that “he who seeks equity must do equity.”
(n) Whether the trial judge erred in treating the
Letter of Offer
enforceable loan contract in the absence of valid execution, contrary to the
Property Law Act 1958
and common-law requirements of consideration
and consent.
Annexure B: Proposed Grounds of Appeal
to 2 October 2025 Application
6. Proposed Grounds of Appeal
(a) Error in law in refusing to admit and consider expert evidence of forgery.
(b) Error in law and principle in permitting Plaintiff’s amendments while
refusing Defendant’s amendments.
(c) Error in striking out the Counterclaim alleging forgery and
misrepresentation.
(d) Denial of procedural fairness and failure to afford equality of treatment
between parties.
McKenzie v McKenzie
[1970] 3 WLR 472.
Vella v Wybecca Pty Ltd
[2014] VSC 443
Australia and New Zealand
Banking Group Ltd v Nguyen
(Supreme Court of Victoria, Steffensen AsJ, 25
June 2024), [33] (‘Summary Judgment Reasons’).
Summary Judgment Reasons, 25
June 2024, [24]–[25].
Summary Judgment Reasons 25
June 2024, [94].
[2024] VSCA 172.
Ibid [9]–[10].
(1992) 66 ALJR 793.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (388 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter