URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:24:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Priority Projects Standing Advisory Committee Referral 46 Report (AC) [2025] PPV 28 (17 June 2025)
Referral 46: VCAT Call-ins P1093/2024 and P1099/2024
Boneo Road, Boneo
Priority Projects Standing Advisory Committee Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
17 June 2025
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Priority Projects Standing Advisory Committee Report pursuant to section 25
of the PE Act
Referral 46: VCAT Call-ins P1093/2024 and P1099/2024
810 Boneo Road, Boneo
17 June 2025
Sarah Carlisle, Chair Annabel Paul, Member
Glossary and abbreviations
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council
tabled document [number] (see
Environment Protection Act 2017
Environment Protection Authority
ESO[number]
Environmental Significance Overlay Schedule [number]
Green Wedge Zone
Municipal Planning Strategy
Officer’s Assessment
Officer’s Assessment of the application to amend the permit
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning Permit P04/0289 issued by Mornington Peninsula Shire Council in
Planning Scheme
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme
Planning Panels Victoria
Jodi and Aaron Neary
810 Boneo Road, Boneo
SLO[number]
Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule [number]
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
VPO[number]
Vegetation Protection Overlay Schedule [number]
Referral summary
Referral number
Referral 46
810 Boneo Road, Boneo
VCAT call-ins
Call-ins of VCAT proceedings P1093/2024 and P1099/2024, relating to
application P04/0289.03 to amend Planning Permit P04/0289 issued
by Mornington
Peninsula Shire Council in 2004
Brief description
Expansion of an existing leisure and recreation facility at 810 Boneo Road,
Boneo (The Ranch)
Applicants (Proponents)
Jodi and Aaron Neary
Responsible Authority
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council
Submissions
107 objecting, 38 supporting
Committee process
The Committee
Sarah Carlisle (Chair) and Annabel Paul
Supported by
Gabrielle Trouse, Planning Panels Victoria
Directions Hearing
First Directions Hearing: 20 February 2025, in person at Planning Panels
Victoria and online
Second Directions Hearing: 1 April 2025, online
Committee Hearing
In person at Planning Panels Victoria and online on 22, 23 and 24 April
Site inspections
First inspection: 26 March 2025, accompanied
Second inspection: 17 April 2025, accompanied
Parties to the Hearing
Jodi and Aaron Neary (Proponents)
represented by Matthew Townsend of
Counsel, instructed by Megan Schroor of S&K Planning Lawyers, calling the
following evidence:
planning evidence from Sandra Rigo of Hansen Partnership
landscape architecture and master planning evidence from Peter Wilson of Peter
Wilson Landscape Architecture
- lay evidence
on skateboarding from Will Stoyle of Skate Australia (written affidavit
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council (Council)
represented by Adeline Lane of Jackson Lane Legal
Asher Nominees Pty Ltd
represented by Hannah Wilson of Planning and
Property Partners
Simon Stuart
represented by Luke English of DSA Law, calling the
following evidence:
landscape and visual impact evidence from Brendan Papworth of Papworth
Priority Projects Standing Advisory Committee Referral 46 [2025] PPV
Date of this report
17 June 2025
1 Introduction
1.1 Terms of Reference and letter of referral
Priority Projects Standing Advisory Committee (Committee) was appointed by the
Minister for Planning (Minister) on 14 June 2020.
The purpose of the Committee
is set out in its (amended) Terms of Reference dated 9 September 2023:
... provide timely advice to the Minister for Planning on projects referred
by the Development Facilitation Program, or where the
Minister has agreed to, or
is considering, intervention to determine if these projects will deliver
acceptable planning outcomes.
This is the Committee’s Referral 46. The members that considered
Referral 46 are:
Sarah Carlisle
The Committee was assisted by Gabrielle Trouse, Project
Officer from the Office of Planning Panels Victoria.
The Minister’s letter of referral dated 15 January 2025 asks the
Committee to provide advice to the Minister on whether the
amended planning
permit should be issued and, if so, the appropriate permit conditions that
should be imposed.
1.2 Process and procedural matters
(i) Directions Hearings
receipt of the letter of referral and the VCAT files, the Committee wrote to all
parties to the VCAT proceedings on 23 January
2025 inviting them to attend a
Directions Hearing at Planning Panels Victoria on 20 February 2025. In its
letter, the Committee
directed that all parties seeking to be heard provide a
summary of the key issues they intended to rely upon at the Hearing before
Directions Hearing. All parties seeking to be heard complied with that
The Hearing was originally set down to commence on 1 April 2025. At that
stage, the matter was to be chaired by Member Meredith Gibbs.
Due to unforeseen
circumstances, Member Gibbs was not able to chair the Hearing and the original
hearing start date was converted
into a second Directions Hearing at which
arrangements were made to reschedule the Hearing to start on 22 April 2025,
Member Carlisle.
(ii) Site inspections
The Committee undertook an accompanied site
inspection on 26 March 2025, which was attended by Member Gibbs, Member Paul,
party Simon Stuart and representatives of the Proponents, Council,
Planning Panels Victoria (PPV) and the Development Facilitation
Following reconstitution of the Committee, Member Carlisle undertook a second
site inspection on 17 April 2025 accompanied
by representatives of the
Proponents and Mr Stuart only.
(iii) Mr Wilson’s evidence
became clear during the cross examination of the Proponents’ landscape
expert Peter Wilson that:
he is a personal
friend of the Proponents
project manager for the proposal, and has been intimately involved in its design
since its inception
financially gained from the project to date, and may financially gain from the
project if it goes ahead.
Mr Wilson’s expertise as a landscape
architect was not challenged, and his evidence in relation to the design
approach for the
project was useful to the Committee. However Mr Wilson cannot
be regarded as independent. His evidence has not weighted as such.
1.3 The Committee’s approach
The Committee considered
all relevant written submissions and material in relation to the application to
amend the permit including:
application reports and plans
expert evidence
presented to the Committee
submissions made
at the Hearing.
Clause 20 of the Terms of Reference requires the
Committee to provide a concise written report to the Minister for Planning.
report focuses on the key determinative issues only and does not seek to
deal with every matter raised through the original objections,
the submissions
of parties at the Hearing and the evidence provided in support. All submissions
and materials have been considered
by the Committee in reaching its conclusions,
regardless of whether they are specifically mentioned in the report.
The Committee has complied with and reported on all relevant matters in
accordance with its Terms of Reference, in particular clauses
11, 15, 18, 20 and
2 The proposal
2.1 The site and surrounds
Permit P04/0289 issued by Mornington Peninsula Shire Council in 2004 (the
Permit) applies to land shown in
, known as 810 Boneo Road, Boneo (the site).
The site is an 80.2 hectare property on the western side of Boneo Road,
Boneo. The site sits within an undulating landscape and is
relatively clear of
vegetation, save for a few patches of largely indigenous vegetation mainly in
the northern part of the site.
The site operates as ‘The Ranch’,
offering activities such as horse riding, archery, flying fox, tennis, rock
a rodeo arena, and a mountainboarding course, mostly located in the
eastern part of the site. Accommodation on site includes cabins
and wagons used
for school camps, a dining facility, and a 58 site camping and caravan park in
the north central part of the site.
The western part of the site is used for
horse grazing and horse husbandry and remains largely undeveloped. A single
storey dwelling
is located near the entrance.
Aerial view of subject site
Source: Document 3.57 (Council Officer assessment)
The site is located within a unique and significant landscape described as
‘the Cups’, being a series of semi stabilised
dunes that have been
formed by accumulation of sand blown from prevailing winds over thousands of
years. This landscape creates
a series of depressions and rises, which
interrupt views to the site from surrounding land.
The site is zoned Green Wedge Schedule 4 (GWZ4) and is subject to the
Environmental Significance Overlay Schedule 15 (ESO15) which
protects the Cups
landscape. Parts of the site are subject to:
ESO Schedule 23
(ESO23) which applies to the western two thirds of the site and protects the
Semi Stabilised Dunes
ESO Schedule 28
(ESO28) which applies to the Boneo Road roadside and protects the Mornington
Peninsula Bushland
the Significant
Landscape Overlay Schedule 3 (SLO3) which applies to the Boneo Road frontage of
the site and aims to maintain a varied
network of scenic roads and protect their
aesthetic and recreational value
the Vegetation
Protection Overlay Schedule 2 (VPO2) which applies to vegetation along the
site’s frontage and part of the southern
boundary and protects significant
tree lines.
2.2 The proposal
current uses and development on the site have evolved over many years, and are
subject to a series of different permits. The
amendment application seeks to
amend the Permit, which authorises the use and development of 60 caravan/camping
The amended permit would facilitate an expansion of the existing operations
on the site, including:
new leisure and
recreation facilities:
- indoor and
outdoor skateboarding facilities
- mountainboarding,
mountain biking and BMX tracks and trails
slopes, rope tow lift conveyor belt, snow sport jumps and airbag landings
- two wakeboard
lakes (no planning permit required) with overhead cable systems and aqua chimp
course with associated buildings
accommodation facilities:
- expansion of
the existing campsite and caravan park from 60 sites to 105 sites
- conversion of
an existing dwelling to staff accommodation
- three new
accommodation cabins
- a new dwelling
for the owners
a new function
centre and restaurant
development:
- alterations to
existing buildings and a new storage building
wastewater storage dam
- alterations of
access to Boneo Road and construction of car parking
- vegetation
- advertising
the sale and
consumption of liquor.
The indoor skateboarding facility, restaurant
and function centre are proposed to be housed in a large building toward the
of the site known as ‘the Barn’.
2.3 Council decision
gave public notice of the application to amend the Permit and referred the
application to relevant referral authorities and
government agencies. 107
objections and 38 letters of support were received.
The Council Officer’s assessment of the amendment application dated 6
August 2024 (D3.57) assessed the proposal and responded
to concerns raised by
objectors. Council determined to grant the application to amend the permit,
subject to a range of conditions.
The Notice of Decision is dated 18 September
2024 (D3.08).
2.4 The VCAT applications
Objectors Mr Stuart and
Asher Nominees Pty Ltd applied to VCAT seeking review of Council’s
decision to grant the amendment application.
Mr Stuart’s application was
P2024/1093 and Asher Nominees’ application was P2024/1099.
Proceeding P1093/2024 was scheduled for a compulsory conference on 30 January
2025 and a hearing on 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 May 2025.
Proceeding P1099/2024 was
scheduled for a compulsory conference on 18 February 2025 and a hearing on 10,
11, 12, 16 and 17 June
Prior to the matter being called in by the Minister and referred to the
Committee, VCAT had determined that both proceedings would
3 Threshold issues
3.1 Context
(i) The proposed activities
proposed activities are listed in Chapter
, and are grouped under ‘new
leisure and recreation facilities’, ‘new accommodation
facilities’, ‘new
function centre and restaurant’ and
‘associated development’. This Report refers to the activities
listed under
‘New leisure and recreation facilities’ as the
‘adventure activities’.
The application nominated the following proposed uses, all of which are
defined land use terms in the Mornington Peninsula Planning
Scheme (Planning
caravan and
camping sites
leisure and
recreation facilities
accommodation
restaurant/function
The Notice of Decision described the uses in the same
(ii) The planning provisions
Under the GWZ and the Core Planning Provisions in
Clause 51.01-2 of the Planning Scheme:
and recreation’ is a
(permit required) use
recreation facility’ is a
recreation facility’ is a
(prohibited) use unless is it for
equestrian based leisure, recreation or sport
‘Restaurant’
and ‘Function centre’ are prohibited unless they are in conjunction
with (relevantly) ‘Agriculture’
or ‘Outdoor recreation
innominate uses
3.2 Characterising the use – indoor skateboarding
(i) The issue
issue is whether the indoor skateboarding facility, located in the Barn, should
be characterised as a separate use of ‘Indoor
recreation facility’
(which is prohibited in the GWZ).
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Mr Stuart submitted the indoor skateboarding
facility should be considered as a separate use to the remaining adventure
activities,
and characterised as ‘Indoor recreation facility’. He
submitted land can be used for more than one separate and distinct
purpose, and
in this case the indoor skateboarding facility is a key element of the proposal,
and should be regarded as an equally
(or more) dominant purpose than the other
adventure activities.
Mr Stuart pointed to the following factors:
the size of the
indoor skateboarding arena and the associated facilities (the Barn is the
largest building proposed on the site by
some margin)
very real prospect
” of large numbers of patrons attending
solely for the purpose of using the indoor skateboarding arena
the descriptions
in the application material and Mr Stoyle’s affidavit (see below) of the
skateboarding facilities as “
world class
”, suitable for
training elite athletes, and offering levels of participation
previously only available overseas
the significant
cost of the Barn (indicated in the application material at $20.3 million)
the extended
operating hours of the Barn, well beyond those of any of the outdoor
activities.
He submitted the indoor skateboarding facility is not a
necessary adjunct to the outdoor facilities and there is no close association
between the indoor and outdoor activities. He submitted:
While it might be argued that the indoor skate park will
‘enhance’ the outdoor component of the Proposal, it is submitted
that the opposite is equally or more correct – the indoor skate park is
being pursued as an end in its own right and, for some
at least, the outdoor
activities will enhance the indoor offering.
The Proponents took a different position. They submitted the indoor
skateboarding facility is an ancillary part of the broader adventure
activities,
and should be regarded as part of that use. They submitted the maximum patron
numbers for the adventure activities (excluding
special events) is 1,196. The
Venue Operations Management Plan
estimates 45 patrons would
use the indoor skateboarding facility at peak times, which is less than 4 per
cent of the maximum patron
numbers for the adventure activities.
The Proponents tabled an affidavit sworn by National Pathways Coach Will
Stoyles. He trains elite skateboarding athletes, and has
been involved in the
design of the proposed skateboarding facilities to ensure they meet the
requirements of a world class facility.
His evidence was:
the overseas
facilities where world class athletes train all have both indoor and outdoor
indoor training
facilities are essential to ensuring athletes have ready access to safe
facilities irrespective of time of day and
weather conditions
rain and even
the sunlight at certain times of day can make a skate park unsafe for
his preference
would always be to train athletes outdoors in conditions that mirror the
conditions they will ultimately compete in,
but unless a skatepark has indoor
facilities it will not be viable as a training venue for elite athletes
several skateparks in Victoria which have either indoor or outdoor facilities
but there is no single park that has both
indoor/outdoor skatepark at the Ranch will be critical to supporting and
training Australia’s future skaters to a level
where they can compete
internationally.
Council submitted the indoor skateboarding facility
should be characterised as ‘Leisure and recreation’ along with the
other adventure activities. It submitted characterising the indoor
skateboarding facility separately as ‘Indoor recreation
facility’ as
proposed by Mr Stuart did not reflect the dominant overall purpose of the
adventure activities.
(iii) Discussion
Council and Mr Stuart cited and relied on the High Court decision in
Perth v O’Keefe
support of their positions on how the indoor skateboarding facility should be
characterised.
Perth v O’Keefe
is the leading authority on characterising a proposed
land use, and establishes the following key principles:
in planning law,
a use must be for a purpose
a use of land
can be for two or more purposes, and it may be necessary to determine if one
purpose is subservient to another
the task of
characterisation involves questions of fact and degree
the appropriate
characterisation of the use should not be approached through a meticulous
examination of the details or processes
or activities
characterisation of the use ought not be answered by reference to defined terms,
but by reference to the ‘real and substantial
purpose’ of the use of
Based on these
the land use proposed in the amendment application should be
characterised holistically and by reference to the real and substantial
(or purposes) of the use.
There is no
doubt the indoor skateboarding facility makes up a substantial element of the
proposal. As Mr Stuart pointed out, it
(or the Barn, which also includes the
restaurant and function centre) represents a significant financial investment, a
large component
of the total project cost and a very significant proportion of
the floor area of the proposed new buildings. The Barn, including
skateboarding facility, is proposed to operate into the night, with longer
operating hours than the outdoor activities.
The Proponents
argued that the indoor skateboarding facility will have less than 4 per cent of
the patrons of the adventure activities,
and should therefore be regarded as
ancillary to the adventure activities. The Committee found the material in
relation to patron
numbers unpersuasive. There is little analysis supporting
the estimated 45 patrons per day at the indoor skateboarding facility.
Venue Operations Management Plan states the patron numbers are “
educated prediction based on other similar operators
“, but no details
are provided. Further, it seems unlikely that such a substantial investment
would be made in the facility
if only 45 patrons are expected to use the
facility at peak times.
That said, the
Committee considers that the indoor skateboarding facility is not such a
dominant purpose as to be appropriately characterised
as a separate use. The
Committee is satisfied based on the application material, Mr Stoyles’
affidavit and Ms Rigo’s
evidence that the skateboarding facilities are
part of a broader suite of adventure activities proposed to take place at the
In particular,
the Committee is satisfied based on Mr Stoyle’s affidavit that the indoor
skateboarding facility is not functionally
separate from the outdoor skate park.
Rather, it provides an alternative when weather conditions and time of day mean
the outdoor
skate park cannot be used. Even if the skateboarding facilities
(together) could be regarded as a separate dominant purpose to the
adventure activities, the indoor skate park is functionally associated with the
outdoor skate park and it would not be appropriate
to characterise it separately
as an ‘Indoor recreation facility’.
(iv) Findings
The Committee finds the indoor skateboarding
separate or dominant purpose of the proposed use, rather it is part of the use
of the land for the dominant purpose of adventure
prohibited on the basis that it constitutes a separate use of ‘Indoor
recreation facility’.
3.3 Characterising the use – adventure activities
(i) The issue
issue is whether the adventure activities should be collectively characterised
as ‘Leisure and recreation’ or as ‘adventure
innominate use). Leisure and recreation and innominate uses are both
(permit required) uses in the GWZ.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Council submitted the adventure activities
(including the indoor skateboarding facility) should be grouped together and
characterised
as ‘Leisure and recreation’. It submitted:
this is the
dominant purpose of the various activities proposed on the site
this is what was
sought in the application
characterising
the adventure activities using the innominate term ‘adventure park’
as proposed by Ms Rigo risks allowing
a broader scope of activities than what
was applied for
it makes sense
to use a defined land use term where one is available rather than an innominate
Council pointed to the Officer’s Assessment which
It is considered appropriate for the permit description to authorise
‘Leisure and recreation’ in this instance as it covers
scope of uses and the permit conditions and endorsed plans will clearly explain
the intent and limitations on the permission
being granted.
The Proponents submitted the adventure activities should be grouped and
characterised as ‘adventure park’. They acknowledged
application sought permission for ‘Leisure and recreation’, but
... the complexity associated with this framing is that it requires prying
into the broader term ‘recreation and leisure’
to extract the
component use ‘outdoor recreation facility’ which must then be
linked to the ‘function centre’
and ‘restaurant’ uses
(which are required to be in conjunction with an ‘outdoor recreation
facility’ [to
be permissible in the GWZ]).
Ms Rigo’s evidence was that the proposal does not neatly fall into a
specific land use term and is better characterised as ‘adventure
park’. She said:
clearly elements of leisure, recreation and sport in a predominately
nature-based setting in the various activities currently
offered and proposed to
be expanded
various forms of
‘Accommodation’ are also provided on the site as well as a
restaurant and function centre use (in the
existing Chapel building)
adventure park could be considered as falling under ‘Leisure and
recreation’, given the existing accommodation,
restaurant/function centre
and sports and recreational uses occurring on the site the better
characterisation is as an ‘adventure
park’ would encompass all the activities under the proposal, other than
those associated with the distinct
‘caravan and camping park’
Ms Rigo said:
Whilst I agree that in isolation, specific components of the adventure park,
such as the Barn or the restaurant could arguably fit
into specific land use
definitions, the dominant use of the site is an adventure park. Given the
Permit specifically allows for
caravan and camping sites, it follows that there
are two dominant uses on the site.
In response to questions from Council and the Committee, Ms Rigo did not
consider there was a risk that describing the permitted use
as ‘adventure
park’ would allow a broader range of activities than those applied for.
She pointed out that the plans
(when endorsed) will form part of the permit, and
will define the activities allowed on the site with more clarity.
(iii) Discussion
While the Committee accepts that it is preferable to
use a defined land use term if there is an appropriate one available, in this
case the Committee considers ‘Leisure and recreation’ is not
suitable to characterise the proposed adventure activities.
The Committee
prefers Ms Rigo’s approach of classifying the proposed adventure
activities as an innominate use of ‘adventure
park’. This better
reflects the holistic nature of the proposal, including the existing uses
occurring on the site.
The Committee is satisfied the risk of ‘scope creep’ if the use
is defined in the amended Permit as ‘adventure park’
is minimal.
The endorsed plans (which will include the Venue Operations Management Plan)
will clearly establish what the permitted
activities are.
(iv) Finding
The Committee finds:
The adventure
activities (including the indoor skateboarding facility) should be holistically
characterised as ‘adventure park’
rather than ‘Leisure and
recreation’.
3.4 The restaurant/function centre
(i) The issue
issue is whether the restaurant/function centre is prohibited.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Council submitted that the restaurant and function
centre are proposed to be used in conjunction with agriculture and/or outdoor
recreation,
and are therefore not prohibited under Clause 51.01-2.
Mr Stuart submitted the restaurant and function centre (proposed to be
located in the Barn) are prohibited, and the permit cannot
be amended to allow
He pointed to the GWZ Core Planning Provisions in Clause 51.01-2 of the
Planning Scheme, which state that ‘Restaurant’
and ‘Function
centre’ are prohibited unless they are in conjunction with (relevantly)
‘Outdoor recreation facility’.
He submitted the restaurant, function centre and indoor skateboarding
facility are all located in the Barn, and are “
inextricably
”. He submitted the restaurant and function centre should
therefore be regarded as being in conjunction with an ‘Indoor
facility’, not an ‘Outdoor recreation facility’. He noted the
application was not put forward on the
basis that the adventure activities
should be characterised as an ‘Outdoor recreation facility’.
Rather, it was put
forward on the basis of a use of ‘Leisure and
recreation’ – a position that the Council officer assessing the
application
accepted as correct.
The Proponents submitted the mere fact that the restaurant and function
centre are located in the Barn does not mean they are not
used in conjunction
with outdoor uses. They submitted the Barn is located centrally so that it is
accessible from the range activities
which would fall under ‘Outdoor
recreation facility’ or ‘adventure park’.
Ms Rigo described the restaurant and function centre as an ‘associated
use’ to the dominant uses of adventure park and
caravan and camping
(iii) Discussion
Clause 64.01 of the Planning Scheme provides that
where there are multiple uses of land, each must comply with the scheme unless
is ancillary to the other.
The Committee accepts that the application nominated the restaurant and
function centre as a separate use for which permission was
being sought. It
also accepts that Council treated it as such, listing ‘Restaurant/function
centre’ as a separate use
in the preamble in the Notice of Decision.
Notwithstanding, the Committee considers that the restaurant and function
centre are ancillary to the ‘adventure park’
use. This is
reinforced in the Proponents’ final preferred permit conditions (D46),
which include:
kiosk and restaurant/function centre must only be used ancillary to the
adventur26.e park use hereby approved, to the satisfaction
of the responsible
kiosk and restaurant/function centre must not be promoted or advertised
independently of the adventure park at the Land.
restaurant and function centre are not separate uses, they do not need to be in
conjunction with one of the uses listed
in Clause 51.01-2. Provided the
dominant use (in this case ‘adventure park’ is permitted, the
restaurant and function
centre are also permitted.
(iv) Findings
The Committee finds the restaurant and function
are ancillary to
the dominant use of the site as ‘adventure park’
do not require
separate use permission
do not need to
be ‘in conjunction with’ one of the uses listed in Clause
prohibited.
3.5 The wakeboarding lakes
(i) Context
62.02-1 of the Planning Scheme states that any requirement in the Planning
Scheme relating to the construction or carrying
out of works (other than a
requirement in a Public Conservation and Resources Zone) does not apply to:
Buildings and
works associated with a dam if a licence is required to construct the dam or to
take and use water from the dam under
Water Act 1989
(ii) The issue
The issue is whether the whether the impacts of the
wakeboarding lakes are relevant matters for consideration.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Mr Stuart raised several concerns over the impacts
of the wakeboarding lakes, including their impacts on the landscape character of
the area, as discussed in Chapter
At the Hearing, the Proponents submitted verbally that these are not relevant
considerations. It submitted:
the wakeboarding
lakes (which it described as dams) will require a licence under the
the wakeboarding
lakes are therefore exempt from the need for a building and works permit under
the Planning Scheme
the impacts of
the wakeboarding lakes are therefore not relevant matters for consideration in
assessing the amendment application.
(iv) Discussion
The Committee does not agree with the Proponents
that the impacts of the wakeboarding lakes are not relevant considerations. The
exemption in Clause 62.02-1 only applies to buildings and works – not use
aspects. The use of the wakeboarding lakes will
have amenity and landscape
character impacts, and the Committee considers these are relevant
considerations, even if impacts associated
with buildings and works (such as the
impacts of a potential dam wall failure) are not.
(v) Finding
The Committee finds:
The amenity and
landscape character impacts of the wakeboarding lakes are relevant
considerations.
3.6 The wastewater treatment dam
(i) The issue
issue is whether the impacts of the wastewater treatment dam are relevant
matters for consideration.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Mr Stuart raised several concerns over the
wastewater treatment dam and its potential impacts on the environment and land
management,
as discussed in Chapter
Council and the Proponents submitted that impacts of the wastewater treatment
dam will be considered and managed by the Environment
Protection Authority (EPA)
Environment Protection Act 2017
(EP Act), and do not require
detailed consideration as part of the planning process.
(iii) Discussion
Like its conclusions in relation to the wakeboarding
lakes, the Committee considers that the planning impacts of the wastewater dam
are relevant considerations in the planning process.
Unlike the wakeboarding lakes, the wastewater dam is proposed to be centrally
located on the site and will have limited visibility
from outside the site. It
will therefore not have broader landscape or visual impacts to the same degree
as the wakeboarding lakes.
The planning impacts are generally limited to
impacts to groundwater which could impact the use of neighbouring land for
agriculture
purposes. This is addressed in Chapter
(iv) Finding
The Committee finds:
planning impacts of the wastewater dam are relevant considerations, they are
largely limited to impacts to groundwater which
could impact the use of
neighbouring land for agriculture
4.1 Landscape and visual impact
(i) The issue
issue is whether the proposed buildings and works result in acceptable outcomes
in terms of landscape character and visual impact.
Impacts on the visual
amenity of adjoining private properties is addressed in Chapter
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Ms Rigo’s planning evidence was that the
proposal satisfies the various policy objectives and strategies relating to
and designing new development to minimise the visual impact on the
landscape. She considered that this had been achieved by the
thoughtful siting
of buildings and works:
” from boundaries
in previously
disturbed parts of the site
in locations
where the extent of vegetation required to be removed had been avoided or
in locations
where the natural contours of the site are suited to the particular activity, to
minimise the extent of earthworks (noting
that some earthworks will still be
necessary).
Her evidence was that landscaping and the undulating
topography would assist in screening buildings and structures. In particular,
the setback of the Barn, the largest proposed building, approximately 400 metres
from Boneo Road, together with surrounding hills
and slopes, would screen direct
views of the building from the frontage of the site.
The wakeboarding facilities are the closest buildings and structures to Boneo
Road. Ms Rigo was satisfied they would not visually
dominate the surrounding
landscape due to the:
existing and
proposed landscaping along the roadside and within the property
setback of 13.4
metres of the wake park facilities building (noted on the architectural plans as
‘Building B01’)
transparency of
the higher elements such as the wakeboarding towers and ‘aqua chimp’
In contrast, Mr Papworth’s landscape evidence (for
Mr Stuart) was that the wakeboarding facilities would be clearly visible
would detrimentally affect the landscape character of the area. He considered
the wakeboarding facilities, along with the Barn
and the snow board/aerial
sports zone facilities, would be highly visible from the neighbouring property
to the south from multiple
vantage points including:
a dwelling on
the land (sited closest to Boneo Road), being at an elevated point looking north
towards the site
the paddocks
closer to the common boundary, including from the ridgeline looking
north-east.
His evidence was that with the additional buildings,
structures and other works proposed, the site would cease to be viewed as
He considered the size and scale of the proposed
wakeboarding lakes to be at odds with the Cups landscape. He said large bodies
of water are not typical in the landscape, and are usually only seen in the form
of agricultural dams or small water features within
golf courses.
In relation to the Radiata Pine trees proposed to be removed along the
southern boundary to allow construction of the wakeboarding
Papworth’s evidence was that these are a significant cultural element in
the landscape and are a prominent feature
seen from the neighbouring property
and for drivers heading north along Boneo Road. He referenced their protection
under the VPO2,
which includes the following objective:
To ensure consideration of the cultural landscape significance of all tree
lines, including those composed of introduced vegetation
species, such as
Monterey or Radiata Pines.
Mr Papworth considered the removal of these trees was not an acceptable
outcome in the context of the fully exposed views of the wakeboarding
that will be created, both from Boneo Road and from the neighbouring property to
Finally, Mr Papworth noted there is a lack of a landscaping around many of
the proposed adventure park facilities such as the Barn,
outdoor skate park, ski
jump and overflow car parking, increasing the visibility of these features from
neighbouring land.
Council was satisfied the siting, design, setbacks and nature of the
topography and existing vegetation were sufficient to protect
the visual amenity
and landscape character of the area.
(iii) Discussion
The existing buildings and works on the site are
largely screened from the public realm by the undulating landscape, existing
and siting of structures away from Boneo Road. There is some
visibility of buildings and works more broadly in the landscape, but
relatively low building heights and large setbacks, the site maintains a rural
character when viewed from the surrounds.
The proposed expansion of the Ranch includes a range of buildings and
structures of greater height and scale, sited much closer to
Boneo Road and
neighbouring boundaries. The assessment required is whether these will have an
acceptable impact on the landscape
character of the area.
There were differing views expressed in submissions and at the Hearing about
whether, in protecting landscape character, the Planning
Scheme seeks to protect
only public views (mainly from Boneo Road), or private views from neighbouring
land as well. While the SLO3
(Scenic Roads) seeks to protect public views along
and from Boneo Road, the broader policy framework relating to the protection of
the scenic qualities of the green wedge and the policies around distinctive
areas and landscapes are also relevant.
The wakeboarding lakes and associated building, towers and aqua chimp
facility are closer to Boneo Road, higher than the existing
buildings and
structures that are visible from Boneo Road, and higher than other buildings and
structures typically found within
the surrounding landscape. The wakeboarding
building (Building B01) is proposed to be set back approximately 13.4 metres
Road and is described as a single storey building. However, with the
fill created to align the building with the surface of the
lake, and large
pitched roof (over 4 metres), the plans indicate the overall height above
natural ground level is 9.6 metres (RL
55.56), which is more akin to a
three-storey building.
The SLO3 seeks to ensure the recreational value of scenic routes is not
compromised by the inappropriate siting and design of buildings.
Boneo Road has
an 80 kilometre per hour speed limit with roadside vegetation that largely
obscures views into the site. However
the vegetation around the entrance to the
site is sparser with gaps allowing views into the site, even if views from
passing traffic
will be fleeting.
The Landscape Visual Impact Assessment dated June 2023 and prepared by Peter
Wilson Landscape Architecture
provided montages of the proposal from various points along Boneo Road. In the
more distant views, the proposed development is barely
perceptible. However
around the main entrance, the proposed wakeboarding facilities will be
Some new planting is proposed along the Boneo Road frontage, noted as
reaching a mature height of 5 to 8 metres, although the existing
provide a constraint. This vegetation, together with the existing vegetation,
will partially obscure and soften views
to the wakeboarding building.
The Committee acknowledges that the Planning Scheme does not require
buildings and works to be totally concealed. However, given
the importance of
this landscape and proximity of the proposed wakeboarding building to Boneo
Road, the Committee consider the building
should be reduced in height. Based on
the mature heights of the proposed plantings, a reduction to a maximum height of
is considered appropriate.
The equipment shed located near the wakeboarding building has a proposed
height of 10.9 metres, but a much smaller footprint than
the wakeboarding
building. The shed appears to be sited behind denser roadside vegetation. The
Committee considers the heights
and siting of the shed to be acceptable in terms
of landscape and visual impacts.
The Committee agrees with Ms Rigo that elements such as the cable tower and
aqua chimp course, while tall (RL 62.37 and RL 52.4 respectively)
are not solid
structures and will therefore not be visually dominant when viewing the site
from Boneo Road.
The Proponents advised the Committee the removal of the stand of Radiata Pine
trees along the southern boundary is required to accommodate
the optimal design
of the southern wakeboarding lake including the curved alignment for the
wakeboarding circuit.
The arborist report submitted with the application material notes that most
of these trees are in fair condition and have a useful
life expectancy of 10 to
20 years. The report rated them as ‘low’ to ‘moderate’
in terms of amenity value
and retention value, and raised no concerns about
their removal.
While recognising that some individual trees may fail over the next two
decades, the pines are a protected ‘significant tree
line’ not just
for their arboriculture value but for cultural values. The ‘Statement of
Nature and Significance of Vegetation
to be Protected’ under the VPO2
states (Committee’s emphasis):
Tree lines within roadside reserves, along streamlines and within properties
form important habitat and landscape elements on the
Mornington Peninsula. Tree
lines often act as habitat corridors linking other, more substantial, areas of
remnant vegetation. These
factors are emphasised in the Shire’s Road Side
Management Strategy.
Many tree lines, including those composed of
non-indigenous trees, such as Monterey or Radiata Pines, are culturally
significant elements
of the Peninsula landscape
These trees have a significant role in mitigating views to the site from
Boneo Road and the neighbouring property to the south, and
have a reasonably
long life expectancy. Further, having regard to the decision guidelines of the
VPO2, the Committee is not satisfied
that there has been appropriate
consideration of the cultural impact of their removal.
While the Proponents made some commitment to replanting in this area
‘subject to engineering advice’, the Committee is
not satisfied that
adequate justification has been provided to remove these trees. In the
Committee’s view, removing the Radiata
Pines to accommodate the
wakeboarding lakes does not strike the appropriate balance between the policy
objectives of encouraging
tourism and recreation uses in the green wedge, the
objectives of the VPO2 to consider and protect the cultural landscape
significance
of all tree lines, and policy objectives of protecting the rural
character, landscape values and scenic qualities of the green wedge.
The Committee therefore recommends a condition requiring this tree line to be
retained, or (if removal is unavoidable) replaced with
planting that has regard
to both cultural landscape and environmental values. The Committee recognises
retention of the Radiata
Pines may require a redesign of the wakeboarding lakes.
It was not persuaded on the material before it that there is no other way
lakes could be designed or sites to accommodate retention of the trees.
In relation to the visual impact of the other structures and buildings
proposed on the site, the Committee accepts that the siting
has generally had
regard to the topography and sought to minimise the removal of vegetation. The
Barn building is very large in
the context of this landscape, with heights
between 12 and 19.1 metres above natural ground level, and a length (albeit
approximately 100 metres. However, it is sited at a low point on the
site and is set back approximately 400 metres from Boneo Road,
and will not be
directly viewed from the public realm along the site’s frontage. Parts of
the building are likely to be visible
from neighbouring properties, however this
will be from a reasonable distance, and the intervening Cups topography will
its visibility in the landscape.
The proposed snow board/aerial sports zone facilities, being up to 12.6
metres in height and sited close to the southern boundary
of the site, will be a
foreign element in the landscape. The hills and slopes on the site and
surrounds will partially mitigate
views more broadly in the landscape, however
depending on extent of vegetation retention and new landscaping, these elements
be visually intrusive in the landscape.
The application material does not include detailed landscape plans. The
Landscape Masterplan generally focuses on revegetation in
the northern part of
the property, and shows minimal landscaping around the Barn or the snow
board/aerial sports zone. The Committee
agrees with Mr Papworth that the
landscaping around these buildings and structures is minimal, and recommends
condition 1A(b)(i)
(requiring a Landscaping Plan) be amended to increase
landscaping around these structures. This will help soften these elements
the landscape and protect the landscape values of the area.
(iv) Findings
The Committee finds:
The wakeboarding
building (Building B01) should be reduced in height given its scale and its
proximity to and visibility from Boneo
The removal of
the Radiata pine trees protected under the VPO2 has not been justified and they
should be retained. If retention is
unavoidable, they should be replaced with
suitable species to provide for the long term maintenance of identified
landscape values.
landscaping, including tree planting, should be provided around the new
buildings and facilities to protect the identified
landscape values of the
4.2 Environmental impacts
(i) The issue
issue is whether the proposal will have unacceptable environmental impacts,
particularly in relation to native vegetation.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
The Proponents relied on the geo-technical, land
capability, ecological and biodiversity assessments submitted in support of the
application
to demonstrate that the proposal would have acceptable environmental
outcomes. They submitted the site had been significantly revegetated
native vegetation since they took ownership of it, and the vegetation removal
and landscaping associated with the proposal had
been designed to increase high
quality native vegetation in appropriate areas. They noted Mr Wilson’s
evidence that:
vegetation to be
removed had been assessed as lower quality
vegetation would be offset as required by conditions of the Notice of
Masterplan for the site, 1.6 hectares of land would be fenced as Conservation
Zones for revegetation
the proposal
also includes planting an additional 1.64 hectares of indigenous vegetation and
500 Moonah Trees in and around the lakes,
carparks and built
Mr Stuart submitted the removal of 95 trees and an impact to a
further 90 trees is unacceptable in the context of the green wedge
associated policies that seek to preserve the rural landscape character.
Mr Papworth was critical of the level information provided about impacts to
existing trees and limited detail shown in the Landscape
Masterplan.
Asher Nominees submitted that any permit issued should require detailed
conditions relating to revegetation and landscaping along
the boundary with its
property to the north and west. It submitted this was required to ensure
consistency with the provisions of
the GWZ and associated policies that seek to
ensure the preservation and enhancement of the landscape and biodiversity values
minimise amenity impacts on neighbouring land.
(iii) Discussion
As previously noted, the Committee is generally
satisfied the proposed buildings and works (with the exception of the southern
wakeboarding
lake) have been sited to retain the most significant vegetation.
The Committee is satisfied the revegetation program will result
in a net gain.
Permit conditions require native vegetation offsets to be secured in accordance
Guidelines for the removal, destruction or loping of native
Permit conditions require:
Management and Protection Plan to be approved before works commence, to ensure
retained trees will be protected
landscaping of
the site and protection of vegetation in accordance with the endorsed landscape
plans and Land Management Plan.
The Committee is satisfied that this
will appropriately require revegetation and landscaping along the boundary with
the Asher Nominees
property to the north and west.
The Committee does not support the removal of the stand of Radiata Pines on
the southern boundary of the site, for the reasons set
out in Chapter
Other environmental values on the site will be protected by conditions
approval of
plans for the wastewater dam
management of
wastewater generated on the site
approval of a
Land Management Plan
approval of a
Farm Management Plan
protection of
approval of a
Construction Management Plan.
On the basis of the application
material, the Committee is generally satisfied that the permit conditions are
appropriate to ensure
the proposal delivers acceptable environmental
Impacts of the wastewater dam are addressed in more detail in Chapter
(iv) Finding
The Committee finds:
proposed permit conditions, the proposal can deliver acceptable environmental
4.3 Land management impacts
(i) The issue
issue is whether the proposal will have acceptable land management impacts.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Mr Stuart submitted there
was no information to determine whether the site could adequately deal with the
large volumes of wastewater
to be generated. He pointed to the fact that the
application was supported by a letter from Strata Geoscience and Environmental
Pty Ltd that set out a scope of works for the Land Capability Assessment
submitted with the application, but there was no assessment
of whether the site
was capable of dealing with the quantum of wastewater.
Mr Stuart said and any leakage or discharge of effluent or other wastewater
to the water table could have devastating impacts on the
viability of his
agricultural use. He submitted that while the volume of wastewater to be
treated triggers an assessment by the
EPA, this does not obviate the need to
determine at the planning stage whether the site has the capacity to accommodate
wastewater.
Council advised that based on the volume of wastewater exceeding 5000 litres
per day, the wastewater dam would require EPA approval
under the EP Act.
Council referred the application under Clause 66.02-1 of the Planning Scheme and
the EPA provided no objection,
and confirmed that EPA approval would be required
for the wastewater dam.
The Proponents submitted that because impacts of the wastewater dam will be
considered and managed under the EP Act, they do not require
consideration as part of the planning process.
Ms Rigo’s evidence was that the upgraded wastewater treatment system,
including the dam, should ensure the sustainable collection
and treatment of
wastewater. She was satisfied this could be dealt with through conditions of
permit, given the relatively large
size of the site and comparatively small area
of land to be developed.
Land stability
Another key area of concern raised by Mr Stuart was
land stability. He submitted the geotechnical work supporting the application
was only preliminary, and further engineering design, environmental management
procedures, inspection and monitoring was required
to allow a proper assessment
of the geotechnical risks and impacts of the proposal.
Mr Stuart noted the Preliminary Geotechnical Risk Assessment made a number of
recommendations, including:
earthworks (cut
and fill) be kept to a minimum
revegetation of
existing and proposed slopes should be provided where possible.
Stuart submitted that contrary to these recommendations, cut and fill had not
been kept to a minimum. He noted the large amount
of cut and fill required for
the wakeboarding lakes, mountain bike trials, mountain board ramps and
buildings, all of which involved
significant changes to the topography of the
site. He also noted the absence of a detailed revegetation proposal for the
of the wakeboarding lakes.
The Proponent submitted that while further geotechnical work would be
required, the work done to date was sufficient for this stage
of the planning
process. It tabled three geotechnical assessments, all prepared by Ground
Science Pty Ltd:
Geotechnical
Desktop Study – The Ranch, Water Sports Lake South, Cape Schanck dated 12
May 2022 (D37)
Geotechnical
Investigation – 810 Boneo Road, Boneo dated 19 May 2023 (D39)
Preliminary
Geotechnical Risk Assessment – 810 Boneo Road, Boneo dated 19 May 2023
The Preliminary Geotechnical Risk Assessment
This document has been prepared to support the planning permit for The Ranch
development. Detailed civil design and earthworks plans
were not provided at the
time of the preparation of this report, and hence the findings and
recommendations herein are preliminary.
The sole purpose of this report is to
guide the next phases of design and support planning permit for development.
Given our general understanding of the site surface and subsurface conditions
and proposed development features, we are of the consideration
that a tolerable
risk level for erosion and landslide can be achieved within the subject site
where the proposed correct control
measures engineering design, environmental
management procedures, and inspection and monitoring (where practicable) are
implemented.
In reference to Appendix D, some areas of “Moderate to High risk”
levels have been assigned based on potential development
conditions that may
occur and the existing ground conditions present. The risks can be mitigated and
achieve a residual risk factor
of “Low” with the correct planning,
design and geotechnical support.
In response to questions from the Committee about whether the proposal had
responded appropriately to geotechnical risks and the ESO23,
the Proponents
included additional conditions in their final proposed permit conditions
Geotechnical Report
to the commencement of each Stage, a Geotechnical Report for that Stage must be
submitted to and approved by the Responsible
Authority. The Geotechnical Report
must, in respect of works to be undertaken on any part of the Land affected by
the Environmental
Significance Overlay (Schedule 23) within the applicable
all erosion mitigation and land stability measures to be undertaken, based on
finalised design levels for works across relevant
part of the Land, that result
in a proposed cut or fill batter slope steeper than 1V:6H;
for the following:
engineering
solutions to keep earthworks (cut and fill) to a minimum, where
practicable;
by a suitably qualified civil engineer (with particular experience in land
sensitive to landslide and erosion conditions);
for all areas of proposed and existing development to reduce the potential for
landslide and erosion;
geotechnical investigation and global stability analysis to be undertaken where
surcharge is proposed within 10m of the crest of
any moderate to steeply sloping
natural slopes, or within existing slopes;
supported on footings and developed within existing slopes or near the crest of
slopes to have suitable footing design,
with footings to be designed generally
depth of weathered bedrock; or
the surcharge of the footings does not daylight within the slope,
re-vegetation
of existing and proposed slopes to be provided where
strict implementation of risk control measures where ‘moderate’ or
‘high’ risk levels are assessed,
to decrease the landslide/ erosion
risk to a tolerable ‘Low’ risk level;
any areas for further assessment and investigation, subject to the observed
residual risk rating;
design documents to be assessed by a suitably qualified geotechnical engineer or
engineering geologist and, if necessary (in
the opinion of the geotechnical
engineer or engineering geologist):
targeted geotechnical investigations must be conducted to:
a robust geotechnical model; and
that site-specific slope stability assessment is undertaken to assess both
short-term and long-term risks; and
detailed landslide risk assessment must be undertaken generally accordance with
the Australian Geomechanics Society (AGS) Practice
Note Guidelines
approved, the Geotechnical Report will be endorsed to form part of the planning
permit. The endorsed Geotechnical Report must
be implemented to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority.
(iii) Discussion
, the Committee concluded that the
planning aspects of the wastewater dam are relevant considerations in the
planning process. For
this proposal the relevant planning considerations are
generally limited to impacts to groundwater which could impact the use of
neighbouring land for agriculture purposes.
The application was supported by a Land Capability Assessment (D36). It
noted there are multiple bores onsite and on neighbouring
land, and that
effluent could pose a significant risk to groundwater without proper treatment
and management. The report recommended
a minimum Class C treatment of effluent
with a minimum buffer of 100 metres from any groundwater bore and 30 metres to
surface waters.
The report noted that the site is capable of meeting the land
area and buffer distance requirements, and concluded:
If the prescriptions of the report are followed, the likely human and
environmental health risks with effluent disposals over the
site is low.
While the Land Capability Assessment is limited in scope, the Committee is
satisfied it is sufficient for this stage of the process.
It establishes that
the site is large enough to accommodate the recommended buffer distances. EPA
approval will be required for
the wastewater dam, which is reflected in the
conditions:
wastewater from the approved development must be disposed to the EPA approved
sewerage system to the satisfaction of the responsible
wastewaters generated within the Land must be treated and retained by an EPA
approved sewerage system to the satisfaction of the
The conditions also require additional plans for the
wastewater dam, and operation of an EPA approved sewerage treatment plant for
the total facility.
The Committee is confident that the proposed permit conditions, combined with
EPA approval processes for the wastewater dam, will
ensure there that:
with appropriate
treatment and management, the likely risks from effluent are low
the risks of
offsite impacts to groundwater that might impact on neighbouring agricultural
uses is low.
Land stability
The western two thirds of the site is contained
within the ESO23. The overlay states:
The stability of semi stabilised dunes is critical to sustainable land
management and the maintenance of environmental values. These
areas may become
unstable if the top surface is removed in steeper sections and exposed to wind
Environmental objectives to be achieved are to:
maintain the
stability of the Cups landform, which the ESO23 states may become unstable if
the top surface is removed in steeper sections
prevent surface
erosion by ensuring buildings are sited to prevent unnecessary wind
sustainable intensity of development in semi stable dune areas
development on land with a ground slope greater than 25 per
Most of the proposed works are within the eastern part of the
site that is not affected by ESO23. However part of the development
this overlay area, including (potentially) part of the wastewater dam.
The preliminary geotechnical assessments submitted with the application
moderate and high landslide and erosion risk levels associated with the proposed
development
identify (but don’t clearly map) areas of earth slump or potential
instability on the site and/or adjoining
document signs
of minor erosion on the site, which were consistent with the Committee’s
observations on its site
analysis of the matters requiring consideration under the ESO23.
Committee notes the conclusion of the preliminary geotechnical assessments that
the site is generally suitable for the proposed
development, subject to detailed
design. However it is not satisfied this has been demonstrated by the
preliminary assessments.
Given the geotechnical sensitivities of the site
(particularly the part within the ESO23), more detailed assessments should have
accompanied the application.
That said, the Committee accepts that the Geotechnical Report required under
the Proponents’ condition 74 will ensure land stability
matters are
properly assessed before works in each stage begin. If these assessments do not
demonstrate to Council’s satisfaction
that land stability matters can be
dealt with appropriately and without adverse impact on the site or surrounding
land, the works
will not be able to proceed.
The preliminary geotechnical assessments do not clearly identify which parts
of the site may be subject to potential instability or
erosion risk, other than
a reference to the area around the entrance (which is outside the ESO23). The
Committee also notes that
the ESO15 applies to the whole site, and seeks to
protect land and soil stability, drainage patterns and ground water quality.
Committee therefore considers detailed Geotechnical Report(s) should be
prepared for the whole site, not just the parts within the
ESO23. Condition 74
should be amended accordingly.
Decision guidelines in the ESO23 include:
Whether there is
any reasonable alternative site for the proposed buildings and works, including
the installation of effluent disposal
and stormwater discharge areas, outside of
the overlay area, or any alternative land management or construction practices,
better meet the objectives of this schedule.
The means of
treatment and disposal of all sewerage, sullage and other wastes where
connection to a reticulated sewerage system is
not available.
better respond to the decision guidelines, the Geotechnical Report(s) required
under condition 74 should also assess whether the
proposed wastewater dam can be
located entirely outside the area affected by ESO23.
(iv) Findings
The Committee finds:
There is room on
the site to locate the wastewater dam to provide appropriate buffers to
groundwater bores on the site and on neighbouring
properties.
Further EPA
approval will ensue that the wastewater treatment system does not cause adverse
impacts on the environment, including
groundwater used on surrounding
agricultural properties.
geotechnical assessment will be required before works commence on any part of
Condition 74 in
the Proponent’s final preferred permit conditions is generally appropriate
to ensure this occurs, but the condition
should be modified to:
- apply to the
whole site (not just the area within the ESO23)
assessment of whether the proposed wastewater dam can be located entirely
outside the area affected by ESO23.
4.4 Impacts on neighbouring land
(i) The issue
issue is whether the proposal will have acceptable offsite amenity impacts.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Visual amenity
Ms Rigo’s evidence
noted that adjoining properties are pastural grazing (with residential use),
horticulture and rural lifestyle
properties in a rural zone. She considered
there were different amenity expectations for rural zoned land than land in
residential
or rural living zones.
Ms Rigo did not consider the proposal would have unreasonable impacts on the
visual amenity of adjoining properties, given the setbacks
proposed for the new
buildings and works. She noted the closest structures to adjoining private
properties were the proposed snow
board/aerial sports zone and the southern
wakeboarding lake. She considered these elements as discrete built form
elements that
could be landscaped to minimise their visual impact on the
adjoining property to the south. To the northwest and west, the nearest
activity is the caravan and camping zone which Ms Rigo considered was
significantly separated with intervening ridgelines to have
minimal impact on
the visual amenity of the neighbouring property to the north and west.
Mr Papworth said from the elevated position of the dwelling on the
neighbouring property to the south:
All of the proposed components of the central part of the site such as the
indoor skate facility and function centre, ski jump and
skate park and camping
area will all be clearly visible and will have a significant visual impact.
Ms Rigo observed that there were existing noise
sources in the area including traffic along Boneo Road, agricultural activities
the surrounding properties and the existing adventure park. She referred to
the acoustic report submitted with the application prepared
by Renzo Tonin &
Associates (November 2022) that concluded that all new use and development is
expected to meet the relevant
noise criteria. Ms Rigo was satisfied that with
the Venue Operations Management Plan and conditions of permit, there would be no
significant off-site amenity impacts with respect to noise.
Asher Nominees submitted the proposed conditions were “
” given the nature of the proposal in the GWZ, but could be
strengthened to ensure appropriate outcomes. In particular, Asher
sought a condition requiring a post commencement acoustic report to be completed
to test that the proposal is meeting the
noise criteria as predicted by the
modelling. It considered this appropriately puts in the onus on the Proponents
(as the agent
of change) to demonstrate that noise impacts are acceptable,
rather than relying on neighbour complaints triggering a compliance
investigation.
Mr Papworth’s evidence was:
Night views over the landscape and lighting impacts at night are unable to be
fully understood or rendered for the purpose of this
report but would be
significant in my opinion.
He stated the Mornington Peninsula green wedge was notable for its lack of
any significant illuminated elements at night in rural
areas. In his opinion,
the proposal would have a significant visual impact at night through the
illumination of the Barn together
with lighting of external activities such as
the ski jump in the snow board/aerial sports zone.
Mr Stuart submitted that the lighting associated with the night-time uses and
car parks, accessways and the like, is likely to have
a significant detrimental
impact on the rural amenity of the area.
(iii) Discussion
Visual amenity
The visual impact of the
proposed facilities on the broader landscape has been discussed in Chapter
In relation to visual amenity as viewed from neighbouring properties, the
Committee disagrees with Ms Rigo’s assessment that
all new works are
well setback
” from adjoining properties. The Snowboard Jump
Office and Viewing Platform in the snow board/aerial sports zone are set back
only 7.4 metres from the southern boundary, with a height of 8.6 metres to the
deck and 12.9 metres to the top of the frame. The
Committee notes that the jump
has been sited to take advantage of the natural contours of the land, but in the
context of a rural
property of 80 hectares, this is not a generous setback.
The new dwelling, overflow car park, and wakeboard lake are also sited
relatively close to the southern boundary, and the camping
and caravan extension
is sited close to the northern boundary.
While dwellings on neighbouring properties have greater separation to the
proposed facilities, there is very limited (and in some
cases no) screening
vegetation proposed within these setback areas.
The Committee considers further planting is required around new buildings and
structures along key parts of the common boundaries,
to mitigate visual impacts
of the new facilities to neighbouring properties. This should include planting
along the southern edge
of the overflow car park and the snow board/aerial
sports zone. Some views from neighbouring properties are from elevated
so the additional landscaping will not obscure the new built form
elements. It will, however, soften their appearance.
The retention of the Radiata Pines at the southern end of the wakeboard lake
as discussed in Chapter
assist in mitigating the impacts of the proposal on the visual amenity of the
neighbouring property to the south.
The acoustic report assessed predicted noise levels
from mechanical services, ‘action sports’ activities, background
and car park noise. It concluded the development will meet the applicable
noise criteria and would not unreasonably affect amenity
in the area by reason
of noise emissions.
The Committee considers the condition suggested by Asher Nominees requiring a
post commencement noise compliance assessment to be
reasonable. While
neighbouring dwellings are located between 200 and over 500 metres away from
noise sources within the site, post
commencement testing is relatively standard
practice and will demonstrate compliance with the applicable noise criteria (or,
if non-compliance
is detected, will address measures to bring the proposal into
compliance). The Committee considers this to be a reasonable approach
green wedge area and a rural setting, particularly given the extent of activity
proposed on the site.
The Committee accepts there is a need to provide
lighting for the safety and enjoyment of patrons using the facility, but
must also recognise the rural context in which the site is located.
Light impacts on the surrounds should be minimised.
The application was accompanied by lighting details for the outdoor skate
park and snowboard jumps, with a plan showing seven lights
for the skate park
and six for the ski jump, mounted at 8 to 10 metres high. No details were
provided of lighting within car parking
areas, along accessways, or around other
facilities within the site including the Barn, although the Committee notes this
is relatively
centrally located within the site and is some distance from any
neighbouring dwellings.
The Committee considers lighting can be appropriately managed by conditions,
and notes the Notice of Decision includes a condition
requiring a Lighting
Management Plan that details lighting to the car parking areas, the cable park,
the outdoor skate park and other
spotlighting in accordance with the Australian
Standard. Other conditions require lights associated with the adventure park
to be switched off within an hour of the operating hours each day and
lighting associated with signs to be baffled to prevent adverse
adjoining land. The Committee consider these conditions to be appropriate.
(iv) Findings
The Committee finds:
planting should be provided around new buildings and facilities located close to
neighbouring property boundaries to soften
visual impacts from neighbouring
properties. This includes the southern edge of the overflow car park and snow
board/aerial sports
should include a condition requiring a post commencement noise compliance
assessment.
conditions can manage lighting impacts.
5 Other matters
5.1 Bushfire risk
did not raise bushfire risk as a key concern. However the site and broader
surrounds are within a designated bushfire prone
area. While not in a Bushfire
Management Overlay, given the relatively large numbers of people capable of
being accommodated on
the site, including for overnight stays, the policy
considerations at Clause 13.02-1S of the Planning Scheme (relating to bushfire
planning for land within a designated bushfire prone area) are relevant.
Ms Rigo’s evidence was that the Emergency Plan, Land Management Plan
and Venue Operations Management Plan appropriately address
the requirements of
Clause 13.02. She noted new buildings will also need to address the building
regulations for construction in
bushfire prone areas, through the building
permit process.
The Committee considers that condition 1A(k) appropriately requires the
implementation of bushfire protection measures:
An emergency plan generally in accordance with the plan entitled The Ranch
Mornington Peninsula Emergency Plan and including specific
procedures to be
followed in the event of bushfire.
New buildings will also need to meet the applicable bushfire standards under
building regulations.
5.2 Signage requirements
Three signs are proposed
to be located near the entry of the site:
a flood lit pole
sign with four panels of 18 square metres total area
two business
identification signs on the entrance gate (2.88 square metres
Ms Rigo’s evidence was that the signs would not
contribute to visual clutter and were compatible with the amenity and appearance
of the location.
Council was satisfied with the siting of the signs and considered they would
not be obtrusive in the environment, given the topography
of the site and
surrounding area and the presence of vegetation.
The Department of Transport and Planning (a referral authority for the
amendment application) required static lighting of the pole
sign only, which is
reflected in condition 76(c). Council recommended the illumination be limited
to 9.30pm, being consistent with
the hours of operation for the adventure park
activities (but not the restaurant and function centre). This is reflected in
conditions of the Notice of Decision.
At the Hearing the Committee observed that a ‘panel sign’,
defined as a sign with an advertisement area exceeding 10 square
prohibited in the GWZ. Clause 52.05-2 (Sign categories) states that if a sign
can be interpreted in more than one way,
the most restrictive requirement must
be met. The pylon sign has a total advertisement area of 18 square metres, and
therefore falls
within the definition of a ‘panel sign’ and is
prohibited.
The Proponents proposed a condition to reduce the area of the pole sign to 10
square metres (by removing two of the four panels).
With this change and the conditions requiring static lighting and lighting to
be switched off at 9.30pm, the Committee is satisfied
that the signage is
acceptable to allow for identification of the facility in a manner that is
compatible with the amenity and appearance
of the area. This is provided for in
the Proponents’ final preferred permit.
5.3 De facto urbanisation
Mr Stuart submitted the
proposal amounts to a de facto urbanisation of the site, on the basis that
recent changes to the
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
prohibit limiting
permanent occupation of caravan parks.
The Notice of Decision includes a condition requiring a
section 173
that includes:
The means to restrict the use of accommodation to serve only casual holiday
makers and tourists for a maximum of ninety (90) days
in any calendar year and a
maximum of 59 consecutive days of occupancy.
The existing
section 173
agreement that applies to the land contains a
similar condition, and Council explained that access to the existing caravan
are controlled with a swipe card, and length of stay is monitored to
ensure the requirements of the
section 173
agreement are met.
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
may make it difficult to
enforce limits on length of stays in the caravan park, the Committee does not
consider that this amounts
to a de facto urbanisation of the land.
6 Overall assessment
6.1 Context
Minister’s letter of referral asks the Committee to provide advice to the
Minister on:
whether the
amended planning permit should be issued
appropriate conditions that should be imposed.
Council’s Part
A and Part B submissions (D16 and D34) and Ms Rigo’s evidence (D21)
comprehensively set out the policies,
zones and overlay controls that are
relevant to the consideration of the amendment application. Key provisions are
Council’s Part A submission also provided a helpful summary of the
permit triggers, application requirements and referral requirements
Project under the Planning Scheme, and a summary of referral authority comments
and responses. The Committee has been assisted
by these in its
deliberations.
6.2 Should the amended permit be issued?
(i) Evidence and submissions
highlighted that the GWZ explicitly identifies that recreation and tourism uses
are encouraged, in contrast to other rural
zones such as the Farming Zone, Rural
Activity Zone and Green Wedge A Zone that don’t list ‘recreation and
tourism opportunities’
within their purposes. Council also considered
that the extensive history of providing leisure and recreation activities on the
site was relevant, with the proposal not being a new proposition for the
Ms Rigo considered the proposal would broaden the recreational and tourism
opportunities already provided on the site, with positive
economic impacts. She
did not consider the proposal was inconsistent with provisions aimed at
protecting agricultural land, noting
that horse husbandry would continue, albeit
at a reduced capacity.
Ms Rigo considered that given the size of the site and setbacks of the
proposed buildings and structures from boundaries, the proposal
unlikely to threaten the ongoing agricultural use of adjoining land. She
highlighted that the area already supports a broad
mix of tourism and recreation
uses, including golf courses, hot springs, accommodation, restaurants, farm gate
sales and breweries.
She considered the proposal to be consistent with the
promotion of nature-based recreation, aligned with a key attraction of the
Peninsula for informal recreation.
Mr Stuart emphasised the focus in the Mornington Peninsula Green Wedge Plan
on protecting natural systems and the quality and character
of the landscape as
the primary assets of the green wedge. He argued that tourism and leisure-based
use and development are ‘conditional’
uses that may be compatible in
certain circumstances but not to the extent proposed in the amendment
application. He submitted:
the size and
scale of the proposal did not respect the rural landscape character and amenity
of the area
the site lacked
the capability and capacity to support the proposal
the proposal
failed to protect and enhance the natural environment.
Mr Papworth
expressed concern that the proposal would transform the current relatively rural
setting to a resort style development
and amusement park, introducing elements
foreign to the landscape such as large water bodies, dry ski slopes and jumps,
building, and other built form that is uncharacteristic of the existing
environment.
(ii) Discussion
Clause 71.02-3 of the Planning Scheme requires a
responsible authority considering a permit application to take an integrated
and to balance competing objectives in favour of net community benefit
and sustainable development.
The site forms part of the Mornington Peninsula Green Wedge, which is
protected under the Planning Scheme for its agricultural, environmental
landscape values, as well as for its recreational and tourism opportunities.
Land use and development must minimise impacts
on the character and appearance
of the area and protect the environment and agricultural uses in the area.
The proposed uses
The GWZ encourages agricultural and tourism uses and
limits non-rural uses to those that either support agriculture or tourism, or
that are essential for urban development but cannot locate in urban areas for
amenity or other constraints.
zone contemplates a broad mix of land uses, subject to having proper regard to
rural, environmental and design and siting issues.
The site has a long established use and development history for leisure,
recreation and tourism uses,
including school camp activities such as flying fox, rock climbing and the
‘leap of faith’, together with accommodation
cabins, dining
facilities and horse riding. The rural setting is integral to the existing uses
and its attraction as a school camp,
and for the range of the other activities
that take place on site.
The Committee considers that tourism and recreation uses are broadly
appropriate uses in the GWZ and on the site. Like the existing
activities on
the site, most expanded or new activities rely on an outdoor or nature based
setting. What is of key relevance in
determining whether the proposal is
consistent with policy is the scale, siting and impacts of these uses, and their
impacts on landscape
character, environmental and land management and
agriculture.
Landscape character
The Planning Scheme has a particular focus on
maintaining visual landscape qualities from the public realm. As noted in
, the Committee considers
this extends more broadly to the visual qualities of the green wedge land within
this distinctive area and
landscape, particularly (but not exclusively) when
viewed from the public realm.
The unique topography of the site and surrounds has the advantage of
concealing or limiting the visibility of buildings and structures
that are set
back from the property boundaries from some viewpoints (particularly those at
lower elevations). As a result, rather
than expansive vistas and views of the
various building, structures, and associated infrastructure, the Cups landform,
together with
established landscaping, help minimise the visual impact of the
proposal on the landscape.
The overall design of the proposed facility, including the siting of the
proposed buildings and works, is responsive to the site’s
topography and vegetation (with the exception of the Radiata Pines along the
southern boundary). Buildings and works are
generally designed and sited to
ensure they are largely screened from public view points.
That said, the Committee considers some changes are required:
The wakeboarding
building (Building B01) should be reduced in height to respond to the SLO3
protecting views along Boneo Road.
justification has not been provided for removing the stand of Radiata Pine trees
that are protected by the VPO2. These should
be retained, which will likely
require a redesign of the southern wakeboarding lake.
landscaping is required around the Barn as well as the proposed facilities that
are located close to neighbouring property
boundaries (the snow board/aerial
sports zone, overflow car parking), to protect the landscape values of the area
and reduce impacts
on the visual amenity of neighbouring properties.
Environmental and land management impacts
At a broad policy level the Committee is satisfied
that, subject to the Committee’s recommended permit conditions, the
will not have an unreasonable impact on the environment. Vegetation
removal has been generally minimised (with the exception of
the Radiata pines),
and the Proponents are undertaking revegetation as part of their overall
management strategy.
A preliminary land capability assessment has been undertaken which
demonstrates the siting of the wastewater dam can be accommodated
on the site
with required threshold distances from groundwater bores. The Committee is
satisfied the EPA approval and licensing
process will ensure the wastewater
treatment facilities do not have inappropriate impacts to groundwater or
neighbouring agricultural
The nature of the landform requires careful consideration of land and soil
stability and erosion risks. While preliminary geotechnical
assessments
concluded the site is likely suitable for the proposed development, the
Committee considers more detailed assessments
should have been provided in
support of the amendment application. That said, the Committee is satisfied
that with some adjustments,
the Proponents’ proposed conditions 74 and 75
are sufficient to ensure geotechnical issues are appropriately assessed before
works commence. If the geotechnical risks cannot be managed to Council’s
satisfaction, the development (or relevant stage)
will not be able to
Impacts on agriculture
The Committee is satisfied the proposal will not
have an unreasonable impact on the agricultural use of the site or surrounding
Agricultural uses on the site are limited, and expected to decrease as a
result of the proposal with a reduced capacity for horse
husbandry. It is not a
policy requirement that all land in the GWZ be used for agriculture.
There was no evidence that noise or lighting impacts from the proposed
development would adversely affect farming activities on adjoining
subject to appropriate wastewater management the Committee is satisfied that the
agricultural and adventure park activities
can successfully co-exist.
(iii) Overall assessment
On balance, the Committee considers the permit
should be amended. The proposal will expand the existing tourism and
recreational
uses, with social and economic benefits to the surrounding
community. Conditions can manage the siting and design of development,
ensure it maintains the environmental and landscape values of the area. The
proposal will not unreasonably affect the surrounding
capacity of agricultural
land and conditions of permit will ensure no unreasonable amenity impacts.
Overall, the proposal will provide
a net community benefit.
6.3 What conditions should apply?
The Committee has
considered the various versions of proposed permit conditions put to it,
the Notice of
Proponents’ Version 2 amended permit conditions (D29)
Nominees’ response to the Proponents Day 2 proposed permit conditions
response to the Proponents’ Day 2 proposed permit conditions (D31)
Proponents’ final preferred permit conditions (D46 and D47)
response to the Proponents’ final preferred permit conditions
The Committee provides its recommended conditions in
6.4 Recommendation
Based on its findings in
the previous chapters, the Committee recommends:
Planning Permit P04/0289 issued by Mornington Peninsula Shire Council on 9
November 2004 in the form and subject to the conditions
A Policy context
Planning policy framework
Municipal Planning Strategy
The Mornington Peninsula Municipal Planning Strategy
sets out a vision for future land use and development in the municipality. Its
objectives are relevant to the proposed development, particularly Clauses 02.01
(Context), 02.02 (Vision), 02.03-1 (Settlement),
02.03-2 (Environmental and
landscape values), 02.03-3 (Environmental risks and amenity), 02.03-4 (Natural
resource management), 02.03-5
(Built environment and heritage), 02.03-6
(Economic development), and 02.04 (Strategic framework plan).
Local and state policy framework
Clauses 11 (Settlement), 12 (Environmental and
Landscape Values), 13 (Environmental Risks and Amenity), 14 (Natural Resource
Management),
15 (Built Environment and Heritage), 17 (Economic Development) and
19 (Infrastructure) of the Planning Scheme are relevant to the
Mornington Peninsula Green Wedge Management Plan (2018)
The Mornington Peninsula Green Wedge Management Plan
(D17b) promotes the value of green wedge land and sets out a vision and planning
principles for its use. The document has been adopted by Council, but is not
incorporated into the Planning Scheme.
Mornington Peninsula Localised Planning Statement
The Mornington Peninsula Localised Planning
Statement (D17c) supports the Mornington Peninsula’s Distinctive Areas and
designation and is referenced in the Planning Scheme.
Planning controls
Green Wedge Zone Schedule 4
The purpose of the GWZ is to guide sustainable use
and development of green wedge land, including facilitating recreational and
uses while preserving its agricultural productivity, natural resources,
landscape, cultural heritage and biodiversity. Schedule
4 provides a minimum
subdivision area and a permit trigger for earthworks which:
change the rate
of flow or the discharge point of water across a property boundary
increase the
discharge of saline groundwater.
Environmental Significance Overlay
The purposes of the ESO include identifying areas
where the development may be affected by environmental constraints, and ensuring
that development is compatible with environmental values identified in a
schedule to the clause.
Vegetation Protection Overlay
The purposes of the VPO include protecting
significant vegetation. The VPO2 (Significant Tree Lines) applies to vegetation
the site’s Boneo Road frontage and the row of Radiata pine trees
along part of the southern boundary.
Significant Landscape Overlay
The SLO serves to identify, protect and enhance the
character of significant landscapes. SLO3, which applies to Boneo Road, aims
maintain a varied network of scenic roads and their aesthetic and recreational
Clause 51.02 – Metropolitan Green Wedge Land: Core
Planning Provisions
Clause 51.02 (Metropolitan Green Wedge Land: Core
Planning Provisions) applies to land in Metropolitan Melbourne that sits outside
the Urban Growth Boundary, including the site. This provision encourages
appropriate use and development of green wedge land, facilitating
recreational
and tourism uses while protecting its landscape, cultural heritage, environment,
biodiversity and agricultural productivity.
Some of the proposed uses of the
site are subject to conditions under Clause 51.02.
Other relevant considerations
As the site is within a Bushfire Prone Area, bushfire risk should be
considered for planning applications including for accommodation
and recreation
facilities.
Clause 65.01 of the Planning Scheme requires the Responsible Authority to
consider, as appropriate:
the Planning
Policy Framework
the purpose of
the zone, overlay or other provision
the orderly
planning of the area
the effect on
the amenity of the area
factors likely
to cause or contribute to land degradation, salinity or reduce water
the extent and
character of native vegetation, the likelihood of its destruction, and whether
it can be protected, planted or allowed
to regenerate
the degree of
flood, erosion or fire hazard associated with the location of the land and the
use, development or management of the
land so as to minimise any such
Other matters to be considered include:
comments and
decisions of referral authorities
other matters a
Responsible Authority must and may consider under section 60 of the PE Act,
including the Victorian planning objectives
and the economic, social and
environmental impacts of the proposed use and development
government policy.
Decision guidelines within the GWZ and applicable
overlays include the need to:
minimise adverse
impacts on the character and appearance of the area including the unique
topography of ‘the Cups’ landscape
protect and
retain land for future sustainable agricultural activities, maintain
agricultural production and consider the impact on
the rural economy
protect and
enhance the biodiversity of the area, including the retention of vegetation and
habitat and the need to revegetate gullies,
ridgelines and property
locate on-site
effluent disposal areas to minimise impact of nutrient loads on waterways and
native vegetation
consider the
landscape impact of the proposed removal, destruction or lopping of
minimise adverse
impacts of new development on landscape features, major roads and vistas through
siting, design, height, bulk, and
colours and materials.
requires specific consideration of (among other things):
alternative siting for the proposed buildings and works and effluent disposal
and stormwater discharge areas outside of
the overlay area
alternative land
management or construction practices that would better meet the objectives of
this schedule
the means of
treatment and disposal of sewerage, sullage and other wastes where connections
to reticulated services are not available
(as is the case here)
the existing use
of the site and the purpose of the proposed buildings and works in relation to
the existing use
appropriate
measures to prevent erosion.
Appendix B Document list
Documents indicated * were part of the referred VCAT documents
Panel hearing documents
Description
Provided by
Terms of Reference
Minister for Planning
Letter of Referral
Minister for Planning
Referred VCAT documents (see below)
Department of Transport and Planning
Directions Hearing notification
Planning Panels Victoria (PPV)
Statement of issues
Simon Stuart
Statement of issues
Statement of issues
Statement of issues
Asher Nominees
Letter from Bunurong Land Council approving Cultural Heritage Management
Plan (26 June 2024)
Cultural Heritage Management Plan (25 June 2024)*
Directions and Hearing Timetable
Email advising change of Committee Chair
Site inspection location requests
Simon Stuart
Site inspection location requests, enclosing attachment:
a) Extract from Landscape Visual Impact Assessment
Site inspection details
Submission, enclosing attachments:
Map - SJ 55 - 9 - Queenscliff Ed 2
Wedge Management Plan
Peninsula Localised Planning Statement
officer report
of Perth v O'Keefe
[1964] HCA 37
(1964) 110 CLR 529
v Shire of Whittlesea
(1993) 11 AATR 175
v Shire of Bulla
(1992) 9 AATR 157
Seven Pty Ltd v City of Knox
(1993) 11 AATR 325
v Shire of Flinders
(1986) 4 PABR 350
Wholesalers v City of Northcote
(1994) 13 AATR 175
Developments Pty Ltd v Strathbogie SC (Red Dot)
[2022] VCAT 938
from SRW to MPSC
to S&K Planning Law
exchange between DSA and S&K
Simon Stuart
Expert witness report of Brendan Papworth
Simon Stuart
Part A Submission
Expert witness report of Peter Wilson
Expert witness report of Sandra Rigo
Affidavit of Will Stoyles
Version 1 permit conditions
Asher Nominees Pty Ltd
Site inspection photos
Notification of hearing adjournment and second Directions Hearing
Further directions and Version 2 Hearing Timetable
Version 2 amended permit conditions
Response to Proponents Version 2 permit conditions (marked up)
Asher Nominees Pty Ltd
Response to Proponents Version 2 permit conditions
Evidence presentation of Peter Wilson
Peter Wilson response to evidence of Brendan Papworth
Part B submission, enclosing attachments:
of 9 September 2024 Council Meeting Agenda
2a. Extract of 9
September 2024 Council Meeting Agenda Attachments Book 1
2b. Extract of 9 September 2024 Council Meeting Agenda Attachments Book
Peninsula Localised Planning Statement (July 2014)
Peninsula Green Wedge Management Plan (April 2019)
Holdings Pty Ltd v Bayside CC
[2022] VCAT 390
Part B submission, enclosing attachments:
a) 269 Stewart Street Pty Ltd v Moreland CC
[2019] VCAT 495
b) Boroondara City Council v 1045 Burke Road
[2015] VSCA 27
c) Cascone v Whittlesea Shire Council
(1993) 80 LGERA 367
d) Hoe v Manningham City Council
[2011] VSC 543
e) Hoskin v Greater Bendigo City Council
[2015] VSCA 350
f) Hu v Whitehorse CC
[2023] VCAT 1336
g) Knox City Council v Tulcany Pty Ltd
[2004] VSC 375
h) Melton CC v Minister for Planning
[2022] VCAT 179
RCC v Lando
[2020] VCAT 793
j) Nest Homes Pty Ltd v Ballarat CC
[2024] VCAT 767
k) Northcote Food Wholesalers Pty Ltd v Northcote City Council
(1994) 84 LGERA
Garden Estate Tours Pty Ltd v Mornington Peninsula SC
[2021] VCAT 622
m) Rowcliffe v Stonnington CC
[2004] VCAT 46
n) Rozen Anor v Macedon Ranges Shire Council Anor
2010 VSC 583
o) Wellington v Surf Coast Shire Council & Ors (Red Dot)
[2011] VCAT 2317
Land capability assessment*
Geotechnical desktop assessment*
Civil design plans (wakeboard lakes)*
Geotechnical Desk Top Study*
Lake Design Preliminary Assessment
Preliminary Geotechnical Risk Assessment*
Evidence presentation of Brendan Papworth
Simon Stuart
Instrument AE126036U (S173 Agreement)
Response to Committee questions
Response to Committee questions, enclosing attachments:
a) Proposed Woodward skate park design
b) Civil Test Soil Testing and Geotechnical Consultants quote for geotechnical
Final preferred permit conditions (version 4A - adventure park)
Final preferred permit conditions (version 4B - leisure and
recreation)
Response to Proponent final preferred permit conditions
Referred VCAT documents
Description
Objections to permit amendment
Simon Stuart – Objection to permit amendment (6 July 2023)
(P2024/1093)
Simon Stuart – Letter supporting objection to permit amendment (6
July 2023) (P2024/1093)
Asher Nominees Pty Ltd – Objection to permit amendment (12 July 2023)
(P2024/1099)
Objectors list (P2024/1093 & P2024/1099)
Referral authority responses to permit amendment
Southern Rural Water referral response (27 July 2023)
Head, Transport for Victoria referral response (15 September 2023)
List of referral authorities consulted
Council decision to grant amendment to permit
Council Notice of Decision to grant an amendment to a permit (18 September
Notice of Decision form (18 September 2024)
Applications for review
Application for review – Simon Stuart (1 October 2024)
(P2024/1093)
Application for review – Asher Nominees Pty Ltd (2 October 2024)
(P2024/1099)
VCAT orders
Initiating Order on 4 October 2024 (P2024/1093)
Procedural Orders on 25 October 2024 (P2024/1093)
Procedural Orders on 26 November 2024 (P2024/1093)
Parties List (27 November 2024) (P2024/1093)
Initiating Order on 24 October 2024 (P2024/1099)
Parties List (24 October 2024) (P2024/1099)
Procedural Orders on 18 December 2024 (matters to be heard together)
(P2024/1093 & P2024/1099)
Background information (Information from Decision Makers) (P2024/1093
& P2024/1099)
Title Documents
Notification letter to Applicant (18 September 2024)
Objectors to permit amendment
Referral response from Department of Environment, Energy and Climate Action
(10 July 2023)
DTP Referral Response (15 September 2023)
EPA Referral Response (10 July 2023)
Acoustic Report
Arborist Report (V3)
Architectural Plans
Biodiversity Assessment
Cultural Heritage Management Plan (June 2024)
Cultural Heritage Management Plan (superseded)
Cut and Fill Plan
Economic and Social Assessment FINAL
Emergency Plan
Equipment Specifications
Farm Management Plan
Lake Design Preliminary Assessment
Lakes Dam – Geotechnical Investigation
Land Management Plan
Landscape Visual Impact Assessment
Lighting details
Offset Quote – Vegetation Link
Planning Submission
Preliminary Geotech Assessment
Preliminary Geotechnical Risk Assessment
Preliminary Land Capability Assessment Letter
Preliminary Site Assessment (Ground Contamination)
Site Survey
Site Survey – No Contours
Site Survey – No Imagery
Traffic Impact Assessment
Venue Operations Management Plan
Application to Amend a Planning Application Form
Council Meeting Agenda
Council Report Attachment – Officer Assessment
Corrected PNPE2 material (2 December 2024)
Corrected PNPE2 material (5 December 2024)
Council response to Practice Note PNPE2 (Information from Decision Makers)
(22 October 2024)
Statements of grounds
Statement of Grounds – Simon Stuart (P2024/1093)
Statement of Grounds – Asher Nominees Pty Ltd (2 October 2024)
(P2024/1099)
Statement of Grounds – Jodi and Aaron Neary (6 November 2024)
(P2024/1099)
Statement of Grounds - Head, Transport for Victoria (18 November 2024)
(P2024/1093)
Practice day hearing (P2024/1093)
Simon Stuart – Practice Day Hearing submission (6 December
Simon Stuart – Attachment – Clause 35.04 (Green Wedge
Simon Stuart – Attachment – Clause 51.02
Simon Stuart – Attachment – Clause 72.06
Simon Stuart – Attachment – Clause 73.01
Simon Stuart – Attachment – L Bisinella Developments Pty Ltd v
Environment Protection Authority
[2024] VCAT 515
Council – Practice Day Hearing submission (9 December 2024)
Permit Applicant – Practice Day Hearing submission (9 December
Permit Applicant – Attachment – Japara Holdings Pty Ltd v
[2022] VCAT 390
(8 April 2022)
Permit Applicant – Attachment – Pileggi v Macedon Ranges SC
[2014] VCAT 906
(25 July 2014)
Permit Applicant – Attachment – Utiger v Brown and Venteb Pty
[2002] VSC 306
(6 August 2002)
C Recommended permit
Tracked against the Proponents’ final preferred version based on the
use being characterised as the innominate use of ‘adventure
PLANNING PERMIT
P04/0289.03
Planning Scheme:
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme
Responsible authority:
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council
ADDRESS OF THE LAND:
810 Boneo Road, Boneo (Lot
3, LP 121193)
) and adjacent Boneo
Road reserve
THE PERMIT ALLOWS:
Planning Scheme Clause Name and No.
Description of what is allowed
Green Wedge Zone
(Table of uses)
Use of land for a camping and caravan park
Use of land for adventure park
Green Wedge Zone
(Buildings and works)
Construct buildings and construct or carry out works associated with a use
in Section 2 of Clause 35.04-1 (camping and caravan park
and adventure
Schedule 4 to Clause 35.04
Environmental Significance Overlay
Construct buildings and construct or carry out works
Remove vegetation
Vegetation Protection Overlay
Remove vegetation
Construct or put up for display a sign in Section 2 of Clause
Native Vegetation
Remove, destroy or lop native vegetation
Licensed Premises
Sell and consume liquor
Land Adjacent to the Principal Road Network
Alter access to a road in a Transport Zone 2
Existing Uses
(Sections 2 and 3 uses)
Construct buildings and construct or carry out works for a use in Section 2
THE FOLLOWING CONDITIONS APPLY TO THIS PERMIT:
Amended plans
1A) Before the use and development authorised under this amended permit
P04/0289.03 starts, amended plans to the satisfaction of the
responsible
authority must be submitted to and approved by the responsible authority. When
approved and endorsed accordingly, these
plans will form part of this permit
together with the plans already endorsed under condition 1 before this permit
was amended on [insert the date of issue of the amended
. The plans
are to be generally in accordance
with the plans submitted with the
application but modified to show
a) The development plans entitled
The Ranch, 810 Boneo Rd, Cape Schanck
prepared by L.V.M and PWLA dated 7 May 2023, Sheet Nos TP-0.00 to TP-5.24E (37
Development Plans
) but modified to show:
reduction in the height of Building B01 (Wake Park Facilities) to 8 metres above
ground level.
of internal accessways including material, width and maximum height of any cut
or fill required.
Dimensioned
location of any works of wastewater dam from title boundaries.
of existing dwelling to be repurposed for staff accommodation.
Delineation
of the dwelling curtilage for the replacement dwelling.
requiring all galvanised cladding to be treated to ensure it is muted and of low
reflectivity.
of earthworks required to facilitate a flat area for camping purposes within
sites 91-98 that must not impact any vegetation
outside the delineated site
b) The plans included in the masterplan entitled
Action Sports Precinct
– Site Masterplan dated November 2023
, Drawing Nos MP-100 to MP-800
(34 sheets) (
Site Masterplan
) but modified to show:
Landscaping Plan generally in accordance with the Overall Plan Proposed Planting
Sheet No MP303 but modified to show:
(1) Consistency with the Land Management Plan prepared by Beacon Ecology
dated 10 May 2023, including the planting lists for re-vegetation
at Appendix 1
of that document
Retention of the stand of Radiata Pines along the southern boundary of
the Land. If the Radiata Pines are removed (only with the
consent of the
Responsible Authority) appropriate replacement planting along the southern
embankment of the southern wakeboarding
lake and between the lake and the
southern boundary, having regard to the objectives and values to be protected
under the Vegetation
Protection Overlay Schedule 2.
(3) Planting along the road frontage adjacent to the buildings within the
boundaries of the Land.
(4) Additional planting
adjacent to
between the
southern boundary
near lake embankment (subject to engineering
advice) and further west near
snow board/aerial sports
and overflow carparking area to soften the appearance of the structures
in these areas and protect the landscape values of the area
as well as the
visual amenity of neighbouring properties.
Additional planting around Building B06 (the Barn) to soften the
appearance of the building and protect the landscape values of the
(6) Planting of dam embankments as guided by consulting engineers.
(7) A schedule of all proposed planting, including the location, species and
size at maturity of all planting, including their botanical
(8) All planting to be indigenous species to the locality.
plan entitled Entry Signage Details, Sheet MP-800 modified to show Sign 01
(re-purposed galvanised steel tower sign) with two
panels only and a total
advertisement area not exceeding 10 square metres.
Tree Management and Protection Plan (
) prepared by a Level V (AQF)
Arborist in accordance with Australian Standard AS 4970-2009
Protection of
trees on development sites
. The TMPP must include all retained trees on the
Land, road reserve or adjoining land whose Tree Protection Zones (
fall within the proposed development footprint (including any associated
buildings, works, excavation or fencing). The report must
include a drawing,
specification and certification procedure; and demonstrate how the retained
trees will be protected during all
stages of development being Stages 1, 2 and 3
) in the plan entitled Development Staging Plan, Sheet MP-301 of
the Site Masterplan, or any amended version of it as may be endorsed
to time under this permit.
d) The Venue Operations Management Plan amended to show:
patron numbers as follows:
(1) Recreation activities: 320 patrons.
(2) Function centre and restaurant: 150 patrons.
(3) Accommodation cabins: 258 guests.
(4) Camping and caravan park: 448 patrons.
six times per year, the number of patrons associated with the approved adventure
park use may be increased to 2,500 (in addition
to guests accommodated at the
camping and caravan park) to facilitate ancillary sporting events. No functions
can occur on the Land
at the same time as the ancillary sporting events.
patron number capacities will be managed.
method for recording patron quantities.
to the Land for ticketed and non-ticketed patrons.
method to ensure that no functions run concurrently with the 6 ancillary
sporting events per year.
to ensure compliance with the endorsed red line plan approved under this
Security/management
staff monitoring patron behaviour to ensure that patron behaviour does not have
a detrimental impact on the amenity
of the surrounding area.
e) A Lighting Management Plan which details lighting to car parking areas and
ensures that lighting for the cable park, outdoor skate
area and any other
spotlighting in accordance with AS 4282—1997 -
Control of the obtrusive
effects of outdoor lighting
f) For the wastewater dam:
plan drawn to an appropriate scale, clearly showing:
(1) Existing surface contour levels, with all contours clearly labelled;
(2) The locations of proposed dam embankments clearly shown, including the
location of the toes of the dam embankments;
(3) Proposed embankment crest level;
(4) Location of proposed spillway;
(5) Proposed water surface level;
(6) The volume of water stored in the dam;
Cross-sections
in two different directions through the proposed wastewater treatment dam at the
critical location showing:
(1) Proposed water surface level;
(2) Proposed top of embankment level;
(3) Proposed embankment upstream and downstream slopes;
(4) Proposed embankment crest width;
(5) Proposed freeboard;
Proposed dam cut slopes;
(7) Proposed level at base of lake/dam;
g) A Waste Management Plan is required to be submitted to and approved by the
responsible authority. The Waste Management Plan is
to detail the
Owner arranging for private collection of waste, recyclables and green waste
bins from within the property including:
(1) Location of bin storage areas.
(2) Location of bin collection areas.
(3) Swept paths and turning movements of vehicle to be used for the
collection of bins from the designated bin collection areas.
(4) Estimated volumes of waste and recyclables generated from the site,
number and size of bins to be used and the associated storage
area for the
(5) Names of contractors able to provide the required service.
h) An acoustic report generally in accordance with the acoustic assessment
report prepared by Renzo Tonin and Associates dated 2
November 2022 (
Land Management Plan generally in accordance with the plan prepared Beacon
Ecological dated May 2022.
j) A Farm Management Plan generally in accordance with the plan prepared
Ag-Challenge Consulting dated 3 May 2022.
k) An emergency plan generally in accordance with the plan entitled The Ranch
Mornington Peninsula Emergency Plan and including specific
procedures to be
followed in the event of bushfire.
the use and development starts, plans to the satisfaction of the responsible
authority must be submitted to and approved by
the responsible authority. When
approved, and endorsed accordingly, these plans will form part of this permit.
Such plans are to
be drawn to scale with dimensions and three copies are to be
provided. The plans are to be in accordance with the plans submitted
application but modified to show to the satisfaction of the responsible
a) The location of all electricity and other services to the camp sites placed
underground.
b) The accessway to the camp site constructed in a suitable crushed rock with
areas where the grade exceeds 1 :6 to be in an all
weather seal coat or similar
to prevent erosion.
d) Fencing that restricts access to existing vegetation in the camping area that
will be retained and to prevent disturbance of erosion
prone land. This must
include details of the location, materials for construction and height of
e) The proposed earthworks, noting cross sections, existing natural ground
level, proposed finished ground level details of retaining
walls including
heights, locations and materials of construction.
f) The location of any proposed access paths for pedestrian or vehicle
movements, including materials for construction and the location
of bollards to
restrict access solely to the proposed driveways and prevent vehicles from
departing from the defined driveways.
g) Any proposed advertising signage, within the boundaries of the Land or
otherwise. These plans must include the location, size
and content of each
advertising sign and elevation details.
h) The location of garbage collection areas, including all rubbish bins.
j) The location of utilities servicing each camp site, including electricity,
water and wastewater. All services must be provided
underground.
k) The location, capacity and specifications of the proposed wastewater
treatment plant including its connection to each camp site.
maximum retention of existing vegetation and supplementary rehabilitation works
to ensure the optimum environmental conditions
for the retained vegetation
(example rehabilitation of disturbed surfaces where tree roots have been exposed
and restoration of soil).
Endorsed plans to be complied
[There are two condition 1s. Renumber remaining conditions]
layout of the Land, the hours of operation, size and type of the proposed
buildings and works, including the materials of construction,
the timing for
completion of the proposed buildings and works, on the endorsed plan must be
complied with and not altered or modified
without the consent of the responsible
layout and activities as indicated on the endorsed plans must not be altered
without the consent of the responsible authority.
Satisfactory
continuation
the works have commenced they must be continued and completed to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority.
Use of camp
to the use of the camp sites, the owner must prepare to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority a lease agreement that
will be used for leasing the camp
sites to campers. The lease agreement must include the following conditions:
a) The camp site must not be occupied for more than 59 consecutive days of
occupancy and for a total of 90 days in any calendar year
by any person.
b) The lessee shall use the camp site for recreational or holiday purposes only
and shall not occupy the Land or individual camp
site as their only or main
place of residence.
c) The lease shall not exceed a maximum term of twelve consecutive calendar
camp sites may only be occupied for a maximum of 59 consecutive days of
occupancy and a total of 90 days in any one calendar year.
The owner shall
ensure that an accurate register of all campers, camp sites, details of periods
of occupancy and residential address
of campers is maintained to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority. The owner must make the register
available to the responsible
authority upon request.
173 Agreement
to the commencement of any works on the approved use and development, the owner
must prepare an agreement pursuant to
Section 173
Planning and
Environment Act 1987
. The agreement must be prepared and registered on the
Land’s title to the satisfaction of the responsible authority and at
owner’s expense. The agreement must provide for:
a) The implementation of a master plan prepared and approved to the satisfaction
of the responsible authority.
b) The operation of an Environment Protection Authority (
sewerage treatment plant for the total facility.
c) The landscaping of the Land and protection of vegetation in accordance with
an environmental management plan approved by the responsible
d) The layout of all existing activities on the Land including the frequency of
e) The layout of possible future activities, including their capacity,
functional integration with the existing uses, staged development
options and
site coverage.
f) The means to restrict the use of accommodation to serve only casual holiday
makers and tourists for a maximum of ninety (90) days
in any calendar year and a
maximum of 59 consecutive days of occupancy.
g) The responsibility for the continued implementation, management and
compliance with the environmental management plan required
by this permit is the
ongoing responsibility of the owner and/or operator of this development.
h) Deleted.
limitation on the number of horses that can be accommodated on the Land at any
one time to a maximum of 50 horses.
j) The owner must lodge with the responsible authority a bond or bank guarantee
for an amount to the satisfaction of the responsible
authority following an
estimate of costs of landscaping to be submitted by the owner to the responsible
authority and such estimate
of costs must be submitted on or before 1 February
2006. The responsible authority may draw against the bond or bank guarantee for
the purpose of carrying out any development works or maintenance works
associated with the landscaping.
Native Vegetation
vegetation (except as required for development shown on the endorsed plan) must
not be felled, lopped, topped, ringbarked or
otherwise destroyed or removed
except with the consent of the responsible authority.
wastewater from the approved development must be disposed to the EPA approved
sewerage system to the satisfaction of the responsible
Infrastructure
telephone and electricity services must be installed via underground connections
to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
25) Deleted
sponsorship signage that is visible from outside the Land may be placed on the
location and details of signs, including those of the supporting structure,
shown on the endorsed plans must not be altered without
the written consent of
the responsible authority.
the commencement of Stage 1 works, all signage, other than that approved by this
permit or which is exempt from the requirement
for a planning permit in
accordance with the planning scheme must be removed to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority.
signs must be designed to a professional standard, constructed and maintained in
good condition to the satisfaction of the responsible
associated with the signs must be designed, baffled and located to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority to prevent
any adverse effect on
adjoining land.
signs must not be illuminated after 9.30pm, and not more than 60 minutes before
the use opens to the public, to the satisfaction
of the responsible
60 days of the associated use of the Land ceasing to operate, the signs hereby
approved must be removed from the Land to the
satisfaction of the responsible
permit as it relates to signage will expire in fifteen years after
the date of issue of the amended permit]
. The responsible authority may
consent in writing to vary these requirements.
expiry of the permit as it relates to signage, the sign and structures built
specifically to support and illuminate it must be
and amenity
use of the Land must comply with the endorsed Acoustic Report to the
satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
levels associated with the use must at all times comply with the Environment
Protection Regulations under the
Environment Protection Regulations 2021
(Vic) under the
Environment Protection Act 2017
(Vic) and the
incorporated Noise Protocol (Publication 1826.2, Noise Limit and Assessment
Protocol for the Control of Noise from Commercial,
Industrial and Trade Premises
and Entertainment Venues, Environmental Protection authority, March 2021, or as
amended from time to
time), or any other superseding
regulation.
36A) Within six (6) months after the commencement of
the use approved by this amended permit, or as otherwise agreed in writing by
the Responsible Authority, a Post Commencement Acoustic Report is to be
submitted to the Responsible Authority. The report must detail
the following
matters to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority:
a) Confirmation that all of the recommendations of the endorsed Acoustic
Report have been implemented.
b) Further testing that has been undertaken to ascertain whether the use
complies with:
(i) The maximum noise levels prescribed by the
Environment Protection
Regulations 2021
(Vic) under the
Environment Protection Act 2017
(Vic) and the
incorporated Noise Protocol (Publication 1826.2, Noise Limit and Assessment
Protocol for the Control of Noise from
Commercial, Industrial and Trade Premises
and Entertainment Venues, Environmental Protection authority, March 2021, as
amended from
time to time) or any other superseding regulation; and
(ii) Any patron noise levels as specified in the endorsed acoustic
non-compliance is measured, recommendations for additional acoustic measures to
ensure compliance with the endorsed Acoustic Report.
d) Confirmation that all acoustic testing required by this condition has been
carried out at a function or event during night time
hours with more than 50% of
the maximum patron capacity by a suitably qualified acoustic engineer.
36B) The provisions, recommendations and requirements of the endorsed Post
Commencement Acoustic Report must be implemented and complied
with to the
satisfaction of the Responsible Authority within three (3) months of endorsement
of that report, or as otherwise agreed
in writing by the Responsible Authority.
During the time any additional acoustic measures are being implemented, no
operations which
would cause non-compliance with the noise levels in the
endorsed Acoustic Report are to take place.
air compressors associated with the ski jump landing pads must only be used
during the operating hours of the recreation facilities
associated with the
approved adventure park use.
music is not permitted in the outdoor areas at any time, except at a background
music level within the curtilage of the
Kiosk and Restaurant/Function Centre.
associated with the approved adventure park use (excluding accommodation) must
be turned off within an hour of the operating
hours each day.
Environmental Health
wastewaters generated within the Land must be treated and retained by an EPA
approved sewerage system to the satisfaction of the
relevant authority.
to occupation of any Stage of development, the associated wastewater system must
be installed to the satisfaction of the responsible
food facilities will be required to install a suitably sized food and oil
interceptor (grease trap) to service all proposed kitchen
satisfaction of the relevant authority. The food and oil interceptor must be
located outside of the food premises and
have an accessible water supply
Vegetation removal
extent of clearing of vegetation as shown on the endorsed plans must not be
altered or modified without the written consent of
the responsible
disturbed surfaces on the Land must be revegetated and stabilised to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority.
Protection of
to the removal of the vegetation, including fallen logs, hollow stumps or ground
habitat, a suitably experienced person must
inspect the vegetation for signs of
habitation by fauna. If wildlife is present during vegetation removal works,
only a suitably
qualified wildlife handler or zoologist can handle wildlife to
ensure it is not harmed. If displaced wildlife cannot be relocated
Land, it must be relocated to an appropriate alternative
Tree protection
to the commencement of any demolition, excavation or works, and during all
Stages of development, the TPZs, tree protection
fencing, recommendations and
tree protection measures identified in the approved TMPP must be implemented,
complied with and certified;
to the satisfaction of the responsible
to the commencement of buildings and works for any Stage, all contractors and
tradespersons operating at the Land or within
the adjacent Boneo Road reserve
must be advised of:
a) the status of trees to be retained; and
b) any obligations in relation to the protection of those trees.
trenching or soil excavation is to occur within the TPZ of retained trees during
development unless shown on the endorsed plans,
without the prior written
consent of the responsible authority.
Landscaping
to the occupation of any Stage of the development (or other time agreed to in
writing by the responsible authority) the landscaping
works for that Stage shown
on the endorsed Landscaping Plan must be carried out and completed to the
satisfaction of the responsible
authority. The landscaping must be maintained to
the satisfaction of the responsible authority, including that any dead, diseased
or damaged plants are to be replaced as soon as
practicable.
Offset requirement
offset the removal of 0.942 hectares of native vegetation the permit holder must
secure a native vegetation offset, in accordance
Guidelines for the
removal, destruction or lopping of native vegetation
(DELWP 2017) as
specified below:
a) A general offset of 0.212 general habitat units:
within the Port Phillip and Westernport CMA boundary or Mornington Peninsula
Shire municipal district; and
a minimum strategic biodiversity score of at least 0.402.
any native vegetation is removed evidence that the required offset has been
secured must be provided to the satisfaction of
the responsible authority. This
evidence is one or both of the following:
a) an established first party offset site including a security agreement signed
by both parties, and a management plan detailing
the 10 year management actions
and ongoing management of the site and/or
b) credit extract(s) allocated to the permit from the Native Vegetation Credit
A copy of the offset evidence will be endorsed by the responsible
authority and form part of this permit. Within 30 days of endorsement
offset evidence by the responsible authority, a copy of the endorsed offset
evidence must be provided to the Department of
Energy, Environment and Climate
Amended Section 173 Agreement
to the commencement of any buildings and works associated with Stage 3, the
owner must amend the Agreement AE126036U registered
on the title of the Land
pursuant to Subdivision 2, Division 2 of
Planning and
Environment Act 1987
. The amended agreement must be prepared and registered
on the Land’s title to the satisfaction of the responsible authority
at the owner’s expense.
amended agreement must provide for an increase in the maximum number of persons
that can be accommodated at the Land at any one
time from 200 to 706 (excluding
Patron Management
management must be undertaken in accordance with the endorsed Venue Operations
Management Plan.
to condition 58, no more than 1396 patrons are allowed on the Land at any one
time, based on:
a) Recreation activities: 320 patrons.
b) Function centre/restaurant: 150 patrons.
c) Accommodation cabins: 258 guests.
d) Camping and caravan park: 448 guests.
e) Dining hall (associated with the existing school camp use at the Land): 220
any one time, no more than:
a) 448 patrons may be accommodated overnight at the camping and caravan park;
b) 258 guests may be accommodated overnight in the accommodation cabins, being
the cabins numbered:
V2, V3, V5 and B4 on the plan entitled Site Plan Existing Conditions, Sheet
MP-200 in the endorsed Site Masterplan; and
and B03b on the plan entitled Site Layout Plan, Sheet TP-1.10 in the endorsed
Development Plans; and
patrons may be present at the restaurant/function centre (within the Barn
the avoidance of doubt the patron limit in condition 55 excludes staff.
to six times per year, the number of patrons at the Land may be increased to
2,500 (excluding guests of the camping and caravan
park) to facilitate ancillary
sporting events.
functions can occur on the Land at the same time as the ancillary sporting
Hours of operation
with the consent of the responsible authority, the adventure park use approved
by this permit must not operate outside the
following hours:
a) Recreation activities: Daily 9.00am to 9.00pm
b) Kiosk: Monday to Sunday 9.00am to 9.00pm
c) Restaurant/function centre (within the Barn building):
to Thursday 8.00am to 10.00pm
and Saturday (and Sunday proceeding a public holiday) 8.00am to
Ancillary Use
the operation of the restaurant/function centre commences, the restaurant
contained within the Chapel building must cease being
used as a restaurant and
must only be used as a dining hall ancillary to the existing school camping use,
to the satisfaction of
the responsible authority.
the school camps cease to operate, the dining hall must be decommissioned or
demolished.
kiosk and restaurant/function centre must only be used ancillary to the
adventure park use hereby approved, to the satisfaction
of the responsible
kiosk and restaurant/function centre must not be promoted or advertised
independently of the adventure park at the Land.
accommodation
existing dwelling to be repurposed for staff accommodation must only be used by
persons employed by the permit holder in association
with the use of the
Sale and consumption of Liquor
seating and extent of the approved use as it relates to the sale and consumption
of liquor as shown on the endorsed plan must
not be altered or modified.
approved use as it relates to the sale and consumption of liquor may only
operate between the following hours:
a) Restaurant/function centre (within the Barn building):
to Thursday 11.00am to 10.00pm
and Saturday (and Sunday proceeding a public holiday) 11.00am to
alcohol sold at the Land is to be taken outside the area identified for the sale
and consumption of liquor on the ‘red line’
plan endorsed under this
licensing of the venue must not cause any nuisance or annoyance to persons
beyond the land because of the emission of noise, or
otherwise, to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority.
Decommissioning of
existing dwelling
30 days of the occupation of the new dwelling approved by this permit, the
existing dwelling must be only used for staff accommodation
in accordance within
the conditions of this permit.
Land Management Plan
endorsed Land Management Plan must be implemented and maintained to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority on a continuing
Farm Management Plan
endorsed Farm Management Plan must be implemented and maintained to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority on a continuing
Emergency Plan
endorsed Emergency Plan must be implemented and maintained to the satisfaction
of the responsible authority on a continuing basis.
Geotechnical
to the commencement of each Stage, a Geotechnical Report for that Stage must be
submitted to and approved by the Responsible
Authority. The Geotechnical Report
must, in respect of works to be undertaken on any part of the Land
affected by the Environmental Significance Overlay (Schedule 23)
within the applicable Stage:
a) detail all erosion mitigation and land stability measures to be undertaken,
based on finalised design levels for works across
relevant part of the Land,
that result in a proposed cut or fill batter slope steeper than 1V:6H;
b) provide for the following:
engineering
solutions to keep earthworks (cut and fill) to a minimum, where
practicable;
(1) designed by a suitably qualified civil engineer (with
particular experience in land sensitive to landslide and erosion conditions);
(2) provided for all areas of proposed and existing development to reduce the
potential for landslide and erosion;
geotechnical investigation and global stability analysis to be undertaken where
surcharge is proposed within 10m of the crest of
any moderate to steeply sloping
natural slopes, or within existing slopes;
supported on footings and developed within existing slopes or near the crest of
slopes to have suitable footing design,
with footings to be designed generally
(1) a depth of weathered bedrock; or
(2) where the surcharge of the footings does not daylight within the
re-vegetation
of existing and proposed slopes to be provided where possible;
of options to relocate the proposed wastewater dam entirely outside the area
affected by the Environmental Significance
Overlay (Schedule
strict implementation of risk control measures where ‘moderate’ or
‘high’ risk levels are assessed,
to decrease the landslide/ erosion
risk to a tolerable ‘Low’ risk level;
d) specify any areas for further assessment and investigation, subject to the
observed residual risk rating;
e) require design documents to be assessed by a suitably qualified geotechnical
engineer or engineering geologist and, if necessary
(in the opinion of the
geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist):
targeted geotechnical investigations must be conducted to:
(1) establish a robust geotechnical model; and
(2) ensure that site-specific slope stability assessment is undertaken to
assess both short-term and long-term risks; and
detailed landslide risk assessment must be undertaken generally accordance with
the Australian Geomechanics Society (AGS) Practice
Note Guidelines
approved, the Geotechnical Report will be endorsed to form part of the planning
permit. The endorsed Geotechnical Report must
be implemented to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority.
Head, Transport for
to commencement of Stage 1 of the development, amended plans must be submitted
to and approved by the Head, Transport for Victoria.
When approved by the Head,
Transport for Victoria, the plans must be endorsed by the responsible authority
and will then form part
of the permit. The plans must be drawn to scale with
dimensions and electronic copies must be provided. The plans must be generally
in accordance with the plans prepared by One Mile Grid, Drawing no. CLP200 Rev C
and annotated Boneo Road – The Ranch Access
Treatment Concept Layout Plan
but modified to show:
a) Channelised Right Turn Lane along Boneo Road in accordance with AustRoads
guidelines to access the Land.
b) Road markings as required for the left deceleration land and right turn
c) Pylon Sign Lighting annotated as static lighting.
to commencement of Stage 1 of the development, a Functional Layout Plan
) along with a functional Road Safety Audit (
submitted to and approved by the Head, Transport for Victoria. When approved by
the Head, Transport for Victoria, the plans
must be endorsed by the Responsible
Authority and will then form part of the permit. The plans must be generally in
accordance with
the plans prepared by One Mile Grid, Drawing no. CLP200 Rev C
and annotated Boneo Road – The Ranch Access Treatment Concept
Layout Plan
but modified to show:
a) Channelised Right Turn Lane along Boneo Road in accordance with AustRoads
guidelines to access the Land
b) Road markings as required for the left deceleration land and right turn lane
to the approval of the FLP and prior to the commencement of any roadworks within
the arterial road reserve the applicant
must submit the detailed engineering
design plans and a detailed RSA to the Head, Transport for Victoria for review
and approval.
The detailed design plans must be prepared generally in accordance
with the approved FLP to the satisfaction of the Head, Transport
to the occupation of the development of Stage 1, all the roadworks as per the
approved FLP must be constructed to the satisfaction
of and at no cost to the
Head, Transport for Victoria.
for the pylon sign near the entrance to the Land must be converted to static
lighting only.
Development Engineering
the endorsement of Condition 1A plans and before any works associated with each
Stage of the development starts, a signed and
completed ‘Checklist for
Development Engineering Plan Approval’ along with engineering plans to the
satisfaction of the
Responsible Authority must be submitted to and approved by
the Responsible Authority. The plans must be drawn to scale with dimensions
shall be emailed to devengadmin@mornpen.vic.gov.au in pdf
The plans must show:
a) All areas of the development being drained by means of an underground
drainage system to retain a post-development 1% Annual Exceedance
Probability
storm event for the critical storm duration on the property and being based on a
soil percolation test reports prepared
by an appropriately qualified
geotechnical consultant.
b) The drainage system on the Land being designed to ensure that storm water
runoff from the development meets the current best practice
performance
objectives for stormwater quality, as contained in the Urban Stormwater Best
Practice Environmental Management Guidelines
(Victorian Stormwater Committee,
c) Details, including levels, of all driveways and parking areas within the
d) A plan of the proposed wastewater storage dam showing the
surface level
embankment is required, embankment crest level
spillway is required, location of proposed spillway
spillway is required, spillway invert level
spillway is required, spillway outlet channel or flow path from
e) Detailed cross-sections through the wastewater storage dam in two different
directions, showing the following information, all
in accordance with the
recommendations of a site specific geotechnical investigation
base level/s
surface level
embankment is required, top of embankment level
embankment is required, embankment upstream and downstream slopes
embankment is required, embankment crest width
embankment is required, core trench to underside of embankment, including width
embankment is required, embankment materials
an embankment is required, embankment compaction standards and compaction
methodology
liner details
f) If a spillway is required, a cross-section across proposed spillway to the
wastewater storage dam showing spillway side slopes
and spillway depth.
g) All car parking areas and bus parking and drop off areas surfaced in
accordance with the endorsed plans.
h) All internal roadways and driveways providing access to car parking areas and
bus parking and drop off areas surfaced to the satisfaction
in accordance with
the endorsed plans.
disability parking spaces surfaced with asphalt or reinforced
j) All pathways providing access from disability parking spaces to an adjacent
part of the development surfaced with asphalt or reinforced
k) TPZs impacted by the works, or as shown on any other development plans and
works designed to avoid TPZs where possible.
m) Proposed methodologies for complying with AS4970-2009
Protection of trees
on development sites
for any works that are required within TPZs.
the approval of engineering plans, drainage computations and documentation are
required for:
a) The proposed drainage system.
b) A STORM and/or MUSIC Report, where applicable.
the approval of engineering plans for asphalt surfaced internal roads, driveways
and car parking areas, a site specific geotechnical
investigation report which
includes pavement design for road and car parking areas is required.
to the commencement of any works for any Stage, a project-specific Major
Construction Management Plan (
) for that Stage must be endorsed by the
Responsible Authority. This CMP is to be based on the standard Major CMP
template found on
the Mornington Peninsula Shire’s website. When approved,
the CMP will be endorsed and form part of the Planning Permit. The
endorsed CMP
must be implemented to the satisfaction of the responsible authority prior to,
and during the applicable Stage of works.
to the commencement of any works for any Stage, a project specific Construction
Traffic Management Plan (
) for that part of the works must be
submitted to the responsible authority for approval. The CTMP must then be
implemented to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority prior to and during
construction of the works.
the initial occupation of any Stage of the approved development, all drainage
works associated with that Stage must be constructed
in accordance with approved
engineering plans, and to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
the initial occupation of any Stage, the areas set aside for the parking of
vehicles and driveways associated with that Stage
as shown on the endorsed plans
must be constructed in accordance with approved engineering plans, surfaced and
drained to the satisfaction
of the responsible authority. Car spaces, access
lanes and driveways must be kept available for these purposes at all
Expiry - use and development
permit will expire in respect of:
a) the development permitted in Stages 1, 2 and 3 if one of the following
circumstances applies:
1 of the development is not completed within five years of [
insert date being
the date of the amendment to this permit with reference P04/0289.03
3 of the development is not completed within ten years of [
insert date being
the date of the amendment to this permit with reference P04/0289.03
b) the adventure park use within respective Stages, if the use is not started
within two years of completion of the respective developments
of that Stage.
In accordance with
Planning and Environment
, an application may be submitted to the responsible authority for
an extension of the periods referred to in this condition.
This was part of the
application material submitted with the amendment application
[1964] HCA 37
(1964) 110 CLR 529
The architectural plans are
part of the application material, Document 1.18 in the VCAT file for
Part of the application
material, Document 1.18 in the VCAT file for P1093/2024
D41 at Appendix D
D41 at Appendix E
D41 at page 7 and Appendix
D41 at Appendix E
Planning Practice Note 42:
Applying the Rural Zones, June 2024
The Committee was advised
that the Ranch has operated since the 1980’s
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (11.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter