URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2025/694.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Krakouer v Australian Football League (No 2) [2025] VSC 694 (11 November 2025)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
AT MELBOURNE
GROUP PROCEEDINGS
S ECI 2023 04323
BRENT KRAKOUER
NEIL ELVIS WINMAR
Second Plaintiff
AUSTRALIAN FOOTBALL LEAGUE (ACN 004 155
DATE OF HEARING
15 October 2025
DATE OF RULING
11 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Krakouer v Australian Football League (No 2)
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VSC 694
COSTS — Group proceeding — Complaint by defendant that
statement of claim defective — Pleadings not closed —
Application by
plaintiffs to amend statement of claim to add parties —Application by
defendant to strike out statement of claim
and that the proceeding not continue
Supreme Court Act 1986
— Significant change in
position by plaintiffs —Application by defendant for costs of summonses,
and pleading amendments
and for immediate taxation —
Supreme Court
(General Civil Procedure) Rules 2025
rr 63.17, 63.20, 63.20.1— Costs
order limited to particular period — No order as to immediate taxation
for costs — Costs in proceeding.
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
F McLeod AO SC with P
Margalit Injury Lawyers
For the Defendant
M Costello KC with A
Gordon Legal
HIS HONOUR:
1 On 25 September 2025, I made orders
giving the first plaintiff, Phillip Krakouer, leave to file and serve an amended
writ and statement
of claim in this proceeding. This ruling deals with the
costs of pleading amendments and of related summonses filed by the parties
November 2024.
Procedural history
2 This group proceeding was commenced by
generally indorsed writ filed on 15 September 2023. Krakouer filed a
statement of claim
on 5 March 2024
3 At a case management
conference on 24 May 2024, both parties raised the prospect of pleading
amendments. Krakouer said he intended
to amend his writ and SOC to add all
Australian Football League clubs as defendants. The defendant, the Australian
Football League
(‘AFL’), said Krakouer’s current pleading
would need to be amended to cure a number of fundamental defects. Orders
made requiring the AFL to give Krakouer notice of the alleged defects in the
SOC, and for Krakouer to serve a proposed amended
statement of claim.
4 Krakouer provided the AFL with a proposed amended
statement of claim (‘PASOC’) dated 13 September 2024, adding five
AFL clubs (‘AFL clubs’) as defendants and making several significant
changes to the pleadings against the AFL.
October 2024, the AFL gave Krakouer notice of alleged defects in the PASOC.
6 On 4 November 2024, orders were made requiring
Krakouer to file and serve the PASOC and an application to join the AFL clubs as
defendants; providing an opportunity for the AFL to file and serve any
application it wished to make in relation to the PASOC; timetabling
of evidence and submissions; and listing the anticipated applications for
hearing on 11 March 2025 on an estimate of three
days (‘November 2024
7 On 7 November 2024, Krakouer
filed and served the PASOC via email in substantially the same form as it was
provided on 13 September
8 On 26 November 2024,
Krakouer filed and served a summons dated 22 November 2024 seeking leave to file
and serve the PASOC and to
join the AFL clubs as defendants (‘amendment
application’).
9 On 29 November 2024, the AFL
filed and served a summons for the following orders:
(a) pursuant to
Supreme Court Act 1986
’), the proceeding
no longer continue as a group proceeding;
amendment application be dismissed; and
(c) the SOC
be struck out with leave to replead
(‘strike out application’).
10 On 11 February 2025, Krakouer advised
the AFL that he no longer sought the relief set out in the amendment
application; proposed
to make further amendments to the SOC; and would seek an
amendment to the Court’s timetable to facilitate this.
11 The proceeding was listed for a case management
conference at Krakouer’s request on 3 March 2025. Michel Margalit,
for Krakouer, affirmed an affidavit on 28 February 2025 in which
she explained that after further consideration, Krakouer acknowledged
were aspects of the PASOC that required augmentation and repleading. Margalit
said that instructions had been received
from Neil ‘Nicky’ Winmar,
and that Krakouer was considering applying to have Winmar added as a second
plaintiff to the
proceeding. Margalit said new counsel had recently been
engaged to undertake the task of reviewing and repleading the SOC. Margalit
[Krakouer] recognises that there has been delay and wasted costs occasioned by
[Krakouer’s] conduct in seeking to join the
proposed defendants and
indulgences have been afforded to [Krakouer]. [Krakouer] is again conscious
that by this course he is requesting
a further indulgence. In recognition of
that fact, [Krakouer] agrees to pay the [AFL] and proposed defendants’
costs of [Krakouer’s]
Summons to the extent that any of those costs are
wasted by reason of any amended summons filed by [Krakouer] on 24 April 2025.
12 Following the case management
conference on 3 March 2025, orders were made providing for Krakouer to serve a
further proposed amended
pleading and amended summons by 24 April 2025; ordering
that Krakouer pay any wasted costs of the AFL clubs by reason of amendment
his summons; and reserving the AFL’s
13 Krakouer provided a further proposed
amended statement of claim on 24 April 2025 (‘ASOC’), which sought
to join Winmar
as a second plaintiff, and did not persist with the earlier
application to join the AFL clubs as defendants. The ASOC amended the
substantially. For efficiency and clarity, it was presented as an entirely
fresh document rather than a repleading of the SOC.
14 On 14 May 2025, the AFL consented to Winmar being
joined as a second plaintiff and to the filing of the ASOC, but sought to
its rights in relation to the proposed pleading, including in respect of
strike out and declassing.
15 On 9 September 2025,
the AFL filed a summons applying for the following orders:
pay the [AFL’s] costs thrown away in relation to the amendments in
[Krakouer’s ASOC], and the summonses of
it dated 29 November 2024 and of
[Krakouer] dated 22 November 2024.
[AFL’s] costs thrown away be taxable immediately.
pay the [AFL’s] costs of this
16 Krakouer submits that the costs
of the pleading amendments and the 26 November and 29 November 2024 summonses
should be in the
cause, and that the AFL should pay his costs of the 9 September
2025 summons.
Submissions
17 The amendments in the ASOC have
resulted in the abandonment of significant allegations in the SOC and PASOC.
Work done by the
AFL in connection with those now abandoned allegations is
wasted. The abandonment of each prior iteration of the statement of claim
made well into the preparation for argument about leave to amend and after
repeated communications from the AFL about the inadequacy
of Krakouer’s
18 Similarly, the AFL’
2024 summons was rendered otiose by Krakouer abandoning the pleading amendment
he proposed at that time. Costs incurred
by the AFL in relation to its summons
have also been wasted.
19 In the present case, there
are good reasons to depart from the default position that the costs of the
parties’ summonses
should be in the proceeding and should not be taxed
until completion of the proceeding.
Krakouer’s protracted application for leave to amend his pleading is
accurately described as ‘an instance of a party
seeking the court’s
indulgence to accurately formulate its pleading which, in an ideal world, it
should have got right in the
20 The following factors support the conclusion
that a costs order in favour of the AFL should be taxable immediately:
(a) Absent an order for
immediate taxation, the AFL will be deprived of costs to which it is entitled
for a substantial and indefinite
costs thrown away in relation to the abandoned allegations are discrete from all
other issues that will eventually require
determination and are
quantifiable.
(c) The conduct of Krakouer in making
then abandoning allegations was both unreasonable and involved a want of
21 The only formal pleadings in this case
are the general indorsement, SOC and ASOC. The significance of the amendments
and proposed
amendments, and the resulting work required to be undertaken by the
AFL should not be overstated. Further, it cannot be said at
this stage of the
proceeding that work associated with allegations that are now not formally
pursued as pleadings will be wasted.
An order for costs thrown away should not
be made at this stage because it is not possible to determine what should be the
of that order, or to identify on taxation the scope of any costs thrown
Provisions and principles
22 The Court has an unfettered discretion
in relation to the costs of steps taken in a
proceeding.
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure)
’) modify costs in some
circumstances. Relevantly, in relation to pleading amendments, r 63.17
Where a pleading is amended (whether with or without leave) the costs of and
occasioned by the amendment and the costs of any application
for leave to make
the amendment are the parties' costs in the proceeding, unless the Court
otherwise orders.
Relevant to interlocutory applications r 63.20 reads:
Where an interlocutory or other application is made in a proceeding and—
(a) no order is made on the application; or
(b) the order made is silent as to costs—
the costs are the parties’ costs in the proceeding, unless the Court
otherwise orders.
The effect of rr 63.17 and 63.20 is to create a starting position that in the
specified circumstances, the costs of the parties are
costs in the proceeding.
A party seeking an order departing from that starting position bears the onus of
establishing why such
an order should be
24 Pleadings have not closed. The AFL is
to file a defence to the ASOC by 13 November 2025. It has not previously
filed a defence.
Accordingly, the
did not require that Krakouer
obtain leave to amend the pleadings against the
Krakouer required leave to
file the ASOC because of the application to add Winmar as a second
and because the ASOC
amended the group member definition and therefore had the effect of
discontinuing claims made on behalf of some
default position is that costs awarded on an interlocutory application or
hearing will not be taxed until the proceeding is
Setka v Abbott
, the Court of Appeal, discussing the circumstances that might justify
departure from the default position,
The discretion to order that the default position not apply is confined only by
the principle that the discretion must be exercised
judicially. But it has been
held, depending upon the circumstances of the particular matter, that the
default position may be upset
where — (1) there is prospect of
considerable delay in completion of the proceeding; (2) the issue the subject of
the interlocutory
order was discrete from what will finally require
determinations; (3) the party against whom the substantive order was made was
of unsatisfactory conduct — described variously as
‘unreasonable’ or ‘reprehensible’, or as involving
want of ‘competence and diligence’.
The Court of Appeal concluded that the circumstances of that case did not
justify departing from the default position. In relation
to the consideration
of delay, it said:
First, the plaintiff’s change of position
brought about
delay. In our view, the new arguments could have been first ventilated months
ago. But the delay has not been very
great, and trial – once the pleadings
issues have been exhausted – will not have been much delayed.
Consideration
26 The AFL clarified in submissions that
it sought a costs order for work directed to matters in respect of each
iteration of the
pleading that were unnecessary by reason of the ASOC. The AFL
submitted the costs order should cover all work done by it in relation
pleadings from the filing of the SOC in March 2024 until the filing and service
of the ASOC.
27 It is not disputed that the AFL is
entitled to an award for some costs thrown away. The issues for determination
(a) whether the AFL’s
costs should be reserved at this stage for determination after the initial trial
of the proceeding;
(b) if costs are to be awarded
now, what the scope of the award should be;
(c) should any costs awarded to the AFL be
taxable and payable immediately?
28 There has been no determination on the
merits of the competing summonses filed by the parties in November 2024.
However, the significant
changes to Krakouer’s case represented by the
ASOC are an implicit acknowledgement of the need to address at least some of
pleading defects identified by the AFL and that the AFL’s strike out
application would have succeeded at least in part.
Krakouer chose not to
persist with the application opposed by the AFL, to join the AFL clubs as
defendants. Krakouer’s change
of course rendered the balance of the
strike out application otiose. The AFL has not persisted with the application
under s 33N
at this stage because of the significant
amendment Krakouer made to his pleadings.
November 2024, the AFL was entitled to proceed on the basis of the November 2024
orders. The determination of those applications
was disrupted when Krakouer
abruptly changed course in February 2025. Work done by the AFL in relation to
the amendment applications
has been wasted. I conclude in all the circumstances
that Krakouer should be ordered to pay the AFL’s costs of the amendment
application and the strike out application up to and including 23 April 2025,
being the day before the ASOC was served.
position is not so clear in relation to the pleading amendments proposed and
actually made by Krakouer.
31 The claims made in
this proceeding are novel and complex. It is not surprising that it has taken
Krakouer a number of attempts,
made in the context of complaints by the AFL
ASOC to a point that is sufficient to allow the case to
32 The AFL has not been required to file a
defence until now.
33 Because pleadings have not
closed, Krakouer was entitled to amend the SOC without
34 There have been some significant changes
to Krakouer’s pleading between the SOC, PASOC and ASOC. However, matters
previously pleaded or proposed but have not been retained in the ASOC
may still be a relevant part of the case pursued by Krakouer
and Winmar against
the AFL. At this stage, the extent that work done by the AFL in responding to
different iterations of Krakouer’s
pleadings has been wasted is unclear.
Further, some of the amendments in the PASOC only indirectly impacted the AFL.
is a novel cause of action which Krakouer pleaded in the PASOC only
against the AFL clubs.
35 Taking into account all
the circumstances, I conclude a more limited costs order should be made in
favour of the AFL in relation
to the pleadings amendments. The reasonable
process of resolving the statement of claim was sent off course by the filing
and service
of the PASOC and the amendment application. If Krakouer had
responded to the AFL’s complaints that the SOC was defective by
serving the ASOC, I would have ordered that the costs of that process be the
parties’ costs in the proceeding.
It is Krakouer’s failed attempt
to amend in the terms of the PASOC which justifies an order for costs made in
favour of the
AFL. I limit those costs to the period from 7 November 2024, when
Krakouer filed and served the PASOC in accordance with timetabling
orders, to 23
April 2025, being the day before the ASOC was
36 The remaining question is whether the
costs awarded to the AFL should be taxable and payable
immediately.
37 The circumstance of delay does not
weigh heavily in favour of an order for immediate taxation. Despite having been
on foot for
over two years, this proceeding is in its infancy. Pleadings have
not closed. The initial trial will not take place until 2027.
I accept there
will be significant delay in the AFL receiving the benefit of the costs order I
will make. However, the delay for
which Krakouer is responsible in relation to
the November 2024 summonses is not great.
work done for which the AFL will be awarded costs is not discrete from the
matters to be determined at an initial trial. Krakouer’s
pleading was central to both applications. It is evident from the materials
that the AFL’s assessment of the various
pleading iterations has involved
consideration of matters that are quite fundamental to the negligence claim
advanced by Krakouer.
It is quite conceivable that a significant part of the
work undertaken by the AFL in relation to the PASOC and the applications
remain relevant to the merits of the proceeding as it progresses. The AFL
effectively accepted as much in final submissions
by acknowledging that
identification of costs thrown away may prove difficult on immediate taxation.
The difficulty in determining,
at this stage, what work has been wasted, and the
risk of repeating the work associated with taxation of costs at the
interlocutory
and final stages are matters that weigh heavily against an order
for immediate taxation.
39 Krakouer’s conduct
in serving the PASOC, making the amendment application and opposing the strike
out application was not
unsatisfactory in the sense of being unreasonable or
reprehensible. Krakouer was struggling to sufficiently articulate the case
wished to make in the proceeding. However, that is not entirely surprising
having regard to the complexity and novelty of the
claim. When it became
apparent to Krakouer in early 2025 that the PASOC could not be supported and
that he would need to change
course, he acted quickly. At the same time
Margalit conceded reasonably on Krakouer’s behalf that the AFL was
entitled to
an award of some costs thrown away as a result. Krakouer’s
conduct is not such as to weigh in favour of an order for immediate
40 Having regard to all the circumstances I
conclude there is not a sufficient basis for departing from r 63.20.1 of
by ordering immediate
41 The AFL has enjoyed only partial
success with the costs application. Various offers have been made by the
parties in relation
to costs before the summons was heard. I conclude in the
circumstances that the parties’ costs of the 9 September 2025 summons
should be in the proceeding.
42 Costs orders will be
made in accordance with these reasons.
Supreme Court (General
Civil Procedure) Rules 2025
rr 63.17, 63.20.1
Edelman v Badower
[2010] VSC 427
Supreme Court Act 1986
JC Jarol Pty Ltd & Anor
v Novamex International LLC (Costs ruling)
[2023] VSC 378
Centraland Holdings Pty Ltd v Amal Trustees Pty Ltd
[2025] VSC 656
Ibid r 9.02.
[2013] VSCA 376
Dale v Clayton Utz (No 3)
[2013] VSC 593
13-16 [58]–[71], 19 [80]–[82].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (261 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter