URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/264.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Burnell (a pseudonym) v The King [2025] VSCA 264 (31 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA
S EAPCR 2025 0189
HENRY BURNELL (A
PRIEST, KIDD and KAYE JJA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
28 October 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
31 October 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 264
JUDGMENT APPEALED FROM:
DPP v [Burnell]
(Unreported,
County Court of Victoria, 14 August 2025, Judge Hawkins)
CRIMINAL LAW – Interlocutory appeal –
Review of refusal to certify – Historical sexual offences – Three
complainant
nieces – Delay of 40 to 45 years since alleged offending
– Witnesses and documentary evidence claimed to be unavailable
Trial judge refused permanent stay – Trial judge refused to certify for
interlocutory appeal – Application to
review refusal to certify
Ms MJ Brown and Mr G Lascaris
Mr G Buchhorn
WMB Lawyers
Ms A Hogan, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
Introduction
an indictment filed in the County Court, the applicant is charged with 16 sexual
offences against his nieces ‘CB’,
‘AC’, aged between eight and 15 years, in a period between 13 May
1980 and 28 July 1985. The charges
include indecent assault (ten charges
– charges 1 to 3, and 7 to 13); sexual penetration of a child under 10
(one charge –
charge 4); and sexual penetration of a person aged between
10 and 16 (five charges – charges 5 and 6, and 14 to 16).
14 August 2025, the trial judge refused a defence application for a permanent
stay of proceedings on all charges (‘the stay
ruling’ or ‘the
interlocutory decision’). Later that day, the judge refused to certify
under s 295(3)(b) of the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
that the interlocutory decision was ‘of sufficient importance to the trial
to justify it being determined
on an interlocutory appeal’ (‘the
certification ruling’).
to s 296 of the CPA, the applicant seeks a review of the judge’s refusal
to certify on a single ground that asserts
that the judge ‘erred in
refusing to permanently stay the proceedings’. Should the application for
review be successful,
by a notice dated 22 August 2025, the applicant seeks
leave to appeal against the interlocutory decision on a ground that also simply
contends that the judge ‘erred in refusing to permanently stay the
proceedings’.
the reasons that follow, we consider that the application to review the
judge’s refusal to certify must be refused.
The alleged offending
applicant, now aged 68 years, was aged between 22 and 27 at the time of the
alleged offending.
He was married
to ‘FD’, who had sisters ‘FR’ and ‘LP’. The
complainants CB and TG were FR’s
daughters, and AC was LP’s
the relevant period, CB and TG lived with their mother, FR, in a three bedroom
brick home, with a bungalow at the back, in Wodonga
(‘the Wodonga
property’). Their sister, ‘SC’, and their brothers,
‘AM’ and ‘JC’
also lived there. AC lived with her
parents at a property in Coolaroo which had an oval-shaped swimming pool in the
the period of the offending, the applicant lived with FD in a home in Braybrook
(‘the Braybrook home’). Many family
members visited and stayed
there. The applicant, who worked as a train driver, would regularly stay at the
Wodonga property overnight
when working in the area.
CB: Charges 1 to 6
1 relates to alleged events at the Wodonga property not long after CB turned
nine years of age in May 1981. CB was sleeping
in the bungalow when the
applicant allegedly started kissing her neck, before putting a hand in her
underwear and touching the outside
of her vagina.
2 relates to the same period. CB was asleep on the bottom bunk in her bedroom,
while TG occupied the top bunk. She woke to
find the applicant in her bed with
his hand in her pants. He then digitally penetrated her vagina. On another
occasion he entered
the bedroom when TG was there and penetrated her vagina with
a finger or an object (uncharged act).
told her mother, FR, what was happening. According to CB, FR slapped her face
and told her not to tell lies. Although FR recalls
a complaint being made, she
does not recall slapping CB’s face or accusing her of lying.
3 and 4 relate to an alleged incident that occurred on the same day that CB
complained to her mother. CB woke to find the
applicant in her bed. He
penetrated her vagina with his fingers, then his penis.
5 relates to alleged offending when CB was aged 10 years. CB was staying at the
applicant’s home, which was being renovated.
Five to seven other children
were present. The applicant was left alone with the children when other adults
went shopping. While
the remaining children watched cartoons on the television,
the applicant took CB to his bedroom and penetrated her vagina with his
6 relates to events at the Braybrook home when CB was aged 11 or 12. As TG and
another child watched television, the applicant
took CB to his bedroom and
penetrated her vagina with his penis.
TG: Charges 7 to 10
7 and 8 involve allegations of offending between December 1981 and late 1983,
when TG, aged 12 or 13, was holidaying at the
Braybrook home. The applicant
penetrated her vagina with his tongue, and then placed his penis against the
outside of her vagina.
9 relates to an incident during the same holiday. TG was asleep when the
applicant allegedly took her out of bed and penetrated
her vagina with his
tongue. Charge 10 involves alleged conduct of a similar nature.
2010 or 2011 TG made a complaint to a relative that the applicant had sexually
assaulted her when she was a child. Some years
later, on 29 December 2022, TG
was involved in a ‘pretext’ telephone conversation with the
applicant, during which the
applicant made a number of statements relied upon by
the prosecution as admissions of sexual misconduct.
AC: Charges 11 to 16
11 relates to a time between July 1982 and July 1984 when AC, aged between 13
and 15 years, was staying at the Braybrook home
with TG. After a game of
‘chasey’, the applicant was holding AC and TG against a wall when he
allegedly put his hand
inside AC’s underwear and placed his finger into
her vagina.
12 relates to an incident at the Braybrook home as AC and the applicant watched
television. The applicant allegedly touched
AC’s breasts over her
13 relates to an alleged incident at the Coolaroo property, when AC and the
applicant were in the pool. The applicant swam
under AC’s legs and poked
her vagina with a finger on the outside of her bathers. He later touched her
vagina over her bathers.
14 relates to an alleged incident during the Christmas holidays when AC was aged
15 and was staying at the Braybrook home.
The applicant and AC went swimming at
Altona. He then took her to a quiet street in Sunshine and penetrated her
vagina with his
penis until he ejaculated.
15 relates to a period prior to AC turning 16, when she was staying at the
Braybrook home. The applicant allegedly inserted
his penis into AC’s
vagina and continued penetration until he ejaculated inside her.
16 relates to a time when FD was pregnant, and AC, who was 15, was staying at
the Braybrook home. The applicant allegedly
inserted his penis into AC’s
vagina and thrusted until he ejaculated inside her.
some time when AC was aged between 16 and 17 and a half, she complained to her
partner and her parents about the applicant’s
The stay ruling
the stay ruling, the judge noted that the applicant had submitted that
continuation of the prosecution would be so unfairly and
unjustifiably
oppressive so as to constitute an abuse of process, or would otherwise involve
an unacceptable unfairness or injustice,
relying on the following
(i) the significant delay of more than four decades, a delay not attributable
to the applicant;
(ii) the unavailability of highly relevant witnesses (including those proximate
to, or in the vicinity of the alleged offending at
the time of the alleged
offence, and who may have given exculpatory evidence, or evidence that seriously
undermined the allegations
levelled against the applicant);
(iii) the loss and/or destruction of physical evidence;
(iv) the inherent unreliability of witness’ recollections after 40-45
(v) the inability to raise a defence or do anything other than offer a bare
denial; and
(vi) the impropriety of an investigating official, who suggested offending by
the applicant to the complainants CB and AC.
judge disposed of the sixth ground first, stating that ‘there is simply no
evidence to which the Court’s attention
was drawn to substantiate this
allegation’. With respect to the other five grounds, citing
the judge set out
the principles that guide the decision to grant or refuse a permanent stay. We
need not repeat them. None are
controversial. The judge then said:
[52] In this case complaints were only made to police in recent years. As such
there is no aspect of the delay in this case attributable
to the accused man.
Given the time, there is a lack of clarity about which other persons were
present, or may have been nearby at
various points throughout the alleged
offending. However most witnesses are still alive and available. In some
instances two of
the complainants were present during alleged offending. There
is no doubt that the memories of witnesses will have eroded over time.
reliability of the complainants’ accounts will necessarily be considered
by the jury. Physical evidence, such as the
accused’s employment records,
which may have provided him an alibi, or used to test competing narratives are
no longer available.
The accused’s ability to test potentially
exculpatory evidence is significantly diminished. Whilst formal house plans may
no longer be available, witnesses who lived in the relevant houses are available
to describe the layout and how the space was used.
These weighing factors go
for and against the disadvantage that the accused will suffer.
[53] Appropriately, the prosecution concedes that a ‘significant forensic
disadvantage’ direction
be given to the jury at trial. It will canvas the disadvantage suffered by the
accused in relation to any unavailable witnesses;
any absence, loss or
destruction of physical evidence; the inability for [the applicant] to do
anything more than offer bare denials;
and unfairness to the accused should he
give evidence.
[54] Counsel for [the applicant] submit that the cumulative effect of these
considerations in addition to that of delay in cause
(sic) the trial to be
fundamentally compromised in a manner that cannot be remedied through the type
of judicial direction I have
[55] More than 40 years have passed since this alleged offending. This delay
was through no fault of the accused man. Allegations
of historical sexual
offending are common place in this Court. The charges are serious, and there is
significant public interest
in the just prosecution of such crimes.
[56] Appropriate judicial direction is available to instruct a jury in relation
to the various issues I have outlined, which go a
significant way to mitigate
against the disadvantage that the accused man may suffer.
[57] There is nothing rare or exceptional about this case which justifies the
remedy of a permanent stay. I refuse the application.
The certification
her certification ruling, the judge said (among other things):
[10] My ruling in respect of the application to grant a stay of proceeding does
not concern the admissibility of evidence. Therefore,
I must consider whether
the decision is attended by sufficient doubt.
[11] There has been recent consideration of the application of the law governing
such applications. The law is well settled.
[12] I am not satisfied that this aspect of my ruling today is attended by
sufficient doubt to warrant certification in respect of
my refusal to grant a
stay of proceedings. Accordingly I refuse to certify.
The applicant’s submissions
in this Court
that the interlocutory decisions should be set aside, the applicant’s
counsel submitted in this Court that the present
proceeding falls ‘within
the exceptional class of cases of which the law recognises the remedy of a
permanent stay is appropriate’.
Counsel relied on a number of factors
relied upon before the trial judge (save that any reliance on investigative
misconduct was
specifically eschewed).
counsel submitted that some of the charged conduct (e.g., charges 1, 2, 5, 6,
11, 12 and 13) is said to have occurred in the
presence of, or in close
proximity to, other people, so that the presence, role or potential evidence of
those other people is integral
to the determination of the allegations. Courts
have consistently recognised the prejudice resulting from the absence of
or unavailable witnesses may reach the threshold of a fundamental
defect in the trial process, particularly if the witness could
have offered
eyewitness or alibi evidence. The relevant enquiry is focused on the value of
the lost opportunity, assessed from the
perspective of the
In the applicant’s
case, the prospective witnesses include: ‘RM’, who is said to have
been present during the
commission of charge 1; ‘RD’ (now deceased),
who is said to have lived at the Braybrook home, where charge 5 is said
occurred; ‘KD’, who is also said to have lived at the Braybrook
and ‘SG’ (now
deceased), who was said to have been present at the Braybrook home both before
and after the commission
of charge 5.
counsel submitted that these witnesses also could reasonably have been expected
to comment on their observations of the
applicant and the complainants, and the
interactions between them. The fact that these witnesses will not be part of
the trial deprives
the applicant of the ability to present a full and accurate
picture of the circumstances that existed during the period of the alleged
counsel submitted that the applicant is unable to present evidence that relates
to his movements and availability during
the period of the alleged offending.
That evidence includes employment records (such as payslips and rosters), and
sporting records
relating to football and cricket matches. The absence of that
evidence impedes his ability to present objective evidence of an alibi,
objective evidence that would demonstrate a lack of practical opportunity to be
present when the alleged incidents occurred.
The importance and value of this
evidence is ‘high’, and cannot be characterised as speculative or
merely contextual.
counsel submitted that the applicant is unable to present evidence of the
physical dimensions and layouts of the properties
in which the alleged offending
is said to have occurred. Many of the allegations are said to have occurred in
common areas (e.g.,
charges 7, 8, 12, 13 and 15) or when others were present or
close by (e.g., charges 1, 2, 5, 6, 11, 12 and 13). The inability to
floor plans, building plans and photographs of the relevant properties deprives
the applicant of making arguments to the
jury that the allegations made by the
complainants are inherently implausible. It also removes an avenue of testing
the reliability
of the complainants’ memories.
counsel argued that the effluxion of time is such the applicant is deprived of
the opportunity of ascertaining the details
of witnesses who could either
provide exculpatory accounts or significantly undermine the accounts given by
the complainants. By
way of example, charge 5 is put on the basis the applicant
was at the Braybrook home with up to seven children. Due to the extent
passage of time the applicant is unable to identify any other adults who may
have been present, and who could reasonably be
expected to be able to comment on
opportunity and supervision, issues that are critical to the determination of
the allegation.
Further, charge 13 is said to have occurred in a swimming pool
at the Coolaroo property when another adult was present. Given the
decades that
have passed since this conduct is alleged to have occurred, the applicant is
unable to identify which adults would have
been present on this specific
counsel submitted that the extended period of time that has elapsed since the
alleged offending is such that the applicant
is unable to offer information that
may have materially assisted in his defence and is confined to offering bare
denials. The delay
in this case is longer than cases in which the period of the
delay has been considered ‘extreme’. This type of delay
invariably occasion prejudice or forensic
disadvantage.
for the applicant contended that while some of the factors relied upon may not
individually justify the grant of a permanent
stay, the combination of factors
renders any trial of the applicant unacceptably unfair. The unfairness is not
amenable to a cure
by direction.
The respondent’s
submissions
for the respondent submitted that the stay ruling was correct. The cumulative
effect of the factors relied upon by the applicant
do not amount to a
fundamental defect going to the root of his trial.
respondent’s counsel submitted that the delay of between 40 and 45 years
between the alleged offending and a trial does
not, of itself, preclude the
applicant from receiving a fair trial. Indeed, it has been held that a fair
trial can be received in
other cases involving similar or longer
Any presumptive prejudice
which may flow from the delay (including the attendant inability to make a
defence other than a simple
denial) can be appropriately cured by a direction
under s 39 of the
Jury Directions Act 2015
the unavailability of a witness causes unacceptable unfairness or prejudice to
an accused, counsel submitted, depends on the
factual matrix in a particular
case. That issue alone, however, is not determinative. In the present case,
counsel submitted, the
probability of unfairness arising from the lost
opportunity to obtain evidence from unavailable witnesses is low. But even if
evidence might bear some significance, directions under s 39 of the JDA can
ameliorate any prejudice. With the exception of RM,
the witnesses nominated by
the complainants as being present during the alleged incidents are available.
Many witnesses who were
said to have been nearby before, during or after those
incidents are also available. Other potential witnesses who are unavailable
not integral to the determination of the allegations. They could offer context
or relationship evidence, but not eyewitness
or alibi evidence. As to RM,
counsel for the respondent submitted that the value of any evidence he might
have offered is limited.
At the relevant time, he was 10 years’ old, and
it is not alleged that he saw or might have seen what happened, since he is
described as having been asleep.
for the respondent submitted that the unavailability of certain physical
evidence does not create incurable prejudice or unfairness
to the applicant.
While employment records might have narrowed down the occasions when the alleged
acts could have occurred, they
could not eliminate the probability of any one or
more incidents having taken place altogether in this case. Sporting records
any ever existed and reliably recorded when, where or who trained or
played) similarly could not establish an alibi or negate an
opportunity to
allegedly offend. Furthermore, there are also witnesses available who can
describe the layout of the relevant houses
and how the spaces were used. Hence,
little opportunity is lost by being unable to examine floor or building plans or
photographs.
respondent’s counsel submitted that questions of witness reliability are
matters for a jury to assess, even if particular
evidence might be considered
weak or tenuous. The present case is not one where available witnesses can no
longer remember or are
confused about the material details of the alleged
incidents and surrounding circumstances. Any presumptive prejudice arising from
the effluxion of time and its potential effect on memory is also not such that
the applicant cannot receive a fair trial. If such
issues do arise, the
applicant might be entitled to an unreliability direction.
counsel submitted that any argument that investigators acted with impropriety
when speaking with CB and AC is without foundation.
There is no evidence which
suggests investigators coached or pressured either witness about what to say in
their respective statements.
Notably, both CB and AC complained to others about
the applicant’s alleged conduct well before they spoke to
The principles guiding the grant or
refusal of a permanent stay
principles that guide the grant or refusal of a permanent stay were recently
discussed in
, in which the Court
[59] As to those principles, it was said in
it is well settled that a court should stay criminal proceedings only if,
having regard to all the circumstances, the continuation
of the proceedings
would involve unacceptable injustice or unfairness, or if their continuation
would be so unfairly and unjustifiably
oppressive as to constitute an abuse of
In order to justify a
permanent stay the circumstances must be
exceptional,
a permanent stay
being a measure of last resort.
There must be a fundamental defect going to the root of the trial of such a
nature that nothing that the trial judge could do in
the conduct of the trial
could relieve against its unfair
consequences.
To obtain a stay,
an accused person must demonstrate that the circumstances are such that any
trial necessarily will be unfair, so
that a conviction would bring the
administration of justice into
The court must have
regard to the substantial public interest in having those charged with serious
criminal offences brought to trial
as well as the fundamental right of an
accused to a fair trial and the need to maintain public confidence in the
administration of
court’s power to grant a permanent stay stems from the court’s
inherent jurisdiction to protect the integrity of its
processes where the
administration of justice so
[60] And in
Authority establishes that a court should stay an indictment if, in all the
circumstances, the continuation of the proceedings would
involve unacceptable
injustice or unfairness, or if the continuation of the proceedings would be so
unfairly and unjustifiably oppressive
as to constitute an abuse of
A permanent stay will only be granted in circumstances which are rare or
exceptional.
As I have said, the trial judge derived guidance
. The following propositions may, I think, be drawn from the
judgment of Osborn JA (with whom Redlich JA and Sifris AJA agreed) and
there cited:
• First, the exercise of the power to stay must be exceptional since it
results in effect in a refusal to exercise jurisdiction.
The primary
responsibility for deciding whether criminal proceedings should be maintained
lies with the Executive and not with the
• Secondly, in cases involving delay, to justify a permanent stay of
criminal proceedings there must be a fundamental defect
which goes to the root
of the trial of such a nature that nothing that a trial judge can do in the
conduct of the trial can relieve
against its unfair consequences. The accused
must demonstrate that the delay is such that any trial is necessarily unfair so
any conviction would bring the administration of justice into
• Thirdly, circumstances that the court should consider in determining an
application for a stay include, the length of the
delay; reasons given by the
prosecution to explain or justify the delay; the accused’s responsibility
for and past attitude
to the delay; proven or likely prejudice to the accused;
and the public interest in the disposition of charges of serious offences
the conviction of those guilty of
The critical factors are
on the one hand the proven or likely prejudice to the accused, and on the other,
the public interest in
the prosecution and conviction of the
• Fourthly, in order to justify a stay, it is the probability of
unacceptable unfairness — rather than the possibility
• Fifthly, a trial will not necessarily be unacceptably unfair even where
relevant documents, recordings or other kinds of
evidence have been lost or
destroyed, or witnesses have died, so that the jury will be called upon to
determine issues of fact on
less than all of the relevant material which might
bear upon the issues thrown up for
determination.
• Sixthly, the trial judge may avoid obstacles to a fair trial by
evidentiary rulings — including by the exclusion of
evidence which is
technically admissible, but which might operate unfairly against the accused
— and by directions to the jury
designed to counteract any prejudice that
the accused might otherwise
Discussion and analysis
cannot be gainsaid that the delay in this case — 40 to 45 years — is
essential question for this Court is whether the applicant has demonstrated that
the continuation of the proceedings against him
will involve unacceptable
injustice or unfairness, or will be so unfairly and unjustifiably oppressive as
to constitute an abuse
of process. There must be shown to be a fundamental
defect going to the root of the trial of such a nature that nothing that the
trial judge will be able do in the conduct of the trial will relieve against its
unfair consequences. The applicant must demonstrate
that the delay is such that
any trial will necessarily be unfair, so that any conviction would bring the
administration of justice
into disrepute. It is the probability of unacceptable
unfairness that is critical, rather than the mere possibility.
can be no doubt that a delay of the order in this case will occasion some degree
of prejudice to an accused person in his or
her defence. As Priest JA said in
[42] There will always be difficulties for an accused person in mounting an
effective defence after a delay of the order in this
case. A number of the
difficulties that will inevitably be encountered were identified by Nicholson J
(a case where
the delay was between 25 and 36 years):
The appellant
will face the problems inherent in meeting allegations about events said to have
occurred many years ago, involving
quite young children. These problems
• the reliability or the accuracy of a complainant’s recollections
the events;
• the difficulty confronting a trier of fact when assessing the veracity
and reliability of a person, not by hearing and observing
their evidence given
when young, soon after the events are said to have taken place and with the
child’s contemporary language
and understanding but after hearing and
observing evidence given in the language of an experienced adult with all of the
possibilities
of reconstruction and re-interpretation that this entails;
• the difficulty confronting the appellant having to go well back in time
to recall, check and verify the accuracy of events
• the difficulty confronting the appellant in endeavouring to obtain and
produce documentary evidence or oral evidence from
other witnesses which might
put in question the evidence of a complainant as to events, times and places.
These problems confront any accused person who wishes to defend historical
child sex allegations and are inevitable where there
is significant delay in the
bringing of a prosecution. ...
[43] I sympathise with the notion that any trial relating to alleged events that
are decades old inevitably will be attended by a
degree of unfairness and
prejudice to the accused. Indeed, nobody experienced in trials involving
allegations of ‘historical’
sexual offences could fail to sympathise
with that view.
Since events
and circumstances contemporaneous to the events the subject of charges are
usually incapable of any meaningful investigation,
more often than not the
accused is driven to a bald denial of misconduct, without the ability to present
independent evidence contradicting
or casting doubt on a complainant’s
account. The opportunity to present an alibi is, in my experience, virtually
non-existent.
Moreover, with respect to those who hold a different view, I doubt
the capacity of the average juror to readily comprehend the true
extent of the
unreliability and inaccuracy of memory where there has been the intervention of
many years between the alleged events
recounting.
Notwithstanding
the manifold disadvantages that usually attend the defence of charges relating
to ancient alleged sexual misconduct,
however, the law contemplates that it may
remain possible for an accused person to receive a trial that is not
unacceptably unfair,
so long as there are means available to a trial judge
— for example, evidentiary rulings and jury directions — to contain
the unfairness and prejudice within tolerable limits.
the present case, counsel for the applicant submitted that relevant witnesses
are unavailable and documentary evidence lost. Thus,
with respect to charge 1,
CB’s brother, RM (then a child of 10), who was present in the bungalow
when the offending allegedly
occurred, is not available. In our view, however,
any evidence that he might have been able to give would have been, at the most,
limited. It is not suggested that he observed, or might have been in a position
to observe, the alleged offending, CB’s evidence
being that he was asleep
at the relevant time.
with respect to charge 5, the applicant claimed that several adult witnesses who
had either lived at the Braybrook home,
or had been present at the home before
and after the alleged offending, are not available. As is the case with charge
1, however,
we consider that any evidence they might have been able to give is
unlikely to have shed any light on the circumstances that existed
Braybrook home that will be relevant to whether the alleged offending occurred
(or could have occurred). CB’s evidence
is that her mother and two of her
relatives went shopping, leaving her and a number of other children at home.
The alleged offending
occurred after the applicant took her into his darkened
bedroom alone, leaving the other children to watch television in another
the house. There is no suggestion that there were any eye witnesses to the
offending. Upon the hearing in this Court, the
parties also confirmed that no
adults were present in the house at the time. It is not apparent what evidence
favourable to the
defence the adults or children might have been able to provide
were they available to give evidence.
we consider it to be entirely speculative to suggest that documentary evidence
said to be unavailable might have assisted
the applicant in his defence to the
charges. Given that the charges are laid between dates, and that they are tied
generally to
the complainants’ memories of their ages when the alleged
offending occurred, it is difficult to see that rosters, pay slips
or sporting
records could have provided the applicant with a meaningful alibi, or have gone
any way towards demonstrating that the
alleged offending did not occur (or could
not have occurred). There is no suggestion that there were any eye witnesses to
the offending.
At the hearing in this Court, the parties also confirmed that no
adults were present in the house at the time. With one exception
(charge 16),
the time frames during which the offences were allegedly committed were broad,
mostly ranging over a 12 or 24 month
period. The applicant’s counsel in
this Court confirmed that it is not in issue that the applicant would regularly
stay overnight
at the Wodonga property where CB lived (where it is alleged that
charges 1, 2, 3 and 4 occurred). Nor is it in issue that the complainants
TG and AC would regularly visit or stay at the applicant’s Braybrook
residence (where it is alleged that charges 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14 and 15
occurred). Accordingly, if the documentary evidence were available, at best it
would have little
relevance to the issue whether the applicant committed the
offences charged. To that extent, the circumstances of this case may
contrasted with those of the recent case of
, in which the absent
putative evidence would have borne directly on the applicant’s lack of
opportunity to offend against the
complainants in the manner alleged.
there is nothing in the submission that the absence of floor plans (and the
like) for the different premises where the offending
allegedly occurred will
deprive the applicant of the ability to advance arguments as to the
implausibility of the offending having
occurred. Witnesses capable of
describing the layout of the various premises, and how parts of the premises
were used, remain available.
our opinion, the presumptive unfairness and prejudice to the applicant that
remains will be amenable to satisfactory amelioration
by a suitably strong
forensic disadvantage direction under s 39(3) of the JDA. The extreme delay of
40 to 45 years should be sufficient
to satisfy the trial judge ‘that the
accused has experienced a significant forensic disadvantage’ within the
of s 39(2).
the direction under s 39(3) will need to be crafted to accommodate the evidence
as it eventually falls at trial, it might
be expected that any such direction
will need to bring home to the jury that, after a delay of 40 to 45 years, the
applicant has
lost those means of testing the complainants’ allegations
that would have been open to him had there not been such an extreme
jury will need to understand that, had the complainants made the allegations
soon after the alleged offending, the applicant
would have been able to explore
its alleged circumstances in detail, and perhaps adduce evidence throwing doubt
upon the allegations
or confirming the applicant’s denials. As an aspect
of that, the jury will need to comprehend the reality that the applicant
lost the opportunity of possibly establishing an alibi, and that he has lost the
chance of presenting a defence other than a
bare denial. Depending on the
circumstances prevailing at the close of the evidence, the jury may also need to
be told that the
applicant has lost the chance to obtain documents that may have
assisted his defence, or to have the complainants medically examined
that CB claims to have bled after the alleged penile-vaginal penetrations
constituting both charge 3 and charge 5). Certainly,
the jury will have to be
instructed on the disadvantages attendant on testing the reliability of the
complainants’ memories
after such a long time.
the circumstances, we would refuse the application to review the judge’s
refusal to certify. As was set out in
on a review of
the refusal of a judge to certify under s 295(3) of the CPA, this Court must
‘consider the matters referred
to in section 295(3)’; and ‘may
give the applicant leave to appeal against the interlocutory decision’ if
as required by section 297’. (It is plain that s 296(4)
requires this Court first to consider whether the ‘interlocutory
is ... of sufficient importance to the trial to justify it being determined on
an interlocutory
Next, s 297(1) makes it clear that, if the Court considers that the ruling is of
sufficient importance to the trial to justify it
being determined on an
interlocutory appeal, the Court may still only grant leave to appeal if
satisfied that ‘it is in the
interests of justice to do so’, having
‘regard’ to the several factors enumerated in s 297(1). In
determining
whether to grant leave to appeal from an interlocutory decision,
this Court should consider whether the decision reveals some error
of principle
which, together with the various other factors in s 297(1), may dictate whether
the Court is satisfied that the interests
of justice warrant a grant of leave to
our view, based on the material before the trial judge, the interlocutory
decision was correct. It reveals no error of principle.
For those reasons, the
application to review the judge’s refusal to certify must
He was born in September
Buchanan (a pseudonym) v The
King (No 2)
[2024] VSCA 50
, [31] (Emerton P and Whelan JA, and Elliott
DPP v Tuteru
[2023] VSCA 188
, [68] (Beach, Walker and Taylor JJA).
Hermanus (a pseudonym) v The
[2015] VSCA 2
(2015) 44 VR 335
, 344 [44] (Priest JA, Maxwell P agreeing).
Jury Directions Act 2015
Luciano v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 12
, [43] (McLeish, Niall and T Forrest JJA).
Bennett (a pseudonym) v The
[2025] VSCA 208
, [138] (Boyce, Orr and Kaye JJA).
Carson (a pseudonym) v The
[2019] VSCA 4
(up to 48 years’ delay);
Bennett (a pseudonym)
[2025] VSCA 208
(up to 43 years’ delay);
pseudonym) v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 111
(up to 42 years’ delay);
Newell (a pseudonym) v The King
[2025] VSCA 160
(up to 40 years’
Hermanus (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2015] VSCA 2
(2015) 44 VR 335
years’ delay).
Canning (a pseudonym) v The
[2025] VSCA 215
, [59]–[60] (Priest, Beach and Walker JJA)
Ballard (a pseudonym) v
[2024] VSCA 26
, [47] (Priest JA, Walker JA and Croucher AJA
agreeing) (citations as in original). See also
Porter (a pseudonym) v The
[2024] VSCA 127
, [47] (Priest, Boyce and Kaye JJA).
Walton v Gardiner
(1993) 177 CLR 378, 392 (Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ)
’). See also
Jago v District Court of New South
[1989] HCA 46
(1989) 168 CLR 23
R v Glennon
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
Dupas v The Queen
[2010] HCA 20
(2010) 241 CLR 237
R v Edwards
[2009] HCA 20
(2009) 255 ALR 399
Williams v Spautz
[1992] HCA 34
(1992) 174 CLR 509
Strickland (a pseudonym)
v DPP (Cth)
[2018] HCA 53
(2018) 266 CLR 325
, 409 [248], 415 [264] (Edelman J);
, MVR 147, [65]. See also
Victoria International Container
Terminal Ltd v Lunt
[2021] HCA 11
(2021) 271 CLR 132
, 141–2 [20]–[22] (Kiefel
CJ, Gageler, Keane and Gordon JJ) (a non-criminal case).
Barton v The Queen
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR 75
, 111 (Wilson J);
, 34 (Mason CJ);
Haris (a pseudonym) v The King
[2023] VSCA 205
[49]–[50] (Emerton P, Beach and McLeish JJA)
, 34 (Mason
, MVR 148, [69];
[39]–[40] (Priest JA, Maxwell P agreeing). (Citations as in
Walton v Gardiner
(1993) 177 CLR 378 at 392 per Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ. See also
R v Glennon
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
[2010] HCA 20
241 CLR 237
R v Edwards
[2009] HCA 20
(2009) 255 ALR 399
83 ALJR 717
Williams v Spautz
[1992] HCA 34
(1992) 174 CLR 509
at 31 per Mason CJ, 60 per Deane J, 76
per Gaudron J.
at 575, [17]. See also
at 61 per Deane J, 76 per
at 575, [18].
at 33–4 per Mason CJ;
[2014] NSWCCA 174
per Leeming JA, [61]–[64] per Bellew J.
at 575, [19].
at 61 per Deane J.
at 576, [22].
at ALR 403, [23]; ALJR 720.
at 576, [23].
at ALR 405, [31]; ALJR 722.
[25]–[26]. See also
at 47 per Brennan J, 77–8 per
Gaudron J. See further,
Bennett (a pseudonym) v The King
, [138]–[149] (Orr and Boyce JJA), [225]–[228]
(2012) 114 SASR 227
at 253, [104]–[105].
[2014] NZSC 155
Elias CJ, McGrath and William Young JJ. See also Lewis, ‘A
comparative examination of forensic disadvantage directions
prosecutions of childhood sexual abuse’,
[1989] HCA 60
(1989) 168 CLR 79
’) at 91 per
Brennan, Dawson and Toohey JJ. Cf Cossins, ‘Time Out
: Myths, Science and the Common Law’,
[2010] MelbULawRw 3
107–8 per McHugh J. See also Rowan QC, ‘Old Allegations of Sexual
See s 295(3)(b).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (460 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter