URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2008/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
09-003 [2008] VMHRB 1 (3 June 2008)
[2008] VMHRB 1
In the Review of P
an involuntary patient at
Area Mental Health Service
Citation: 09-003
[2008] VMHRB 1
Date of Hearing: 3 June
Board Members
Involuntary patient –
Mental Health Act 1986
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
– jurisdiction of the Board – failure to
conduct timely review – breach of Charter rights – impact of the
Charter on the jurisdiction of the Mental Health Review Board.
In this case, the legal representative, Ms Shalit raised on P’s behalf
a jurisdictional issue, supported by a Charter argument,
relating to the effect
on P’s second community treatment order (CTO) and underlying involuntary
status of the Board’s
purported failure to conduct a review of P’s
first CTO during 2007. She initially did this by lodging a statement purporting
to substantially comply with the requirements of the Board’s Practice
Direction 2007/1.
The Board’s executive officer rejected the initial statement for
failing to comply with the requirements of the Practice Direction,
on the ground
that it would be unfair to the authorised psychiatrist of the area mental health
service (hereafter referred to as
"the service") providing treatment to P. The
Practice Direction requires the parties to lodge documents in a prescribed
order to make it relatively uncomplicated for the other party, in this
case the authorised psychiatrist, to provide a response under
the Practice
Direction addressing the Charter issues raised.
Charter arguments made in compliance with Practice Direction
In summary, Ms Shalit’s Charter argument was as follows:
"As set out in the attached Outline of Submissions, the Charter issue
involved in this case is whether by reason of the provisions
sections 10
of the Charter the failure of the Board to conduct a
section 30(4)
an extension of a CTO or to conduct any review before the expiry of that
extended CTO means that extension and purported
CTO is invalid and the Board
accordingly lacks jurisdiction to conduct a review of a purported extension of
that expired CTO".
The original argument was put as follows:
“1. The Board does not have the jurisdiction to conduct a review of the
extension of P's Community Treatment Order (CTO) which
was purportedly extended
from 14 February 2008 (sic) to 16 January 2009. (Second CTO)
2. The second CTO depended upon the validity of the prior extension of the
CTO which commenced on 15 February 2007 and expired on
14 February 2008. (First
3. The Board failed to conduct a review of the first CTO in breach of
Mental Health Act 1986
(the Act). No other hearing before the
Board to confirm the first CTO was conducted prior to its expiry.
4. Failure by the Board to conduct a review of the first CTO is not a mere
procedural irregularity or technical illegality (cf.
substantive disadvantage because P does not get the external review required
under the Act”.
After setting out ss10(c) and 13 of the Charter, and the s7(2) limitations on
Charter rights, Ms Shalit then outlined the application
of the Charter as
"... Because a CTO requires a person to obtain psychiatric treatment without
their full, free and informed consent, it is an infringement
of a person's
section 10(c) rights and section 13 privacy rights and can only be enforced if
lawful and not arbitrary.
15. For a law to avoid being arbitrary, the interference must be governed by
clear, pre-existing rules and the circumstances and procedures
adopted are
predictable and foreseeable by those to whom they applied.
Regina v Ashworth
Hospital Authority (now Mersey Care National Health Service Trust) ex parte
[2005] UKHL 58
paragraphs 34, 94 and 122.
16. The Board's failure to conduct a review of the first CTO meant that the
first CTO became arbitrary because the clear rules set
out in the MHA were not
17. In order for a CTO to be compatible with ss1O(c) and 13 of the Charter,
it must be confirmed by the Board on appeal or review
s36C. Otherwise, the CTO
becomes arbitrary and incompatible with ss10(c) and 13 of the Charter.
18. The Act is silent as to the status of a person who is subject to a CTO,
where there is a failure by the Board to review the CTO
in accordance with the
Act. In order for a statutory provision to be Charter compliant, the Charter
enables a tribunal to read in
words which would change the meaning of the
enacted legislation so as to make it Charter compliant.
‘In other words, to an extent bounded only by what is "possible" a
court can modify the meaning and hence the effect of primary
and secondary
legislation’
Ghaidan v Godden-Mendoza
[2004] UKHL para 32.
A reading of s30 of the Act whereby a person is no longer an involuntary
patient subject to a CTO when the Board fails to conduct
a review would make
this section compatible with the Charter. Such a reading would also be
consistent with
By a letter dated 9 May 2008, the service’s solicitor advised the Board
that the service would not respond to the Charter issues
as it was of the view
that they were not relevant to the service.
On behalf of the Attorney General, Ms Davidson, of the Victorian Government
Solicitor’s Office, advised the Board by letter
dated 22 May 2008 that the
Attorney General would intervene in the proceedings in respect of the Charter
issues and provided the
Board with a submission in response dated 24 May
Timely review – jurisdictional issue
The Attorney General submitted that the principal issue for determination is
whether a failure to conduct a review within 12 months
invalidated the CTO so as
to preclude its extension, and that the question should be determined in
accordance with the principles
set out by the High Court of Australia in
Project Blue Sky Inc. v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(1998) 194 CLR
(hereafter referred to as
Project Blue Sky
) and as applied by the
Supreme Court of Victoria in
Wilson v Legal Services Board
(hereafter referred to as
Garde Wilson
). Ms Davidson further
submitted that the Charter does not require this test to be modified in any way,
as it is consistent with
the approach of courts in other jurisdictions under
human rights instruments.
The Board received a further submission on behalf of P from Mr Stanton, a
barrister briefed by Ms Shalit, addressing the Attorney
submission. Mr Stanton argued that, as a creature of statute, the failure by
the Board to conduct a mandatory review
pursuant to s30 constituted a
S157/2002 v The Commonwealth of Australia
211 CLR 476
(hereafter referred to as
) on the basis of a failure to accord P
procedural fairness or natural justice. He also argued that the Board should
apply the Charter
in determining how to apply the appropriate tests.
In summary, Mr Stanton urged to Board to follow the reasoning of the High
by taking the view that the Board’s review obligation
is a mandatory or imperative duty, rather than a directory one - leading
conclusion that the Board’s failure to complete the review within the
mandatory 8 week period, and certainly within
the 12 month period, rendered the
CTO void, and the authorised psychiatrist’s decision to extend it invalid
and of no legal
effect. He acknowledged the requirement for the Board to
interpret the law consistently with the objects of, and the whole statutory
scheme established in, the Act. The Charter would, in his view, reinforce such
an interpretation. He argued that any concept of
waiver (relating to P’s
conduct) ought not to apply in P’s situation.
Ms Davidson provided to the Board and the other parties an expanded written
submission at the hearing. Ms Davidson confirmed that,
in general, her
submissions were limited to the intervention in relation to Charter issues.
However, initially, she raised several
decision of the Supreme Court of Victoria in
, she argued that the
Board should consider it, despite it not being directly relevant to the Charter
issues or the Attorney General’s
position. She viewed the decision as
providing the Board with jurisdiction to consider the CTO in this case as a
valid order in
place, which it is entitled to review. Therefore the Board
should assume jurisdiction.
Ms Davidson submitted that, in considering P’s argument, strict
compliance with the 8-week review requirement would invalidate
whereas proper adjournments and considerations of reasonable timeliness would
provide substantial compliance, consistent
with the Board's previous decisions
that have not required strict compliance. Ms Davidson set out her own analysis
of the statutory
scheme, highlighting the clear mandatory requirements of the
authorised psychiatrist under ss14 and 14B before a CTO can be made.
Davidson's view, these provide examples of conditions precedent, such as
examining the patient and satisfying him or herself
that the s8(1) criteria
apply, the failure of which would render any CTO invalid. By comparison, other
requirements, such as informing
patients of the extension, the grounds for the
extension, and giving a copy of the extended CTO, together with s18 which
the provision of information to involuntary patients, including
information about the right to obtain a second psychiatric opinion,
sought to invoke, also appear to be specified as mandatory requirements, but are
unlikely to impact on the validity of the
CTO as they are "less mandatory".
Ms Davidson went on to propose that the effect of the strict compliance
argument put by Mr Stanton would be to deprive P of his right
to natural justice
under the Act and other rights. If a review was required to have taken place no
later than 11 April 2007, this
would be incompatible with the adjournment on 4
April 2007 for the purpose of entitling P to obtain a report from an independent
psychiatrist, and would fly in the face of the Board's natural justice
obligations, especially where the adjournment beyond the eight
week period was
for the benefit of the patient. She argued that a more fluid approach,
considered as substantial compliance, was
required by the Board, returning to
the test in
Project Blue Sky
as to how to ascertain the consequences of
invalidity and whether this was the intention of Parliament.
Application of the Charter to matters before the Board
Mr Stanton advised the Board that he had had discussions with Ms Davidson the
day before the hearing in respect of a preliminary issue
relating to the
application of the Charter to the matter before the Board, particularly the date
of operation of the interpretive
provision (s32) and when the proceeding
commenced. He submitted that the Charter is applicable, but suggested that,
even if it were
not, because of the Supreme Court of Victoria decision of Bell J
Ragg v Magistrates Court and Corcoris
[2008] VSC 1
(hereafter referred
), consideration of the privacy and medical treatment rights in
the Charter have a broader significance in statutory interpretation
nonetheless.
He noted that Part 2 commenced on 1 January 2007, but that the obligations on
public authorities commenced on 1 January 2008, leaving
the period in between
without clear direction. He submitted that the Charter should be read
literally, therefore providing guidance
and instruction in relation to all
matters after 1 January 2007. However, he conceded that, even if s32 is not
able to be considered
during the earlier period, as it is now after 1 January
2008 and the current proceedings commenced after that date, in his view the
interpretation provision was enlivened. This, he said, was consistent with the
recent Supreme Court of Victoria jurisprudence of
Tomasevic v
[2007] VSC 337
at paragraph 70.
In essence, Mr Stanton argued that, as at 4 April 2007 when the Board
adjourned the review hearing now in dispute, the Charter was
enlivened, but
considered the point moot because of the significance of the Charter and its
rights protection and guarantees, as
described by Bell J in
Ms Davidson then addressed her arguments (at paragraph 42 of her submission)
regarding the retrospectivity of s32 of the Charter in
the context of the events
in this case which span the period before and after 1 January 2008. In her
view, s32 cannot affect the
interpretation of the Act in the period before 1
January 2008 because of the specific commencement date given in s2(2) of the
She argued that the consequence was that if the CTO was invalid before
that date, s32 cannot apply to give such a result, even if
it may be possible
under a strict common law interpretation.
On this basis, it was submitted for the Attorney General that there is no
different interpretation because the hearing is taking place
after 1 January
2008 and the Board should apply the law at the time of the events in question.
Section 49(3) quite clearly does
not apply to the Board before 1 January 2008.
In substance, therefore, a failure to conduct a review within the eight week
does not render the CTO incompatible with the Charter.
Fair Hearing – s24 Charter right
In respect of the engagement of the s24 Charter right raised by the
Chairperson of the Board, Ms Davidson queried whether the Board
hearing could be
described as a "civil proceeding", as the section was based on s14 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR) which has been
interpreted as a proceeding involving the determination of rights and
obligations in suits at law or
a dispute between two parties in the form of a
judicial review, but not engaged at the administrative stage. A formal
was not made in relation to this issue by either party.
Views of the service
The Board offered Dr I, as authorised psychiatrist, the opportunity to
comment on the submissions. He highlighted the objects of
the Act, particularly
the provision of treatment to vulnerable patients, as the justification for
continuing to treat P. He questioned
whether an administrative oversight ought
to lead to a patient not receiving ongoing treatment. He confirmed that,
wherever the
clinical file mentioned that the treatment team had reviewed P,
implicit in those reviews was a check that the s8(1) criteria were
In his view, P had had adequate reviews during the relevant period and the s8(1)
criteria had been met.
Board’s jurisdiction – The Board’s obligation to conduct
a timely review
The Board considered itself duty-bound to consider its previous decisions
Re the appeal and review of JM
(1996) 2 MHRBD (Vic) 282, in which case
another Board rejected a submission that the Board’s failure to review
JM’s detention
within eight weeks of admission, as required by the then
s30(a), had the effect of discontinuing that detention; and in
Re the review
(1995) 2 MHRBD 225, in which case a different Board concluded that a
failure to conduct a review would not invalidate a CTO made by
an authorised
psychiatrist.
The Board also examined relevant local and international human rights
jurisprudence. In this case, the Board was facing a balancing
act involving
several competing natural justice considerations, namely assisting P to obtain
further evidence that may have been
of assistance to his argument that the Board
should be satisfied that the s8(1) criteria no longer applied to him, and
a timely review of the extension of P’s CTO.
The legal member of the Board concluded that the 2007 review remained valid
and extant, that is of continuing legal effect. It was
adjourned under the
order of the Board dated 4 April 2007, an order made within its powers specified
in the Act. The Board has substantially
complied with its review obligation
under s30(4), in accordance with the requirements set out by the High Court in
Project Blue Sky
. The legal member was satisfied that the Board did not
exceed its jurisdiction, nor had it failed to exercise its jurisdiction in
manner contemplated by the High Court in
. That the matter was not
relisted and the hearing completed earlier was regrettable, to say the least.
However, in the view of
the legal member of the Board, the delay caused by the
adjournment does not constitute a jurisdictional error that invalidated
CTO at any time. It was consistent with an appropriate degree of
flexibility in the Board’s practices and procedures necessary
elements of fairness and finality, both of which are important considerations.
At the time of the hearing, P appeared
before the Board as an involuntary
patient in the manner accepted by the Supreme Court in
The matter of XY (No
12501 of 1991)
6 March 1992, and the Board was required to conduct its
annual review and review of the most recent CTO extension
The Impact of the Charter on the Board’s jurisdiction
The Board was then required to determine whether the Charter in any way
changed the jurisdictional decision that the Board Member
made (above).
The Board examined the question of whether the Board is a Tribunal and/or a
public authority for the purpose of the charter, and found
that when carrying
out administrative or registry functions, the Board’s executive officer
and staff comprise a public authority.
This view was assisted by a note under
paragraph (j) of the definition of “public authority” (Charter s4),
which provides
some guidance as to the meaning of “acting in an
administrative capacity” (the note forms part of the Act (see s36(3A)
Interpretation of Legislation Act
)). The note states that
the following are examples of where a court or tribunal acts in an
administrative capacity: committal proceedings,
the issuing of warrants, listing
of cases, and adoption of practices and procedures.
By contrast, when a determination is made at a hearing that an adjournment
should be granted, the Board has a different role, a position
supported by the
recent decision of Justice King of the Supreme Court in
[2007] VSC 2.
From this, the Board concluded that the registry
functions of the Board such as listing cases for hearing and sending out notices
of hearing are examples of the Board acting in an administrative capacity.
However, if an application for an adjournment is made
at the commencement of or
during a hearing, then the Board, in determining to grant an adjournment, is no
longer acting in an administrative
capacity, but is undertaking its
quasi-judicial decision-making function in its capacity as a tribunal under the
It may be argued that, as the Board in each hearing is conducting a merits
review of whether the patient meets the statutory criteria
to remain an
involuntary patient, it therefore stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker, that is the authorised psychiatrist,
and so is a public authority for the
purposes of the Charter. In the Board’s view, such a view misconceives
the role of the
Board (or of a s120 review by VCAT). The proceeding that the
Board conducts is by way of a de novo hearing, its determination is
form of a review of the original decision maker’s decision but reflects
whether the statutory criteria have been
satisfied at the date of the Board
hearing. Most importantly, at no stage does the Board have any temporary or
ongoing responsibility
for the clinical treatment, care and management of the
patient, which at all times resides under the Act with the authorised
psychiatrist.
Turning then to its decision-making functions, the Board considers itself a
tribunal for the purposes of the Charter.
interpretive function
The Board then examined its interpretive function under
of the Charter.
The Board’s understanding of this important interpretive function of
courts and tribunals is that, irrespective
of there being any ambiguity in the
language of a statutory provision in the Act, it is required to make every
reasonable effort
to interpret the Act's provisions in a way which is compatible
with Charter rights (see Ghaidan v Godin-Mendoza
[2004] UKHL 30
, paragraphs
32-33, 44-50, 59-76, and 106-124). This is subject to the Charter’s
express limitation, namely "so far as it is
possible to do so consistently with
(the Act’s) purpose", and in accordance with any general limits under
of Charter or expressed in a particular Charter right.
In the vast majority of Board hearings, the role of the Board is one
involving mixed questions of fact and law by which it gathers
evidence, makes
findings of facts, and applies the
criteria for involuntary treatment to a
particular patient who is the subject of the hearing. This process rarely
involves direct
arguments or competing issues relating to statutory
construction, but rather requires the application of the statutory criteria to
the facts found on the evidence
When the Board is required to interpret, rather than apply the relevant
legislation, subject to any specific direction to the contrary,
intends to follow guidance adapted from Canadian and New Zealand authorities
[1986] 1 SCR 103 and
Hansen v The Queen
[2007] NZSC 7)
adopting a logical and stepped approach as a practical decision-making framework
to follow. Under this five-step approach, the
Board must:
Charter rights relevant to the issue under consideration, and their
implications.
how the relevant provisions of the Act, and their current interpretation, would
apply to the issue under consideration.
If there is a match with the rights and
implications identified in step 1, the Act and Charter appear consistent.
there is a discrepancy, assess whether the discrepancy is permitted by the
Charter as a reasonable limitation of the relevant right/s.
If so, the Act and
Charter appear to be consistent.
the limitation is not reasonable, but the wording of the Act, interpreted in
accordance with its purpose, can permit a Charter-consistent
interpretation,
adopt the new interpretation.
the wording or the purpose of the Act will not permit the Charter-consistent
interpretation, adopt the current interpretation despite
its inconsistency with
the Charter. Further, in this situation, the Board must consider whether there
are other courses of action
that should be followed to bring the inconsistency
to attention in the appropriate quarters.
In relation to step 1, it was argued that the issues before the
Board raised Charter rights under
(right to freedom from medical
treatment without full, free and informed consent) and 13 (right to not have his
or her privacy, family,
its own analysis, the Board considered that, potentially, the right to a
hearing under
of the Charter was also engaged by the facts in this case.
In relation to step 2, irrespective of the manner of identifying any
shortcomings that led to the circumstances causing the current
situation, the
inherent difficulty faced by the Board in considering any interpretation,
Charter-consistent or otherwise, of the
current statutory provisions is the lack
of any express consideration in the Act of the consequences of a failure by the
conduct a periodic review and review of the extension of a CTO in
accordance with its obligations under
and (4). This position is
exacerbated by the fact that the Board, as a statutory decision-making body
under the Act, is given specific
and strictly limited powers under s36C(2) to
discharge an involuntary patient from a CTO, namely "(I)f the Board considers
criteria in
section 8(1)
do not apply to the patient...". This power
presupposes that a completed hearing takes place, evidence in respect of each of
five criteria is considered, and the Board applies those criteria to the
facts that it finds based on that evidence to determine
whether or not each of
the five criteria is met in respect of the particular patient.
After considering the protections built into the Act’s statutory
regime, the Board took the view that the current interpretation
of the relevant
provisions in the Act is Charter-consistent, notwithstanding the failure of the
Board to complete and determine the
2007 CTO review. It also concluded that, in
the circumstances that prevailed at the time, at the relevant points in time
January 2008 when the Charter came fully into operation, namely 17
January 2008 - when the authorised psychiatrist further extended
the CTO, and 20
February 2008 - when the Board received the report indicating the hearing was
still outstanding and made immediate
enquiries leading to the hearing being
relisted, the authorised psychiatrist and Board staff appeared to act in a
reasonable and
timely manner consistent with P’s Charter rights.
Although not required to consider the remaining 3 steps to the approach, the
Board considered step 3 in relation to limitations. It
noted additional factors
that support the view that the Act and Charter appear to be consistent on the
basis of the reasonable limitation
(or proportionality) argument and took the
view that the current interpretation of the relevant provisions in the Act is
Charter-consistent.
Determination of the Board:
(1) The Board recognised the Attorney General as an intervener to the
proceedings pursuant to
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Act 2006
(the Charter).
(2) The Board joined the Attorney General as a party to the proceedings
pursuant to Schedule 2, Clause 5A(a).
(3) The Board determined that P not be entitled to personally inspect or
otherwise have access to the specified document pursuant
(4) The Board was satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order was
The Board therefore confirmed the community treatment order.
Application for non-disclosure - The Board determined that P not be
entitled to personally inspect or otherwise have access to the
documents pursuant to
Review of involuntary status – The Board found the continued
treatment of P as an involuntary patient was necessary.
P was represented by Mr M Stanton (of counsel) instructed by Ms B Shalit,
of the Mental Health Legal Centre.
The Attorney General was represented by Ms Joanna Davidson (Special
Counsel) of the Victorian Government Solicitors Office and Ms
Louise Jarrett
(Solicitor) of the Victorian Government Solicitors Office
Date of Decision: 8 July 2008
Decision of the
Supreme Court of Victoria in
In the Matter of XY
(1991) 1 MHRBD 501.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (74.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter