URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2018/684.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:24:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DPP v Smith [2018] VSC 684 (16 November 2018)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
AT MELBOURNE
CRIMINAL DIVISION
OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
Prosecution
ANTHONY JOHN SMITH
DATE OF HEARING
25 September 2018
DATE OF SENTENCE
16 November 2018
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
DPP v Smith
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2018] VSC 684
CRIMINAL LAW — sentencing — manslaughter — offer accepted
of plea of guilty to charge of manslaughter after accused
committed on but
before trial of charge of murder — accused man non-consensually strangled
or choked woman to death during
consensual sexual activity — man
physically strong and woman small and petite — killing took place in
confined space
of motor vehicle, rendering woman virtually defenceless —
accused had previously caused physical distress to another woman
strangling and choking in similar circumstances — actions of accused
associated with disrespectful, contemptuous and
misogynistic views and opinions
victim and evaded
responsibility for her death by telling lies and blaming
others for the killing — as result of covert police operation, accused
revealed location of victim’s grave 20 months later — gravity of
offending — general and specific deterrence —
denunciation.
APPEARANCES
For the prosecution
Mr K J Doyle
Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria
For the accused
Mr A L Purcell
Galbally and O’Bryan Lawyers
HIS HONOUR:
1 Anthony John Smith, you are charged on
indictment with the offence of manslaughter of Karen Rae at Frankston in
Victoria on 15 April
2015 for which you were arrested on 9 December 2016. You
pleaded guilty to this charge after being initially charged with the offence
murder in respect of which you undertook a contested committal. After being so
committed on, and before the trial of, the charge
of murder in this court, on 21
May 2018 you offered to plead guilty to the offence of manslaughter, which was
accepted by the prosecution.
You were arraigned on and pleaded guilty to that
charge on 6 June 2018. You are aged 51 years.
maximum penalty for the crime of manslaughter is imprisonment for 20 years.
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic), the only purposes for which
sentences may be imposed are to impose a just punishment, to deter the offender
specifically and
other people generally from committing the same or similar
offences, to rehabilitate the offender, to denounce the offender’s
criminal conduct and to protect the community.
3 Karen was born on 12 November 1966 and was aged
only 48 years when she died. She would have been aged 52 years last Monday.
was a daughter, a mother and a wife. Her mother is Christina Boyle, who
has written a heartfelt victim impact statement to which
I will later refer.
She has lost her only daughter. Karen’s four children, all sons, are aged
24 years, 23 years, 18 years
and the youngest is aged only 9 years. They have
lost their mother. Karen’s husband and the father to the three eldest
is Vincent Sabatucci. The couple separated 16 years ago but never
divorced. He has lost his wife and the co-parent of those children.
Bainton, Karen’s former domestic partner, is the father and has the
custody of her youngest child, but she was in frequent
former partner and the co-parent of that child. Karen has other relatives, who
are also grieving. The
court has seen touching photographs of Karen as a child,
as a child with her mother and as an adult in the company of her family
friends, including with one of her own children. This is the Karen that has
4 It is true that Karen had a long history
of drug addiction involving mainly methamphetamines and cannabis and this
affected her
lifestyle and her health. It is also true that she was estranged
from her mother, although there were promising signs of reconnection
before her death. But her drug-addicted lifestyle does not diminish by even one
particle the respect that she warrants
as a human being and a woman, or the
responsibility that you bear for the crime that violated the most fundamental of
her human rights,
the right to life. Nor does it diminish by even one particle
the dreadful impact of the killing upon her family and friends, who
living victims of the crime, about whom I will say more
5 This was a very serious example of the crime
of manslaughter which occurred when you non-consensually strangled or choked
to death with your own hands during consensual sexual activity in your
motor vehicle. In legal terms, the manslaughter was carried
out by the unlawful
assault and dangerous act of the non-consensual strangling or choking. While
that act was deliberate, it was
not done with the intention of killing Karen or
causing her really serious injury. No accomplice was involved, and you used
bare hands and no ligature or weapon.
takes a certain amount of time to strangle or choke someone to death using
one’s bare hands, and that time was taken.
I do not accept the submission
of your counsel that the offending was of a short duration. This implies that
you brought about Karen’s
death in a short time. Although I do not know
exactly how long it took, I do not think that the time taken to bring about the
of a person by strangulation or choking using one’s bare hands can
fairly be described as short. It would have been a terrifying
way for Karen to
die, particularly in the circumstances. I would not, however, describe the
nature of the offence as sustained.
Further, there was no mutilation of
Karen’s body, and the offence was not premeditated or
7 After Karen died, you secretly buried her
body beside the Frankston freeway and disposed of her things, you drove the
motor vehicle
into a tree and had it taken away and crushed, and you gave
numerous false accounts of your movements and blamed others for the crime,
to conceal your responsibility, although, after twenty dark months for
Karen’s family, you did lead police to where she
was, and have pleaded
guilty to the crime now charged.
8 This was a
repugnant crime committed by a man against a woman in a position of extreme
vulnerability. Karen was a physically small
and petite women. You were a
physically much larger and stronger man. The motor vehicle was a very confined
space in which the
disparity of physical strength rendered Karen virtually
defenceless. You must have been aware of the dangerous risks involved when
strangling or choking a woman during consensual sexual activity, and not only
because you have pleaded guilty to Karen’s manslaughter
by those means. A
former partner of yours had previously complained to you about your aggression
in this very situation. During
sexual activity with that partner, you would
pull her hair really hard and, on many occasions, choked her around the throat.
she had trouble breathing and would have to punch you to make you
stop. As for Karen, in her extremely vulnerable position and in
the confines of
the motor vehicle from which there was virtually no escape, she was unable to
take the kind of defensive action that
was apparently open to your former
partner. You must have known and were prepared to run the dangerous risks
involved in non-consensually
strangling or choking Karen during consensual
sexual activity. This greatly increases the gravity of your offending and your
responsibility for Karen’s death, accepting that it was not
9 The dreadful impact of the crime upon
Karen’s family is eloquently conveyed by the contents of the victim impact
of her mother, Christina Boyle, which I here summarise:
Ms Boyle speaks of her daughter, Karen, who was addicted
to drugs. She suffered a sad, miserable and painful existence because of
addiction and the choices she made. Karen would not be in touch with her, her
mother, and other family members for long
periods of time, forcing them to
keep their distance, because they believed that she would be using drugs at that
Ms Boyle believes that Karen was ashamed and did not want her to see her like
that and she did not want her to see how she was living.
Ms Boyle said that
Karen knew that if ever she needed help that she would never say no
Karen knew she was loved and that her mother would always be there for her
and that she would always help Karen when she could.
From the last time that
she saw Karen until she went missing, this was the longest period of time that
they did not have contact.
This was a grieving time for Ms Boyle because Karen
was missed, the real Karen, the one who was a happy, funny woman who laughed
lot when not under the influence of using drugs.
The last period that they did not see each other lasted for about seven years,
right up until just before Karen went missing. Ms
Boyle was thrilled when
Karen finally reached out to her through Facebook. This was not long before she
was reported missing.
She was very happy with the contact and she knew it was
only a matter of time before she would ask and try again to get help. They
done it before and it could be done again. She knew that Karen was getting
ready to ask for help.
Sadly, this was not to be, as not long after
reaching out
to her mother, Karen went missing, and the opportunity was
stolen from her to get clean and well again by her being killed.
She was missing for 20 months and the last person
that she saw was
Mr Smith. It was 20 months of hell before Karen's body was found. Ms
Boyle speaks of what it was like for Karen
when she was a child. She tells
of what it was like when she went missing, how her mind was on it all the time.
She was always
wondering and thinking, ‘Where are you ... Are you hurt,
are you being held captive against your will, are you in
pain, are you
suffering, are you alive or worse?’ Then to find out that she had died in
terrible circumstances and that she
had been dead all that time was gut
, heartbreaking, this was ‘the worst experience
Ms Boyle says that the fact is that Karen was killed, even though Mr Smith has
pleaded guilty to manslaughter on the basis that it
was done accidentally.
Karen, a beloved daughter, is gone from her mother, a cousin and a niece, and
the manner of her killing
just compounds the horror and pain that all have
For her, Ms Boyle, to think of Karen, her girl, her only child, being disposed
of in the way that she was, just as if she was just
garbage, is
incomprehensible, it’s painful, it’s horrific and it is in her mind
daily. In her view, it was cold hearted
and evil. Ms Boyle speaks of not being
able to shake it away. She says that for any mother to have this horror, that
someone could
treat her child in this way, just tossed aside in the dirt as if
it was an inconvenience to be gotten rid of, is just the worst pain
wrote: ‘I have to live with that, thinking of her there, all alone’.
She was hidden very close to her home.
Her young sons will always be scarred
badly by this, in particular the youngest boy who adored his mother so much and
still talks
of her daily.
Ms Boyle speaks of driving past her daughter's shallow grave more than once. She
used to say to herself: ‘Where are you, Karen?
What has happened to my
girl?’ Now she thinks of her there all alone, hidden in plain sight in
such an awful way, which
is an unbearable pain to bear.
Christina Boyle ends by saying ‘Karen is now finally at peace’.
10 Turning to your background and
circumstances, you were born on 4 July 1967 in Kingston upon Thames in the
United Kingdom. You
came to this country as a child aged four years with your
parents and older brother. You are not an Australian citizen. As a result
your crime, you may be deported back to the United Kingdom, where you have no
family or friends, and as an older man. You would
be forced to leave your
children and friends in Australia. This will hang over your head whilst in
custody and after release, which
I take into account.
11 You were aged 47 years at the time of offending.
As I have said, you are now aged 51 years. Your mother is alive and in her
Your father is deceased. At the time of the offending, you resided
in Langwarrin with your mother. You are concerned about how
she will live on
12 You are the father of two children with
your former wife. The children are boys, aged 21 and 18 years
respectively. Your youngest
son suffers from autism-spectrum disorder and
requires extensive care. Your relationship with your former wife, when you were
from 29 to 40 years, was the most stable and productive of your life
and lasted for 11 years. It is a time reflected upon fondly
by your former wife
and her children. You remain on good terms with them. Both your former wife
and your sons have recently been
added to your prison visitor list and you are
reconnecting with them, which is a very positive sign from the point of view of
rehabilitation.
13 You were raised by your
parents in the Frankston area. They were gainfully employed and had a loving
relationship. There are
no incidents of family violence or neglect in your
background. You were educated at Frankston High School, completing year 11.
all reports, you were a good student and excelled at sport, particularly
athletics. After leaving school, you commenced employment
with the railways.
It was at this time that you developed a range of legal problems through
negative peer associations, heavy drinking
and experimenting with illicit drugs.
Your late father played an important role in saving you from this anti-social
and self-destructive
lifestyle. You began working with him, a carpenter by
trade, installing windows and sliding doors. You are a very talented person
mechanically and use these skills to assist family members and
14 In 1999, your family purchased a golf
driving range. You and other family members worked there seven days a week.
This amplified
your interest in the sport to such a degree that you reduced your
handicap to low single figures — good enough for you to win
championship.
15 Unfortunately, your father developed
prostate and then bone cancer. The family sold the business to assist in his
efforts to fight
the disease. He died in 2009. You played a pivotal role in
caring for your father during the final two years of his illness, conveying
to his medical appointments and being his constant companion, even when he was
in palliative care. You experienced considerable
grief when your father finally
succumbed to cancer. I am not sure that you have fully come to terms with the
loss and what it means
to you as a surviving middle-aged
16 After your father’s death, you
commenced employment as a truck driver and, later, a tow-truck driver. The work
was demanding,
and you excelled at it. You were still doing this work at the
time of the offending, albeit sporadically.
medical evidence reveals that your health is not good. You suffer from a heart
condition that was diagnosed in 2013. In early
August of that year, you
presented at Frankston Hospital with an anterior cardiac infarction and VF
cardiac arrest. You were admitted
to the ICU and had a coronary stent inserted.
The incident was very serious, and you have been described as ‘very lucky
be here’. You have been prescribed various medications for your
conditions and remain on them while in custody. You have
experienced another
heart attack whilst in custody and have had further stent surgery. There have
been five in total.
18 You have been a long-term user
of cannabis and, towards the end, methamphetamines. Your usage was particularly
high in the two
years prior to the present offending. You have been drug-free
since your arrest in 2016. There is no evidence to suggest that,
at the time of
the offending, you were suffering from a mental
19 In relation to remorse, I take into
account your plea of guilty, which is the main mitigating consideration, but the
your actual remorse is limited and very hard to assess. As a result
of admissions made during a police undercover operation, you
were arrested on 9
December 2016. The next day you led police to where Karen was buried, which
ended the terrible period of uncertainty
that was being experienced by her
family, for which I give you due credit. But the admissions that you made to
the undercover police
made your position in relation to that issue untenable,
and statements made by you to those operatives betrayed a callous disregard
what you did to Karen. Even after revealing the location of her body, you
continued to give false accounts of your involvement
in her death. Up to as
late as January 2017, you were blaming others for the way that she died. Beyond
your admission that Karen
died as a result of non-consensual strangling or
choking during consensual sexual activity, the actual circumstances and precise
cause of her death remain unclear. The pathology is not determinative in this
regard. I take into account the letter of apology
that you subsequently wrote
to Karen’s family, which appears to be sincere. A fair summation is that
you have demonstrated
some remorse for what you did to Karen, but I am unable to
say that you are completely remorseful. I do accept the submission of
counsel that you are not beyond redemption and I have noted the several steps
that you have taken to undertake drug rehabilitation,
occupational training and
other educational programmes whilst on remand, and that you have obtained
trusted employment within the
20 You have a
prior criminal record going back to 1986 for mainly street and drug-related
offences and have received sentences across
the whole gamut of options. In
summary, you have been in and out of trouble with the police for a fair portion
of your adult life.
While none of the offences approach manslaughter in
seriousness, you have been convicted for crimes of violence, particularly
causing injury and assault with a weapon in 2006 and again in 2007.
In 2012, you received a suspended sentence of imprisonment of
12 months for the
offences of assault and committing an indecent act with a child under the age of
21 You have served time on remand within
the mainstream section of the Metropolitan Remand Centre and have used it
productively.
You have completed courses in traffic management, drug and
alcohol rehabilitation and managing sleep, among others. I do not have
of you undertaking courses or psychological counselling about respecting and
avoiding violence against women, which I do
not hold against you, but I strongly
suggest you explore, particularly in the context of your possible deportation
after release.
You need to reflect deeply upon these matters. The trusted
position in which you have been employed involves emptying bags from
flights containing headphones and other discarded items. You are a voracious
reader of books provided by your mother, and
donate them, when finished, to the
MRC library. You also assist with tasks such as cleaning and assisting inmates
for whom English
is a second language.
22 The most
important mitigating consideration in this case is your plea of guilty to the
charge of manslaughter. It was not an early
guilty plea, but it was made before
the trial in this court of the then charge of murder and you must be given due
credit for it.
The plea has significant utilitarian value because it has saved
the community and those involved in the trial the expense, inconvenience
emotional trauma of a contested proceeding. No witness has had to give
evidence. None of Karen’s family or friends have
had to endure such a
proceeding. Judicial and police resources have not been diverted from other
business. The plea provided the
answer to the question of who killed Karen and
in what general circumstances, and therefore brought a measure of emotional
to Karen’s family and friends, as did your leading police to the
location of her body. For the reasons that I have given,
the plea of guilty is
also some indication of remorse.
23 I accept your
counsel’s submission that the sentence to be imposed should come with a
parole period and that it should not
be crushing and should not connote
destruction of any reasonable expectation of useful life after release. For
reasons that I will
later give, I do not accept your counsel’s submission
that specific deterrence is not a significant sentencing
consideration.
24 You have had positive relationships
in your life, including with women, as revealed in character references that
have been supplied
to the court, including one from your eldest son to which I
pay particular regard. He refers to the needs of your other son, his
disabled younger brother, to missing you and to wanting to rebuild his
relationship with you. He says that he ‘can’t
imagine my life
without my Dad in it’. He says that ‘I go and visit my Dad whenever
I can. We are still very close
and I love seeing him’. I have taken this
reference into account in accepting your counsel’s submission that you are
not beyond redemption.
25 No two cases of
manslaughter are precisely the same and this crime throws up a great variety of
circumstances that affect the sentencing
of the offender. Nonetheless,
consistency in sentencing is an important principle. In that connection, I have
had regard to sentences
of this court in the other cases of manslaughter to
which counsel on both sides have referred me and to the sentences for that crime
in the period 2011–12 to 2015–16, as described in Sentencing
Snapshot No 199 (April 2017) of the Sentencing Advisory
Council. I have not
been able to obtain information in the period after 2015–16 as it is not
currently available.
26 This was a very serious
example of the crime of manslaughter that was committed in circumstances of
great aggravation. You abused
your physical power as a strong man to strangle
or choke (without her consent) a small and petite woman to death during
sexual activity in a confined space that rendered her virtually
defenceless. You buried her in secret and concealed the whereabouts
of her body
for twenty months. You took sustained steps to evade responsibility for the
crime, including by lying to police and
others about your involvement and
blaming others for what occurred.
27 Turning to
general and specific deterrence, this is a court of law not morals and I am here
to pass sentence for the crime of manslaughter,
not to pass judgment on the
social practice of ‘rough sex’ or any other form of consensual
sexual activity between adults.
But it is relevant to the purposes of
sentencing as applicable in this case that your interest in strangling or
choking women during
sexual activity, such as occurred with Karen, is directly
related to disrespectful, contemptuous and misogynistic views and opinions
you expressed about women generally and Karen personally after, and by reference
to, her death.
28 Examples include telling a
girlfriend in July to August 2015 that you would do to her what you did to
Karen. You told your former
partner on 21 July 2015 that ‘any other slut
who said anything [about Karen’s death] would be buried on top of [Karen]
and never be found’. You told her then partner that the police would
never find ‘the bitches’ (using the plural)
where you buried them.
In mid-late 2015, you grabbed a female friend by the throat after she refused to
have sex with you and spoke
and bragged about strangling and choking a sex slave. On 3 December 2016 and
speaking of Karen, you told another female friend that ‘I did this bitch
over and she deserved it’. On a number of occasions,
you bragged to
people about killing Karen, only to withdraw the admission and laugh about it.
In October 2016, you told a covert
police operative that you liked smaller
framed females and putting them in the boot of your car. Speaking of a
particular female
covert operative, you said that you would like to ‘choke
her out and run a train on her’. In the context of a discussion
violence towards females, on 15 November 2016 you explained to a covert
operative that doing the ‘Darth Vader’
involved grabbing someone by
the throat in a choking motion, which you demonstrated with a grip like action
involving the thumb and
index finger of your right hand. To another covert
operative you described Karen as a ‘thing’ and a
‘creature’.
There are other similar statements that I will not
repeat. I do not accept your counsel’s submission that this is to be
as bluff, bluster, trash and rubbish talk. The circumstances of
Karen’s killing and the evidence before the court establish
otherwise and
also demonstrate what this language can lead to. It dehumanises women, blames
them for male violence, normalises the
abuse of male power and contributes to
the creation of circumstances in which a woman may be violently harmed or killed
as occurred in this case.
29 It is not a
crime to have views and opinions and you are not here being sentenced for having
or even expressing these views and
opinions, totally repugnant that they are.
But the circumstances of the offending and the evidence before the court
establish that
you acted upon these views and opinions when killing Karen,
albeit unintentionally, in the particular way that you did. By unlawfully
assaulting her and dangerously strangling or choking her without her consent
until she was dead, you treated her as the impersonal
object of your own male
power and sexual pleasure during otherwise mutual and consensual sexual
activity. In other words, you used
her as a woman for your own ends as a man,
and in a manner that resulted in her death. The punishment must be condign when
of manslaughter is committed by a man who dangerously uses a woman as
a means to his own ends and the appreciable risk of her death
eventuates. You also treated Karen’s body as a thing to be discarded and
concealed, thus depriving her (and her family
the comfort) of a decent burial, a
point eloquently made by her mother.
30 No woman and
certainly not Karen is a piece of meat, a sex slave to be strangled or choked,
someone to be put in a car or run a
train on, or a thing or a creature to be
non-consensually strangled or choked by a man using his power to obtain sexual
at the appreciable risk of the women’s death. As I have said on
other occasions,
all women (and
Karen in particular) have an inviolable human right to life, to equality —
not just the appearance of equality
but to real equality — to physical and
emotional integrity, to respect for the dignity of their humanity and to
personal autonomy,
and to freedom from fear of physical or mental harm at the
hands of men. Women, supported by their family and friends and the community
generally, look as of right to the law for protection from men who would act on
disrespectful, contemptuous and misogynistic views
and opinions about women in
the manner that you have. The views and opinions on which you acted in killing
Karen are utterly inconsistent
with these rights of women and the standards of
equality, respect and decency that are observed in contemporary society which
courts must uphold. You as an individual and others who might likewise
offend must be deterred from acting on disrespectful, contemptuous
misogynistic views and opinions about women in that or any other like manner.
The crime that you committed must be unequivocally
denounced by the court not
just because it was an aggravated manslaughter but because it is directly
associated with those views
31 Therefore, for the offence of
manslaughter of Karen Rae, you will be imprisoned for a period of 13 years. I
direct that you serve
a period of ten years before you become eligible for
release on parole.
32 I declare that your
pre-sentence detention is a period of 527 days, not including this day.
Pursuant to
Sentencing Act
, I direct that this be entered
in the records of the court and reckoned as time already
33 Pursuant to
Sentencing Act
I also declare that, had you not pleaded guilty to this
offence, I would have imposed a sentence of imprisonment of 15 years with
minimum period before becoming eligible for parole of 13 years.
DPP v Turner
(23 June 2017) [33];
DPP v Paulino (Sentence)
[2017] VSC 794
December 2017) [31].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (306 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter