URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1607.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Proctor v Grass & Caruso [2025] VCC 1607 (7 November 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
LAW DIVISION
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
Case No. CI-24-06287
TARRYN PROCTOR
DEAN MICHAEL GRASS & PHOEBE SAVANNAH
HIS HONOUR JUDGE OVER
DATE OF HEARING
1 August 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT
7 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Proctor v Grass & Caruso
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1607
REASONS FOR
Subject: Application for an extension of limitation period
Catchwords: Proceeding pursuant to
Accident Compensation
for damages for workplace injury – limitation period of six
years expired – application to extend time – whether
reasonable to extend time – whether a
Jones v Dunkel
should be made against the plaintiff because previous solicitors did not give
evidence – delay of about eight years
and nine months – whether
previous findings of fact in decision determining serious injury application are
admissible in damages
proceeding and, if so, what use can be made of them
– claimed specific prejudice because of witnesses’ loss of
recollection
of key events – general prejudice – relevance of cause
of action against the plaintiff’s former solicitors
Legislation Cited:
Limitation of Actions Act
Accident Compensation Act
Evidence Act
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Limitation of Actions (Amendment) Act
Interpretation of
Legislation Act
County Court Civil Procedure Rules
, reg 43.03
Cases Cited:
Griffiths v Nillumbik Shire Council
[2022] VSCA 212
Prince Alfred College Incorporated v ADC
[2016] HCA 37
(2016) 258 CLR 134
Gestmin SGPS SA v Credit Suisse (UK) Limited
[2013] EWHC 3560
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
O’Donnell v Reichard
[1975] VicRp 89
(1975) VR 916
Shone v National Express Group Australia (Swanston Trams) Pty
[2019] VSC 782
Delai v Western District Health Service &
[2009] VSC 151
Bevilacqua v Giovanni Costa & Sons Pty Ltd
[2017] VCC 1474
Tsiadis v Patterson
[2001] VSCA 138
(2001) 4 VR 114
Superior Meat & Poultry Supply (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2021] VCC 1081
Fabre v Arenales
(1992) 27 NSWLR 437
Proctor v Victorian WorkCover
[2024] VCC 844;
Whiteford v Ropolo
[2009] ACTSC 22
Maurice Blackburn Cashman v Brown
[2011] HCA 22
(2011) 242 CLR 647
King v Muriniti
[2018] NSWCA 98
(2018) 97 NSWLR 991
Ford Motor Company (Aust) Ltd v
[1998] VR 152
Welsh v Adecco & Ors
[2017] VSC 44
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
(1996) 186 CLR 541
Nikolau v Papasavas, Phillip & Co
[1989] HCA 11
(1988) 166 CLR 394
Norwegian Capricorn Line (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2007] VSC 157
Judgment: The limitation period is extended
APPEARANCES
For the plaintiff
Mr D McWilliams SC &
Mr S Mullaly
Arnold Dallas McPherson
For the defendants
Ms R Kaye KC &
Ms M Cameron
IDP Lawyers
HIS HONOUR:
Introduction
17 September 2012 the plaintiff was riding a horse performing track work for the
defendants. She came off the horse (the
) and says she injured
her hips and lower back.
late 2013, she made a claim against the defendants for workers compensation
Accident Compensation Act
) for injury
from the incident. In early 2014 the insurer rejected the claim.
April 2014 she sought legal advice from Shine Lawyers (
) about the
incident. Shine advised her to issue a Magistrates’ Court proceeding
challenging the rejection of her workers compensation
claim. It also advised her
that she may have an action in negligence against her employer or a third party
for damages for personal
injury, that there was a six-year limitation period to
commence a damages proceeding, and that she should commence the damages
by 16 September 2018, though it may be possible to extend the time.
plaintiff retained Shine to act for her from about April 2014 until November
2020. The plaintiff claims she trusted Shine to look
after her interests during
the retainer.
Magistrates’ Court that challenged the rejection
of her workers
compensation claim. That litigation was prolonged with periods of inactivity and
a contest about whether the plaintiff
was a “worker” for the purpose
of the AC Act at the time of the incident and, if so, who employed her. In about
the Magistrates’ Court decided the plaintiff was a worker
employed by the defendants at the time of the incident.
the retainer, Shine took steps to bring a damages proceeding such as preparing
documents for a serious injury application,
a necessary precursor to commencing
a damages proceeding if the AC Act applied to that proceeding. But, Shine did
not make a serious
injury application or commence a damages proceeding for the
November 2020, the plaintiff ceased her retainer with Shine. By this time, the
limitation period for a damages proceeding had expired.
December 2020, the plaintiff retained Arnold Dallas McPherson (
current solicitors. ADM prepared a serious injury application and made it on 17
June 2021. The insurer rejected it.
18 October 2021, ADM filed on the plaintiff’s behalf a proceeding in this
Court seeking a determination that she had a serious
injury. This Court heard
the serious injury proceeding from 19 to 23 June 2023. The hearing was unusual
in that it ran for five
days. Witnesses gave evidence about how the incident
14 June 2024, Tsikaris J determined the plaintiff had a serious injury from the
incident, and she granted leave to the plaintiff
to bring a damages proceeding.
In doing so, her Honour made findings of fact about the incident including about
the quality of the
recollections of witnesses to the incident.
29 October 2024, the plaintiff commenced the damages proceeding. The defendants
filed a defence that claimed that her action was
statute-barred. The plaintiff
conceded the proceeding was commenced after the expiry of the limitation period,
and she now applies
to extend the time to commence a proceeding.
sole issue is whether it is just and reasonable to extend time for the plaintiff
to bring the action in the damages proceeding.
The plaintiff says it is. The
defendants say it is not. They claim to have suffered specific and general
prejudice from the delay,
attribute the cause of delay to Shine and say that the
plaintiff has a good action against Shine in negligence and breach of retainer
for damages for the loss of the opportunity to pursue the damages proceeding.
The operative limitation period
plaintiff was a “worker” at the time of the incident so the damages
proceeding is governed by s134AB of the AC Act
as it is in respect of an injury
from employment on 17 September 2012 for which she has an entitlement to
compensation under that
proceeding is as permitted by and in accordance with s134AB of the AC Act.
injury, the subject of the plaintiff’s action, is not a disease or
disorder. Therefore, s5(1)(a) of the
Limitations of Actions Act
) provides the limitation period: six years from the date on which
the cause of action accrued.
cause of action accrued when the plaintiff first suffered the alleged injury the
subject of the action, which was on 17 September
134ABA of the AC Act can affect the calculation of the limitation period for a
s134AB proceeding. That section requires periods
relating to the making of a
claim for compensation for permanent impairment and for making a serious injury
application to be disregarded
in calculating the limitation period under the LA
Act. That section does not affect the calculation of the limitation period in
case as the plaintiff has not made a claim for compensation for permanent
impairment, and she had not made a serious injury application
operative limitation period had expired.
operative limitation period for the plaintiff’s damages proceeding
commenced on 17 September 2012 and it expired on 18 September
Because her damages
proceeding is in accordance with s134AB of the AC Act, the plaintiff had to make
an application for a serious
injury application on or before 18 September 2018.
was uncertainty up to May 2019 about whether the plaintiff was a
“worker” under the AC Act at the time of the incident.
It is useful
to note that if the plaintiff had not been a “worker” under the AC
Act at the time of the incident, that
Act would not have applied to the damages
proceeding, so she would not have had to prove she had a “serious
injury” before
commencing a damages proceeding. Further, the limitation
period would have been governed by Division 2 of Part IIA of the LA Act,
provides for a limitation period of the earlier of either twelve years from the
incident or three years from the date of
discoverability.
Application for an extension of time
plaintiff applies for an extension of time under s23A(2) of the LA Act. That
section permits a court to extend the limitation
period to bring an action if
“it is just and reasonable to do so”. This can be done even though
the limitation period
has expired and the proceeding has already been
23A(3) requires a court in determining whether to extend time to have regard to
all the circumstances of the case including
but not limited to each of the
(a) the length of and reasons for the delay on the part of the plaintiff;
(b) the extent to which, having regard to the delay, there is or is likely to be
prejudice to the defendant;
(c) the extent, if any, to which the defendant had taken steps to make available
to the plaintiff means of ascertaining facts which
were or might be relevant to
the cause of action of the plaintiff against the defendant;
(d) the duration of any disability of the plaintiff arising on or after the date
of the accrual of the cause of action;
(e) the extent to which the plaintiff acted promptly and reasonably once he knew
that the act or omission of the defendant, to which
the injury of the plaintiff
was attributable, might be capable at that time of giving rise to an action for
damages; and
(f) the steps, if any, taken by the plaintiff to obtain medical, legal or other
expert advice and the nature of any such advice he
may have received.
Court of Appeal in
Griffiths v Nillumbik Shire
in considering an
application to extend time under s23A of the LA Act set out the established
legal principles that apply to such
an application:
“(1) The applicant, for an extension of time, bears the onus of
establishing that it is just and reasonable to order that the
limitation period
be extended. It is for the applicant to prove the facts which enliven the
discretion to grant the extension and
to show good reason for exercising the
discretion in his or her favour;
(2) The purpose of a discretion conferred by provisions such as s 23A is to
ensure a fair trial on the merits of the case. Loss
of evidence, which tends
against the prospect of a fair trial, will usually be fatal to an application to
extend time;
(3) The relevant delay commences from the time of the accrual of the cause of
(4) Relevant prejudice to a defendant is both that which occurs by reason of the
delay (such as the demonstrable loss of documents
or testimony of a relevant
witness) as well as the
prima facie
prejudice suffered by a defendant
who, if not for the application for extension, would have the benefit of the
limitation period;
(5) In cases of long delay, there is presumptive prejudice as important, perhaps
decisive, evidence may disappear without its existence
apprehended;
(6) The circumstances of the case referred to in s 23A(3) require a
synthesis of the competing considerations set out in the subsection
in reaching
a conclusion that takes into account all of
Prince Alfred College Incorporated v
the High Court
stated that a decision about whether to extend a limitation period must take
account of the reasons why limitation
periods exist:
"An extension
of time is not a presumptive entitlement which arises upon satisfaction of the
pre-conditions that enliven the discretion.
The onus of persuasion is upon the
applicant for an extension of time. The exercise of the discretion to grant an
extension of
time must take account of the reasons for the limitation regime,
and the discretionary nature of the decision to be made must be
respected when
conducting appellate review of a primary judge’s
decision.”.
evidence in the application consisted of the following:
(a) two affidavits of the plaintiff, made 30 April 2025 and 31 July 2025;
(b) three affidavits of Sarah Richardson, one made 6 May 2025 and two on 31 July
2025. Ms Richardson is a solicitor with ADM, the
plaintiff’s current
solicitors; and
(c) two affidavits of Catherine Mortellaro, made 23 June 2025 and 29 July 2025.
Ms Mortellaro is a solicitor with IDP Lawyers, the
defendants’ solicitors.
Issues with finding facts
following specific issues affect how I find facts in this case.
Use of affidavits
parties tendered affidavits without requiring any deponent to attend for
cross-examination and without objection. Although this
was the position of the
parties, it is still necessary for me to scrutinise the evidence, particularly
in assessing weight and the
use that can be made of the evidence.
affidavits contain statements of fact about events. An affidavit in an
interlocutory application should expressly state whether
a statement of fact is
based on knowledge, or on information and belief, and if the later, the grounds
for the information and belief.
some parts, the affidavits do not do this, or do not do this clearly.
making findings of fact, I have taken the general approach of preferring
contemporaneous documents about an event and placing less
weight on a
deponent’s statement about the event, particularly where the statement of
fact is based, or appears to be based,
solely on the deponent’s review of
a document rather than her own
Furthermore, there
are parts of the affidavits that are not statements of facts but are better
characterised as submissions. I have
not had regard to submissions made by
affidavit in making findings of fact.
Jones v Dunkel
plaintiff did not call anyone from Shine as a witness.
defendants submitted that I should infer, in accordance with the rule in
Jones v Dunkel,
uncalled evidence would not have assisted the plaintiff in considering why Shine
did not make a serious injury application
on behalf of the plaintiff before the
expiry of her limitation period. This was said to be particularly so where the
plaintiff submitted
that Shine had a strategy of delaying the making of a
serious injury application until after the Magistrates’ Court had resolved
the issue of whether the plaintiff was a worker employed by the
defendants.
Jones v Dunkel
provides that an unexplained failure by a party to
call a person as a witness whom the party may be expected to call on a subject
may permit an inference to be drawn that the person’s evidence would not
have assisted the party’s case on that subject.
The inference can be
considered in deciding whether to accept any evidence on that subject or in
deciding whether to draw any inference
of fact from the evidence about that
the defendants did not specify a person who the plaintiff could or should have
called, I accept that a legal practitioner
who handled the plaintiff’s
matter while she retained Shine, particularly around the time the limitation
period expired, would
likely have been able to give evidence, either by
affidavit or in person, about why Shine did not make a serious injury
application
on behalf of the plaintiff before the expiry of the limitation
is aware of the proceeding. The defendants issued on Shine a subpoena for
production of documents, and they produced documents
relevant to having acted
for the plaintiff, which are heavily redacted pursuant to a claim of client
legal privilege.
There is no
evidence to suggest that a person from Shine would not have been available to
give evidence.
precondition to drawing a
Jones v Dunkel
inference is that the missing
witness would be expected to be called by one party rather than another because
the missing witness
is effectively in a party’s
the issue of whether Shine could be characterised as in the plaintiff’s
camp, the defendants referred me to examples of extension
of time applications
where a plaintiff had called his or her previous solicitor at the time of the
expiry of the limitation period
as a witness in support of a submission that it
was not unprecedented for a plaintiff in an extension of time application to
his or her previous
solicitors.
That is so, but
there are conversely examples where a plaintiff has not called his or her
previous solicitor to give evidence and
Jones v Dunkel
inference has
been drawn against the
More significantly,
the defendants did not refer me to any case where a court has drawn a
inference against a plaintiff in an extension of time application
because he or she has not called a previous solicitor to give evidence.
defendants submitted that the interests of justice dictated that a
inference must be
However, the question of
whether to draw an inference is between parties; the fact that a third party may
(or may not) benefit from
an inference not being drawn is not determinative of
the question.
do not accept that Shine, or, more accurately, a witness from Shine can be
properly characterised as someone who is in the plaintiff’s
plaintiff had a solicitor/client relationship with Shine that broke down in
the Victorian Legal Services
Commission about the adequacy of Shine’ representation of
There is no evidence to
suggest that the relationship has improved since then, and it seems unlikely it
has given that the plaintiff
may, depending on the outcome of the extension
application, seek to sue Shine for professional negligence. There is not a
basis to assume that Shine would collaborate with the plaintiff in
providing an affidavit explaining its conduct, especially if this
could or may
implicate it in a future action. Further, in the absence of an affidavit and
knowing what evidence may be given, the
plaintiff was not required to call a
person from Shine to give oral
am not satisfied that a
Jones v Dunkel
inference should be drawn, and I
do not draw one.
even if such an inference was drawn, I do not consider it would affect in a
material way the fact finding in this case. As
will become apparent later in
these reasons, I reject the plaintiff’s submissions that Shine had a
strategy to delay making
a serious injury application until after the
Magistrates’ Court determined whether the plaintiff was a worker employed
defendants when the incident happened.
Findings of
following paragraphs are finding of facts.
Racecourse. In this role, she rode for several trainers,
including the
defendants.
17 September 2012 the incident happened. The plaintiff was riding a horse for
the defendants when she came off. The plaintiff claims
the horse bucked, causing
her to somersault forward and land heavily on the ground, and that she suffered
injury from the incident.
defendants admit that the plaintiff was “dislodged” from a horse
while riding for the defendants on 17 September 2012
and that she suffered
injury from the incident, but they put in contest the circumstances of how and
why she came off the horse and
the nature and extent of her injury from the
were three witnesses to the fall: the plaintiff; Mr Dean Grass; and Mr Warren
plaintiff claims in the year following the incident she had ongoing pain in her
lower back and hips, and she saw a physiotherapist
massages for it. She thought the pain would resolve with time.
Camdon Fary. That led to her having an MRI of her
hips. She understands the MRI
showed a labrum tear in her right hip and a suspected labrum tear in her left
25 November 2013, Mr Fary performed an arthroscopy of the plaintiff’s
right hip, revealing a torn ligament and a torn labrum.
November 2013, the plaintiff submitted a claim for workers compensation under
the AC Act. The claim form named the defendants as
her employers and claimed
that she was injured in the incident by suffering labral tears to her left and
right hips.
Mr Fary advised her it was unlikely that she would
be able to return to track
riding in the future because of her
7 January 2014, the plaintiff was notified that the insurer rejected her workers
compensation claim.
January 2014, the insurer commissioned SECA Group Pty Ltd (
investigate the plaintiff’s workers compensation claim. SECA investigated
and prepared a report dated 29 January 2014,
which runs for 48
The report listed the
claimant as the plaintiff, and the defendants as the employer of the plaintiff.
The investigation included
interviewing the plaintiff, Mr Grass, and Mr Hunt
included with the report.
report included a section headed “common law potential”.
plaintiff appealed the rejection of her workers compensation claim to the
Accident Compensation Conciliation Service. A certificate
of genuine dispute was
issued on 13 March 2014.
30 April 2014, the plaintiff consulted Shine for legal advice regarding the
Shine advised her to
issue a Magistrates’ Court proceeding challenging the rejection of her
workers compensation claim.
Shine also provided the plaintiff with legal advice about a damages proceeding,
including that there was a time limit of six years
to bring a proceeding and
that they would proceed on the basis that the time limit was to expire on 16
September 2018.
wrote to the plaintiff on 30 April 2014. The letter confirmed her instructions
informed her about her potential
entitlement to workers compensation and that she may be able to bring a common
law damages claim,
which was separate and in addition to any workers
compensation claim. The letter explained the need to show “serious
to commence a damages proceeding and the need to prove negligence
in that proceeding. The letter stated that after a compensation
permanent impairment had concluded that Shine would “discuss with you our
advice in respect of your prospects of
succeeding in a common law damages claim
and then discuss with you whether you wish to make such a
The letter stated
that her right to bring a common law damages claim expired on 16 September 2018.
the letter she was also provided a document titled “Time Limits and Your
Rights in Workcover Claims and Claims for
which relevantly
“You have advised us that your injury occurred (or the
symptoms commenced on 17/9/2012.
Therefore, it is important for you to
remember that you only have until 16/9/2018 to commence a claim. If you or your
Solicitor have
not lodged a claim before this date, you may never be able to do
Special provision apply to enable a claim to be brought
outside the six year period in limited circumstances.
This can include
circumstances where a defendant is not prejudiced by a late claim and a court
considers that it is in the interests
of justice to grant an extension.
A court will take into account when a claimant became aware of all
relevant information and was themselves responsible for any delay.”
plaintiff signed a cost
The costs agreement
was not before the Court. I infer from the fact that, as will be shown, Shine
took steps to prepare a serious
injury application that the plaintiff’s
retainer with Shine included pursuing a damages proceeding.
8 October 2014, Shine commenced on behalf of the plaintiff a proceeding in in
the Magistrates’ Court that named Mr Grass
and Ms Phoebe Caruso as
defendants and challenged the rejection of her workers compensation
Shine informed her about
the Magistrates’ Court
proceeding.
21 October 2014, Trueman Dawson Lawyers
purported to
file on behalf of the defendants a defence to the Magistrates’ Court
proceeding.
The defence did not
deny that the defendants had employed the plaintiff at the time of the
which under the rules
of that Court is tantamount to an admission that the defendants had employed the
22 October 2014, IDP Lawyers purported to file on behalf of the defendants a
further defence to the Magistrates’ Court proceeding.
The defence admitted
that the plaintiff was employed by the defendants at all material times, which
would have included the
December 2014 and January 2015, Shine prepared a brief to counsel to prepare
serious injury paperwork, being an affidavit and statement
It does not appear the
brief was sent at that time.
15 December 2014, Mr Fary performed an arthroscopy of the plaintiff’s left
hip, which revealed a torn ligament and a torn
21 January 2015, a mention was held at the Magistrates’ Court, where the
Court raised that two defences had been filed. The
matter was adjourned.
Subsequently, IDP Lawyers filed a notice of change of practitioner, taking over
sole conduct of the proceeding
defendants.
4 February 2015, the Court granted leave to the defendants to file and serve an
amended defence. That amended defence put in issue
whether the plaintiff was a
“worker” employed by the defendants at the time of the incident.
The matter was listed for
hearing on 15 May
This hearing was then
relisted to 4 June 2015.
27 May 2015, Shine advised the plaintiff by email that the defendants had
alleged she was not a worker under the Act, and requested
various documents
regarding her employment.
2 June 2015, the Magistrates’ Court ordered that the proceeding against
the defendants be struck out with the right of reinstatement.
stated that pursuant to s16(4)(b) of the AC Act, Racing Victoria should properly
be a defendant, with enquiries to be made
regarding the plaintiff’s permit
or approval to ride track work. The Court said that the plaintiff was either to
issue a new
proceeding against Racing Victoria or the plaintiff could seek to
reinstate the Magistrates’ Court
proceeding.
2015 and 2021, the plaintiff underwent multiple cortisone injections to her
hips, five further arthroscopic surgeries to her
hips and a lumbar medial branch
block for her lower back
2016, the plaintiff contacted Shine by telephone several times regarding her
case. On each occasion she was told a solicitor
would call her back, but this
never occurred.
Lawyers received no correspondence from Shine regarding the plaintiff’s
case from 4 June 2015 to 25 July
February 2017 Shine reviewed the plaintiff’s matter to determine whether
it should progress to making a common law
approximately mid-2017, the plaintiff received a call from a solicitor at Shine,
but she was travelling overseas at the time. Upon
her return she called the
solicitor, who said the plaintiff’s previous solicitor had left the firm
and the plaintiff’s
file had become lost during his departure. On this
call, the plaintiff raised that the time limit for her damages proceeding would
expire next year, to which the solicitor replied that she was aware of the time
limit and would ensure a claim was initiated before
July 2017, seeking to reinstate the Magistrates’
Court proceeding, and
seeking to include Racing Victoria as a defendant. The proceeding was re-listed
in the Magistrates’
2 August 2017, Shine considered how to proceed with the matter if the plaintiff
was not a “worker” at the time of the
It identified that if
the damages proceeding was not subject to the AC Act there would be a limitation
period issue. I infer that
Shine understood that if the plaintiff’s
damages proceeding was not subject to the AC Act then Division 2 of Part IIA of
LA Act provided the operative limitation period for the damages proceeding,
being the earlier of three years from the date of discoverability
years from the date of the incident, and if this was case the limitation period
had likely expired so an extension of time
was needed.
11 September 2017, the Magistrates’ Court granted the plaintiff leave to
file and serve an amended complaint and statement
of claim that included Racing
Victoria as a defendant, and granted leave to Mr Grass and Ms Caruso to file an
amended defence.
6 November 2017, the Magistrates’ Court held a mention where the Court was
informed that the amended complaint and amended
statement of claim had not been
served on the defendants. Plaintiff’s counsel did not have any
instructions. The proceeding
was adjourned for further
the further mention on 11 December 2017, plaintiff’s counsel informed the
Court that he was having difficulty contacting
the plaintiff, and that the
amended complaint had not been served on Racing Victoria as they were having
difficulty contacting them.
The proceeding was adjourned for further
late-2017 the plaintiff met with Mr Andrew Ingram, barrister. Mr Ingram wrote an
undated advice, which states that he conferred
with the plaintiff and her mother
on 6 December 2017 and that he “explained to the [p]laintiff that the
purpose of the conference
was to draft Affidavit material in support of a
serious injury application pursuant to the provisions of s134AB of [the AC Act]
a prelude to a claim for common law
The heavily
redacted advice concludes with Mr Ingram stating that he returns the papers to
Shine. Mr Ingram via his clerk raised
an invoice dated 22 December 2017 for work
that included conferring with the plaintiff and drafting an affidavit, statement
and advice.
time records for the plaintiff’s matter have an entry for 11 December 2017
for “[p]ersual of serious injury
documents, drafted by Counsel”, and
an entry for 19 December 2017 for it to draw a “Form A- Serious Injury
Application”,
which is the
administrative form approved by the Victorian WorkCover Authority for making a
serious injury application.
infer that in late-2017 Shine retained Mr Ingram to prepare court documents so
that the plaintiff could make a serious injury application
in respect of injury
from the incident, and that Mr Ingram drafted serious injury documents, which he
returned to Shine soon after
the conference, so that Shine had the serious
injury documents by mid-December 2017.
17 January 2018, the defendants were served with an amended statement of claim
in the Magistrates’ Court
proceeding.
23 February 2018, the plaintiff conferred with Mr James Plunkett, barrister, and
two people from Shine. Mr Plunkett was the barrister
who had acted at times for
the plaintiff in the Magistrates’ Court proceeding. He prepared an advice
to Shine dated 26 February
2018. The copy of the advice before the Court was
heavily redacted. The advice has a header for the Magistrates’ Court
proceeding.
He states that he had been instructed to advise on how best to
proceed with the claim. The plaintiff claims that the purpose of her
with Mr Plunkett was to prepare a serious injury
application.
I do not accept
that was the purpose of the conference given Mr Plunkett’s advice. I infer
that the purpose of the conference
was for Mr Plunkett to advise about how to
proceed with “the claim”, which included a damages proceeding.
Plunkett advised about the limitation period for a damages proceeding. His
initial advice is predicated on the plaintiff not being
a “worker”,
so that Division 2 of Part IIA of the LA Act provided the operative limitation
period for the damages proceeding:
the earlier of twelve years from the incident
or three years from the date of discoverability. He advised that the damages
may be defended on the basis that the limitation period expired on 17
September 2015 (being three years after the incident), advised
plaintiff could apply to extend time, opined that such an application would be
successful, and recommended issuing a generally
indorsed writ urgently to
mitigate any argument that delay had been caused by the negligence of
He gave further advice
that if an application for an extension of time was “unsuccessful, a claim
could nevertheless continue
to be pursued under the [AC Act] where the
limitation period is six years ... and so yet to expire”. It is difficult
to understand
parts of his advice. The plaintiff either was or was not a
“worker” so it was not a matter of choosing, as Mr Plunkett
suggest, whether the AC Act applied or which limitation period applied.
Plunkett raised via his clerk an invoice dated 26 February
The invoice billed for
having conferred with the plaintiff and providing advice. He did not bill for
preparing serious injury paperwork.
Shine’s time records for the matter
have an entry for conferring with the plaintiff and a barrister on 23 February
perusing the advice of Counsel on 27 February
infer that in eary-2018 Shine was uncertain about how to proceed with the
plaintiff’s matter considering the contest about
whether the plaintiff was
a “worker” under the AC Act at the time of the incident. It retained
Mr Plunkett to advise
how best to proceed with claims by the plaintiff including
a damages proceeding and that by late February 2018 it had read and received
the hearing there was a reference to an undated file note by Shine that recorded
that the plaintiff had two options: first, to
pursue a damages proceeding as if
the AC Act did not apply to it; the second, was to run the Magistrates Court
proceeding to determine
whether the plaintiff was a “worker” and if
she was to then to make a serious injury
application.
Although the file
note was undated, I infer it was likely to have been written in about early 2018
as its contents accord with discussions
happening at about this time and the
advice of Mr Plunkett.
at February 2018 Shine had not commenced a damages proceeding. Mr Plunkett had
recommended Shine issue a generally indorsed writ.
At about the same time, it is
likely someone at Shine had identified an action to take was to check whether a
generally indorsed
writ had been issued, and if not, make sure one was issued
“to protect her”.
Shine did not issue a generally indorsed writ on behalf of the plaintiff at any
1 March 2018, there was a further mention of the Magistrates’ Court
proceeding. Mr Plunkett, appearing for the plaintiff,
informed the Court that
documents had been served on Racing Victoria, but the plaintiff had received no
response. There was no appearance
by Racing Victoria. Plaintiff’s counsel
told the Court that he was unsure if the plaintiff was going to pursue
proceedings
. The Court informed
plaintiff’s counsel that the plaintiff needed to decide whether to proceed
with judgment in default, or
to have the Magistrates’ Court proceeding
dismissed, and if she had not decided by the next mention, the Court would
out the matter. The proceeding was adjourned for further
7 March 2018, Racing Victoria filed and served a defence to the
Magistrates’ Court.
February and July 2018, the plaintiff spoke with Shine over the phone several
times. The conversations mostly focused on the
ongoing Magistrates’ Court
proceeding. However, she raised concerns about the impending six-year time limit
for her damages
claim on multiple occasions. Her solicitor assured her that it
would be fine, that they were aware of the time limit and an extension
obtained for the damages proceeding if
mentions were listed and adjourned in the Magistrates’ Court between March
and July 2018, with appearances from all
The matter was
eventually listed for hearing on 19 October
18 September 2018, the limitation period
When it expired, Shine
had not made a serious injury application on the plaintiff’s behalf or
commenced a damages
proceeding.
October 2018, a person from Shine conducted two reviews of the file where it
was noted that the limitation period had been recorded
as expiring in September
19 October 2018 the Magistrates’ Court held a hearing. The plaintiff gave
evidence about whether she was employed by the
defendants or Racing Victoria at
the time of the incident.
22 October 2018, the Magistrates’ Court adjourned the proceeding
part-heard to a date to be fixed, with a note that the parties
were to exchange
written submissions.
plaintiff and Racing Victoria served
submissions,
and the plaintiff
and Mr Grass and Ms Caruso prepared agreed
4 March 2019, the plaintiff emailed Shine asking if the Magistrates’ Court
had made a decision. On 5 March 2019, Shine replied
by email advising that her
solicitor was on maternity leave and that they were still awaiting the
Court’s judgment.
1 May 2019, Magistrate Guthrie handed down his decision to the effect that the
plaintiff was an employee of the defendants and
dismissing her claim against
Racing Victoria on the basis that it was not her
Following several
mentions, the proceeding was listed for hearing on 1 October
plaintiff says in about April 2019, she was contacted by Shine to advise the
Magistrates’ Court had determined she was a
worker employed by Mr Grass
and Ms Caruso. However, this was likely in May 2019 given the Court handed down
its decision on 1 May
the next few months, the plaintiff contacted Shine on several occasions to
determine next steps in her case. She was unable to
get onto any of the
solicitors handling her case. She left messages with the reception requesting a
call back but never received
13 August 2019, the plaintiff emailed Shine asking for an update on her case. On
14 August 2019, she received an email from a paralegal
stating that a hearing in
the Magistrates’ Court had been set down for 1 October 2019. On 28 August
2019, she received a further
email regarding a prehearing conference on 9
September 2019.
prehearing conference, the plaintiff asked the solicitor about the time limit
for the damages claim, and was advised that
they would ask for an extension for
the damages claim and that it would not be a
of an out of court
settlement.
November and December 2019, the plaintiff contacted Shine on several occasions
seeking an update on her damages claim. She
did not reach any solicitors and did
not receive a call back.
15 January 2020, the plaintiff received an invoice from Shine for legal costs
for her workers compensation claim. The amount sought
was larger than she
expected. She contacted Shine and the Victorian Legal Services
multiple occasions to discuss the invoice but did
not receive a call
However, on 10 February
2020 she spoke with Ms Nicole Ward where she complained about the invoice.
During that consultation, there
was discussion of the plaintiff’s concerns
that she was out of time to bring a damages proceeding and Ms Ward said that she
would review the file but if Shine had missed the expiry date then it would have
to cease to act as it would be
conflicted.
19 August 2020, Shine’ legal practice manager emailed the plaintiff
apologising for the delay in responding and indicating
she was seeking authority
to reduce the amount of the
9 September 2020, the plaintiff received a revised invoice from Shine. She
repeated failure to return
her calls, and was advised that a new solicitor would be taking over her damages
application which it sent to the plaintiff on 14 October
It also advised the
plaintiff that she was required to sign a new cost
Following discussion,
the plaintiff was told that Shine would not represent her in relation to her
damages proceeding unless she
signed a new cost
8 November 2020, the plaintiff made a complaint to the Victorian Legal Services
Commissioner about Shine.
prepared a letter in response to the complaint dated 30 August
I find that letter is a
draft as it includes comments to a reader asking for further clarification and
highlighted parts. The draft
letter claims that, “the view was taken that
[the plaintiff] would need to resolve the question of who her employer was in
order to have any prospect of success in a common law application”. The
draft letter was refined leading to a letter dated
10 September
Tellingly that letter
omitted the claim that Shine had taken the view that the worker issue had to be
resolved before considering
whether to make a serious injury application.
10 November 2020, the plaintiff emailed Shine requesting that they cease to
represent her or act on her
1 December 2020, Shine wrote to the
confirmed that Shine no longer acted for her, and stated that
“arguably” her limitation period for an action
against the
defendants expired on 17 September 2018 and advising that an extension of time
application could be made.
1 December 2020, the plaintiff signed a cost agreement and disclosure statement
17 June 2021, Shine wrote to
The letter was mainly
extension of time application “has
no reason not to succeed” and
that the plaintiff had a duty to mitigate her claimed loss.
17 June 2021, a serious injury application was lodged in relation to the
plaintiff’s damages
The defendants
rejected the application on 15 October 2021. The defendants provided a copy of
their draft defence, which did not
plead a limitation
18 October 2021, the plaintiff filed an Originating Motion for the serious
injury application.
plaintiff’s serious injury application was heard by Tsikaris J from 19 to
23 June 2023. On 14 June 2024, Tsikaris J handed
down her decision in
v Victorian WorkCover
The plaintiff
was granted leave to commence a proceeding seeking damages for pain and
suffering and loss of earning
29 October 2024, ADM filed and served a writ and statement of claim, commencing
the damages proceeding.
statement of claim bought an action in negligence against the defendants
claiming damages for personal injury. She claims that
on 17 September 2012 Mr
Grass requested her to ride a two-year-old horse. She refused, but he ordered
her to do so, which she did.
She says that while riding the horse it bucked
repeatedly and pulled its head down causing her to be thrown off the front and
5 December 2024, the defendants filed their defence. They admitted that on 17
September 2012 the plaintiff was dislodged from a
horse that she was riding in
track work for the defendants causing her injury but either denied or did not
admit the allegations
made by the plaintiff. They pleaded that the
plaintiff’s claim was barred as it had been brought after the six-year
period in s5(1) of the LA Act. This led to the plaintiff filing an
application for an extension of time.
Analysis of the
circumstances of the case
following analysis needs to be seen in the context of the findings of fact made
Section 23A(3)(a): the length of and reasons for the
delay on the part of the plaintiff
delay started with the accrual of the cause of action, being when the plaintiff
first suffered damage, which was when the incident
occurred on 17 September
plaintiff submitted that the delay ended when she filed the writ, which was 29
October 2024.
I reject that
submission.
defendants helpfully referred to the Court of Appeal’s reasoning in
Griffth v Nillumbik Shire
ends in a claim where there has been a serious injury
application:
“... the appropriate end point for calculating
the period of delay in a claim involving a ‘serious injury’ process
... is the date upon which the respondent to the claim (or its insurer) receives
the serious injury application and the material
supporting the application
(assuming that the documentation sets out in sufficient detail the circumstances
of the alleged tortious
acts or omissions giving rise to the potential common
law claim and where appropriate an account of the injuries and consequences
to flow from the alleged negligence)
defendants submitted, which I accept, that the delay ended when the plaintiff
made the serious injury application on 17 June 2021,
there being no argument
delay is from 17 September 2012 to 17 June 2021, a period of about eight years
and nine months.
plaintiff explained her reason for the delay as follows:
“During the period when Shine was acting for me, I believed
and trusted that they were doing everything required to protect
interests and advance my cases. I raised my concerns regarding the time limit
for bringing the common law claim with my
Shine solicitors on many occasions. I
was repeatedly told by my solicitors that they were aware of the time limit,
would work toward
it and/or would simply get an extension if required. I was
told not to worry about the time limit. I placed my trust in the Shine
solicitors and believed they knew what they were doing and would do everything
required by the law to obtain compensation for my
injuries in the common law
I understand that the WorkCover claim was lengthy, taking about 7 years to
resolve, and that it involved legal points made by the
Defendant regarding
whether I was a worker for Mr Grass which may have impacted my common law claim.
I believe this is also a reason
for the common law claim being brought
defendants expressly stated that it did not submit that the plaintiff was at
fault in any way for the
Instead, they
submitted that the reason for the delay was because of the negligence of her
previous solicitors, Shine.
find that the plaintiff has a good explanation for the delay, and she was not
the cause of or complicit in the delay. Within about
19 months of the incident,
she consulted Shine, a firm who regularly acted in work injury claims and
proceedings. She trusted them
to act for her and in her best interests, which
was not unreasonable. She was aware of the limitation period. She contacted
limitation period and she received assurances that they would. She
steps were taken before the limitation period expired to prepare a serious
injury application: for example, she conferred
with Mr Ingram in late-2017 for
the purpose of preparing a serious injury application. Later, after the expiry
of the limitation
period, she was told by Shine that an extension of time could
be obtained if needed.
will consider further the question of the cause of the delay in the context of
considering the potential for the plaintiff to being
a professional negligence
action against Shine.
Section 23A(3)(b): the extent to which,
having regard to the delay, there is or is likely to be prejudice to the
defendants submitted they have or are likely to have suffered prejudice from the
delay in the form of specific and presumptive
considering prejudice, it is important to reflect on why prejudice matters. The
majority of the High Court in
Prince Alfred College
discussed how delay
can prejudice the fairness of a trial in a case where there was delay of about
46 years between alleged actionable
events that occurred in 1962 and the
commencement of a proceeding in 2008, and the plaintiff in 1997 had been aware
in 1997 of the
potential for a action and had elected not to pursue it at that
“Where a trial is conducted long after the events which
gave rise to the dispute, the risk that the trial will be a mere simulacrum
the process of doing justice becomes greater with the passage of time. The onus
is on the party claiming an extension of time
to show that a fair trial may be
had now, notwithstanding that passage of
defendants claimed they did not know that the plaintiff wished to bring a
damages proceeding until she made the serious injury
application eight years and
nine months after the
Further that they
“prejudiced or [are] likely to be prejudiced in defending
the Plaintiff’s damages claim because the memories of the two
witnesses to the incident (other than the Plaintiff) [being Mr Grass and Mr
Hunt] as to central issues in dispute have faded
with the passage of time and a
long time has passed since the treating surgeon [being Mr Fary] whose evidence
is important on the
question of causation has treated the Plaintiff such that
the Defendant cannot have an acceptably fair
I accept that the defendants did not know the plaintiff would in fact bring a
damages proceeding until she made her serious
injury application, they (and/or
their insurer) were aware by December
within 15 months of the
incident, that she was making a workers compensation claim that put in issue the
circumstances of the incident.
The notification led to the defendants, or their
insurer, engaging an investigator in January 2014 to investigate the
circumstances
The letter to the
investigator was not in evidence but I infer that the investigator was also
asked to consider the potential for
a damages proceeding, given the
investigator’s report included a section headed “common law
comments that related to a potential damages
proceeding.
fact that the defendants were put on notice about the plaintiff’s
allegations of injury within 15 months of the incident
lessens in my view the
extent of prejudice to the
defendants.
provided with the opportunity to investigate the circumstances of the fall,
which they did, leading to the comprehensive
investigation report including
statements taken from the three witnesses to the incident being the plaintiff,
Mr Grass and Mr Hunt.
Furthermore, they had the opportunity to have the
plaintiff medico-legally examined, which happened on 27 December 2013 when Mr
White, consultant surgeon, examined the plaintiff and prepared a report
of the same day.
White’s report was provided to the defendants as it was relied on in
rejecting her workers compensation
and it was later
served by the defendants’ solicitor on the plaintiff in May 2015 along
with two further medical reports that
the defendants had
defendants accepted in closing submissions, rightly in my view, that the
statements of Mr Grass and Mr Hunt taken by the investigator
went some way to
ameliorating prejudice in respect of those
However, they said
that they suffer specific prejudice because Mr Grass and Mr Hunt’s
recollection of the incident had degraded
with time, which would affect the
fairness of a trial.
defendants did not put on affidavits from Mr Grass or Mr Hunt about the quality
of their recollection of the incident to show
that their memories about the
circumstances of the incident had faded with time, nor did Ms Mortellaro make a
statement of belief
based on what Mr Grass and Mr Hunt had told her about the
quality of their memories.
they sought to show specific prejudice by referring me to factual findings made
by Tsikaris J in the serious injury application
Hunt’s recollections of the incident and some of the materials from the
hearing of the serious injury
application.
the serious injury application, Mr Grass answered interrogatories on behalf of
the defendants and made an affidavit. The answers
to interrogatories and the
affidavit were not in evidence in this proceeding. At the hearing of the serious
injury application, Mr
Grass gave oral evidence. The transcript of his evidence
was in evidence. In his evidence-in-chief he adopted his affidavit, save
clarifying that Mr Hunt had assisted the plaintiff back onto her horse after the
incident rather than him as he had claimed in
cross-examination at the hearing of the serious injury application, Mr Grass was
challenged about his recollection of the incident:
Q: Do you recall
how, in your own memory now how the plaintiff came off the horse and how she
landed? ---
A: I recall how - what happened with the horse. I recall her going down the
side of it. I can't exactly tell you exactly how she landed,
as in - whether on
her side which is common in the way you would fall off in that situation, or she
could have landed on her bottom.
But to me, I - no, I can't give you an actual -
how she landed, but I recall - I recall the fall, I recall the incident, I
how it happened.
Q: What I want to suggest to you is that her fall indeed was a non event for
you, and that you don't remember the details of the fall
at all? ---
A: Yeah, I do remember the details of the fall.
Q: Why did you say in your statement: "It was a non event fall as far as I
was concerned, which is why I don't remember the details."?
A: Don't remember the details of the dates and the times. I remember the
Q: No, you're talking about the fall. "It was a non event fall as far as I
was concerned, which is why I don't remember the details."
You're talking about
the fall. And the reason you don't remember the details of the fall was because
you thought it was a non event.
That's the truth, isn't it? ---
A: No, no, I remember the fall. She came off the side. The horse propped,
went one side, went the other side, she went down the side
and came off. It was
a light fall.
Grass was asked whether he had seen the plaintiff land after the fall given that
she fell off the horse on the opposite side to
where he was positioned, and he
said that because he was on a horse he could see how she
Grass was questioned about his claim in his statement that he could not remember
how the plaintiff landed:
Q: "I can't remember how she landed."
What do you mean by that?
A: Well, I can't remember whether she was to land exactly on what part, but
when you roll off the side of a horse, you generally
fall on your side, so, I've
come off the same way myself many times.
Q: So you relied on your experience about how people generally come off
horses, rather than how she came off this horse?
A: She come off the side of the horse I saw her come off the side of the
horse, and she's landed on her side I can't say whether
she landed on her bottom
or legs. She landed on the side - on the ground on her side.
Q: So you accept that she could have come off the horse and landed on her
A: Yes, she could have.
Q: If someone came off a horse and landed on their bottom, would that be a
matter of concern for you?
A: Depending on the fall. A lot of falls are so soft, people hit the deck,
jump straight up and away they go again, it's not a -
it's not a hard
re-examination, Mr Grass was asked about his ability to recall of the
Q: Can I ask you to explain the things that you are very
clear about that happened on that day? ---
A: I'm clear about the fall because I don't - I actually don't have - I've
had not many people fall off riding working for me, riding
with me, so I am
pretty clear about anyone that has fallen off the horses. I remember the horse -
what it did, and I remember how
she slipped down the side of it.
Q: So when you say you're very clear about the fall can you just go through
the detail that you are very clear about, please? ---
A: We were cantering side-by-side around the track, slow because they were
just pre-trainers so we were just cantering slow. As we
come around where the
hut is, another rider came around the outside, the horse that Tarryn was on got
a fright, it propped to the
right, it propped to the left, and she came out and
down the side of it, and landed off the side of the horse.
Q: You were asked a number of questions about what you saw in terms of how
Ms Proctor came off the horse. Can I ask you to describe
precisely the line of
sight that you had to her at the time when this happened? ---
A: So I was right beside her on a horse right beside, so as the horse bounced
one way, she got unseated because it went bing-bing.
And it was snappy, quick
when they do it, and she went over the side of the horse and came down beside
its neck and shoulder.
the serious injury application, Mr Hunt made an affidavit about his recollection
of the fall. The affidavit was before the Court
proceeding.
In the affidavit,
Mr Hunt said that he was working on the day of the incident as a trackwork
supervisor and was in a hut about 15
metres from the track of the racecourse. He
described the incident as follows:
“I do remember Tarryn
falling off one of Dean Grass’s horses in around September 2012. This
occurred almost directly in
front of the hut where I was sitting watching. She
and Dean Grass where cantering slowly along the sand track. Tarryn’s horse
shied at something and she slid off the side and fell on to the track. The horse
didn’t buck or anything like that. Tarryn
didn’t go up in the air.
She slid off down its side and landed on the track on the opposite side to me.
It happened very quickly.
I think she landed on her feet. If I had to rate on a
scale of one to ten I would rate on the bottom end for seriousness. The track
sand, that is 100 ml deep.
Tarryn got straight back on the horse. I recall giving her a boost. It was a
fair while ago and I don’t remember the fine details.
I do remember that
she came off the horse and that it wasn’t a hard fall. It didn’t
require an entry to be made in the
Complaints and Incidents
Mr Grass’ view of the incident was from a distance of at least 15 metres
and the plaintiff landed on the side of the
horse furthest from him, which means
that the horse would have been between him and where the plaintiff landed.
Hunt gave oral evidence at the hearing of the serious injury application. The
transcript of his evidence was not before the Court.
Tsikaris made findings about Mr Grass and Mr Hunt’s recollections of the
incident to the effect that time had affected
their recollections, which was
critical to her Honour preferring the evidence of the plaintiff over Mr Grass
and Mr Hunt’s
defendants submitted that while her Honour’s findings were not binding on
me, they were “instructive” to the
issue of the specific prejudice
suffered by the defendant from
The legal basis for
the submission was not articulated.
submission could not be based on issue estoppel. Section 134AB(19A) of the AC
Act prevents any issue estoppel from a finding made
on an application for leave
to bring proceedings in respect of the injury in any proceedings for the
recovery of damages brought
in accordance with s134AB. This extends to the
determination of the limitation application.
party referred me to
Evidence Act
. That section
(1) Evidence of the decision, or of a finding of fact, in an Australian or
overseas proceeding is not admissible to prove the existence
of a fact that was
in issue in that proceeding.
(2) Evidence that, under this Part, is not admissible to prove the existence of
a fact may not be used to prove that fact even if
it is relevant for another
serious injury application was a separate proceeding from the damages
proceeding.
The findings made
by Tsikaris J about the quality of Mr Grass and Mr Hunt’s recollections of
the incident were facts in another
proceeding and they cannot now, pursuant to
Evidence Act
, be used in the damages proceeding to
prove that Mr Grass and Mr Hunt’s recollections of the incident have been
affected by
the passage of time. However, I accept that pursuant to
can use the decision in the serious injury application to show that the quality
of Mr Grass and Mr Hunt’s recollections (and
the plaintiff’s) is
likely to be an issue that arises in the damages proceeding.
I cannot use Tsikaris J’s findings about the quality of Mr Grass and Mr
Hunt’s recollections of the incident,
I can review the part of Mr Grass
and Mr Hunt’s evidence in the serious injury application tendered in the
limitation period
application to determine whether either of their memories have
or are likely to have faded with the passage of time.
reviewed the evidence tendered in this application, I consider that Mr Grass and
Mr Hunt have a remarkably good recollections
of the incident. Each of them in
the serious injury application materially described how the plaintiff came off
the horse. The only
issue with their recollection was the position of the
plaintiff’s body when she landed, though both agreed that the fall was
serious or was light. It is not apparent to me from the evidence that in fact
that each of them had seen the plaintiff land despite
their claims to the
contrary. It is to be noted that even when interviewed by the investigator
within 16 months of the incident they
were unclear about the position of the
plaintiff’s body when she landed.
claimed specific prejudice relating to Mr Fary having not treated the plaintiff
for a long time is non-existent. Mr Fary was a
treating doctor and his evidence
is based on his treatment of the plaintiff. He does not need to have examined
the plaintiff. Mr
Fary gave evidence in the serious injury application and the
transcript of his evidence was in evidence in this
application.
It shows he has
good recollection of relevant events.
accept that the there is or is likely some prejudice to the defendants related
to Mr Grass and Mr Hunt not recalling how the plaintiff
landed but it is not
significant in the context where they are able to give cogent evidence about the
circumstances of the incident
more generally.
23A(3)(b) requires the Court to have regard not only to specific prejudice but
also the extent there is likely to be
defendants submitted that the period of delay of eight years and nine months was
“inordinate or
substantial”,
the language of
Ford Motor Company (Aust) Ltd v
Adecco & Ors
defendants referred to McHugh J’s comments in
Brisbane South Regional
Health Authority v Taylor
regarding the rationales for the existence of limitation
“The effect of delay on the quality of justice is no
doubt one of the most important influences motivating a legislature to
limitation periods for commencing actions. But it is not the only one. Courts
and commentators have perceived four broad rationales
for the enactment of
limitation periods. First, as time goes by, relevant evidence is likely to be
lost. Second, it is oppressive,
even "cruel", to a defendant to allow an action
to be brought long after the circumstances which gave rise to it have passed.
people should be able to arrange their affairs and utilise their
resources on the basis that claims can no longer be made against
them. Insurers,
public institutions and businesses, particularly limited liability companies,
have a significant interest in knowing
that they have no liabilities beyond a
definite period. ... The final rationale for limitation periods is that the
public interest
requires that disputes be settled as quickly as
McHugh elaborated on the potential effects of a
“Sometimes the deterioration in quality is palpable, as
in the case where a crucial witness is dead or an important document
destroyed. But sometimes, perhaps more often than we realise, the deterioration
in quality is not recognisable even by the
parties. Prejudice may exist without
the parties or anybody else realising that it exists. ... The longer the delay
in commencing
proceedings, the more likely it is that the case will be decided
on less evidence than was available to the parties at the time that
the cause of
action arose”.
Dawson agreed with McHugh J that:
“... once the legislature
has selected a limitation period, to allow the commencement of an action outside
that period is prima
facie prejudicial to the defendant who would otherwise have
the benefit of the
limitation.”
defendants also submitted that prejudice may occur in circumstances where
several of the defendants’ witnesses have already
accepted that their
memories about the circumstances of the incident have faded due to the effluxion
of time, whereas the plaintiff
has maintained that she has a good recollection
of the events.
the hearing, the plaintiff accepted that “there will be general prejudice
in relation to the
Buchanan JA opined in
Tsiadis v Patterson:
opinion paragraph (b) of s.23A(3) does not limit the Court’s attention to
prejudice which is present or is likely
to occur in the sense that it is more
probable than not that it will occur and the word “extent” in the
paragraph requires
the Court to have regard to the degree to which prejudice is
likely to eventuate. ... Of course the influence of potential prejudice
decrease as its likelihood is
accept that the defendants are likely to be subject to some presumed prejudice
because of the period of delay. The extent of the
presumed prejudice, though, is
limited because, as discussed above, the key witnesses to the incident have
generally retained good
recollections of the incident.
on the issue of prejudice, while I accept there has been some prejudice to the
defendants because of the time since the
incident, I do not consider that the
prejudice is significant. At the trial, there will be competing evidence about
how the incident
occurred and the plaintiff, Mr Grass and Mr Hunt can each give
their version of events. This is the hallmark of a factual contest,
passage of time has not prevented a fair trial.
Section 23(3)(c):
The extent, if any, to which the defendant had taken steps to make available to
the plaintiff means of ascertaining facts which were
or might by relevant to the
cause of action of the plaintiff against the defendants
plaintiff suggested the conduct of the defendants caused the period of the delay
in three ways.
first, was based on the defendants having not raised a limitation defence in the
draft defence filed in the serious injury application
process, and first raised
it when they filed their defence in December 2024.
defendants submitted that the timing of the raising of the limitation defence
was not causative of the delay given that the delay
period ended with the making
of the serious injury application, which was before a draft defence was filed.
agree with the defendants’ submission. Further, assuming that the
defendants had raised the limitation period defence it is
not clear that the
Court would have necessarily heard the serious injury application and the
extension of time application at the
second, was based on the defendants having put in issue in the
Magistrates’ Court proceeding whether the plaintiff was a
worker employed
by the defendants and that the resolution of that issue contributed to delay.
accept that the contest about whether the plaintiff was a worker at the time of
the incident partly explains the delay. However,
the defendants were entitled to
contest the worker issue. The fact that it took over five years to determine
the worker issue was
largely not the fault of the defendants. There was no
suggestion that they concealed or hid material. A review of the conduct of
Magistrates’ Court proceeding does not show that the defendants caused
substantial delay to the running of that proceeding.
third, was based on the defendants having put causation in issue in the serious
injury application, leading in large part to a
five-day hearing and about a year
between the hearing and the reasons being hand down. The conduct of the serious
injury application
was after the period of delay had ended. More generally, the
defendants were entitled to put in issue the question of causation in
serious injury application and were not responsible for any delay.
Section 23A(3)(d): the duration of any disability of the
is no evidence of the plaintiff having any disability relevant to whether time
should be extended.
Section 23A(3)(e): whether the plaintiff
acted promptly and reasonably once she knew she may have an action against the
defendants.
accept that the plaintiff acted promptly and reasonably once she knew she may
have an action against the defendants. I refer to
my findings in paragraph
Section 23A(3)(f): the steps taken by the plaintiff to
obtain medical, legal or other expert advice and the nature of any advice she
may have received
have made findings about the legal and medical advice obtained by the plaintiff.
I find she acted reasonably in taking steps to
obtain medical and legal advice
and in responding to that advice.
A potential action against her
previous solicitors
plaintiff has a potential action against Shine in negligence and breach of
retainer for damages for the loss of the opportunity
to pursue the damages
proceeding if she is not granted an extension of time.
Tsiadis v Patterson
the Court of Appeal held that the potential for a
plaintiff to bring an action in negligence against previous solicitors is a
consideration, with Buchanan JA stating:
weight to be given to the availability of a cause of action against a solicitor
will depend upon the circumstances of each
case. The liability of a solicitor is
not to be equated with that of the original wrongdoer, and accordingly I do not
think it is
correct to conclude that an applicant with a good prospect of
successfully suing his solicitor will suffer no prejudice if his application
refused. The liability of the solicitor will be determined not only by the
likelihood of establishing liability on the part of
the original wrongdoer, but
also by the terms of the solicitor’s retainer, the instructions given by
the client from time to
time and by the manner in which the solicitor’s
work has been performed. If the plaintiff is successful in an action against
solicitor, the damages to be awarded are not based upon an assessment of the
losses, pain and suffering caused by the injury
sustained by the plaintiff, but
are commensurate with the value of the lost chance to recover damages from the
original tortfeasor.
Proceedings against the solicitor will be more complex and
expensive than proceedings against the original wrongdoer. Usually the
likelihood that the applicant will succeed in an action against his or her
solicitor cannot be known with any precision when an application
under s.23A of
the Act is decided. In the present case it appears that Turner was in breach of
the obligations which he owed to the
respondent, but that view is one based upon
hearing only the respondent’s version of her engagement of Turner and the
of the succeeding years, for of course no evidence was led or submissions
made on behalf of the solicitor. The matters referred to
by Smith, J.
Repco Corporation Ltd v. Scardamaglia
should not lead to a plaintiff’s
potential cause of action against a negligent solicitor being completely
ignored, but rather
affect the weight to be given to the availability of the
cause of action.”
plaintiff submitted that it is not immediately apparent that Shine acted in a
negligent manner by failing to file the plaintiff’s
serious injury
application before the expiry of the limitation period in circumstances where
the defendants disputed that the plaintiff
was a worker within the meaning of
the AC Act and that the defendants were the plaintiff’s employer, and
proceedings with respect
to those issues were still on foot.
did take steps to protect the plaintiff’s common law rights before the
limitation period expired by retaining a barrister
in late-2017 to prepare
documents for a serious injury application. Yet, by early 2018 without the
worker issue there was uncertainty
within Shine about how to proceed with a
damages proceeding as exemplified by it seeking advice from Mr Plunkett, in
which he suggested
that Shine proceed on the basis that the AC Act did not apply
to the damages proceeding. That advice would have been confusing.
were steps that Shine could have taken to protect the plaintiff’s common
law rights pending determination of the worker
issue. It could have assumed that
she was not a worker and issued a damages proceeding as of right without needing
to go through
the serious injury gateway. It could have assumed that the
plaintiff was a worker and made a statutory impairment claim that would
suspended the running of the limitation period or made a serious injury
application and held it in abeyance pending determination
of the worker issue.
With the benefit of hindsight, these were preferable courses to taking no step
to protect the plaintiff’s
common law interests before the expiry of the
operative limitation period. Even after the worker issue was resolved in May
Shine did not take steps to prepare a serious injury application.
plaintiff’s submission would have had more force if Shine had made a
serious injury application for the plaintiff soon after
the Magistrates Court
resolved the worker issue in May 2019.
at the material before the Court, I find that the likely reason Shine did not
commence a serious injury application was its
inadvertence rather than the
product of a strategy.
consider that the plaintiff has reasonable prospects of succeeding in an action
against Shine. That finding needs to be tempered.
I have made findings about
Shine acting for the plaintiff. It is important to appreciate that my findings
are based on the material
before the Court without having heard from Shine. My
findings are not a final determination of whether Shine has any liability to
plaintiff. It would be open for Shine, in any case, if the plaintiff brought an
action against it to argue that it acted reasonably
in the context of the
confusion about whether the plaintiff was a worker at the time of the incident,
even though this would seem
at best a partial explanation for the delay.
though I consider that the plaintiff has reasonable prospects of succeeding in a
professional negligence action against Shine,
the weight to be accorded to this
factor is limited by other
The action would be
for damages for the loss of the opportunity to make and pursue a damages
proceeding against the defendants. In
the damages proceeding, the plaintiff
would have the opportunity to try to obtain the full value of the loss and
damages she claims
for her injury, but in the professional negligence proceeding
she would be limited to damages for the loss of opportunity that must
account of the chance of success and an assessment of what damages she could
have received if she had succeeded. There are many
factors that go to valuing
damages for loss of
opportunity.
On any view she
would only be able to recover at best a fraction of her claimed losses. She
would also have to prove two cases, which
is likely to be more costly and time
place limited weight on the plaintiff’s potential to bring a profession
negligence against Shine.
Synthesising
all the circumstances of the case, including the specific matters referred to in
s23A(3)(a) to (f), I am satisfied that
it is just and reasonable to extend the
limitation period applicable to the plaintiff’s action to 27 June 2021,
the serious injury application was made.
the avoidance of doubt, if the period of delay ended on 29 October 2024,
contrary to my findings in paragraphs 116 to 119, I extend
the time to 29
October 2024 for the same reasons.
has been delay largely because of Shine; the plaintiff was not the cause of or
complicit in that delay. The plaintiff has a
potential cause of action against
Shine. The availability of that action is relevant, and supports not granting an
extension of time,
but is not such a strong factor.
accept granting an extension of time will deprive the defendants of a limitation
defence. Also, not granting an extension of time
would mean the plaintiff could
not pursue her damages proceeding.
delay in this proceeding meant that a serious injury application was made about
eight years and nine months after the incident
(when it should have been made
within six years of the incident). A trial of the action will now not take place
until 2026, some
thirteen years after the incident.
timeframe is less than ideal, and in many other cases could have caused or would
likely have caused prejudice that prevented
a fair trial. However, in this case
my review of the evidence is that the prejudice the defendants have or have
likely suffered do
not prevent a fair trial of this proceeding.
Curiously, the serious injury
application was determined under the
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act
, when by reason of the date of the injury it should
have been determined under the
Accident Compensation Act
turns on this.
Pursuant to s40 of the LA Act,
the version of the Act before the commencement of s3 of the
Limitation of
Actions (Amendment) Act
2002, which commenced on 5 November 2002, applies.
This is version 72. Save where stated otherwise, a reference in these reasons to
Limitation of Actions Act
is to version 72 of that
In calculating the limitation
Interpretation of Legislation Act
that where a period is expressed to begin on a particular day that day shall not
be included in the period.
LA Act, s23A(4).
[2022] VSCA
Ibid, [68] (citations
[2016] HCA 37
(2016) 258 CLR 134
Prince Alfred
[99] (citations omitted).
County Court Civil
Procedure Rules
, reg 43.03.
Gestmin SGPS SA v Credit
Suisse (UK) Limited
[2013] EWHC 3560
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Jones v Dunkel
Transcript of hearing on 1
August 2025 page (“T”) 13, line (“L”) 1-15; T35, L26
– T36, L17; Plaintiff’s
outline of submissions dated 31 July 2025,
[25] & [37]-[38].
Jones v Dunkel
O’Donnell v Reichard
[1975] VicRp 89
(1975) VR 916
T16, L6 to L12; the
subpoena is at the parties’ Joint Court Book (“JCB”) 426-432;
the order of the Court in respect
of objections to production are at JCB
O’Donnell v
[1975] VicRp 89
(1975) VR 916
T92, L5 T93, L12;
v National Express Group Australia (Swanston Trams) Pty Ltd
[2019] VSC 782
Delai v Western District Health Service & Anor
[2009] VSC 151
Gordon v Norwegian Capricorn Line (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2007] VSC 157
Bevilacqua v Giovanni Costa & Sons Pty Ltd
[2017] VCC 1474
that the solicitors called as a witness were also the instructing solicitors at
the application for an extension of time.
See, for example,
Tsiadis v Patterson
[2001] VSCA 138
(2001) 4 VR 114
Tomolo v Superior Meat & Poultry Supply (Aust) Pty Ltd
Welsh v Adecco & Ors
[2017] VSC 44.
The defendants referred the
Court to Clayton J’s observation in
Tomolo v Superior Meat &
Poultry Supply (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2021] VCC 1081
, (at [58]) that it would not
be in the interest of justice to allow an ex-solicitor of a plaintiff in an
extension of time application
to avoid a potential claim against them by not
putting before a court any evidence about their conduct of the file and the
for delay. While I sympathise with this observation at a general level,
see Ormiston J’s comments in
at [3] for the contrary view.
Victorian Legal Services
Commissioners complaint form dated 11 August 2021, JCB 502-506.
Fabre v Arenales
(1992) 27 NSWLR 437
Affidavit of
Tarryn Proctor made 30 April 2025 (“Plaintiff’s first
affidavit”), [7], JCB 7.
Defence dated 5 December
2024, [4] & [6].
Plaintiff’s first affidavit, [9], JCB 7.
Ibid, [11], JCB 8; the
claim form is exhibit TP-1 to the plaintiff’s first affidavit, JCB
Plaintiff’s
first affidavit, [11], JCB
Ibid, [12], JCB 8.
SECA circumstance and
investigation report dated 29 January 2014, JCB 551-603, noting that four of the
tendered pages are blank.
Plaintiff’s
first affidavit, [12], JCB 8.
Ibid, [13], JCB 8;
Affidavit of Sarah Richardson made 6 May 2025 (“Ms Richardson’s
first affidavit”), [7(b)],
Plaintiff’s first
affidavit, [13], JCB 8.
Ibid, [14], JCB 8.
Letter from Shine Lawyers
to Tarryn Proctor dated 30 April 2014, JCB
Plaintiff’s
first affidavit, [15], JCB 8.
Plaintiff’s statement
of claim dated 8 October 2014, JCB 146-148.
Plaintiff’s first
affidavit, [17], JCB 9.
Affidavit of Catherine Mortellaro made 23 June 2025 (“Ms
Mortellaro’s first affidavit”), [16], JCB 131.
Notice of defence dated 21
October 2014, [2], JCB 152.
Magistrates’ Court
General Civil Procedure Rules
, reg 13.02(2).
Notice of defence dated 22
October 2014, [1], JCB 149.
Shine Lawyers time records
dated 11 October 2018 (entries for 19 December 2014, 12 January 2015 and 13
January 2014), JCB 449.
Plaintiff’s first affidavit, [10], JCB 7.
Ms Mortellaro’s
first affidavit, [17], JCB
Ibid, [18], JCB
Ibid, [19], JCB
Plaintiff’s first
affidavit, [18], JCB 9; Email from Shine Lawyers to Tarryn Proctor dated 27 May
2015, JCB 28-29.
Mortellaro’s first affidavit, [22], JCB
Plaintiff’s
first affidavit, [10], JCB
Ibid, [20], JCB
Ms Mortellaro’s
first affidavit, [23], JCB 132.
Shine Lawyers time records
dated 11 October 2018 (entry for 8 February 2017), JCB, 471.
Plaintiff’s first
affidavit, [22], JCB 10.
Mortellaro’s first affidavit, [24], JCB 132.
Shine Lawyers time records
dated 11 October 2018 (entry for 2 August 2017), JCB 471.
Ms Mortellaro’s
first affidavit, [25], JCB
Ibid, [26], JCB
Ibid, [27], JCB
Letter of advice of Andrew
Ingram (undated), JCB 616-619.
Tax invoice for fees due to
Andrew Ingram dated 22 December 2017, JCB 212.
Shine Lawyers time records
dated 11 October 2018 (entries for 11 December 2017 and 19 December 2017), JCB
s134AB(5)(a).
Mortellaro’s first affidavit, [28], JCB 133.
Plaintiff’s first
affidavit, [23], JCB 10.
Letter of advice of James
Plunkett dated 26 February 2018, JCB 536-537.
Tax invoice for fees due to
James Plunkett dated 26 February 2018, JCB 219.
Shine Lawyers time records
dated 11 October 2018 (entries for 23 February 2018 and 27 February 2018), JCB
Shine Lawyers file note
(undated), JCB 516-517.
Ms Mortellaro’s
first affidavit, [31], JCB
Ibid, [32], JCB
Plaintiff’s
first affidavit, [24], JCB
Ms Mortellaro’s
first affidavit, [33]-[35], JCB
Ibid, [35], JCB
See footnote 3 of
these reasons for decision.
Ms Richardson’s first affidavit, [11], JCB 41.
File note of Ms Amy Akers
of Shine Lawyers dated 12 October 2018, JCB 486; File note of Ms Amy Akers of
Shine Lawyers dated 17 October
2018, JCB 487.
Plaintiff’s first
affidavit, [26], JCB 11.
Mortellaro’s first affidavit, [36], JCB
Ibid, [37], JCB
Plaintiff’s
first affidavit, [27], JCB
Ms Mortellaro’s
first affidavit, [38], JCB
Ibid, [39]-[40], JCB
Plaintiff’s
first affidavit, [28], JCB
Ibid, [29], JCB
Ibid, [30], JCB
Ms Mortellaro’s
first affidavit, [41], JCB
Plaintiff’s
first affidavit, [32], JCB
Ibid, [33], JCB
Ibid, [34], JCB
File note of Ms Nicole
Ward of Shine Lawyers dated 10 February 2020, JCB 489-490.
Ibid, [34], JCB
Ibid, [35], JCB 12.
Ibid, [36], JCB 12; File
note of Mr Glen Northway of Shine Lawyers dated 8 October 2020, JCB 493; File
note of Mr Glen Northway
of Shine Lawyers dated 14 October 2020, JCB
Plaintiff’s
first affidavit, [36], JCB
Ibid, [38], JCB 13.
Victorian Legal Services
Commissioners complaint form dated 11 August 2021, JCB 502-508.
JCB 509 -512.
Plaintiff’s first affidavit, [40], JCB
Letter from Shine
Lawyers to Ms Tarryn Proctor dated 1 December 2020, JCB
Letter from
Shine Lawyers to Arnold Dallas McPherson dated 17 June 2021, JCB
Richardson’s first affidavit, [15], JCB
Ibid, [16], JCB
Ibid, [17], JCB
Plaintiff’s
first affidavit, [43], JCB
Ibid, [44], JCB
Plaintiff’s
outline of submissions dated 31 July 2025, [24].
[2022] VSCA 212.
Plaintiff’s
first affidavit, [45]–[46], JCB 14.
Prince Alfred
, [105]; see also
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v
(1996) 186 CLR 541
, 551 (McHugh J).
Ms Mortellaro’s
first affidavit, [46], JCB 137.
Ibid, [56], JCB 141.
Ibid, [46], JCB 137.
SECA circumstance and
investigation report dated 29 January 2014, JCB 551-603.
Ibid, JCB 562.
See, for example,
See, for example, a
similar situation in
Whiteford v Ropolo
[2009] ACTSC 22.
Report of Mr Roger White
dated 27 December 2013, JCB 607-612.
Letter from Allianz
Australian on behalf of WorkSafe Victoria to Tarryn Proctor dated 7 January
2014, JCB 172-174.
Letter from IDP Lawyers
to Shine Lawyers dated 26 May 2015, JCB 158.
T52, L18 - T53, L1.
Ms Mortellaro’s
first affidavit, [49]-[54], JCB 138-140.
Transcript of hearing on
21 June 2023 page (“SIA T”) 201, lines (“L”) 24-28.
SIA T221, L5-14; SIA
T222, L31 – SIA T223,
SIA T207, L22
– T208, L28.
T207, L22 – T208,
SIA T227, L20
– SIA T228, L4; SIA T228, L21-29.
Affidavit of Warren Hunt
made 28 September 2022, JCB 351-352.
Ibid, [7]–[8],
T56, L9 - T57, L19. The
relevant finding in respect of Mr Grass is at
Proctor v VWA
844, [169]; and Mr Grass at [171].
Maurice Blackburn Cashman v Brown
[2011] HCA 22
King v Muriniti
[2018] NSWCA 98
(2018) 97 NSWLR 991
SIA T248 – SIA
[1998] VR 152
[2017] VSC 44
(1996) 186 CLR
Ibid, 552-553
(citations omitted).
, [28] (citations omitted).
Norwegian Capricorn Line (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2008] VSC 517
Nikolau v Papasavas,
Phillip & Co
[1989] HCA 11
(1988) 166 CLR 394
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (629 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter