URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2012/967.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:32:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Herald and Weekly Times Pty Limited v The Office of the Premier (General) [2012] VCAT 967 (10 July 2012)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
GENERAL LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. G104/2012
Freedom of Information Act
application to the Office of
the Premier to inspect part of diary of Chief of Staff; application refused on
basis that diary was not
an ‘Official document of a Minister’;
analysis of whether diary was ‘a document in the possession of a
and ‘that relates to the affairs of an agency’;
decision of the Minister set aside – matter remitted.
The Herald and Weekly Times Pty Limited
The Office of the Premier (the Premier as
responsible Minister)
Her Honour Judge Jenkins Vice President
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
19 June 2012
DATE OF ORDER
10 July 2012
The Herald and Weekly Times Pty Limited v The Office of the Premier
[2012] VCAT 967
decision of the Minister to refuse to grant access under
section 13(b)
Freedom of Information Act
to the document requested and
specified in the Applicant’s letter dated 15 November 2011, is set aside.
request is remitted to the Minister for consideration according to
Her Honour Judge Jenkins Vice President
APPEARANCES:
For Applicant
Mr J P Cashen
Instructed by Kelly Hazell Quill Solicitors
For Respondent
Dr G Griffith QC with Dr C
Instructed by VGSO
INTRODUCTION
parties provided detailed written Statements of Legal Contentions, which are
drawn upon extensively for the purpose of these
letter dated 15 November 2011, the Applicant wrote to the Respondent seeking
access, pursuant to
Freedom of Information Act
FOI Act), in the following terms:
I seek a copy of the diary of
Mr Michael Kapel, chief of staff to the Premier. My request relates only to the
period February 1-28,
letter dated 27 January 2012, the Senior FOI Officer of the Respondent
determined that the document sought, namely the diary of
Mr Kapel for the month
of February 2011 (the Document):
...is not an official document of a
Minister, as defined in s 5(1) of the FOI Act and therefore no right of access
is available to
you pursuant to the FOI Act.
reaching this determination, the Senior FOI Officer further states that he was
mindful that:
The individual entries that make up the document
relate to a variety of matters which could not properly be considered the
of any agency.
above quote suggests that the decision-maker did examine the Document before
making a determination.
application dated 7 February 2012, the Applicant sought review by the Victorian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal (the Tribunal)
of the Respondent’s
decision, pursuant to s 50(2)(a) of the FOI Act ( the Application).
a Directions Hearing on 16 March 2012, Senior Member Proctor made Orders which
included the following Note:
The respondent submits it is not
appropriate in this proceeding to require it to provide the documents in dispute
to the Tribunal
seven days before the hearing. As the proceeding apparently
involves entry in a diary over one month, the Tribunal does not require
production before the hearing but requests the respondent to have the diary
available for production at the hearing if need be.
to the above instruction of the Tribunal, at the hearing of the Application, the
Document was not made available by the Respondent.
Counsel for the Respondent
submitted that the question whether the Document falls within the meaning of
‘an Official document
of a Minister’ is a matter of construction of
the FOI Act, which does not require examination of the Document itself. The
Respondent takes this position on the basis that there is otherwise evidence of
the nature of the diary, how it is kept and for what
the conclusion of the hearing the parties agreed that the Document be provided
to the Tribunal, for my exclusive perusal. This
has now been done and is
addressed below.
QUESTIONS FOR DETERMINATION
parties agreed that the Application raised the following questions for
consideration:
(a) whether the
Document falls within the meaning of ‘an Official document of a
for the purpose of
s 13 of the FOI Act; and
Document is ‘an Official document of a Minister,’ whether the
Applicant has a legally enforceable right to
obtain access to it under s 13(b)
of the FOI Act.
the purposes of the Application, the Tribunal need only determine the first
question. If the question is answered in the affirmative,
then the Application
will be remitted back to the Respondent for consideration as to whether an
exemption is claimed in respect of
the Document or any part of the Document, in
accordance with s 25 of the FOI Act.
THE PARTIES’ POSITION IN SUMMARY
Applicant contended that, properly construed, the Document was an
‘Official document of a Minister’ to which the Applicant
entitled to full access, subject only to any deletions made in accordance with
s 25 of the FOI Act.
Respondent contended that the Document cannot be an ‘Official document of
a Minister’ by reason that it was neither
in the possession of a Minister,
qua Minister; and nor does it have the character of a document that relates to
the affairs of an
Respondent relied upon the evidence of the Premier’s current Chief of
Staff to the effect that:
(a) the diary,
and therefore the Document contained within the diary, was neither created by
nor provided to any department or other
such public service entity or to any
public servant;
(b) the purpose
of the diary was to assist Mr Kapel to manage his time in his role as Chief of
Staff to the Premier (which role relates
to the affairs of the Office of the
Premier); and
(c) it does not
record whether Mr Kapel in fact used his time as recorded or what occurred in
any meeting that Mr Kapel in fact did
consequence, the Respondent submitted that it is not a document that has any
connection to the acts or actions of any agency so
as to give it the character
of a document ‘that relates to the affairs of an agency’. Nor does
it have the necessary
character as an Official document.
Respondent further submitted that the diary of the Chief of Staff to the Premier
is not a document that contains any material
relevant to the Premier’s
exercise of his functions in his capacity as Premier. The diary records a
Ministerial officer’s
intention to meet persons. There is no sufficient
nexus between the matter in the diary and the Premier’s exercise of his
Ministerial
RELEVANT FACTS
Michael Kapel was Chief of Staff to the Premier from about December 2010 to 23
January 2012, including the period from 1 to 28
February 2011 (the
in the Americas based in San Francisco and departed
overseas early May 2012.
Accordingly, the Respondent submitted that no adverse inference should be drawn
from Mr Kapel’s failure
to give evidence.
Anthony Nutt, is the current Chief of Staff to the Premier. He also fulfils the
function of Secretary to Cabinet. Prior to Mr
Kapel’s departure, Mr Nutt
was aware of the subject FOI request.
Nutt gave oral evidence and adopted his written witness statement filed with the
Tribunal. In his witness statement Mr Nutt provides
a concise historical
account of the emergence of Ministerial advisers and Ministerial offices, by
reference to a number of attached
articles on the subject. He also
distinguished between the functions of such Ministerial advisers and the
functions of public servants
within Government departments and agencies. Under
cross-examination he expanded upon this distinction, some aspects of which I
summary, his evidence was to the following effect:
(a) The Chief
of Staff is a Ministerial officer appointed by the Premier pursuant to
Public Administration Act
(Vic) (the PA Act);
(b) The Chief
of Staff manages the Office of the Premier (OTP), which is staffed almost
entirely by Ministerial officers appointed
pursuant to s 98(1) of the PA
(c) Ministerial
officers appointed pursuant to s 98(1) of the PA Act are partisan political
appointments. In contrast, public servants
are employed under Part 3 of the
PA Act. Ministerial officers and public servants sit within separate
hierarchies in the Government.
The principal distinction between Ministerial
officers and public servants is the partisan political advice provided to
by Ministerial officers;
basis of discussions between Mr Nutt and Ms Colleen Carney, former personal
assistant to Mr Kapel and now personal assistant
(i) The diary relates to appointments made in Mr
Kapel’s role as Chief of Staff to the Premier;
(ii) The diary was used by Mr Kapel to manage his time in performing his duties
as Chief of Staff by recording his intentions as
to future activities, but did
not record whether the Chief of Staff in fact used his time as
(iii) The diary was maintained in electronic form;
(iv) Mr Kapel or Ms Carney made all entries in the diary;
(v) The only persons with control of and access to the diary were Mr Kapel and
Ms Carney; the diary was password protected; and
(vi) The diary was never provided to any department or other such public service
entity or to any public servant.
oral evidence, Mr Nutt confirmed that the duties and functions of a Ministerial
adviser listed in paragraph 11 of his statement
are still broadly applicable;
and his particular duties and responsibilities are listed under paragraph 38.
He further clarified
these duties as follows:
(a) In relation
to major public policy matters, he may become involved in research, evaluation
and preparation of memoranda for the
(b) The range
of matters in which he may give advice to the Minister encompass the whole of
Government and may relate to:
(i) Political;
(ii) Party management;
(iii) Parliamentary management; and
(iv) Public policy across a number of areas, such as education; transport
(c) He will deal with a range of stakeholders, both with and without the
Premier; and both with and without public servants;
(d) He will assist the Premier by attending to many issues on his behalf, in
accordance with his instructions, in the development
of responses to issues or
management of issues or conduct of affairs;
(e) He will interact with public servants at a senior level, both with and
without the Premier, often within the Premier’s
private office;
(f) He will deal with all range of external contacts encompassing: parliamentary
colleagues, unions, community, business and ethnic
parties and organisations,
(g) All of his dealings are within the context of a framework set by Government
and in accordance with the instructions of the Premier;
(h) Parliamentary duties include dealing with questions to and speeches for the
Premier; and all interactions between the Premier
and other Parliamentary
participants;
(i) As Chief of Staff he will generally supervise and manage responses to the
very large volume of correspondence received by the
OTP, but he will sometimes
deal with it personally;
(j) He will deal with the media, as required, including input into a press
release which deals with significant matters;
(k) Interactions with public servants and stakeholders encompass meetings,
correspondence and telephone calls;
(l) His day to day activities encompass a range of capacities and different
aspects of Government: Parliamentary, political and
administrative functions;
but he does not deal with these in a segmented fashion but rather as an
‘integrated holistic role’;
(m) When Mr Kapel was Chief of Staff, Mr Nutt dealt with him extensively while
he was in the Cabinet office and believes that Mr
Kapel approached his role in a
similar manner to that which he described;
(n) He keeps one electronic diary in which he records appointments noting the
time, date, place and usually the main parties and
usually the expected
duration. He will occasionally record personal information. He was not
familiar with the details of the way
Mr Kapel recorded information;
(o) He uses his diary as a prompt rather than as a record; and where changes are
made during the day, such as urgent meetings, or
where meetings have been
cancelled, this may not be recorded in the diary;
(p) He does not use his diary to note matters or detail of matters discussed at
meetings; and
(q) He agreed that he would provide access to the Premier to his diary if
requested and presumed that Mr Kapel would have done the
23 Mr Nutt confirmed that all freedom of information
requests made to the OTP are handled by a senior FOI Officer, who is an adviser.
The FOI officer will be either, appointed under the PA Act or, seconded from the
public service.
will be referred by the Department to the OTP, where they should properly be
dealt with within the OTP. FOI requests which
relate to documents in the
possession of the Department may also be referred to the OTP for noting, within
the FOI regime, in which
case they may be drawn to the attention of the Chief of
Staff, who in turn may alert the Premier about such matters prior to the
being processed by the Department.
Nutt would not describe there to be any overlap of functions between the OTP and
the Department. However, one aspect of the OTP’s
role is to interact with
Departmental officers. In the case of Parliamentary questions on notice, the
Department will generally
prepare material for consideration by the Premier.
The Chief of Staff may also provide advice for consideration by the
LEGISLATIVE REGIME
3(1) of the FOI Act sets out its objects as follows:
The object of
this Act is to extend as far as possible the right of the community to access to
information in the possession of the
Government of Victoria and other bodies
constituted under the law of Victoria for certain public purposes by—
(a) making available to the public information about the operations of
agencies and, in particular, ensuring that rules and practices
affecting members
of the public in their dealings with agencies are readily available to persons
affected by those rules and practices;
(b) creating a general right of access to information in documentary form in
the possession of Ministers and agencies limited only
by exceptions and
exemptions necessary for the protection of essential public interests and the
private and business affairs of persons
in respect of whom information is
collected and held by agencies.
3(2) of the FOI Act further provides:
It is the intention of the
Parliament that the provisions of this Act shall be interpreted so as to further
the object set out in
subsection (1) and that any discretions conferred by this
Act shall be exercised as far as possible so as to facilitate and promote,
promptly and at the lowest reasonable cost, the disclosure of information.
Accordingly,
it is plain that Parliament intended to give members of the public access to
information held by the Government and other
public bodies; and that the
legislation be interpreted so as to further this objective. A member of the
public therefore has a right
of access to information, unless the FOI Act
expressly or by necessary implication, provides otherwise.
Respondent’s
Counsel highlighted certain principles of statutory interpretation, for the
purpose of this Application. In particular:
Interpretation of Legislation Act
(Vic) provides
In the interpretation of a provision of an Act or
subordinate instrument—
(a) a construction that would promote the purpose or object underlying the
Act or subordinate instrument (whether or not that purpose
or object is
expressly stated in the Act or subordinate instrument) shall be preferred to a
construction that would not promote that
purpose or object; and
(b) The High Court has recognised that the long title of an Act may assist in
both identifying the purpose of an Act, as well as
giving meaning to
provisions;
(c) The long title of the FOI Act is:
An Act to give the Members
of Public Rights of Access to Official Documents of the Government of Victoria
and of its Agencies and
(d) The purpose of s 13(b) of the FOI Act is to provide access to ‘an
Official of a Minister’, as opposed to
documents; and
(e) The Tribunal must construe the text, context and purpose of the relevant
legislation. In
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ stated at
[69] The primary object of statutory construction is to
construe the relevant provision so that it is consistent with the language
purpose of all the provisions of the statute. The meaning of the provision must
be determined “by reference to the language
of the instrument viewed as a
Commissioner for Railways (NSW) v Agalianos
Dixon CJ pointed out that ‘the context, the general purpose and
policy of a provision and its consistency and fairness are
surer guides to its
meaning than the logic with which it is constructed’. Thus, the process
of construction must always begin
by examining the context of the provision that
is being construed.
[70] A legislative instrument must be construed on the prima facie basis
that its provisions are intended to give effect to harmonious
goals. Where
conflict appears to arise from the language of particular provisions, the
conflict must be alleviated, so far as possible,
by adjusting the meaning of the
competing provisions to achieve that result which will best give effect to the
purpose and language
of those provisions while maintaining the unity of all the
statutory provisions. Reconciling conflicting provisions will often require
court “to determine which is the leading provision and which the
subordinate provision, and which must give way to the
other”. Only by
determining the hierarchy of the provisions will it be possible in many cases to
give each provision the meaning
which best gives effect to its purpose and
language while maintaining the unity of the statutory scheme.
[71] Furthermore, a court construing a statutory provision must strive to
give meaning to every word of the provision. In
The Commonwealth v Baume
Griffith CJ cited
R v Berchet
to support the proposition that
it was “a known rule in the interpretation of Statutes that such a sense
is to be made upon
the whole as that no clause, sentence, or word shall prove
superfluous, void, or insignificant, if by any other construction they
be made useful and pertinent”.
I will be guided by these and other relevant
principles.
RELEVANT STATUTORY PROVISIONS
Section 13 of the FOI Act
13 of the FOI Act provides:
Subject to this Act, every person has a
legally enforceable right to obtain access in accordance with this Act to
(a) a document of an agency, other than an exempt document; or
(b) an Official document of a Minister, other than an exempt document.
FOI Act therefore identifies two categories of documents over which every person
has a legally enforceable right to obtain access,
subject to any
exemptions.
term ‘exempt document’ is defined in s 5(1) and
(a) a document which, by virtue of a provision of Part IV,
is an exempt document; or
(b) an Official document of a Minister that contains some matter that does
not relate to the affairs of an agency or of a department.
a document must fall within the meaning of either a ‘document of an
agency’ or an ‘Official document of a
Minister’ to invoke s 13
of the FOI Act. Once a document qualifies in either respect, it will then be
relevant to enquire
whether the document falls within the meaning of an
‘exempt document’.
25 of the FOI Act provides to the effect that where a document contains some
exempt material then, where practicable, access
shall be granted to a copy of
the document with such exempt material deleted.
‘Document of an agency’
5(1) of the FOI Act provides:
Document of an agency
document of the agency
means a document in the possession of an
agency, or in the possession of the agency concerned, as the case requires,
whether created
in the agency or received in the agency.
5(1) of the FOI Act defines ‘agency’ thus:
department, council or a prescribed authority.
is common ground that the Office of the Premier is neither a department, nor a
council, nor a prescribed
Accordingly, the
Document is not a ‘document of an agency.’
‘Official document of a Minister’
5(1) of the FOI Act provides:
Official document of a
Official document of the Minister
document in the possession of a Minister, or in the possession of the Minister
concerned, as the case requires, that relates
to the affairs of an agency, and,
for the purposes of this interpretation, a Minister shall be deemed to be in
possession of a document
that has passed from his possession if he is entitled
to access the document and the document is not a document of an agency ...
Accordingly,
the term ‘Official document of a Minister’ embodies two components
or limbs. The relevant document must be:
possession of a/the Minister
to the affairs of an agency
dealing with each of these limbs, I note that the Respondent sought to rely upon
the word ‘Official’ in the expression
document’ as denoting documents of a specific type, namely those that have
the character of being properly
authorised in some way, by a Minister. No
authority was cited for this interpretation and I could find none, either in the
law or in the relevant Second Reading
or Explanatory Memorandum
for the FOI Bill.
13(a) refers to ‘document of an agency’; in contrast to s 13(b)
which refers to ‘Official document of a
Minister.’ As already
indicated, the later expression embodies two components:
‘possession’ (actual or deemed)
by the Minister; and ‘relates
to the affairs of an agency’. When both components are satisfied we have
‘an Official
document of a Minister’. There is no notion of
explicit authorisation of the document; and no requirement that a Minister
involved in the creation or maintenance of the document.
in the possession of a Minister
Respondent advanced a construction of the first limb which relied upon the
Minister being in possession of a document in a Ministerial
capacity or
‘qua Minister’. The Respondent further submitted that the second
limb, ‘and relates to the affairs
of an agency,’ must then operate
as a limiting factor, effectively creating a sub set of documents which
constitute an Official
document of the Minister. In my view, such distinction
is illusory and relies upon a somewhat tortured and certainly unnecessary
interpretation of the first limb.
my view, the Applicant correctly described the intended operation of the above
definition. The first limb of the definition clearly
‘possession’ or deemed possession, by a person who holds the
position of a Minister of the Crown. The second
limb relates to the capacity in
which the relevant document comes into the possession of a Minister.
Furthermore, in my view, earlier
decisions of the Tribunal are entirely
consistent with this approach to the definition of ‘Official document of a
Respondent submitted to the effect that ‘Minister’, within the FOI
Act, does not extend to Ministerial staff. Accordingly,
a document created by a
Chief of Staff for his own purposes cannot constitute an ‘Official
document of a Minister’ as
any possession or deemed possession (by the
Minister) did not arise in the context of the Minister exercising Ministerial
In my view, this approach is also flawed.
a document is or becomes an ‘Official document of a Minister’, does
not depend upon who created the document in
the first instance or whether the
document ever falls into the possession of an agency. Once a document is in, or
deemed to be in,
the possession of a Minister, the question arises as to in what
capacity the Minister possesses such document.
Re Schubert v Department of Premier and
Senior Member Megay,
when considering the definition of ‘Official document of a Minister’
in s 5(1) of the FOI Act, noted
Over the years there has been
developed the concept of constructive possession, an interpretation more in
keeping with the objects
of the legislation and its beneficial character than
might apply elsewhere...
This notion of the wider interpretation is to be found in an early case in
this Tribunal,
Re Guide Dog Owners and Friends Association and Northern
Thanet Pty Ltd and Commissioner for Corporate Affairs
(1988) 2 VAR 405.
408, Judge Jones stated that: “in my view, having regard to the scheme and
objects of the Act, possession embraces legal
or constructive possession; that
is a right and power to deal with the document in question. It is not confined
to actual or physical
possession. Such a construction is, in my view,
consistent with decisions of the Tribunal where it has regarded documents in the
control of an agency as being documents of the agency”.
endorse these comments and further note that such broad construction is
consistent with the further qualification contained in the
definition:
...a Minister shall be deemed to be in possession of a
document that has passed from his possession if he is entitled to access to
document and the document is not a document of an agency.
Accordingly,
it follows for the purpose of this Application, that the Premier will be deemed
by s 5(1) to be in possession of the
Document if he:
(a) is entitled
to access to the document; and
Document is not a ‘document of an agency’ as defined by s 5(1) of
entitled to access to the document
a Minister is entitled to access a document is ultimately a question of fact, to
be determined by the Tribunal on a case by
case basis. The relevant
circumstances relied upon by the Applicant were as follows:
Premier’s and Mr Kapel’s respective roles within the Office –
that is Minister and Ministerial adviser;
(b) Mr Kapel
created the diary in the performance of his duties within the Office;
(c) Statements
in the witness statement of Mr Tony Nutt, filed by the Respondent,
...ministerial staff ... must only act in
accordance with the instructions of their Minister or the Premier, as the case
The purposes and function of the Document was to assist Mr Kapel to manage
his time in performing his duties as Chief of Staff
(d) Mr Nutt agreed under cross-examination that the Premier was entitled to
access his diary and he assumed that the same situation
would have pertained
between the Premier and Mr Kapel’s diary.
my view, by reason of the nature, content and purpose of the diary, the Premier
was entitled to access the diary and any part of
it, and it was not contested
relates to the affairs of an agency
affairs of an agency include anything that could be considered the business of
government or the exercise by a Minister of his
or her Ministerial
Applicant submitted that the phrase ‘relates to the affairs of an
agency’ should be construed broadly, so as to mean
‘relates in any
way to any of the affairs of any agency’. I agree.
Ministerial
capacity and all that relates to that role, are synonymous with the affairs of
an agency. While there may be specific
statutory discretions vested in a
Minister, it is only through a relevant agency that Ministerial functions,
duties or other statutory
discretions, can be performed. It is only for the
purpose of the second limb that one has regard to definitions of
and relevant
should be noted at this point that ‘relates to the affairs of an
agency’ in relation to a particular document, is not
limited to an agency
within the relevant Minister’s area of responsibility, but extends to any
v Office of the Premier
concerned an
application to the OTP (as well as all other Ministerial offices) for release of
media plans. The request was denied
on the basis that the documents were
exempt. Before the Tribunal, the respondent claimed that the documents contained
material of
a political nature and were not Official documents of a Minister or
alternatively did not relate to the affairs of an agency or a
department.
OTP employed 22 media advisers who were each allocated to a Ministerial
Portfolio, for which they prepared a weekly draft media
plan. From these were
prepared a master media plan by the Head of Communications and Principal Adviser
Media, in the OTP.
The master media plan would set out the
particular media focus or engagements of the Premier and each Minister each
Neither the individual media plans nor the master media plans were circulated
or distributed outside the Office of the
Honour Judge Hampel Vice President, considered the phrase ‘relates to the
affairs of an agency’ in s 5(1) of the FOI
Act and concluded that the
evidence in that case made it clear that:
...there was a
considerable overlap between the business of government and the promotion of the
political image of the government
Honour accepted that the documents were not documents of an agency, as they were
prepared by Ministerial Advisers within the OTP
and remained in their
possession.
Honour further accepted that the documents were in the possession, or deemed
possession, of the Minister, being provided to Ministers
each week for
consideration in Cabinet meetings.
Re Said and John Dawkins
the tribunals
distinguished between documents held by a Minister, qua Minister, and documents
held in a private capacity
the Minister’s capacity as a member of a political party, or a local
However, as Her Honour
Judge Hampel identified in the
case, there may be documents which
are in the capacity of a Minister, qua Minister, which serve multiple
Honour noted that one of the documents sought in the
...included matters relevant to the Minister’s
activities as a local member, and member of a political party. It also included
matters relevant to the exercise of his Ministerial functions as Minister for
Planning ...
If any final plans contain like matters, even if sought to be addressed in a
manner designed to ‘optimise political opportunities
government’ and ‘promote the political image of the government in
the community’, they would, in my view,
contain matters which would also
relate to the affairs of an
conclusion, Her Honour was not satisfied that it was apparent from the nature of
the documents that they were exempt and was not
satisfied that it would not be
practicable to grant access to edited copies, excluding any exempt parts.
Applicant relied upon the reasoning in the
case in support of the
proposition that whenever a document contains matter that relates to a
Minister’s exercise of Ministerial
functions, the document will also
relate to the affairs of any
the Respondent submitted that the
case does not stand for the test
advanced by the Applicant and contended that the test applied by Her Honour was
that: where a document
contained material
Minister’s exercise of his functions, in his capacity as a Minister, such
a document relates to the affairs of an agency;
and not that: whenever a
document contains matter that
to a Minister’s exercise of
Ministerial functions, the document will also relate to the affairs of any
agency. In my view,
this distinction is untenable and cannot be ascertained
from a careful reading of Her Honour’s
indicated above, whenever a document contains matter that relates to a
Minister’s exercise of Ministerial functions, the
document will also
relate to the affairs of an agency. The fact that such document may also be of
a party political nature does
not preclude that matter from also relating to the
affairs of an agency for the purposes of the Act.
appears clear from Mr Nutt’s witness statement that the Office of the
Premier supports and serves the Premier in the Premier’s
exercise of
Ministerial functions. The Chief of Staff only acts upon the instructions of
the Premier and given the enormous demands
upon a Premier’s time, the
Chief of Staff will frequently attend meetings on behalf of the Premier. In
particular, Mr Nutt
states that:
The functions of the OTP are to
support and serve the Premier in his various capacities, including:
... in his ministerial role as head of the government and Minister for the
also appears that Mr Kapel, as manager of the Office of the Premier, was
directly involved in this support and service of the Premier.
Nutt’s statement further notes that:
As Chief of Staff to the
Premier, I manage the OTP;
Mr Kapel’s duties and responsibilities as Chief of Staff were the same
as my duties and responsibilities ... save for one difference.
duties and responsibilities did not involve direction of the Cabinet Office
follows that Mr Kapel’s diary includes entries directly related to his
(and the OTP’s) support and service of the Premier
in the Premier’s
Ministerial capacity. My examination of the Document also confirms this view.
In this regard, Mr Nutt stated
Mr Kapel’s diary during
the relevant period relates to appointments made in his role as Chief of Staff
to the Premier;
Mr Kapel’s diary was used by Mr Kapel to manage his time in performing
his duties as Chief of Staff by recording his intentions
as to future
activities.
accept the Applicant’s submission that, given that Mr Kapel used his diary
to manage his time in performing those duties,
the diary itself must also relate
to the affairs of an agency or agencies under the Act.
Furthermore,
I accept that, the fact that Mr Kapel was a Ministerial adviser does not, of
itself, preclude the contents of his diary
from relating to the affairs of an
is no question that a Ministerial adviser performs a separate and distinct
function to a public servant. However, as readily
identified by Her Honour
Judge Hampel in the
case, there can be an overlap in the
performance of the respective functions. The ‘value added’ by the
political acumen
of a Ministerial adviser, does not render the subject matter
any less part of a Minister’s Ministerial responsibilities, which
to the affairs of an agency.
is uncontroversial that where a document is created or received by an agency and
then provided to a Minister, then the document
relates to the affairs of an
agency because necessarily something has been done within an agency in relation
to that document (even
if that act is only providing it to a Minister).
Equally, any document in the possession of a Minister, directing an agency to
an action, relates to the affairs of an agency, because it concerns
what is actually taking place within the agency.
there is no basis for limiting the scope of ‘Official document of a
Minister’ to these kinds of examples. Consistent
with the stated purposes
of the FOI Act, the concept of ‘possession’, for the purposes of s
5(1), should be broadly applied
and extend to any document with which the
Minister has a right or the power to access or deal. Furthermore, the
expression ‘relates
to the affairs of an agency’ does not connote
direct involvement by an agency in the document per se, but rather whether the
document records any act, matter or event which falls within the
Minister’s responsibilities as a Minister of the Crown.
Ultimately,
the question of whether a document relates to the affairs of an agency is a
question of fact that requires an analysis
of the document’s actual
most situations it will be readily ascertainable, from the nature and content of
a document, whether it is in the possession of
a Minister for a purpose outside
of his/her Ministerial capacity. Obvious examples acknowledged in earlier
Tribunal decisions include
a document:
(a) relating to
the Minister’s private affairs;
(b) received
solely in his capacity as a member of a political party; or
(c) relating to
the administration of his/her electoral office.
Wilson v Department of Premier and
the Tribunal
was concerned with a request to disclose records relating to the Premier’s
Business Advisory Body or Business Round
Table Group. The respondent
(Department of Premier and Cabinet) had acceded to the original request in part
and claimed exemption,
on various grounds, to the remaining documents, which
decision was affirmed by Senior Member Ball.
respondent in
case had submitted, in relation to one of
the documents, that part of the document was not in the possession of the
as a Minister
but in his capacity as member of a political
party. Senior Member Ball accepted the following submission made on behalf of
Respondent:
The concept of ‘an Official document of a
Minister’ and the qualification that a document must relate to the affairs
an agency would appear to import a distinction between a document in the
possession of the Minister as a Minister and a document
in the possession of a
Minister in some other capacity, such as his or her capacity as a member or
officeholder of a political party
or as a local member. Were it otherwise, all
manner of party political or constituency documents in the possession of
Ministers might
be subject to FOI, a result that was plainly not intended...
interpretation proffered by the respondent and endorsed by Senior Member Ball in
case was rejected by the Respondent in the current case.
In my view, there was no misunderstanding on the part of the Senior Member,
expressed the essence of the respondent’s submission as
Respondent submitted that the heading to the last seven lines of an attachment
to that document was not in the possession of the
as a Minister
but in his capacity as a member of a political party. After examining the
relevant document the Tribunal accepts that such a distinction
can be drawn and
accepts the submission of the Respondent [as quoted above]...
Re Schubert v Department of Premier and
Senior Member
Megay, was concerned with an application for release of the computerised
appointment diary of the Premier over a period
of 12 months. After finding that
s 13(a) was not satisfied, the Tribunal considered whether the document
qualified for release under
s 13(b). The reasoning in
case was criticised by the Respondent in the current case on the basis that
the Senior Member apparently interpreted an incorrect
formulation of ‘an
Official document of a Minister’. While it is true that the definition of
‘Official document
of a Minister’ appears to have been
mis-transcribed in the reasons for decision, by the omission of the words
‘and relates
to the affairs of an
in my view, there
is no doubt that the Senior Member had regard to the correct wording of the
definition. When the Senior Member
turned her mind to s 13(b) she noted
There is no doubt in my mind that the Premier's diary is an
Official document of a Minister and there was no argument on the point.
must be considered is whether there is contained in that Official document
“some matter that does not relate to the affairs
of an agency or of a
department”.
examining a sample of the diary, the Senior Member formed the view that it did
contain some exempt matter. However, in view
of the 12 month period to which
the request related, it would not be practicable to excise such exempt
material...
Without considerable effort, enquiry, editing and
Accordingly, access was denied because it was not practicable to release an
edited version. In my view, as discussed further below,
similar concerns would
not preclude the release of an edited version of the Document in this case.
my view, the content of the Document clearly includes material relevant to the
Premier’s exercise of his functions in his
various Ministerial capacities.
In evidence, Mr Nutt confirmed that he only ever acted on the instructions of
the Premier and in
meetings may on occasions represent the Premier and
communicate instructions given to him by the Premier.
completeness, I will refer to the following authorities relied upon by the
Respondent.
North Sydney Council v Ligon 302 Pty
the High Court
considered the scope of s 77(1) of the
Environmental Planning and Assessment
which provided in part:
development application may be made only by:
(a) the owner of the land to which the development application
...[emphasis added]
development application was lodged in respect of land, access to which included
rights of way across an adjoining parcel of land.
The High Court held that the
absence of consent by the adjoining landowner was not a proper ground for the
council to withhold its
consent. The subject development was not proposed to be
carried out on the adjoining land and therefore did not ‘relate’
such land. In reaching this construction, the Court made specific reference to
the purpose of the Act, noting that it is concerned
with the environment and the
amenities of various areas of the State. It is not concerned with the
regulation of private rights
of ownership, but with the physical use made of, or
affecting, the topographical entity of land.
Respondent sought to reason from
that the word
‘relates’ used in conjunction with the word ‘affairs’
has the affect of limiting the scope
of documents in the possession of a
Minister to a sub-category of that broader class. I do not agree that such
reasoning flows from
Indeed, both
to which the
Respondent also referred, highlight the importance of interpreting words and
phrases in the context of the particular
legislation.
New South Wales Crime Commission v
Greg James J had to
determine the intended scope of the word ‘affairs,’ where it
appeared in the expression ‘concerning
the affairs of the owner’ in
s 12(1) of the
Criminal Assets Recovery Act
Honour noted the breadth of various dictionary
and after examining in
detail the context of the relevant section, His Honour concluded
...the ‘affairs’ of which the section speaks are
those activities of persons suspected of serious crime related activity
property is restrained by a restraining order under the Act which activities
might affect the making of further orders under
reasoning in both
cases clarify why a narrow
interpretation of ‘relates’ and ‘affairs’ respectively
was consistent with the
purpose of the relevant legislation in which those terms
appeared. By contract, in this case, there is no identified mischief or
inconsistency in giving the second limb of the definition, the broadest
operation consistent with a Minister’s capacity as
a Minister.
is acknowledged that while there is broadly similar legislation to the FOI Act
in other Australian jurisdictions, decisions concerning
such legislation may be
of limited utility where the schemes are relevantly
However, certain
observations made in
Parnell v Office of the Premier of
are equally applicable
to the current case.
case concerned an application for access to certain documents, including
certain entries in the Premier’s diary on a particular
application in respect of the diary entries was initially refused on the basis
that the document did not fall within the
definition of ‘a
Minister’s document.’
3.6.1 of the
Freedom of Information Act
that a Minister’s document means:
a document which is held by
a Minister... and that relates to the affairs of an agency; but does not include
an agency’s document.
respondent in
case submitted that a Minister’s
document did not include: personal affairs; duties as a member of Parliament;
duties as a
member of a political party; and duties as leader of that party.
The respondent provided affidavit material to the effect that the
(a) was managed
by the Premier’s Private Secretary;
(b) included
all of the Premier’s proposed appointments and activities for each day,
including: his responsibilities as Premier;
as member for his electorate; as
leader of his party; and as a private citizen;
(c) included a
majority of meetings and events which related to issues across portfolios beyond
those for which he has direct responsibility;
(d) may not
reflect what the Premier actually did, as changes may not be
respondent conceded that the Premier’s diary was a ‘Minister’s
document’ to the extent that the entries
relate to information in relation
to the Premier’s appointments as Minister responsible for the Department
of Premier and Cabinet;
and the Community Relations Commission; and Premier of
NSW; but not as member for his electorate; leader of the party; or as a private
citizen. The NSW Administrative Decisions Tribunal (‘ADT’) affirmed
this interpretation, but extended the ambit of
‘a Minister’s
document’ to the appointments concerning agencies for which the Premier
was not the responsible Minister.
In my view, this interpretation has equal
application to the definition of ‘Official document of a Minister’
ADT denied access to the requested diary entries by reason that they only
related to appointments in the Premier’s capacity
as member of the
with its failure to produce the Document at the hearing, the Respondent sought
to resist the Application on the basis that
no question of onus arises in terms
of s 55, by reason that the Tribunal is faced with a question of law,
specifically, statutory
construction and whether the diary (and Document)
constitutes ‘an Official document of a Minister’.
55 of the FOI Act provides:
(1) In proceedings under this Part by virtue of
section 12, the principal officer upon whom the notice was served has the
establishing that the document concerned is not a document as described
in section 8(1) or section 11(1).
(2) In proceedings under this Part, the agency or Minister to which or to
whom the request was made has the onus of establishing that
a decision given in
respect of the request was justified or that the Tribunal should give a decision
adverse to the applicant.
my view, the Respondent is subject to s 55 for the purpose of this Application.
The position adopted by the Respondent is both
untenable and in any event not
consistent with the approach apparently taken by the original decision-maker, or
the approach taken
at the hearing. In particular:
indicated above, there is at the very least a strong suggestion in the
decision-maker’s letter of 27 January, 2012 that
he had examined the
Document prior to making a determination; and
Respondent relied upon evidence of the current Chief of Staff as to the nature
and content of the diary which he keeps, in
support of its statutory
construction.
there was no direct evidence as to the nature of the actual contents of Mr
Kapel’s diary or the manner in which he
used and relied upon it. In my
view, this was inexcusable.
Kapel was still Chief of Staff both at the time of the original request [15
November 2011] and at the time when the belated determination
was made [27
January 2012]. He was also still available to the Respondent at the time when
it filed a Statement pursuant to s 49
VCAT Act [6 March 2012] and according to
Mr Nutt did not depart for overseas until sometime early May 2012. Accordingly,
ample time within which the Respondent could have obtained a statement
from Mr Kapel and indeed a statement from Ms Carney, who was
responsible for making entries in the diary. In my view, the Respondent has not
taken all reasonable steps to discharge
the onus imposed by s 55.
my view, the Document should have been examined by the original decision-maker,
if indeed it was not; and it should have been produced
to the Tribunal at the
commencement of the hearing as previously requested.
THE DOCUMENT
examination of the Document, made available after the hearing, confirms that
entries have been made in a manner consistent with
the evidence given by Mr Nutt
in relation to his own diary. Some entries have more description as to the
nature and purpose of a
particular meeting. No entries appear for the period
Tuesday 1 February to Tuesday 8 February 2011 inclusive. Entries otherwise
appear to encompass:
(a) Matters of
a clearly personal nature;
(c) Meetings
apparently concerning Government business;
(d) Variously
described meetings including and/or chaired by the Premier;
(e) Meetings
with third parties, including media personnel; and foreign dignitaries; some
also including the Premier;
(f) Airline
flight bookings;
(g) Meetings
with other Ministers; and
parties agreed that the Document is (deemed to be) in the possession of the
Minister (in this case the Premier) and is also not
a document of an
entry in the Document should properly be considered as a separate document, for
the purpose of s 13 of the FOI Act.
that the Document, which I have now examined, is typical of the diary of Mr
Kapel as the Premier’s Chief of Staff,
I find that such diary and the
Document within that diary, recorded entries of proposed appointments and other
notations, which related
to the daily management of the Chief of Staff’s
time, as well as recording certain events concerning the Premier specifically
the Government in general.
examination of the Document reveals certain entries which are clearly not
relevant to the Premier’s capacity as Premier or
other Minister of the
Crown, and accordingly do not relate to the affairs of an agency. These are
entries which:
apparently personal in nature;
(b) relate to
the internal administration of the OTP, such as staff meetings and staff
appointments;
possibly relate to the affairs of the Premier’s electoral office;
possibly relate to the Premier’s membership or leadership of his political
possibly relate to the administration of the Parliament.
are other entries which, on their face, do or could relate to the affairs of an
agency. Those entries which do not fall under
one of the preceding sub
paragraphs, constitute an ‘Official document of the Minister’ which
qualify for release under
s 13(b) of the FOI Act, subject only to any applicable
claimed exemptions.
Respondent bears the onus of proving either that the entry falls outside of the
ambit of Ministerial capacity or that the entry
otherwise qualifies for
my view, for the purpose of this Application, it is irrelevant
Document originates from an agency or constitutes a direction to an agency;
Document was ever provided to an agency or a public servant;
(c) The Premier
was involved in or contributed to the entries made in the Document;
(d) The Premier
attended any particular appointment entered in the Document;
(e) The Premier
ever accessed the diary or the Document, although it is quite conceivable, as
submitted by the Applicant, that the
Premier may need to access the diary to
verify the timing of meetings attended by the Chief of Staff, on his behalf, and
(f) The diary
entry contains any substantive information about the content of any meeting;
that is, the diary entries do not need
to constitute stand alone documents;
recorded meeting was in fact cancelled or not attended by the Chief of
activities of the OTP and the role performed by the Chief of Staff, on behalf of
and subject to the instructions of the Premier,
clearly compliment the functions
of the Departments for which the Premier is vested with Ministerial
responsibilities, as well as
agencies for which other Ministers bear Ministerial
responsibility. The critical determinant of whether the diary entries in this
case relate to the affairs of an agency are whether the Chief of Staff, by the
diary entry, has recorded an attendance or other event
which is referable to the
Ministerial responsibilities of the Premier or any other Minister, as a Minister
of the Crown.
Accordingly,
the range of entries which qualify for release include:
(a) attendances
involving a range of stakeholders, both with and without the Premier; and both
with and without public servants;
(b) interaction
with public servants, both with and without the Premier;
(c) attendances
involving Parliamentary colleagues; the media, unions; community, business and
ethnic parties and organisations;
(d) attendances
involving foreign dignitaries, including politicians and diplomats;
entries which may record events, whether or not attended by the Chief of Staff;
(f) entries in
the nature of descriptions, observations or outcomes.
I am satisfied from an examination of the Document that it would be practicable
to grant access to an edited copy of the
Document, if need be.
decision on behalf of the Minister to refuse to grant access to the Document
under s 13(b) will be set aside. The request will
be remitted to the Office of
the Premier for the Minister or his delegate to deal with in accordance with s
13 and s 25.
Her Honour Judge Jenkins Vice President
As defined by s 5 of the FOI
Mr Nutt conceded under
cross-examination that he did not have any particular knowledge of how Mr Kapel
managed his diary but could
only give general evidence based on his discussions
with Ms Carney.
For example, see
v Googoorewon Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 16
(1993) 176 CLR 471
, 477 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson,
Gaudron and McHugh JJ) where the High Court was interpreting the purpose of the
Encroachment of Buildings Act
The University of
Melbourne v Robinson
[1993] VicRp 67
[1993] 2 VR 177
, Brooking J at 178 and in
of Premier and Cabinet v Birrell (No 2)
[1990] VicRp 5
[1990] VR 51
, Murphy J at 53,
reference was made to the long title in construing the FOI Act.
Section 5(1) defines
department to mean a department within the meaning of
Administration Act
or an office specified in
section 16(1)
that Act. Section 5(1) defines council to have the same meaning as in
Local Government Act
Section 5(1)
prescribed authority to be a body corporate established by an Act or by the
Governor in Council or by a Minister, or to be
a body declared by the
regulations to be a prescribed authority, as to which see
Information Regulations
Freedom of Information Bill
Second Reading Speech 14 October 1982 Hansard Legislative Assembly
Freedom Of Information Bill
Notes of Clauses 17.12.1982.
See the cases of Wilson,
Schubert and Davis herein.
(2001) 19 VAR 35
Interpretation of Legislation Act
Defined in s 5 of the FOI
[2011] VCAT 1629.
Paras 20 & 21.
Para 28 & 29.
[1993] AATA 9
(1993) 30 ALD 242.
Such as a Minister’s
private rate notice for his home or the registration papers for a private motor
Office of the Premier
[2011] VCAT 1629
at para 54 per Hampel J.
Davis v Office of the
[2011] VCAT 1629
At [55] to [56].
[2001] VCAT 1769.
At para 25.
(2001) 19 VAR 35
Reproduced under paragraph
17 of the decision.
Paragraph 40.
[1996] HCA 20
(1996) 185 CLR 470 (Brennan
CJ, Dawson, Toohey, McHugh and Gummow JJ).
[2000] NSWSC 591
(2000) 49 NSWLR 465.
At para 21.
At 479 para 62.
For example,
Ex parte Victorian Public Service Board
[1985] VicRp 81
[1985] VR 825
, 831 (Kaye J);
Parnell v Office of the Premier of New South Wales
[2009] NSWADT 42
to [22], [25], [30].
[2009] NSWADT 42.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (350 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter