URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2006/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
07-026 [2006] VMHRB 5 (16 August 2006)
In the review of P
An involuntary patient at Maroondah Hospital Psychiatric Service
[2006] VMHRB
Date of Hearing:
16 August 2006
Board Members
Dr H Chopra
Involuntary patient –
Mental Health Act 1986
(2)- review of treatment plans – the wishes of the patient
–nature and degree of risk of treatment
P was an involuntary patient on a community treatment order made on 5 July
2006. The Board conducted an initial review of his involuntary
Delaney and Ms Leslie, P’s legal representatives, made submissions to the
Board in relation to the statutory criteria.
In relation to
section 8(1)(a)
was submitted that P’s situation was one where there was not a mental
illness, but the actions of a person who was responding
to a situational crisis.
In relation to
section 8(1)(c)
, the Board must weigh the treatment benefits with
the negative side effects. It was submitted that P was experiencing significant
side effects whilst being treated with flupenthixol, which outweighed the
benefits, and there must be some proportionality when considering
provision. It was submitted that
section 8(1)(e)
was not met because P had
support mechanisms in place and could be treated in a less restrictive manner.
In the alternate, it was submitted that the Board should order a review of
the treatment plan pursuant to
section 35A(2)
of the Act as the treatment plan
did not comply with
section 19A.
It was argued that the authorised psychiatrist
had not taken into account P’s wishes especially in relation to the depot
and that nature and degree of risks with the treatment such as
drowsiness and weight gain.
(1) The Board accepted that, prior to admission, P was experiencing stress as
a result of harassment and assaults. However, the Board
also accepted the
evidence that the intensity of P’s beliefs reflected paranoia and
delusional thinking. On the evidence before
it, the Board accepted that P had a
medical condition and that it manifested as a significant disturbance of thought
(2) The Board considered that there was insufficient evidence to be satisfied
that P was a threat to others at this point, but was
satisfied that P’s
metal illness required treatment and that without that treatment there would be
a deterioration in his condition.
Although he was experiencing negative side
effects of the medication, there had been some improvement in his mental state
and a reduction
in his delusions and distress.
(3) The Board concluded that given P’s ambivalence about the current
diagnosis and the medication, the community treatment order
provided a structure
and monitoring for P to receive the treatment he required, and that it was
necessary to prevent a deterioration
in his mental state. The Board concluded
that the community treatment order was necessary for P’s health.
(4) The Board’s view was that given that P does not accept that he has
a mental illness and was not accepting and engaging with
the current treatment,
it was not possible to be satisfied that P would accept and receive adequate
treatment for his condition without
the community treatment order. The community
treatment order was the least restrictive manner for P to receive the treatment
he requires.
(5) Although
section 19A(2)(a)
requires that the authorised psychiatrist must
take into account
the wishes of the patient, it does not require that the
treatment plan reflect or accede to the wishes of the patient.
(6) It was clear that the treating team’s insistence on continuing
treatment with medication was at odds with P’s expressed
wishes. In cases
such as this, where the patient does not accept the treatment, the treating team
is in a difficult position because
the treatment plan cannot accord with the
wishes of the patient. The Board concluded that P’s views were considered
into account to the extent possible given his attitude to
(7) The evidence, including Dr KY’s report and the clinical notes,
indicate that the side effects of the treatment were part
of the treating
team’s considerations. The Board was satisfied that this met the
requirement that the authorised psychiatrist
take into account the matters in
section 19A(2)(e).
(8) The Board was satisfied that the treatment plan took into account all of
the matters required by
section 19A(2).
Accordingly the Board was satisfied
that the authorised psychiatrist had complied with
in preparing the
treatment plan.
Review of involuntary status – The Board found the continued treatment
of P as an involuntary patient was necessary.
P was represented by Ms C Leslie and Ms S Delaney, of the Mental Health
Legal Centre Inc.
Date of Decision:
16 August 2006
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
Maroondah Hospital Psychiatric Service
HEARING NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
16 August 2006
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER REVIEW:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the treatment of P as an involuntary patient subject
to a community treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: T Barty
Community Member: C Hayes
Psychiatrist Member: Dr H Chopra
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 16 August 2006:
Doctor: Dr KY
Legal Representatives: Ms Catherine Leslie and Ms Sophie Delaney of the
Mental Health Legal Centre
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was satisfied that the treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
The Board therefore confirmed the community treatment order.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
16 August 2006
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P be treated as an involuntary patient subject to a community treatment
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
1. Clinical file of P.
on Involuntary Status dated 14 August 2006, prepared by Dr KY and presented to
3. Treatment and Individual Service Plan prepared on 5 July
evidence at the hearing.
of intervention orders taken out by P as complainant and a letter from Eastern
Access Community Health (EACH) provided by
, if the Board is satisfied that a person subject to a community
treatment order does not satisfy the criteria specified in
, the Board
must discharge the person from the community treatment order. Therefore, the
Board considered:
P appear to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P subject to a
community treatment order necessary for his health
or safety (whether to prevent
a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the
protection of members
of the public; and
P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of his freedom of decision and action?
, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
P was admitted to hospital and made the subject of
an involuntary treatment order on 17 June 2006. A community treatment order was
made on 5 July 2006 for the period to 4 July 2007.
The matter came to the Board by way of a review pursuant to
section 30(1)
, which requires the Board to conduct an initial review of an involuntary
treatment order within 8 weeks after the order is made.
Submissions on behalf of P
Ms Leslie submitted to the Board that P did not
satisfy sub-sections 8(1)(a),(c) and (e) of the
. In the alternate, it was
submitted that the Board should order a review of the treatment plan pursuant to
section 35A(2)
Leslie told the Board that P had been subject to harassment and abuse over a
period of time, and that he had been robbed and physically
abused. His admission
to hospital followed a recent robbery where a person, JH, had threatened him
with a knife. P says that he does
not have a mental illness, but suffers stress
and paranoia in response to these situations. There was a previous admission
burns to P’s hands when a neighbour poured oil on him. These
situations have resulted in P feeling stressed and paranoid for
his safety and
for his belongings. He has taken steps to get an intervention order against JH.
Ms Leslie referred the Board to a previous unreported case of the Board;
01-017 (unreported decision of 30 April 2001) which involved
a person who had
been the victim of a long period of domestic violence. She submitted that
P’s situation was one where there
was not a mental illness, but the
actions of a person who was responding to a situational crisis.
In relation to
section 8(1)(c)
, the Board must weigh the treatment benefits
with the negative side effects. P is experiencing significant side effects. He
and is sleeping between 12 to 18 hours per day. He misses appointments
and is frustrated that he is forced to take medication. P
does not believe that
the flupenthixol has made any difference. He has also had some weight gain. He
is not able to return to work
because of the effects of the medication. He would
rather not have needles and does not think that the medication has made any
to his experiences of anxiety and paranoia.
Ms Leslie submitted that the risk to the person and others relevant to
section 8(1)(c)
must be real. P is no risk to himself or others, and P has taken
steps to protect himself by taking out the intervention order. Ms
provided the Board with copies of two intervention orders made on 8 August 2006.
She said that the stressors which have affected
P in the past have been
addressed by the intervention orders. JH has left P alone since the order was
Ms Leslie submitted that
section 8(1)(c)
was not met because P’s side
effects outweigh the benefits, and there must be some proportionality when
considering this provision.
Section 8(1)(e)
was not met because P had support mechanisms in place. He had
engaged well with Groundwork and had secured a job at Fire and Clay
just before
he became unwell. Ms Leslie provided a letter from EACH in support of P, which
showed that P had been a client of the
service for two years.
P will engage with CREST to assist with his independent living skills. If P
was discharged from involuntary status, he would continue
to engage with
Groundwork and CREST. If he becomes stressed and paranoid he will contact his
mother. As an example of his support
mechanisms, Ms Leslie pointed out that the
last admission occurred when EACH contacted the hospital.
In relation to
section 35A(2)
, Ms Leslie submitted that
section 19A
been complied with. The authorised psychiatrist had not taken into account
P’s wishes especially in relation to the
depot medication and that nature
and degree of risks with the treatment such as drowsiness and weight gain. There
had been no real
improvement. The Board should order a revision of the treatment
In closing submissions, Ms Leslie stated that L from EACH has acknowledged
that P needs to engage with CREST, and P will do so. If
the Board confirms the
community treatment order, it should order a revision of the treatment plan and
consider alternative beneficial
treatments.
Evidence of P
P told the Board that there had been no change in
his mental state. He was less paranoid because the people that were chasing him
were no longer doing so. The medication had not helped. He had put on weight and
had other side effects. He does not need any medication.
If he was not on a community treatment order, he would prefer not to have the
medication. He was not unwell when he came into hospital
– he was just
stressed. He has never had a mental illness.
Evidence of Dr KY
Dr KY told the Board that
he went to see P on 16 June 2006. He was aware that P had some past history with
an admission in 2003, and
that there had been some contact with psychiatric
services in 2001. He agrees that there have been incidents affecting P and that
P’s concerns were reality based. However, even taking into account the
real basis for some of P’s concerns, on that day
P’s presentation
was such that he considered that P was unwell. There were other features evident
at that time such as blunted
affect and significant formal thought disorder.
Besides the fears about his neighbours, P spoke of a conspiracy which reflected
intensity to the delusions and well systemised delusions. He referred to
“recruitment” repeatedly. He knows that P had
a difficult
relationship with his step-father but P’s thoughts about this were bizarre
in nature and indicated that there was
some magical quality.
He tried to discuss the diagnosis and treatment with P but P got angry. Based
on the interview that he conducted he was satisfied
that P was suffering from a
psychotic illness. P has been untreated since his previous admission.
Indications (from another staff
member who interviewed P about 48 hours before
he saw P) were that P stopped medication shortly after discharge. He believed
the only way to get him treated was to admit him and for P to have a period
in hospital.
He reviewed P on 13 July 2006. He felt that there had been some improvement
in his mental state, despite P’s protestations.
Referring to his notes
from 13 July 2006, there had been a shift in P’s thinking in that he was
acknowledging that something
had happened. In the days following, P told the
CATT that he would stop medication if he was not on a community treatment order.
P is on two different medications and he acknowledges that there are probably
some side effects. They had reduced the dose of Solian
and eventually will rely
on the depot medication alone, but P has only had four injections and it can
take more than six injections
before the medication reaches a therapeutic level.
If they decrease the Solian too much before the depot takes effect this may be
inadequate treatment.
P is well engaged with L, a worker at EACH. Dr Y believes that she has
supported P beyond the requirements of her job and that this
is not sustainable
as a long term support mechanism for P.
P’s stress is directly related to P’s illness. It is too early in
the treatment process to determine whether the treatment
is working. He has no
doubt that P’s neighbourhood exacerbates his situation.
When questioned by Ms Leslie, Dr Y said that he agreed that P’s
progress had been slow. Prior to his admission though, P was
distressed and there was an imminent risk. Weeks later P said that he was still
anxious but when questioned, he acknowledged
that nothing has happened since he
was out of hospital. In relation to the side effects, their response has been to
reduce the dose
slightly. They have considered diazepam and benztropine. They
are required to make clinical decisions about the side effects and
the benefits
of treatment. Drowsiness is an ongoing issue. His primary goal is to treat
P’s mental illness. The treating team
need to look at his sedation and
determine which medication is causing it, or whether it is a negative symptom of
his illness. These
issues take time to deal with and he acknowledges that they
are not quite there yet. He stated that the depot has a longer lag time,
oral medication reaches a therapeutic level much quicker.
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to an community treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or he has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board considered the exclusionary criteria in
and has decided that
these were not relevant in this case.
Section 8(1A)
states that a person is mentally ill if they have a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory. The Board considers
the person has a condition characterised by a disturbance of any one of those,
they satisfy the legal test and they are considered
to be mentally ill.
Ms Leslie submitted that P did not have a mental illness. She said that he
experienced stress and paranoia in response to a history
of threats, assault and
The Board referred to the clinical notes, and the report and oral evidence of
Dr KY. His report refers to thought disorder and well-systematised
persecutory
delusions and low mood. In his evidence to the Board, Dr KY referred to his
review of P on 16 June 2006 and described
P’s condition at that time. The
admission notes and clinical review notes confirmed Dr KY’s oral evidence.
the Board that there was an intensity to P’s delusions and
paranoia which took it beyond a response to real events.
P’s own evidence to the Board on this issue was that he was not unwell
when he came to hospital, but was merely stressed and
that he had never had a
mental illness. He was less paranoid at present not because of any treatment,
but because he had taken out
intervention orders and as a result, the defendants
named in those orders were not chasing him.
The Board accepted that prior to admission, P was experiencing stress as a
result of harassment and assaults. However, the Board also
accepted the evidence
that the intensity of P’s beliefs reflected paranoia and delusional
thinking. On the evidence before
it, the Board accepted that P had a medical
condition and that it manifested as a significant disturbance of thought and
Board was satisfied that P has a mental illness.
This criterion was therefore satisfied.
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
The Board was satisfied that P’s current medical condition is such that
he requires treatment, including the administration
of medication and monitoring
of his mental state. On the basis of his mental illness and the symptoms
experienced by P, he requires
treatment that can be obtained by being subject to
a community treatment order.
This criterion was therefore satisfied.
Because of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment
of P subject to a community treatment order necessary for his health
(whether to prevent a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or
otherwise) or for the protection of members
of the public?
Dr KY’s report said that P had told other staff that he would stop
taking oral medication once supervision stopped. If this
occurred, there was a
risk that P’s mental state would worsen, there would be further social
isolation and he would experience
distress and depression due to the persecutory
phenomena. The report also stated that prior to his most recent admission he had
sleeping with a large stick or knife nearby and that P had threatened to
kill his tormentors and the staff who put him in hospital.
Ms Leslie submitted that this criterion was not met. She told the Board that
the side effects outweigh the benefits of P’s current
The Board considers that there was insufficient evidence to be satisfied that
P was a threat to others at this point, but was satisfied
that P’s metal
illness required treatment and that without that treatment there would be a
deterioration in his condition.
Although he was experiencing negative side
effects of the medication, there had been some improvement in his mental state
and a reduction
in his delusions and distress.
The Board concluded that given P’s ambivalence about the current
diagnosis and the medication, the community treatment order
provided a structure
and monitoring for P to receive the treatment he required, and that it was
necessary to prevent a deterioration
in his mental state. The Board concluded
that the community treatment order was necessary for P’s health.
The Board was therefore satisfied that this criterion was met.
Has P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness?
Before considering whether a person is in fact consenting to treatment, the
Board must be satisfied that the person is able to consent
to treatment. In
Re the Review
of 99-567 (unreported MHRBD, 13 November 1998)
Board expressed this as follows:
“To be able to consent a patient must be aware of the extent of
their illness and be aware of its nature to the extent they
can recognize those
aspects of behaviour that are symptomatic of the existence of that illness. In
addition they must understand
the changes in symptoms that the treatment is
intended to bring about.”
The evidence of Dr KY was that P had little insight into his illness. This
was confirmed by P’s own evidence before the Board.
P explained that he
was not unwell when he came to hospital and had never had a mental illness. He
stated that he did not need medication,
it was not helping him and although he
accepted that he was less paranoid, he said that this was because his
persecutors were no
longer chasing him.
The Board was satisfied that P had little insight into his illness and the
need for treatment. He did not have an understanding of
his illness.
P was unable to consent to the necessary treatment, and accordingly, this
criterion was met.
Is P unable to receive adequate treatment for the mental
illness in a manner less restrictive of his freedom of decision and
Ms Leslie submitted that P had sufficient support in the community. He was
well engaged with EACH, Groundwork and would be referred
to CREST. The Board
noted the letter from the case manager at EACH regarding P’s involvement
with that service. At the hearing
P indicated that he was keen to commence
employment. The evidence supported Ms Leslie’s contention that P was well
with services that could support and assist P.
Dr KY’s report indicated that the EACH caseworker was P’s most
trusted social contact and that he had limited contact
with his mother and
The Board’s view was that given that P does not accept that he has a
mental illness and was not accepting and engaging with
the current treatment, it
was not possible to be satisfied that P would accept and receive adequate
treatment for his condition without
the community treatment order.
The present community treatment order is the least restrictive manner for P
to receive the treatment that he requires.
The Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient’s treatment plan, the
Board must be satisfied that the requirements of
met. The Board considered each of the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
The Board considered the treatment plan dated 5 July 2006. The plan noted the
diagnosis of schizophrenia. It included statements about
P’s current
situation, goals and strategies.
P’s treatment plan specifies the authorised psychiatrist, treating
doctor, case manager and the place that he will receive treatment.
states that progress reports will be prepared each three months.
Ms Leslie submitted that the treating team had failed to comply with
in that they had not taken into account P’s wishes and the nature and
degree of the risks of treatment. In particular, the
side effects experienced by
P had not been taken into account.
Section 19A(1)
requires that the authorised psychiatrist must prepare, review
on a regular basis and revise as required, a treatment plan for each
Section 19A(2)
states that in preparing reviewing and revising a treatment plan,
the authorised psychiatrist must take into account six matters.
Ms Leslie said
that two of these factors had not been taken into account, namely the wishes of
the patient (sub-paragraph (a)) and
the nature and degree of any significant
risks associated with the treatment or any alternative treatment (sub-paragraph
If the Board is satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has not complied
section 19A
, it may order the authorised psychiatrist to revise the
treatment plan.
section 19A(2)(a)
requires that the authorised psychiatrist must
take into account
the wishes of the patient, it does not require that the
treatment plan reflect or accede to the wishes of the patient.
The Board considered the evidence provided at the hearing by P that he did
not want the medication, and the evidence by Dr KY regarding
medication and their attempts to adjust it. It was clear that the treating
team’s insistence on continuing treatment
with medication was at odds with
P’s expressed wishes. In cases such as this, where the patient does not
accept the treatment,
the treating team is in a difficult position because the
treatment plan cannot accord with the wishes of the patient. The Board concluded
that P’s views were considered and taken into account to the extent
possible given his attitude to treatment.
With respect to
section 19A(2)(e)
and the question of whether the authorised
psychiatrist had taken into account the nature and degree of any significant
risks associated
with the treatment, the Board noted the submissions and
concerns surrounding the side effects that P was experiencing.
The evidence, including Dr Y’s report and the clinical notes, indicate
that the side effects of the treatment were part of the
treating team’s
considerations. The Board was satisfied that this met the requirement that the
authorised psychiatrist take
into account the matters in
section 19A(2)(e).
The Board was satisfied that the treatment plan took into account all of the
matters required by
section 19A(2).
Accordingly the Board was satisfied that
the authorised psychiatrist had complied with
in preparing the Treatment
Section 35A(1)(b)
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
The plan was being implemented by the clinic. As there were no apparent
barriers to its implementation, the Board was satisfied that
the plan is capable
of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
criteria were met, the Board made the determination set out
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (107 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter