URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/47.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Girl Guides Association of Victoria [1998] VADT 47 (27 July 1998)
Equal Opportunity Board
Reasons for Decision on an application for exemption under section 40 of
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
27 July 1998
Girl Guides Association of Victoria
Cate McKenzie - President
Daniel Rechtman - Member
Carmel Morfuni - Member
The Application
On 10 April 1995 Phillips Fox, Solicitors, acting for the Girl Guides
Association of Victoria (The Association), applied to this Board
exemption under section 40 of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(The Act). The
Equal Opportunity Board directed the applicant to place an advertisement in a
daily newspaper circulating throughout
Victoria, inviting interested people to
make submissions about the proposed exemption. In accordance with this
direction, an advertisement
was placed in the Age Newspaper on 23 May 1995.
The Board then set 20 July 1995 as the date for the hearing of oral
submissions in relation to the exemption. At that hearing, the
applicant was
represented by Mr Ruskin, Solicitor, of Phillips Fox. The Board has received no
other written or oral submissions.
At the hearing, Mr Ruskin advised the Board that the application was for an
exemption from s31 of the Act.
The Legislation
(1) The Board may, by notice published in the Government Gazette, grant
exemptions from any of the provisions of this Act in relation
(a) a person, or class of person;
(b) an activity, or class of activity;
(c) the circumstances referred to in section 21(5);
(d) any circumstances of a specified nature.
(2) An exemption under this section shall remain in force for a period, not
exceeding three years, specified in the notice but may
after re-examination by
the Board be renewed from time to time by the Board for a successive period not
exceeding three years.
Section 31.
Discrimination by clubs or community service organisations
(1) In this section "club" means a social, recreational, sporting or
community service club or a community service organisation which-
(a) is in occupation of any Crown land; or
(b) is directly or indirectly in receipt of financial assistance from the
State Government or a municipal council.
(2) It is unlawful for a club to discriminate against a person who is not a
member of the club on the ground of status or by reason
of the private life of
the person-
(a) by refusing, or failing to accept, that person's application for
membership; or
(b) in the terms on which it admits the person to membership.
(3) It is unlawful for a club to discriminate against a person who is a
member of the club on the ground of status or by reason of
the private life of
the person-
(a) by denying that person access or limiting that person's access to any
benefit provided by the club;
(b) by depriving that person of membership or varying terms of that person's
membership; or
(c) by subjecting that person to any other detriment.
(4) This section does not apply to discrimination by a club against a person
on the ground of the status or by reason of the private
life of the person
where the club is established-
(a) solely for persons of a different status or with a different private life
(as the case may be) to that first-mentioned person;
(b) either exists and operates principally-
(i) to prevent or reduce disadvantage suffered by persons of the status or
with the private life of persons for whom the club is established;
(ii) for the purposes of the preservation of minority culture.
(5) Nothing in sub-section (2) (b) or (3) renders unlawful discrimination on
the ground of sex if the discrimination relates to the
use or enjoyment of any
benefit provided by the club where-
(a) it is not practicable for the benefit to be used or enjoyed-
(i) simultaneously;
(ii) to the same extent-
by both men and women; and
(b) either-
(i) the same, or an equivalent, benefit is provided for the use of men and
women separately from each other; or
(ii) men and women are each entitled to a fair and reasonable proportion of
the use and enjoyment of the benefit.
Section 4(1)
"Private life" in relation to a person means-
(a) The holding or not holding of any lawful religious or political belief or
view by the person;
"Status" in relation to a person means-
(a) The sex;
of that person...
The Material Before the Board
The following summary of the Association's history and purposes is based on
the application for the exemption the material filed in
support of it and the
submissions made at the oral hearing.
The peak body of the world organisation of Girl Guides was incorporated in
the United Kingdon by Royal Charter in 1922. The Charter
provided for the
establishment of National and local organisations. Among the organisations
established were an Australian Association
and a Victorian Association. The
members of the Council of the Victorian Association became an incorporated body
by virtue of the
Girl Guides Association Act 1952
(Vic). The name of this new
incorporated body was the Girl Guides Association of Victoria. The 1952 Act
provided for the constitution
of the Association to be lodged with the Registrar
The Girl Guides Association of Victoria is a voluntary association and is
bound by the rules and statements of policy of the Australian
Girl Guides
Association and the World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts. Females
only are eligible for membership of the
Association. Those who are over 7 years
old are only eligible for the membership of the Association if they make the
Guide Promise.
The Guide Promise is in the following terms-
"I Promise I will do my best to do my duty to God, to serve the Queen and my
Country, to help other people, and to keep the Guide
In some circumstances, the parts of the Promise relating to Queen and Country
are omitted or varied. The changes are made where the
person making the Promise
lives in one country but is a citizen of another.
The primary aim of the Association is to encourage each member to become a
responsible part of the community and to promote self-confidence
and competence.
Community Service and self-development of members are two of the principal
objectives of the Association. Service
of others is emphasised in the Guide
In 1972 and 1975, the World Conference of the Girl Guides Association, whose
resolutions all member Associations recognise, explained
that part of the
Promise that deals with the duty to God in the following terms-
"The acknowledgement of the necessity for a search for a faith in God, in a
supreme being, the acknowledgement of a force higher than
man, and the highest
spiritual principles".
The World Conference has also acknowledged that, as well as from the duty to
God, the Guide Promise involves a commitment to country
or community and of the
principle of service. At the hearing, it was submitted on behalf of the
applicant that "Queen" had a much
wider meaning than the British Crown. It could
encompass a commitment to the country and its system of Government. Although
are not the usual meanings of God and the Queen, we accept that the World
Guide movement interprets these terms in this broad and
unusual way.
The Submissions
Before we can consider an exemption from the provisions of s31 of the Act, we
must first be satisfied that it is at least arguable
that s31 will apply to the
applicant association.
It was submitted by the Solicitor for the Association that it was not a
"club" within the meaning of s31(1) of the Act.
The first submission was that the applicant was not a sporting, social,
recreational or community service club. A club, it was submitted,
voluntary organisation formed primarily for social purposes. There might be
other additional characteristics such as the fact
that the body of members owns
land, charges and collects fees, or carries on other common activities - but
these characteristics
are not essential to the nature of a club. (See ex parte
Turner & Hardy & Anor
[1948] 48 SR (NSW) 133
; Bennet & Anor v.
Cooper [1948] 76 CLR570).
In our view, we must look first at the way in which "club" is used in the Act
and must apply with caution those authorities that deal
with the interpretation
of "club" in other contexts and under different legislation. In this
legislation, "club" has a wide meaning.
It is not confined to a club established
for a social purpose. It also includes a sporting or recreational club and a
community service
club. It may well be that, since one of the principal objects
of the Association is community service and the fundamental Guide Promise
includes a community service element, the Association is a community service
club within the meaning of the s31(1).
However this may be, we have no doubt that the Association is a community
service organisation within the meaning of the section.
It was then submitted for the applicant that, even if the applicant was a
community service club or organisation, it did not satisfy
the other two limbs
of the definition in s31(1) of the Act. These are that the club or organisation
must either be in receipt of
financial assistance from the State or a Municipal
Council or must be in occupation of Crown Land. It was stated in submissions for
the applicant that, although the Association owns its Head Office, it leases
various lands from Municipal Councils. Some of these
leases are at Commercial
rentals, and some are at nominal rentals. In answer to questions from the Board,
the applicants solicitor
stated that the applicant, as a non-profit making
organisation, received rate concessions in respect of land occupied by it. We
no doubt that the below-market rentals and the rate concessions together
constitute financial assistance to the Association from
the State or Municipal
It follows that, in our view, there is a good arguable case that s31 of the
Act applies to the Association.
Eligibility for membership of the Association is clearly determined by sex.
It is at least arguable that this constitutes discrimination
prohibited by s31.
It may also be that the exclusion from membership for those who do not believe
in a supreme being and therefore
cannot take the Guide Promise may constitute
discrimination under s31 on the ground of private life. There is then an
arguable case
that s31 applies to the Association.
The Exemption
After considering the material before us, we have decided to grant the
exemption sought. Our reasons are -
a) That the existence and purposes of the Association have been recognised by
a special Act of Parliament (The
Girl Guides Association Act 1952
) enacted for
the specific purpose of incorporating the Association. It would be consistent
with Parliament's recognition of the Association
to grant the exemption.
b) The Association provides an environment in which females have an unique
opportunity for self development and the development of
self confidence.
c) The Scout organisation provides for males a similar opportunity for
separate self-development.
The Exemption will be for a period of 3 years. We grant this exemption on the
basis that the Association will ensure, as far as possible,
that members and
prospective members are made aware of the wide meaning given to the words of the
Guide Promise. This requirement
is made to protect against possible
discrimination, and is consistent with the over-all purpose of the Act.
Equal Opportunity Board
Reasons for Decision on an application for exemption under section 40 of
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
27 July 1998
Girl Guides Association of Victoria
On reading the application and other material filed in support of the
exemption and on hearing Mr Ruskin solicitor for the applicant,
the Board orders
1) That exemption from the provisions of section 31 of the Act is granted to
the applicant for 3 years from the date of publication
of the notice of
exemption in the Government Gazette.
Cate McKenzie - President
Daniel Rechtman - Member
Carmel Morfuni - Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (20.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter