URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2024/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:43:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Archie Brothers Australia Pty Ltd at Holey Moley, Hijinx Hotel [2024] VicLiqComm 18; (9 December 2024)
Archie Brothers Australia Pty Ltd at Holey Moley, Hijinx Hotel [2024] VicLiqComm 18 (9 December 2024)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application under
section 153
Liquor Control
Reform Act 1998
by Archie Brothers Australia Pty Ltd for an internal review
of a decision by a delegate to:
an application for variation of an on-premises licence; and
to grant an application for a permanent underage approval
premises trading as Holey Moley/Hijinx Hotel, located at Shop 2-007, Chadstone
Shopping Centre, 1341 Dandenong Road, Malvern
Commission:
Mr John Larkins, Acting Chair
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair
Mr Steven Brnovic, Commissioner
Ms Sue Timbs, Commissioner
Appearances:
Mr Daniel Robinson, Counsel for Archie Brothers
Australia Pty Ltd
Mr Michael Majewski, Counsel Assisting the Commission
Dates of Hearing:
Date of Decision:
9 December 2024
Date of Reasons:
9 December 2024
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the delegate and, in substitution, grant:
variation of an on-premises licence; and
application for a permanent underage approval
subject to the
conditions set out in Appendix A.
Introduction
consumption harms minors. Victorian law prohibits licensees from supplying
liquor to minors, limits minors’ exposure
to liquor and limits the
circumstances on which unaccompanied minors should be on licensed premises, for
that reason.
Applicant operates premises in a busy shopping centre, which includes novel,
immersive attractions and games with varying degrees
of appeal to minors.
internal review applications are one of two separate internal reviews sought by
this applicant, which were heard and determined
together. The issue in both
cases was whether unaccompanied minors should be permitted on those premises, to
play games alongside
adults, where alcohol is consumed during those games. The
Commission decided to grant the first application with respect to the venues
Archie Brothers Cirque Electric and Strike Bowling, which are co-located on the
same premises at Chadstone Shopping Centre. Much
like the first application,
this application also involves two venues co-located on the same premises: Holey
Moley and Hijinx Hotel.
While the nature of the venues on the premises the
subject of this application are different, ultimately, the Victorian Liquor
) has also decided to grant the
applications with respect to the Holey Moley/Hijinx Hotel premises for similar
reasons. These reasons
for decision should therefore be read together with the
Commission’s reasons in
Archie Brothers Pty Ltd for the premises
Archie Brothers Cirque Electric/Strike
The Premises
Brothers Australia Pty Ltd (
) is the holder of the
on-premises licence (Licence No. 32371083) (
premises located at Shop 2-007, Chadstone Shopping Centre, 1341 Dandenong Road,
Malvern East, trading as Holey Moley/Hijinx
Applicant is part of the Funlab Group (
), a leisure and
entertainment company managing multiple venues offering activities such as
arcade games, bowling, mini-golf, and
escape rooms. These venues feature bar
environments and tavern-style dining.
section at the Premises is Holey Moley: a compact 18-hole miniature golf venue
with each hole themed. Holey Moley includes a licensed
premises area, which is
the main bar area. This area includes seating and is supported by the provision
of food and drink. According
to evidence of Niall O’Doherty, Chief
Operating Officer of Funlab Group:
Holey Moley is a nostalgic,
fun and interactive mini-golf experience where the focus isn't necessarily about
who gets the best score
but more about how much fun everyone has getting through
the course and what memories they take with them. The courses are designed
all ages and skill levels in mind and getting an ‘instagrammable’
picture is more important than a hole in
other section at the Premises is Hijinx Hotel: a restaurant/bar with a series of
interactive challenge rooms where guests engage
in timed games. Like Holey
Moley, Hijinx Hotel includes a licensed premises area, which is the main bar
area that has seating and
is supported by the provision of food and drink. In
his witness statement, Mr O’Doherty describes the section as
Hijinx Hotel resembles a combination of games and
challenges where patrons enjoy scoring points on the leaderboard. It comprises
5 random challenge rooms upon arrival, providing an element of surprise and
mystery which entices patrons. It is interactive and
provides elements of time
pressure as each challenge room has a time limit for the objective to be
reached. This makes Hijinx Hotel
unique as it resembles a hotel, but is solely
for games and not for
accommodation.
Holey Moley and Hijinx Hotel are part of the same Premises, they are split into
two adjacent venues. The entrances to each of
the sections sit on opposite ends
of the Premises, and there is a licensed seating area surrounding each entrance,
as per the following
Figure 1: Entry to Hijinx Hotel Figure 2: Entry to Holey
Figures 3 and 4: Examples of interior of Holey Moley
Figure 5: Example of interior of Hijinx Hotel
the Premises, the venues are split by a wall separating each of the licensed
premises areas (i.e., the main bar areas), with
the Holey Moley venue at the
south end of the Premises, and the Hijinx Hotel venue at the north end.
The Licence
Licence authorises the Premises to supply liquor for consumption on the licensed
premises within defined trading hours:
Monday to Sunday
– between 11am and 1am the following morning.
Good Friday and
ANZAC Day – between 12 noon and 1am the following morning.
Licence is endorsed with an authorisation for the Applicant to supply liquor
within the unlicensed areas of the Premises, subject
to delineation and signage
requirements in accordance with
section 9(1)(b)
Liquor Control Reform
The red line plan of the Premises (
Red Line Plan
illustrates the location of the licensed premises areas in each section. These
are designated as ‘L.P.’ in the below
Figure 6: Red Line Plan of the Premises
can also be supplied within the unlicensed areas of the Premises, known as
‘authorised areas’. The authorised
areas are designated on the Red
Line Plan as ‘A.A.’. The licensed seating areas are also authorised
areas and they are
designated on the Red Line Plan as ‘A.A.
this is only in circumstances when the authorised areas are ‘switched
a) the authorised areas are clearly delineated with barriers or similar physical
devices; and
b) signage must be prominently displayed at each entrance, stating that no
person under the age of 18 is allowed within the authorised
areas unless
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
effect, switching on the authorised areas permits the Applicant to supply liquor
for consumption in all areas of the Premises (except
for the challenge rooms at
Hijinx Hotel, which sit outside of the red-lined sections), so long as there are
no unaccompanied minors.
For convenience, these conditions were referred to
throughout the hearing as the ‘Strike Conditions’, and are so
operates a number of other licensed premises in Victoria which also have the
Strike Conditions.
Applicant’s current practice of turning on the authorised areas on the
Premises is similar across its two sections:
a) At Holey Moley, the authorised areas are switched on at all times, and
alcohol supply and consumption can occur across the whole
venue, including the
licensed seating areas. By keeping the authorised areas switched on, the
Applicant in effect excludes unaccompanied
minors at all times.
b) At Hijinx Hotel, the authorised areas are switched on at all times, and
alcohol supply and consumption can occur across all of
the authorised areas and
licensed seating areas of the venue. Like with Holey Moley, by keeping the
authorised areas switched on,
the Applicant excludes unaccompanied minors from
the venue at all times. No supply of liquor is allowed in the challenge rooms as
they sit outside of the red-lined parts of the Premises.
8pm onwards, all minors (whether accompanied or not) are required to leave the
Premises, and all authorised areas as delineated
on the Red Line Plan.
Applicant must also comply with Responsible Service of Alcohol (
requirements, including that it ensures that any person who sells, offers for
sale or serves liquor on the licensed premises has
completed responsible service
Original Applications
13 December 2022, the Applicant, represented by BSP Lawyers (
two applications with the Commission. In summary, these applications (
Original Applications
) consist of the following:
a) an uncontested application for a variation of conditions on the Licence under
section 29(2)(c) (
b) an uncontested application for a permanent underage approval under section
120(2)(e) until 8pm (
the Permanent Underage Approval
Applicant also proposed a condition on the Licence that the Permanent Underage
Approval only applies when the licensees or a related
entity within Funlab holds
the Licence.
Original Applications are interdependent, and cover two different sections on
the Premises (i.e., Holey Moley and Hijinx Hotel).
They are interdependent in
that what is sought, which is the substitution of the current Strike Conditions
with an approval under
section 120(2)(e).
rationale behind the Original Applications is (in summary):
a) The Applicant aims to provide a consistent experience for guests across
different venues both within Victoria and nationally.
Currently, Victoria is the
only jurisdiction where the Strike Conditions apply in a number of Funlab
premises, creating inconsistencies
in customer experiences across different
b) A consistency in experience would improve how requirements regarding minors
are conveyed to staff across all venues. Funlab would
achieve consistent
procedures and staff training by allowing the same rules to apply across its
c) The Applicant wants to prevent customer disappointment and refunds due to
misunderstandings regarding restrictions on unaccompanied
minors, noting that
customers expect uniform access across similar entertainment precincts.
d) The Applicant wants its staff to focus more on liquor licensing compliance
measures that directly reduce harm, such as preventing
secondary supply of
alcohol to minors and ensuring responsible alcohol service. This, the Applicant
argues, is more effective than
having staff focus on managing physical aspects
of the Strike Conditions, such as signage and demarcation. By emphasising staff
interaction,
supported by RSA training, the Applicant believes that staff can
better monitor and manage the consumption of liquor while enhancing
the overall
customer experience.
its submissions on behalf of the Applicant, BSP stated that the expected
outcomes of the grant of the Original Applications were
that “the proposal
would allow unaccompanied minors to enjoy the activities and gaming components
of the Premises, as well
as the non-alcoholic food and beverage
offerings.”
Essentially, the
arrangement would facilitate the supply, handling, and consumption of alcohol by
adults while they are actively
engaging in or near the same activities as
unaccompanied minors. For example, a group of friends may include a mixture of
and adults who visit the Premises together to enjoy mini-golf or
challenge rooms, and the adults in the group could responsibly purchase
consume alcohol during their visit. The intention is to create an inclusive
experience where both unaccompanied minors and adults
can participate in shared
social activities.
support of the Original Applications, BSP provided the Commission with a copy of
the Venue Management Plan (
). Relevantly, the VMP included specific
provisions for monitoring minors on the Premises:
a) The Premises allows unaccompanied minors to attend the Premises until no
later than 8pm on any given day. After this time, unaccompanied
prohibited from being on the Premises.
b) All staff are under strict instructions to ensure that liquor is not sold or
supplied to persons under the age of 18 years. This
includes preventing
secondary supply, where an adult might provide alcohol to a minor. To enforce
this, any person suspected of being
under 18 will be required to present
appropriate identification confirming they are of legal drinking age. Acceptable
forms of identification
are strictly those approved under the LCR Act, and
foreign passports are the only acceptable form of international ID.
the Applicant chooses to keep authorised areas switched on at all times, and so
does not allow unaccompanied minors on the Premises
at any time, the Commission
understands that the above VMP provisions are intended to apply in the
circumstances that the Applicant
is granted a permanent underage approval.
submitted that the Applicant is an experienced operator of licensed premises,
with its director managing several other Funlab
venues. It also submitted that a
number of these venues have operated with a permanent underage approval without
any infringements
or non-compliance incidents over four years, demonstrating
their capability to manage such conditions.
to section 33, copies of the Original Applications were served on the Chief
Commissioner of Police and on the Stonnington
Council. Neither objected to the
Original Applications.
14 February 2023, BSP provided supplementary submissions on behalf of the
Applicant in support of the Original Applications (in
a) BSP emphasised that section 120(1) allows minors on licensed premises under
certain conditions, and the broad powers granted to
the Commission suggest that
Parliament anticipated additional circumstances for the grant of permanent
underage approvals.
b) The Premises is located in a family-friendly area within Chadstone Shopping
Chadstone SC
), where unaccompanied minors are expected to visit.
c) The social profile of Chadstone SC’s patrons does not indicate economic
disadvantage or vulnerability to alcohol abuse,
and there is no notable issue of
underage drinking or secondary supply in the area.
d) As part of Funlab, the Applicant has considerable experience managing
premises with permanent underage approvals at other locations,
including Crown
Casino, Frankston Shopping Centre and Docklands. This demonstrates that the
Applicant had proposed effective harm
minimisation strategies in its management
e) The permanent underage approval sought is not a blanket authority but limited
to 8pm, reflecting the venue's youth-friendly focus
during the day, with liquor
being an ancillary component. This reduces the risk of secondary supply.
Original Decision
6 September 2023, a delegate of the Commission refused the Original Applications
pursuant to subsection 44(2)(b)(ii)
Original Decision
). In summary, the delegate was not satisfied that
granting the Original Applications would be in line with the objects of the LCR
Act, in particular the objects of harm minimisation and the responsible
development of the liquor
Applications
for Internal Review
18 September 2023, the Applicant applied to the Commission for review of the
Original Decision (
Review Applications
1 and 2 May 2024, the Commission held a public hearing of the Review
Applications (
). Mr David Robinson of Counsel appeared
for the Applicant, and the following witnesses gave evidence for the Applicant:
a) Niall O’Doherty, Chief Operating Officer of Funlab;
b) Natasha Ciconte, Operations Manager of the Premises;
c) Mitchell Bierman, Venue Manager of the Premises;
d) Tony Zalewski, Director of General Public Safety; and
e) Laura Thomas, Director of Urbis.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
2 of Part 9 governs internal review applications. Under section 152, the
Original Decision is a reviewable decision, and
the Applicant is eligible to
apply for the review of that decision. The Review Applications were made
pursuant to section 153.
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Applications is to make a fresh decision
that either affirms or varies
the reviewable decision, or sets it aside and substitutes it for another
decision considered appropriate.
In effect, in this case, the Commission may either grant the Original
Applications and if so, whether to do so subject to
conditions,
or refuse to grant
Determination
of an uncontested application
the LCR Act, an application for variation of an on-premises licence may be
contested or uncontested. The Original Applications
were uncontested.
an application is an uncontested application, section 44(1) requires the
Commission to grant or refuse to grant such an application
at any time after the
expiry of the applicable period for making an objection. Section 44(2) empowers
the Commission to refuse to
grant the Review Applications on various grounds,
including that granting of the application would be conducive to or encourage
44(4) provides that the Commission may have regard to any matter the Commission
considers relevant and make any enquiries
the Commission considers
appropriate.
172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit
and is bound the rules of natural
The objects of the LCR Act
172D(3) and 172U(3)(b) require the Commission, in exercising its internal review
function, to have regard to the objects
of the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines in respect of the regulation of liquor issued by the Minister. The
objects of the
LCR Act are set out at section 4(1):
contribute to minimising harm including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes
to, and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products;
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and
reducing risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
4(2) further provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament
that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or
imposed by this Act
must be exercised and performed with due regard to harm
minimisation
3(1) defines harm as follows:
harm arising from the misuse and
abuse of alcohol, including—
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury or
property damage.
Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in section
44(2) are relevant considerations, the determination
of an uncontested
application was ultimately to be made pursuant to section 44(1) and section
157(1) at the discretion of the Commission,
with reference to the objects of the
sections of the LCR Act relevant to this matter
Section 9 Authorised Premises
to section 9(1)(b), the Commission may approve an on-premises licensee to supply
liquor on any other premises authorised
by the Commission and specified in the
licence for consumption on those premises.
Section 120 Permanent
underage approval
120(1) provides that a licensee is guilty of an offence if a person under the
age of 18 years is on a licensed premises or
any authorised premises and is not
in the company of a responsible adult.
120(2)(e) provides an exception to the offence, providing that it does not apply
to the presence on licensed premises or authorised
premises of a person under
the age of 18 years in accordance with the approval of the Commission and any
conditions to which that
approval is subject.
120(3) provides that, if the Commission grants or revokes an approval for the
purposes of subsection (2)(e), the Commission
must cause the licence or permit
to be endorsed accordingly.
Commission’s reasons in
Archie Brothers Pty Ltd for the premises
Archie Brothers Cirque Electric/Strike Bowling
set out the
Commission’s approach to the exercise of discretion under section
120(2)(e), having regard to the statutory context,
history of the provision and
previous decisions insofar as they may be relevant to what the Commission had
observed to be a growth
of new, immersive-type entertainment
It is unnecessary to
duplicate that approach here, save to say that the Commission adopts the same
approach in determining these
applications.
Reasons for decision
Issues for determination on review
main issues for the Commission in this review are whether varying the Licence
would be conducive to or encourage harm or otherwise
contrary to the objects of
the LCR Act, and whether the grant of the Permanent Underage Approval would be
consistent with the objects
of the LCR Act; particularly, minimising harm to
Specifically,
the question is whether allowing the Applicant to supply liquor for consumption
across the whole Premises when minors
are unaccompanied by a parent or legal
guardian would increase the risk of harm to minors.
the reasons that follow, the answer to that question is a qualified
Whether granting the Review Applications would
be conducive to or encourage harm, or be contrary to the objects of the LCR Act
The Commission is concerned to minimise harm to minors
Commission has a specific and serious focus on giving effect to the statutory
objective of minimising the risk of alcohol-related
harm to minors. That is
because of the nature of the harms/understanding of impact on liquor on minors.
The concept of harm minimisation
is anticipatory and there may be cases in which
a conservative approach should be
When it comes to harm
to minors, the Commission adopts a conservative approach.
drinking poses unique risks, particularly due to its impact on the developing
adolescent brain. Alcohol consumption during
this critical growth period can
interfere with brain functions related to memory, language, attention, and
executive functioning,
leading to cognitive impairments that may persist into
adulthood. These effects can diminish an individual's ability to succeed in
school, work, and daily life, highlighting the importance of minimising young
people's exposure to alcohol. In addition, academic
research indicates that peer
influence plays a significant role in adolescent alcohol use, with both direct
interactions and sustained
exposure to peers impacting drinking
behaviours.
the context of the Review Applications, the Commission acknowledges that the
Premises features distinct sections, each providing
a unique combination of
entertainment options that may appeal to minors. This configuration necessitates
a careful consideration
of the potential risks posed by allowing unaccompanied
minors in an environment where alcohol is served.
Premises is in the Social Quarter, at Chadstone SC
Premises is situated within The Social Quarter, a mezzanine dining area at
Chadstone SC. In its submissions on behalf of the Applicant,
BSP describes
Chadstone SC as being ‘undeniably a family-friendly area’, where
‘the patron demographic and social
profile’ is ‘not
questionable or problematic’, and ‘there is no profile of economic
disadvantage or vulnerability
it may be true that Chadstone SC is generally perceived as a family-friendly,
low-risk location with a positive social profile,
it is important to acknowledge
that, as a large public shopping centre, it is not immune to the risk of
antisocial behaviours, including
incidents of violence and youth-related
disturbances. The presence of multiple licensed venues increases the risk of
alcohol-related
harm, particularly during peak trading times and events that
draw large crowds. Past incidents involving unruly behaviour, both
alcohol-fuelled
and otherwise, demonstrate that even locations typically
regarded as safe and well-managed can experience periods of heightened risk.
even the Applicant acknowledges this risk within its
, where it states that
‘[s]taff and management are to be mindful of other licensed premises in
the area when assessing patrons
for intoxication, anti-social conduct, or any
indication of use of illicit
substances’.
Social Quarter at Chadstone SC comprises several licensed premises that
collectively form a centralised dining and entertainment
area within the centre.
Besides the Premises, these licensed venues include Cityfields, an all-day
eatery and bar,
Terre, an Italian restaurant.
her report dated 24 April 2024, Ms Thomas describes The Social Quarter as a
“precinct [that] was opened in 2023 with a focus
on entertainment and
dining”. According to Ms Thomas,
“[T]he aim of the
Social Quarter is to expand the offering at the centre beyond shopping alone and
to bolster the range of experiences
available into the evening hours. The Social
Quarter has been developed adjacent to the existing entertainment focus (Hoyts,
existing restaurants).
All of the restaurants in the Social Quarter and the adjoining Dining
Terrace are licensed, as is the Hoyts
its submissions on behalf of the Applicant, BSP describes The Social Quarter as
‘a high-quality offering which will attract
many young and adult patrons
– and it is not a location with an association of high-risk behaviour when
it relates to alcohol’.
SC is particularly accessible to minors. The centre is well serviced by public
transport, with several bus routes stopping
directly at the shopping complex,
including at the dedicated bus interchange. The Social Quarter is conveniently
situated within
walking distance from this interchange, making it easily
reachable for young people using public transport. Additionally, the close
proximity to Oakleigh Station, only a five-minute bus ride away, further
enhances accessibility for minors traveling from other parts
of the city.
ease of access makes the Premises inherently attractive to younger individuals,
who may frequent the shopping centre not only
for retail or social purposes but
also for recreation – potentially at a licensed venue. This level of
accessibility, paired
with the presence of multiple attractions at Chadstone SC
that are targeted at youth, may increase the potential risk of underage
individuals attempting to access or loiter near a licensed premises.
to evidence of Dr Zalewski at the Hearing, the Premises within The Social
Quarter is favourable because it is somewhat out
of the way and not in
high-traffic areas or thoroughfares. This reduces the likelihood of people
merely passing by, as patrons have
to physically go to the entertainment areas.
He also noted that the Premises is not located adjacent to the food court, which
attracts loitering in shopping centres.
addition, the witnesses for the Applicant described the physical layout of The
Social Quarter as a "horseshoe-shaped precinct"
that is relatively contained,
with limited access points and minimal
through-traffic.
stated that Chadstone SC provides "central security" which the Premises can rely
on for support in patron
management.
Commission accepts that, on balance, the risk profile of The Social Quarter
appears to be low. The contained layout, low through-traffic,
separation from high-traffic areas, and centralised security contribute
positively to managing these risks. Nonetheless,
vigilance must be maintained
due to the shopping centre setting, which brings its own set of challenges in
ensuring public safety
and the responsible service of alcohol at licensed
premises located therein.
The Premises has a broad age
Premises is unique as it has two separate offerings, with each being a separate
and distinct section that is part of the same
licensed premises.
behalf of the Applicant, BSP submitted:
The Premises is not
primarily a ‘bar’, rather it is a family-oriented recreation
facility with a multitude of activities
and games that are designed to appeal to
all ages – including to minors. The application therefore does not
establish a precedent,
or an image that is contrary to the public interest, of
allowing minors into Premises that are primarily designed to operate as
marketing material for the Holey Moley section depicts it as a diverse
entertainment space. Its website describes it as a "multi-sensory
labyrinth",
offering mini golf with immersive, themed elements. Dynamic imagery conveys a
cheerful atmosphere, depicting social interaction
and group enjoyment,
positioning Holey Moley as a venue for casual gatherings and celebrations. The
visuals suggest that the venue
targets a broad demographic, including
The marketing material
for the Hijinx Hotel section also depicts it as a diverse entertainment space,
targeting group activities,
including families, students, and adults. Its
website describes it as a “quirky New York style hotel".
overall messaging of both sections illustrates the Premises as a destination for
group entertainment. The supply of liquor at
the Premises is designed to be
ancillary to the broader entertainment offering, which focuses primarily on
providing recreational
and social activities. In his statement, Mr
O’Doherty said that:
All Funlab venues are designed to
create spaces where people of all ages can come to experience different forms of
entertainment as
a primary reason to visit, in a surrounding that is conducive
to creating connections, fun and memories. Food and beverage offerings
complementary to these entertainment offerings and allow us to cater to the
needs and wants of our guests in an inclusive and
welcoming environment.
Whilst each concept and each venue has unique qualities, many of our
venues are designed to cater for all groups with a focus on families
spaces during the day before catering for a more adult-centred demographic at
layout of the Holey Moley section appears to be designed to create an immersive
and engaging environment. It offers two distinct
nine-hole mini-golf courses,
each featuring uniquely themed holes that blend creativity with interactive
elements. The design incorporates
vibrant colours and dynamic lighting that
appeals to a broad demographic.
the Hijinx Hotel section, guests are greeted by a faux lobby adorned with
vibrant shapes colours and surrealist elements, implying
a whimsical tone to a
traditional hotel setting. The authorised areas on the venue have extensive
seating with high bar stools around
small round tables, some booths with
bookshelves, and more spacious padded chairs. Combined with the adjoining
challenge rooms which
offer activities (such as throwing a basketball
through a hoop, solving word scrambles, or remembering song patterns on a giant
the Hijinx Hotel section also has a design that would appeal to a broad
demographic.
Commission also gives weight to the fact that Hijinx Hotel’s and Holey
Moley’s entry points are less obviously aimed
at attracting minors.
Adjacent to Hijinx Hotel is Holey Moley, but Holey Moley is accessible by
escalator above ground level. In
that sense, Holey Moley is a venue that is
separate to Hijinx Hotel, and even more separate and discrete from Strike
Bowling and
Archie Brothers Cirque Electric and the experiential setting outside
their entrances.
Commission does not consider that either section of the Premises is uniquely
directed at minors. In addition, the Commission notes
that, while both sections
do have various fixtures, they are relatively compact, and staff members would
have a mostly unobstructed
line of sight to observe patron activity and
Commission recognises that the Premises represents a recent paradigm shift from
venues for which permanent underage approvals
are typically sought, where
minors’ presence may be ancillary to some other activity, such as
partaking in a meal, or for a
sporting occasion. In this case, the Premises
allows for patrons at Holey Moley to partake in activities while consuming
and so while a person may choose to drink alcohol or not, the
consumption of alcohol is not necessarily ancillary to the entertainment
offer, but may be part of it, and part of its attraction.
combination of amusement activities and licensed alcohol service at the Premises
presents a challenge, as it risks blurring the
lines between child-appropriate
entertainment and adult-oriented experiences, potentially creating an
environment where minors could
be unduly influenced by the presence of alcohol
and have easier access to it.
before the Commission was that players tend to spend up to two hours at the
Premises at a time,
lengthy period for a minor to potentially be in the vicinity of adults consuming
alcohol throughout. This extended exposure
not only heightens the risk of minors
perceiving alcohol as a typical element of social engagement but also increases
the possibility
of secondary supply.
a permanent underage approval in place, minors at the Premises would be exposed
to people other than their parents drinking.
In her evidence, Ms Thomas
identified that peer influence is a risk factor when it comes to alcohol-related
behaviours, as older
peers drinking in the presence of minors could influence
alcohol behaviours.
The research
reviewed by Ms Thomas highlighted that peer behaviours can play a major role in
normalising drinking for young
though, given the state of the research that was before the Commission, and the
evidence as to supervision and management
in place at these particular Premises,
this in itself did not give rise to a ground on which these applications could
properly be
Licensee mitigation measures
Applicant has made submissions about Funlab’s experience in operating
multiple licensed premises with similar Holey Moley
and Hijinx Hotel
activations. In effect, the Applicant is seeking to adopt licence conditions and
authorisations similar to those
already in operation at a number of other Funlab
premises with a permanent underage
The Commission accepts
the strong compliance history of these venues operated by Funlab. This is a
significant protective factor
against the risk of harm to minors at the
Premises: Funlab’s compliance history gives the Commission comfort that it
be able to appropriately mitigate risks of harm to minors arising from
their presence on licensed premises; that being so, the Commission
determined to impose the conditions suggested by the Applicant, that the
Permanent Underage Approval applies only so long as
the Applicant or a related
entity within the Funlab Group holds the Licence. It stands to reason that the
removal of the Strike Conditions
should be granted on the same basis.
Applicant provided information to the Commission about measures currently taken
by the Applicant to mitigate the risks of harm
at the Premises, including those
arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol at the Premises.
to the existing VMP, the staffing at the Premises generally includes a manager,
one staff member, and a technician during
weekday trade before 5pm. After 5pm on
weekdays, a manager and two staff members are present. On weekends and during
school holidays,
staffing increases to a manager and three to four staff members
based on anticipated patronage. On Friday and Saturday nights after
Premises operates with two managers and five to six staff, adjusted according to
expected patron numbers.
her evidence at the Hearing, Ms Ciconte provided a comprehensive outline of the
training process for all team members, which starts
with an induction and
continues with sectional training for specific areas, such as floor, bar, and
reception duties.
stated that managers receive training on the use of the ‘Safety
Culture’ platform for incident reporting,
which is part of their
onboarding. According to Ms Ciconte, incidents are recorded on the Safety
Culture platform and reviewed regularly.
If there are learning opportunities or
corrective actions to be implemented, they are communicated back to the
management teams.
Ms Ciconte was unable to provide an example of when an alcohol-related incident
arose, including in the context of underage
supply, the Commission accepts that
the Applicant has successfully operated for a period of two years without any
alcohol-related
incidents. The Commission further notes that Victoria Police did
not raise any concerns with regard to the Original Applications.
Commission accepts that the Applicant has established appropriate controls
relating to staff training and incident reporting.
The Applicant's proactive
approach to minimising risks, including staff training on harm minimisation,
regular audits of compliance
measures, and dedicated supervisory staff during
peak hours, provides the Commission with confidence that the risks of harm to
on the Premises can be effectively mitigated in part through these
strategies are proposed. Ms Ciconte described that if the grant was successful,
the Applicant would implement a wrist-banding
policy. She said:
“Any patron who attends and purchases liquor will be
provided with a wrist-band. The purpose of this is to simplify the ability
staff to visually monitor any drinking activities of patrons – as staff
would be prompted to approach any patron who appears
to have liquor but not a
wristband. Patrons would have to provide identification to the satisfaction of
staff in accordance with
his report, Dr Zalewski stated that, overall, the existing VMP for the Premises
“provides a reasonable basis for effective
management, compliance and
security”. In addition, he stated that he was of the view that the
Premises did not “disclose
any specific risks that would not be evident in
any similar licensed premises where unaccompanied minors are permitted”.
he did propose several changes to the existing VMP to ensure effective
risk mitigation, compliance and improve safety procedures,
relevantly including:
a) attaching Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) to the existing VMP to provide
clear, step-by-step instructions for key operational
activities (e.g., how to
manage patrons, respond to incidents, intervene on suspect patrons, identify
fake IDs, and deal with unaccompanied
b) providing documented guidance on specific risks, such as images of all
approved forms of identification, steps to identify fake
IDs, and actions to
take if a fake ID is detected;
c) detailing specific methods for monitoring and managing unaccompanied minors,
such as allocating responsible staff to oversee specific
areas and taking
proactive steps to prevent secondary supply of alcohol to minors.
Commission accepts Dr Zalewski’s evidence in this regard. It is important
that the Applicant maintains and complies with
a VMP that is appropriate to the
risks posed by unaccompanied minors on the Premises, and that it continues to
abide by the training
and management practices of at least the standard and
quality described to the Commission by the Applicant and Dr Zalewski. The
will impose conditions on the Licence that the Applicant does so.
the importance of ensuring proper monitoring of the Premises in reducing the
risk of harm to minors, the Commission imposes
specific conditions requiring
security guards, CCTV and embedding appropriate RSA measures as set out in the
those reasons, the Commission is not satisfied that it would be conducive to or
encourage harm to revoke the Strike Conditions
from the Licence and there is no
other reason to refuse the application to vary the conditions, subject to a
grant of the Permanent
Underage Approval.
Should a permanent
underage approval be granted?
the Permanent Underage Approval ought to be granted requires a consideration of
the particular circumstances and risks involved
in the grant, having regard to
the objectives of the LCR Act, both explicit and inferred.
particular circumstances, site and premises is that it provides a novel
entertainment offering in terms of it being an immersive
experience which is not
of a nature that is typically associated with the consumption of liquor by
adults in the presence of minors.
It allows for patrons to partake in mini-golf
while consuming alcohol, and so while a person may choose to drink or not, a
may drink while playing any of the games on offer.
Commission acknowledges that mini-golf is an activity that has broad appeal. In
the Commission’s experience, it is a competitive
activity that is popular
with and played by people of all ages, both minors and adults. It is not
uncommon for mini-golf venues in
Victoria to offer alcohol as part of the social
and recreational offering. In the Commission’s view, community
expectations
are not such as to hold concerns about the association of mini-golf
at Holey Moley with the consumption of liquor; accordingly, licensing
premises with an approval under section 120(2)(e) would not be contrary to the
objective of facilitating the diversity of licensed
premises reflecting
community expectations, nor would it amount to an irresponsible development of
the liquor, licensed hospitality
and live music industries.
on the design and marketing of the Premises, the Commission does not consider
that either Holey Moley or Hijinx Hotel at The
Social Quarter are venues that,
in the Commission’s view, are mainly for minors, or that have a particular
appeal to minors.
In addition, the game of mini-golf is necessarily limited to
however long it takes to play the game. The opportunity for consuming
(and so to engage in risky drinking or secondary supply) is thereby limited by
time and activity.
layout of each venue is in and of itself conducive to minimising harm. Areas
where alcohol may be consumed at Holey Moley are
limited: patrons may gather and
remain in small areas at or near mini-golf hole, or at tables in front of the
bar area. Each of those
areas are confined, easily visible to staff with good
opportunity for appropriate supervision to reduce the chance of secondary supply
and risky drinking.
for areas where alcohol may be consumed at Hijinx Hotel, these are even more
limited as the challenge rooms fall outside of the
red-lined section of the
Premises. The Commission accepts that what is sought by the Applicant with
respect to the Hijinx Hotel venue,
is essentially to allow unaccompanied minors
to be on licensed premises in areas where food and beverages are served to
In this regard, the Commission notes that the LCR Act already provides
an exception to the offence of a licensee allowing a minor
to be on licenced
premises, where minors are on the premises for the purposes of partaking of a
meal. With that in mind, the Commission
does not consider it an irresponsible
development in the liquor and licensed hospitality industry to permit
unaccompanied minors
to be on the non-play areas of the Hijinx Hotel premises
for a meal and a non-alcoholic drink (or even a non-alcoholic drink with
or alone), given the location, nature and circumstances of this premises and the
risk mitigations to be applied by the Applicant.
addition, the Applicant is an experienced operator who has operated similar
venues without incident. The absence of evidence of
harm from those venues is a
matter of considerable weight. The Commission accepts the Applicant is
well-aware of its obligations
to minimise harm to minors and has implemented
(and will implement) a number of appropriate strategies to do so (as described
The Commission gives further weight to the Applicant’s commendable
history as a significant protective factor in terms of minimising
the risk of
harm to minors.
these factors, and compliance with conditions imposed on the Licence, the
Commission considers that the risk of harm to unaccompanied
minors, is low. To
further reduce this risk, the Applicant has indicated it would limit the
approval to 8pm on any day and also require
any person who purchases alcohol to
wear wrist-bands.
Commission considers these measures would reduce the risk of harm to minors to
an acceptably low level. They are appropriate additional
layers of protection
against harm, and so the Commission will impose these as conditions on the grant
of the Permanent Underage Approval.
Decision on review
regard to all the matters set out above, the Commission has determined to grant
the Review Applications.
The preceding 98 paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Mr John Larkins (Acting Chair), Mr
James O’Halloran
(Deputy Chair), Mr Steven Brnovic (Commissioner), and Ms
Sue Timbs (Commissioner).
This licence is an on-premises licence and
authorises the licensee to supply liquor on the licensed premises for
consumption on the
licensed premises during the trading hours specified
The licensee shall not cause or permit undue
detriment to the amenity of the area to arise out of or in connection with the
the premises to which the licence relates during or immediately after the
trading hours authorised under this licence.
No unaccompanied minors may
be present on the licensed premises after 8pm on any day.
Management Plan
To the extent that a matter is not already dealt with on
this licence, the licensee must maintain and comply with a Venue Management
(however described), that:
(a) contains, at minimum, the matters included in the Plans of Management dated
December 2022 as provided by the licensee with respect
to responsible service of
alcohol, prevention of sale and supply of liquor to minors and supervision of
the licensed premises;
(b) requires persons over the age of 18 years to wear and display wristbands as
a condition of entry; and
(c) implements the recommendations of Dr Tony Zalewski at page 20 of his report
dated 25 April 2024.
The licensee must ensure that the Venue Management Plan is retained on
the licensed premises at all times for inspection by an authorised
Victoria Police or Liquor Inspector.
The licensee shall
install and maintain a surveillance recording system able to clearly identify
individuals, which shows time and
date and provides continuous images of all
entrances and exits, bars and entertainment areas.
The surveillance
recording system must operate from 30 minutes before the start of the
entertainment until 30 minutes after closure.
A copy of the recorded
images must be available upon request for immediate viewing or removal by the
Victoria Police, or a person
authorised in writing by the Victorian Liquor
Commission or its successors, or otherwise retained for at least 1 month.
The positioning of the cameras is to be to the satisfaction of the
Licensing Inspector.
Signs are to be displayed in all areas subject to
camera surveillance. Such signs shall read "For the safety and security of
and staff this area is under electronic
surveillance".
Crowd controllers, licensed under the
Private Security Act 2004
, are to be employed at a ratio of 2 crowd controllers
for the first 100 patrons and 1 crowd controller for each additional 100 patrons
or part thereof. One crowd controller is to be present outside the premises to
monitor patrons arriving and departing the premises.
Crowd controllers are to be
present from 30 minutes before the start of the entertainment being provided,
until 30 minutes after
Maximum Capacities
Trading Hours
Monday to Sunday Between 11am and 1am
the following morning.
Good Friday & ANZAC Day Between 12 noon and 1am
the following morning.
Approvals/Consents
- The areas endorsed as licensed seating area (L.S.A) on the
approved plan may operate as authorised premises when the following
are satisfied:
(a) the area or areas are delineated by barriers, rope and post devices,
planter boxes or similar demarcation devices; and
(b) at the entrance to each authorised area a notice of no less than A4 size is
displayed which states: "No person under the age
of 18 years is permitted within
this area unless in the company of a parent or legal guardian" in letters no
less than 10mm in height
followed by the words: "This area is an authorised area
permitting the supply and consumption of liquor pursuant to an on-premises
licence under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
" in letters no less than 5mm in
Liquor can be supplied either within the licensed premises or within the
authorised premises.
Liquor supplied under this licence may only be
consumed within the licensed premises or the authorised premises.
dance parties or equivalent events are not to be conducted on these
This authorisation operates only when the licensee, or a
related body corporate or associated entity (within the meaning of the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth)) of Funlab Pty Ltd holds the licence or is otherwise
sub-let or assigned the permissions under the licence;
- Persons under the age of 18 years are permitted on the licensed
premises other than in the company of a responsible adult subject
following conditions:
(a) Persons under the age of 18 years are not permitted on the licensed premises
later than 8pm on any day;
(b) The approval operates only when the licensee, or a related body corporate or
associated entity (within the meaning of the
Corporations Act 2001
Funlab Pty Ltd holds the licence or is otherwise sub-let or assigned the
permissions under the licence;
(c) The approval operates only so long as the conditions of the licence are
otherwise complied with.
End of conditions
Witness Statement of Niall
O’Doherty, dated 24 April 2024, at [16].
Ibid at [18].
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
The following premises also
have the Strike Conditions: Archie Brothers Morris Moor (on-premises licence no.
32373768); Strike/Archie
Bros/Holey Moley, Point Cook (on-premises licence no.
32283078); Strike Bayside (late night (on-premises) licence no. 32276673);
Strike CCW (on-premises licence no. 32293502); Strike City (late night
(on-premises) licence no. 32271623); Strike Eastland (on-premises
licence no.
32354934); Strike Highpoint (on-premises licence no. 32327848); Strike Melbourne
Central (late night (on-premises) licence
no. 32280339).
LCR Act, sections 108AA, 108AB,
108AC, 108AD.
See above n 1, at [20].
Annexure to variation
application, dated 8 December 2022.
Section 44(2) states that: The
Commission may refuse to grant an uncontested application on any of the
following grounds —
[...] (b) in any case - [...] (ii) that the granting
of the application would be conducive to or encourage harm.
See section 4(1).
Section 157(2) to (5)
further prescribe the manner in which the Commission is to undertake internal
Sections 44, 49 and 157.
Sections 44 and 157.
Section 44(2)(b)(ii).
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2012] VSCA 325
confirms that harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act
and therefore the primary consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although
not to the exclusion of the other objects).
See further
Brothers Pty Ltd for the premises trading as
Archie Brothers Cirque
Electric/Strike Bowling
[2024] VLC at [53]-[72].
See further
[34], citing
Nardi v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2005] VCAT 323
Leung, R. K., Toumbourou, J.
W., & Hemphill, S. A. (2014). The effect of peer influence and selection
processes on adolescent
alcohol use: A systematic review of longitudinal
studies. Health Psychology Review, 8(4), 426–457. See also Henneberger, A.
K., Mushonga, D. R., & Preston, A. M. (2021). Peer Influence and Adolescent
Substance Use: A Systematic Review of Dynamic Social
Network Research.
Adolescent Research Review, 6(1), 57–73.
Addendum submissions in
support of variation application, dated 9 February 2023.
Plan of Management –
Holey Moley/Hijinx Hotel, Shop 2-007, The Social Quarter, 1341 Dandenong
Road, Malvern East, VIC, 3148, dated December 2022.
Ibid, [71].
General licence no.
Restaurant and café
licence no. 32370312.
Report of Laura Thomas,
dated 24 April 2024, [8]-[9].
Transcript of 1 May 2024,
Transcript of 1 May 2024,
p29; Transcript of 2 May 2024, pp30, 51.
Transcript of 2 May 2024,
See above n 7.
For example, see Holey Moley
https://www.holeymoley.com.au/?_gl=1*1o2j7bi*_ga*MTE3MDg1MzA2OS4xNzMwNjExNjY2*_ga_KE036Z8JY9*MTczMjIzNTk5Ni41LjEuMTczMjIzNTk5OC4wLjAuMA
For example, see Hijinx
Hotel website:
https://www.hijinxhotel.com.au/?_gl=1*1oj2l6g*_ga*MTE3MDg1MzA2OS4xNzMwNjExNjY2*_ga_KE036Z8JY9*MTczMjIzNTk5Ni41LjEuMTczMjIzNTk5OC4wLjAuMA
See above n 1, at [9]-[10].
Transcript of 2 May 2024,
Ibid, p112.
Ibid, p126.
The following premises have
a permanent underage approval: Archie Bros Cirque Electric/Strike Bowling
(on-premises licence no. 32371106);
Archie Brothers Cirque Electric (on-premises
licence no. 32347911); Archie Brothers Century City Walk (on-premises licence
no. 32379219);
Holey Moley Crown (late night (on-premises) licence no.
32351897); B. Lucky and Sons (late night (on-premises) licence no. 32280371);
Holey Moley (on-premises licence no. 32276160).
Transcript of 2 May 2024,
Ibid, pp26-27.
Witness Statement of Natasha
Ciconte dated 24 April 2024, at [50].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (19 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter