URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VRAT/2009/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:38:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Carr (GRE) - App 02 2009 [2009] VRAT 7 (25 May 2009)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
Appeal No 2 of 2009
In the matter of an Appeal
MR JOHN CARR
AGAINST THE CONVICTION AND PENALTY OF SEVEN MONTHS DISQUALIFICATION
IMPOSED BY THE GREYHOUND RACING VICTORIA BOARD FOR BREACHING GREYHOUND
AUSTRALASIA RULES 83(2)&(3)
JUDGE HICKS
, His Honour
MRS M. LONG,
MR I. VIGOR, Adviser
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT MELBOURNE ON MONDAY 25
MAY 2009 AT 10.45 A.M.
MR J. B. DAVIS appeared on behalf of Greyhound Racing Victoria.
MR F. ABEL (with leave) appeared on behalf of Mr John Carr.
(Judge Hicks)
F I N D I N G
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal by Mr John Carr, licensed trainer against
the decision of the Independent Appeals Board made on 16
February 2009. At the
Independent Appeals Board, Mr Carr was found guilty of breaching Australasian
Greyhound Racing Rule 83 (2)
& (3) and he was disqualified for a period of
seven months from that date. Both at the Stewards' Inquiry on 16 December 2008
and the subsequent appeal from the stewards' decision to the Independent Appeals
Board on 16 February 2009, Mr Carr pleaded guilty
to the relevant charge. Rule
83 of the Greyhound Australasian Rules stipulates that a dog must, in effect, be
presented for a race
On 21 October 2008, Mr Carr was a
licensed trainer, and raced his dog Bond Master at the Warragul greyhound race
meeting. At a race
at such meeting at Warragul on 21 October 2008, Mr Carr's
dog Bond Master dead heated for first place. Stewards subsequently requested
sample be taken from Mr Carr's dog for analysis. Subsequent analysis revealed
that Bond Master tested positive to stanozolol,
which is an anabolic steroid and
which is a prohibited drug under the rules of greyhound racing. Whilst Mr Carr
pleaded guilty before
the stewards and the Independent Appeals Board, Mr Abel,
who sought leave and was granted leave on Mr Carr's behalf, stipulated that
client desired to plead not guilty before this Tribunal.
Accordingly, the matter proceeded as a plea of not guilty before
the Tribunal. The prosecution called evidence, which was not challenged
Abel. No evidence was called indeed by the appellant in this case. Mr Abel
made no submission and a no case submission at
the end of the evidence. Mr Abel
in fact read from a prepared statement. In the end it became clear that
Mr Abel was, in effect,
putting forward relevant submissions onto the
question of penalty. A breach of
Greyhound Racing Rules
offence of absolute liability, and accordingly a defence of honest and
reasonable misdeed is not open.
After hearing all the evidence,
including the tendering of the transcript, the tendering of the certificates,
and taking into account
Mr Carr's previous pleas of guilty, the charge was
proven to the relevant Briginshaw v. Briginshaw test and also taking into
as I do, that a breach of
is a serious matter. The charge was
proven. During the statement read out by Mr Abel, he submitted that what his
client Mr Carr
had done was to do no more than listen to and be guided by
veterinary advice. Mr Abel referred to an undated statutory declaration
Bell, veterinary surgeon. I shall refer to such letter in a moment.
It is clear from the evidence revealed in the transcripts and
tendered before this Tribunal and accepted as evidence before the Tribunal
Bond Master had been treated prior to 21 October 2008 with the anabolic steroid
stanozolol. The last known date as to when
Bond Master was treated with
stanozolol was on or around 3 September 2008, some six weeks and six days prior
to the race meeting
on 21 October 2008 to which he tested positive. Such
treatment was carried out by Mr Carr personally on such date. Prior to
date, Bond Master had been given repeated doses, up to seven in total, of 1
millimetre dosages of stanozolol.
prohibits a dog from
being presented for a race with a prohibited drug in its system. It does not
prevent a greyhound being given
such a drug on veterinary advice if such dog is
not racing. Anabolic steroids were banned in approximately July of 2008 and
such drugs as stanozolol. Widespread publicity that anabolic steroids
were banned in the greyhound racing industry then followed.
Notification in
greyhound magazines stated that veterinary advice should be sought. Mr Abel
before this Tribunal submitted that
was exactly what his client, Mr Carr, did
when he consulted Dr Bell. It should be stated that neither Dr Bell, veterinary
or Mr Carr, the appellant were called to give evidence at any stage
before this Tribunal.
Even accepting Dr Bell's letter into
evidence, as I have done - in fact it was read into the transcript - the weight
to be given
to such letter is a matter for the Tribunal considering that Dr Bell
was not called. Even on the surface it should be noted that
Dr Bell's letter
advised Mr Carr there was conflicting information as to the withholding period
in relation to anabolic steroids.
It should be stated that the evidence before
me both from Dr Vine, director of Racing Analytical Services Ltd and Dr Smith,
surgeon, is that there is no known scientific studies which could
provide accurate information to veterinary surgeons as to how long
would stay within a dog's system after it is administered.
addition, Dr Vine was of the opinion that accepting that what was put to him,
that the dog in question had some seven shots of
1 millimetre - millilitres, I
should say, prior - some weeks before the race, that it could be accumulative or
in fact a build up
effect within the dog's system which also may contribute to
slower excretion rates from the dog. It would appear that the opinions
veterinary surgeons is various to how long it takes after the administration of
stanozolol for such a drug to be excreted from
the dog's system. Dr Bell,
in his letter, stated that he advised his client Mr Carr that there was a
conflicting opinion about the
matter, but the general opinion that it was at
least 14 days.
It is unknown whether Dr Bell was informed by
Mr Carr that the dog in question had previously been on treatment of
stanozolol. His
opinion is not clear on the surface of the statutory
declaration; if it relates only to a single injection of stanozolol or not,
to accumulative doses. Nevertheless, I accept that to some extent Mr Carr
consulted his veterinary surgeon as to how long he
should wait before his dog
was to race after the drug had been administered. Mr Abel, who made a number of
submissions to the Tribunal,
all of which I have considered and taken into
account, submitted the appropriate penalty was of suspension and not
disqualification.
The central submission of Mr Abel was what more
can Mr Carr do? He has gone to a veterinary surgeon who says it is perfectly
permissible
to administer stanozolol, which it is, and they have relied on the
vet's advice as to how long he should wait before he should race
his greyhound
in order to ensure that there is no prohibited substance in the dog's system at
the time it races. Mr Abel has submitted
that in reality this is exactly what
Mr Carr did. He was advised that he had to wait at least 14 days and in
fact at the time his
dog Bond Master was swabbed, it was six weeks and six days,
well after the period that the veterinary surgeon had advised him of.
stated, neither Mr Carr nor Dr Bell gave evidence before me. Nevertheless, I am
prepared to at accept the matters set out
in the undated statutory declaration
of Dr Bell, even though it is not clear as to when Dr Bell gave such advice.
Against matters put in mitigation though, Mr Davis, who appeared
on behalf of the stewards, submitted that the industry in general
tolerate and should not tolerate anabolic steroids being in greyhounds at the
time of racing, and their use in fact would
be a blight on the industry. They
could be clearly used for improper purposes, submitted Mr Davis, giving dogs an
unfair advantage.
In particular, Mr Davis pointed out that even looking at Dr
Bell's statutory declaration, Dr Bell informed or made Mr Carr well
there was conflicting opinion about the matter, but Dr Bell had stipulated at
least 14 days and it is unknown whether
Dr Bell was talking about 14 days
per shot or what the situation was, if there had been accumulation of a number
of shots over a
period of time.
Of particular significance, Mr
Davis submitted on behalf of the stewards, was that for a simple fee of $150, Mr
Carr could have had
elective testing of Bond Master prior to returning to racing
to ensure that it had no prohibited substance within its system at the
racing. Such a service was well advertised in the greyhound racing industry and
readily available. Mr Davis submitted on
behalf of the stewards that of
great concern was that it was well publicised that anabolic steroids fell within
a Category 4 policy
offence and it was well advised that a person being found
guilty of such an offence, as a matter of policy, would ordinarily expect
year period of disqualification.
This policy was well publicised.
It was clear from the evidence tendered before me that such policy had been
released in the media
and in the greyhound racing industry. Mr Davis submitted
that overall, Mr Carr had been given by Dr Bell advice which was heavily
qualified in terms of there were conflicting opinions. On top of that, Mr Davis
submitted that Mr Carr had the means of discovering
what the true situation was
by either elective testing and further, that was shown by Mr Carr's own evidence
at the hearing below,
subsequent and easy research revealed to him that a period
of some four to six weeks was often suggested as a relevant period to
before the dog should race.
In my opinion, the matters put
forward by Mr Davis on behalf of the stewards have real force. Whilst the
matters put forward by
Mr Abel are relevant in mitigation of sentence - and I
accept that Mr Carr had sought advice from a veterinary surgeon as to an
appropriate
waiting or withholding period - they do not absolve Mr Carr from his
ultimate responsibility to make sure his dog does not race when
it is not free
from a prohibited substance. I also accept that in mitigation that Mr Carr has
had some 22 years in the industry
and has an unblemished record. In the end, I
agree with the comments of His Honour Judge Maguire in the Greyhound and Harness
Appeals Tribunal decision of the appeal of Magnisalis dated on 14 January
2009 in New South Wales who stated as follows:
"Trainers in situations such as present before this Tribunal often seek
to rely upon veterinary advice received as an excuse. The
fact of the matter,
however, is that the trainer has the ultimate responsibility. Incorrect
veterinary advice does not constitute
a shield. It is not an automatic
protection from penalty if a dog is not presented drug free. It is almost the
invariable result
that a disqualification follows the presentation of a dog
which is not drug free. Indeed, this Tribunal is unaware of any breach
subject rule which does not result in disqualification."
In arriving at the appropriate penalty, in my opinion general
deterrence has clear application in this case. It is of paramount
that the integrity of the greyhound racing industry, and indeed, all racing be
maintained. It is paramount that all dogs
race at a level playing field.
Anabolic steroids do not create a level playing field. I have also taken into
account in mitigation
that Mr Carr is a married man, has about 20 dogs in work
and owns his own property and works for the Department of Human Services.
opinion, whilst not without some sympathy for Mr Carr's position, it is clear
that it is the trainer's responsibility to present
his or her dog at a race
meeting free from prohibited drugs.
Whilst each case must be
decided on its own merits, there was clear policy that steroids were banned and
they fell within a Category
4 offence which would ordinarily result in a two
year period of disqualification. Considering all the relevant matters, I am of
the opinion that disqualification is the only appropriate penalty and that
period should be fixed at seven months from today's date.
I should add that
such decision was mine and mine alone, but it is the unanimous decision of my
advisers as well. The Tribunal
would also like to make the following comment.
As a result of evidence called before this Tribunal, Dr Vine and Dr Smith gave
that there is, at present, no scientific or medical foundation for
determining exactly how long a drug such as an anabolic steroid
stays within a
dog's system after it is administered. Clearly veterinary surgeons within the
industry have different opinions as
to how long is an appropriate period for a
withholding between the time the anabolic steroid is administered and the time
In my opinion, it may be prudent for the industry
to at least publicise that fact, namely that there appears to be no known
scientifically
defined time as to how long an anabolic steroid might stay within
a dog's system after it is administered, and that accordingly,
it may be prudent
after the administration of an anabolic steroid to advise your client to have
elective testing done to see if such
substance still remains within the dog's
system. These are all matters for the industry, and there may be quite
practical reasons
why my comments should not even be followed or in fact taken
heed of. It is all matters for the greyhound racing industry to consider.
order refund of the deposit.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (51.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter