URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Brown v Australian Securities Services Pty Ltd [1998] VADT 12 (23 September 1998)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LIST
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
s13(a) and (c) - discrimination
against job applicants - age.
COMPLAINT NUMBER No. 119 of 1997
COMPLAINANT William John Brown
RESPONDENT Australian Securities Services P/L
BEFORE Bernadette Cremean, Member
WHERE HELD Melbourne
DATE OF HEARING 23 September 1998
DATE OF DECISION 21 October 1998
DECISION Complaint dismissed
APPEARANCES:
COMPLAINANT Mr Steven Brown
RESPONDENT Mr Flower of Counsel
REASONS FOR DECISION
The Proceeding
On the 21 June 1996 the Complainant lodged with the Equal Opportunity
Commission (the Commission) a complaint under the
Equal Opportunity Act
(the Act) claiming unlawful discrimination on the ground of age in the
area of employment. By letter of 30 June 1997, the Commission
referred the
complaint to the Tribunal. The referral was required by the Complainant and was
on the basis that the complaint was
non-conciliable.
A preliminary conference was held on 30 July 1997 at which the parties were
directed to serve and file particulars of complaint and
defence. The Complainant
served and filed particulars of complaint on 13 August 1997. The Respondent
served and filed particulars
of defence on 16 October 1997.
At a call over on 3 September 1998 the Respondent was ordered to file and
serve witness statements on or before 16 September 1998.
In addition both
parties were ordered to file and serve any further material upon which the
proposed to rely on or before 20 September
1998. On 16 September 1998 the
Respondent filed witness statements. The matter was heard on 23 September
The Legislation
The relevant provisions of the Act that apply in this case are as
Definitions
In this Act-
"attribute"
means an attribute in Section 6;
"discrimination"
has the meaning given in
The following are the attributes on the basis of which discrimination is
prohibited in the areas of activity set out in
Meaning of discrimination
(1) Discrimination means direct or indirect discrimination on the basis of an
(2) Discrimination on the basis of an attribute includes discrimination on
(a) that a person has that attribute or had it at any time, whether or not he
or she had it at the time of the discrimination;
(b) of a characteristic that people with that attribute generally has;
(c) of a characteristic that is generally imputed to a person with that
(d) that a person is presumed to have that attribute or to have had it at any
Direct discrimination
(1) Direct discrimination occurs if a person treats, or proposes to treat,
someone with an attribute less favourably than the person
treats or would treat
someone without that attribute, or with a different attribute, in the same or
similar circumstances.
(2) In determining whether a person directly discriminates it is
irrelevant-
(a) whether or not that person is aware of the discrimination or considers
the treatment less favourable;
whether or not the attribute is the only
or dominant reason for the treatment, as long as it is a substantial
Discrimination against job applicants
An employer must not discriminate against a person-
(a) in determining who should be offered employment;
(c) by refusing or deliberately omitting to offer employment to the
3.Applicable principles of law.
The Complainant claims discrimination on the basis of age. As indirect
discrimination was not alleged, the Tribunal restricts its
comments to direct
discrimination. In the context of this case, direct discrimination will be
established if the Complainant can
prove he was treated less favourably by the
Respondent than a person younger that he in the same or materially similar
circumstances.
Age must be a substantial reason for this treatment (section 8).
Discrimination is only prohibited in areas covered by the Act and
in this case
section 13(a) and (c) are the relevant provisions.
4. Evidence.
With leave the Complainant was represented by his son, Mr Stephen Brown. The
Respondent was represented by Mr. Andrew Flower of Counsel.
It is agreed that on 15 April 1996 Mr William Brown rang the offices of
Australian Security Services P/L and spoke to Mr Stuart Fife,
a director of the
company, regarding employment as a security guard. It is also agreed the phone
call was unsolicited and that the
Respondent took down the Complainant's
particulars including his qualifications, experience, height, weight and
Evidence for the Complainant
Mr William Brown
The Complainant testified that when he had given his qualifications, the
Respondent appeared interested in giving him a job but was
told there wasn't one
available at the time. The Complainant says that when he stated his age (68 yrs)
the Respondent changed his
attitude. He became negative. In evidence the
Complainant said, "Here we go again, no job because of my age". At the time the
Complainant
had been ringing around other agencies, it being a common practice
for job applicants to register with companies by telephone. In
support the
Complainant exhibited a booklet (exhibit A) detailing various telephone
applications. Since 15 April 1996, the Complainant
has not heard from the
Respondent regarding any employment. Under cross-examination the Complainant
agreed that the phone call had
been unsolicited, that there had been no
advertisements placed by the Respondent company nor had any approaches been made
Respondent. He further agreed the Respondent had said be was periodically
employing staff and that his details would be recorded
on a list. The
Complainant admitted he found employment 2 months after the incident and was
employed at the time he issued the proceedings.
Mr Stephen Brown
Mr Stephen Brown gave evidence of the impact the incident had on the
Complainant but rejected any suggestion that he had coerced his
father into
making the complaint.
Evidence for the Respondent
1. Mr Stuart Fife
Mr Fife adopted his statement in evidence and confirmed he had taken the
Complainant's particulars. He says he told the Complainant
he would file away
his details as the company had a solid core of regular guards who were looked
after first. He stated in evidence
that the company didn't have any positions
available at the time. He disagreed with the Complainant's recollection of the
and denies that he spoke to him in an abrupt and pessimistic way.
In cross-examination Mr Fife stated his oldest employee guard was aged 50
years but added he hadn't had anyone ever the age of 50
apply for a security
guard position.
Mr John Trengove
Mr Trengove who was a part-time bookkeeper for the company adopted his
statement in evidence. He says he was present in Mr. Fife's
office at the
relevant time and he heard the phone call. He agrees with Mr. Fife's
recollection of the conversation. He further stated
he didn't detect any
negative tone on the part of Mr Fife.
The Submissions
It was submitted on behalf of the Complainant that because "everything
changed when asked about his age" Section 13(a) of the Act
had been breached.
Secondly it was said that as the Complainant had not received a job offer since
15 April 1996, section 13(c) of
the Act had been breached. Finally it was put
that section 22(2) of the Act had been contravened as the Complainant possessed
the necessary training, qualifications and experience.
Mr Flower, for the Respondent, submitted the following.
First it was said, that on the evidence, the approach by the Complainant
could not give rise to an offer of employment capable of
being accepted. That as
there had been no solicitation, no advertising, and no position available, no
offer of employment could have
been made. Accordingly there was no relevant
determination for the purposes of Section 13(a) of the Act. In support of that
proposition
the reasoning of
Inquiry regarding the Commissioner of Police
(1984) EOC 92-016
at p 75, 448-9 was adopted. Secondly it was contended that in
respect of section 13(c) there was no evidence to prove that ground.
been no communication since 15 April 1996 and in fact the Complainant had been
in employment since June 1996. In respect
of section 22(2) of the Act it was
said that as it was a definition section relating to an exception, it was not
relevant. Finally
it was submitted that the issue relating to the attribute of
age was the interpretation to be given to an attitude over the phone.
basis of all the evidence there was no breach of either section 13(a) or (c),
accordingly the claim should be dismissed.
Based on the evidence before it, the Tribunal makes the following
The Tribunal accepts the Respondent's
submission as to whether employment should have been offered to the Complainant.
The Tribunal
is satisfied that the approach by the Complainant could not have
given rise to an offer of employment capable of being accepted.
It cannot be
said there was a position available at the time of the phone call. As to any
future offers of employment there was no
obligation on the part of the
Respondent to make such an offer. There had been no communication between the
parties since 15 April
1996 and the Complainant had been in other employment
since June 1996.
There is no evidence
establishing that the Complainant was treated less favourably by reason of his
age. The main issue is the interpretation
to be given to the phone conversation
of 15 April 1996. The Complainant did not persuade the Tribunal of a consistent
version and
in regard that the Complainant's evidence was unreliable. Where it
differed, Mr Fife's evidence was preferred. As to the tone of
the conversation
the Tribunal has been asked to infer less favourable treatment because of a
perceived change. The Tribunal is unwilling
to draw such an inference. Having
regard to the evidence of Mr Trengove, the Tribunal is not even persuaded that
there was a change
Accordingly the Tribunal is not
satisfied that the Respondent has breached either section 13(a) or section 13(c)
of the Act. As for
the claim made under section 22(2) of the Act, such a claim
has no foundation in law.
The Tribunal finds that the complaint should be dismissed.
The Respondent did not apply for costs. Accordingly no order is made as to
No. 119 of 1997
This complaint having come on for hearing before the Tribunal on 23 September
1998, and on hearing the parties THIS TRIBUNAL DOES
That this complaint be
That there is no order as to
Dated this 21st day of October 1998.
Ms Bernadette Cremean
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (26.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter