URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Readdie v People Shop Pty Ltd (Penalty) [2025] VMC 3 (9 April 2025)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
No. N11679381
LAUREN READDIE
PEOPLE SHOP PTY LTD T/AS ERUDITE LEGAL
MAGISTRATE:
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
11 March 2025
DATE OF DECISION:
9 April 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS:
Readdie v People Shop Pty Ltd (Penalty)
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VMC 3
INDUSTRIAL LAW –
Fair Work Act 2009
Judiciary Act 1903
– pecuniary penalty orders – course of conduct – whether a
proceeding commenced as a small claim can be amended
to a non-small claim
proceeding – application of State laws as to amendment of pleadings when
exercising federal jurisdiction
– factors relevant to determining
appropriate penalty – relevance of prior contraventions of senior manager
– contrition,
cooperation and corrective action – conduct of
defendant during proceeding.
APPEARANCES:
For the Plaintiff
Lauren Readdie
Litigant in person
For the Defendant
HER HONOUR:
INTRODUCTION
proceeding concerns claims made by Ms Readdie under the
Fair Work Act 2009
) against her former employer People Shop relating to her
employment as a solicitor between 17 February 2022 and 13 March 2022. I
determined these claims on 27 November 2024 (
Liability Decision
the following orders:
1. The Defendant is ordered to pay the sum of $7,913.84 to the Plaintiff.
Defendant is ordered to pay the sum of $271.89 to the Plaintiff’s
nominated superannuation fund.
Defendant has contravened the following provisions of the
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) (the Act):
of the Act, by contravening
of the Act by requiring the Plaintiff to
work more than 38 hours in the weeks of 14 February, 21 February and 7 March
those additional hours being unreasonable;
of the Act, by failing to pay the Plaintiff as required on 27 February
2022 and 27 March 2022;
of the Act, in respect of its payment to her of $1000 on 6 March 2022, by
failing to keep pay records required by r 3.33 of the
Fair Work Regulations
(Cth) (the Regulations);
535(1) of the Act, in respect of the failure to keep overtime records required
by r 3.34 of the Regulations;
535(1) of the Act, in respect of the failure to keep superannuation records
required by r 3.37 of the Regulations; and
536(1) of the Act, in respect of its payment to her of $1000 on 6 March 2022, by
failing to provide a pay slip containing the information
set out in r 4.36 of
the Regulations.
546(1) of the Act provides that an eligible State or Territory court may order a
person to pay a pecuniary penalty that the
court considers is appropriate if the
court is satisfied that the person has contravened a civil remedy provision.
This decision
concerns Ms Readdie’s remaining claim for the imposition of
civil penalties in respect of People Shop’s contraventions
of civil remedy
provisions under the Act, along with interest pursuant to s 547 of the Act.
Readdie filed written submissions regarding these matters in accordance with my
directions. People Shop did not file any written
material. Both parties made
oral submissions at the penalty hearing on 11 March 2025. I have had regard to
the parties’ submissions
and the evidence and findings in the Liability
Decision. This decision assumes familiarity with the Liability Decision and
terms have the same meaning in both.
Shop raised two jurisdictional issues. Firstly, People Shop contended that an
amendment to Ms Readdie’s claim to remove
her election that it be dealt
with as a small claim pursuant to s 548 of the Act, and to add a claim for
penalties, was invalid because
s 548 does not permit such an amendment.
Secondly, People Shop argued that the decision to allow Ms Readdie to amend her
invalid on procedural grounds.
the relevant time,
s 548 of the Act
548 Plaintiffs may choose small claims procedure
(1) Proceedings are to be dealt with as small claims proceedings under this
section if:
(a) a person applies for an order (other than a pecuniary penalty order) under
Division 2 from a magistrates court or the Federal
Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (Division 2); and
(b) the order relates to an amount referred to in subsection (1A); and
(c) the person indicates, in a manner prescribed by the regulations or by the
rules of the court, that he or she wants the small
claims procedure to apply to
the proceedings.
(1A) The amounts are as follows:
(a) an amount that an employer was required to pay to, or on behalf of, an
(i) under this Act or a fair work instrument; or
(ii) because of a safety net contractual entitlement; or
(iii) because of an entitlement of the employee arising under
subsection 542(1);
(b) an amount that an outworker entity was required to pay to, or on
behalf of, an outworker under a modern award.
(1B) Proceedings are also to be dealt with as small claims proceedings
under this section if:
(a) a person applies for an order (other than a pecuniary penalty order)
under Division 2 from a magistrates court or the Federal
Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division 2) in connection with a dispute relating to
one or more of the following matters:
(i) whether a casual employee meets the requirements of either or both of
paragraphs 66B(1)(a) and (b);
(ii) whether an employer of a casual employee has reasonable grounds under
section 66C not to make an offer to the employee to convert
full‑time or part‑time employment under section 66B;
(iii) whether a casual employee may make a request of an employer to
convert to full‑time or part‑time employment under
section 66F;
(iv) whether an employer of a casual employee has reasonable grounds under
section 66H to refuse a request from the employee made
section 66F; and
(b) the person applying for the order indicates, in a manner prescribed by
the regulations or by the rules of the court, that he
or she wants the small
claims procedure to apply to the proceedings.
[note omitted]
Limits on award
(2) In small claims proceedings, the court may not award more
(a) $20,000; or
(b) if a higher amount is prescribed by the regulations—that
higher amount.
(3) In small claims proceedings, the court is not bound by any rules of
evidence and procedure and may act:
(a) in an informal manner; and
(b) without regard to legal forms and technicalities.
(4) At any stage of the small claims proceedings, the court may amend the papers
commencing the proceedings if sufficient notice
is given to any party adversely
affected by the amendment.
Legal representation
(5) A party to small claims proceedings may be represented in the
proceedings by a lawyer only with the leave of the court.
(6) If the court grants leave for a party to the proceedings to be
represented by a lawyer, the court may, if it considers appropriate,
subject to conditions designed to ensure that no other party is unfairly
disadvantaged.
(7) For the purposes of this section, a person is taken not to be
represented by a lawyer if the lawyer is an employee or officer
Representation by an industrial association
(8) The regulations may provide for a party to small claims proceedings to
be represented in the proceedings, in specified circumstances,
by an official of
an industrial association.
(9) However, if small claims proceedings are heard in a court of a State,
the regulations may so provide only if the law of the
State allows a party to be
represented in that court in those circumstances by officials of bodies
representing interests related
to the matters in dispute.
relevant procedural history is as follows.
Readdie elected on her Form 13A Complaint, as filed, to have the matter heard as
a small claim, as provided for by the applicable
rules of the
She obtained a default order
on her claim on 22 November 2022. On 1 December 2022, People Shop applied for a
re-hearing in respect
of the default order. On 22 December 2022, after People
Shop’s application for re-hearing had been made but prior to its
determination,
Ms Readdie filed and served a document (
the December
) stating as follows:
APPLICATION FOR ORDERS IN RELATION TO CONTRAVENTIONS OF CIVIL REMEDY
PROVISIONS:
FAIR WORK ACT 2009
In relation to complaint: N11679381
I wish to exercise the right afforded to me by
s 540(1)(a)
(Cth) to request that orders be made against my former employer -
People Shop Pty Ltd, trading as Erudite Legal - in relation to contraventions
civil remedy provisions. I cite the following eligible contraventions:
An employer must not contravene a provision of the National
Employment Standards
maximum weekly hours
compassionate leave
Method and frequency of payment
(1) An employer must pay an employee amounts payable to the employee in relation
to the performance of work:
(a) in full (except as provided by
section 324)
(b) in money by one, or a combination, of the methods referred to in subsection
(c) at least monthly.
Shop’s re-hearing application was granted on 3 April 2023 by a Judicial
Registrar, and the Judicial Registrar also ordered
as follows:
The Plaintiff's [Complaint] is amended so that the proceeding is no longer a
matter to which the Small Claims Procedure in
Fair Work Act 2009
applies, and that the notice the Plaintiff filed on 22 December 2022 is taken to
form an annexure to the Plaintiff's complaint (
3 April Order
a Directions Hearing before me on 14 June 2023, Ms Readdie confirmed that she
was pursuing civil penalties and that she had filed
and served the December
Notice. I confirmed that the Judicial Registrar had made the order referred to
above. People Shop also sought
particulars of Ms Readdie’s damages claim.
I proposed that Ms Readdie file and serve an amended claim including her
penalty claim and particulars of her damages claim. People Shop
submitted that this would be an appropriate course. I ordered:
1. On or before 16 June 2023 the Plaintiff has leave to file and serve an
amended claim and particulars of claim including her claim
for pecuniary
penalties and her claim for general damages (which may be provided by way of
attachments to the complaint).
2. On or before 23 June 2023 the Defendant is to file and serve any further
defence to the amended claim.
16 June 2023, Ms Readdie filed a document (
AMENDMENT TO PLAINTIFF'S CLAIM
Please note that on Page 6 of the Form 13A, the following section should be
amended to read:
ORDERS SOUGHT
The plaintiff seeks orders that the defendant do either or both of the
Pay monies in the sum of the breaches claimed: $11,378.36 - as calculated in
application.
Impose a penalty: Y - outlined in the document entitled Application for Orders
in Relation to Contraventions of Civil Remedy Provisions'.
Please also see
document entitled 'Email sent 22 Dec'.
Do something else: An award of general and/or pecuniary damages, of an amount in
the vicinity of $10,000 - $15,000, or other amount
as awarded by the court -
outlined in the documents entitled 'Application for ... Orders in Relation to
Contraventions of Civil Remedy
Provisions and Applicant's Submissions Regarding
the Possibility of Entitlement to Damages'.
Shop did not subsequently file any amended defence, or otherwise take issue with
Ms Readdie’s penalties claim. Instead,
People Shop pursued its Conspiracy
Application
and the proceeding then
took the course summarised in the Liability
548 of the Act can be enlivened when a person applies for an order in respect of
an amount that an employer was required to
pay to, or on behalf of, an employee
under the Act or a fair work
instrument.
Where a person
indicates that they want the small claims procedure to apply to proceedings, s
548 governs the procedure which this
Court must apply to those
proceedings.
The small claims
procedure under s 548 of the Act cannot be used where a person seeks a pecuniary
penalty order.
548(4) deals expressly with amendment of the papers commencing a proceeding. The
crux of People Shop’s first jurisdictional
argument is that s 548(4) of
the Act is a complete statement of the power of the Court to allow amendments to
a small claim and does
not empower the Court to allow an amendment from a small
claim to a non-small claim. I accept People Shop’s contention that
548(4) only operates insofar as a proceeding remains a small claim. I conclude
that the purpose of s 548, as evident from its text,
in the context of the
compliance and enforcement regime established in Chapter 4 of the Act, is to
establish a less onerous procedure
for determining claims of low monetary value.
The monetary limit for a small claim, at the relevant time, was
Section 548 relaxes a
number of aspects of practice and procedure commonly associated with the
determination of civil claims. The
court is not bound by rules of evidence and
procedure and may act in an informal manner and without regard to legal forms
and technicalities.
A party may
only be represented by a lawyer with leave of the court, which may be granted
conditionally so as to not unfairly disadvantage
Representation by
industrial associations is
facilitated.
Viewed in this
context, the amendment power in s 548(4) is a specific instance of the
informality, absence of legal form and technicality
referred to in s 548(3). It
provides a court with broad power to allow amendments to a small claim at any
stage, with the only procedural
requirement being sufficient notice to a party
adversely affected. Given this, I do not consider s 548(4) permits an amendment
a claim with the effect that s 548 no longer applies to that claim.
I do not accept that s 548(4) is a complete statement of the circumstances in
which Ms Readdie’s claim may be amended.
Section 548(4) is silent as to
the procedure for amendment of a small claim to a non-small claim. As such,
there is a ‘gap’
in respect of the applicable powers and procedure
for such amendments.
dealing with Ms Readdie’s claim, this Court is exercising federal
Section 79(1)
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) provides:
(1) The laws of each State or Territory, including the laws relating to
procedure, evidence and the competency of witnesses, shall,
except as otherwise
provided by the
Constitution
or the laws of the Commonwealth, be binding on all
Courts exercising federal jurisdiction in that State or Territory in all cases
to which they are applicable.
Masson v Parsons
the High Court described the purpose and effect of
As was explained in
Rizeq v Western Australia
, the purpose of
Judiciary Act
is to fill a gap in the laws which regulate matters coming
before courts exercising federal jurisdiction by providing those courts
powers necessary for the hearing and determination of those matters. In the case
of a State court exercising federal jurisdiction
... such a gap exists by reason
of the absence of State legislative power to command a court as to the manner of
its exercise of
federal jurisdiction. In such cases,
fills the gap by
picking up the texts of State laws governing the manner of exercise of State
laws governing the manner of
exercise of federal jurisdiction.
[Citations omitted].
Accordingly,
this Court may rely on the application of its own procedural rules as
Commonwealth laws to fill the ‘gap’
left by s 548(4). Relevantly,
Magistrates Court General Civil Procedure Rules 2020
) provides that at any stage in a proceeding, this Court
may grant leave to amend any document (including a complaint or pleading)
the purpose of determining the real question in controversy between the parties
to any proceeding, correcting any defect or error
or avoiding multiplicity of
proceedings. The Court may exercise any power under the rules of its own motion
or on application of
is also empowered to dispense with compliance with the requirements of the
Magistrates’
Court Act 1989
) provides that the Industrial Division
of the Court is obliged to exercise its jurisdiction with the minimum of legal
form and technicality.
conclude that the application of these provisions pursuant to
Judiciary Act
empowered this Court to permit the amendment of Ms Readdie’s
small claim to a non-small claim and to include her claim for
penalties. Accordingly, I reject People Shop’s first jurisdictional
People Shop’s second jurisdictional argument is based on alleged
procedural deficiencies associated with the Judicial Registrar’s
In particular, People Shop contends that the 3 April Order amended Ms
Readdie’s claim on the Judicial Registrar’s
own motion, without an
application and (referring to
Chief Commissioner of Police v
with insufficient
reasons. People Shop contends that the Court lacks jurisdiction accordingly.
conclude that I am entitled to proceed on the basis of the Judicial
Registrar’s decision as it stands. Review of a Judicial
Registrar’s
determination is provided for under section 16K of the MC Act and the rules of
An application for
review is required to be made, supported by affidavit, within 14 days after the
date on which the determination
No review in respect of
the 3 April Order has been applied for or conducted. The matter was raised for
the first time as a jurisdictional
argument at the Penalty Hearing. Accordingly,
I reject People Shop’s second jurisdictional argument.
any event, in addition to the 3 April Order, the amendments to Ms
Readdie’s claim to include the pecuniary penalty claims
were subsequently
confirmed by way of the June Amendment. People Shop consented to my orders
permitting this amendment and did not
file any amended defence or otherwise take
issue with the addition of these claims. Consistent with both the 3 April Order
June Amendment, Ms Readdie’s claim was not heard as a small claim
pursuant to s 548. It was heard and determined by the Court
as an ordinary
Industrial Division proceeding.
LEGAL PRINCIPLES FOR DETERMINING APPROPRIATE PENALTIES
purpose of civil penalties is primarily, if not solely, the promotion of the
public interest in compliance with the Act by both
specific and general
deterrence of further
contraventions.
A civil penalty
must be ‘fixed with a view to ensuring that it is not regarded by the
contravenor or others as an acceptable
cost of doing
purpose of general deterrence, it is important to send a message that the
relevant contraventions are serious and not
acceptable.
‘appropriate’ civil penalty will not exceed what is reasonably
necessary to achieve the deterrence of future contraventions
of a like kind by
the contravenor and others,
will strike a reasonable balance between oppressive severity and the need for
deterrence.
circumstances of the contravenor as well as the conduct involved in the
contravention may be considered, as both may bear
on the need for
deterrence.
maximum penalty is one factor in determining an appropriate penalty, in that
there must be some reasonable relationship between
the theoretical maximum and
the penalty imposed.
the maximum penalty is not to be applied
‘mechanically.’
factors which may be relevant to determining an appropriate penalty in respect
of the Act include: the nature and extent of
the contravening conduct; the
amount of loss or damage caused; the circumstances in which the conduct took
place; the size of the
contravening company and its market power; the
deliberateness of the contravention and the period over which it extended;
the contravention arose out of the conduct of senior management or a
lower level; whether the contravener has a corporate culture
conducive to
compliance or had taken corrective action; whether the contravenor has
cooperated with authorities responsible for enforcement
of the Act in relation
to the contravention; whether there has been any similar previous conduct by the
contravenor; whether the
contravenor had exhibited contrition; and the need to
ensure compliance with minimum standards by provision of an effective means
investigation and enforcement.
These factors are non-exhaustive and should not be applied as a
Consistent with
remains the primary factor, with these other factors to be ‘seen through
the prism of what is necessary to achieve
deterrence.’
the principles of totality, parity and course of conduct derived from criminal
sentencing may assist in the assessment of
what is considered reasonably
necessary to achieve deterrence.
Ultimately, as with criminal sentencing, determination of a civil penalty is an
evaluative exercise, taking account the relevant
factors through a process of
‘instinctive
synthesis.’
considering appropriate penalties I have followed the established procedural
approach as set out in
Fair Work Ombudsman v NSH North Pty Ltd
(1) Identify the separate contraventions, with each breach of each obligation
being a separate contravention, and each breach of
a term ... being a separate
contravention.
(2) Consider whether each separate contravention should be dealt with
independently or with some degree of aggregation for those
contraventions
arising out of a course of conduct, noting that s 557 of the FW Act provides
that two or more contraventions of a
given civil remedy provision are to be
taken to be a single contravention if committed by the same person and arising
out of a course
of conduct by that person.
(3) Consider whether there should be further adjustment to ensure that, to the
extent of any overlap between groups of separate aggregated
contraventions,
there is no double penalty imposed, and that the penalty is an appropriate
response ...
(4) Consider the appropriate penalty in respect of each final individual group
of contraventions, taken in isolation.
(5) Consider the overall penalties arrived at ... and apply the totality
principle, to ensure that the penalties ... are appropriate
and proportionate to
the conduct viewed as a whole, making such adjustments as are
CONSIDERATION OF APPROPRIATE PENALTIES
Identifying the contraventions
1 is to identify each individual contravention. Ms Readdie contends that
penalties should be imposed in respect of each of the
contraventions referred to
in my 27 November 2024 order, including contraventions of ss 535 and 536 of the
Act. However, whilst
Ms Readdie alleged contravention of these provisions in
her Complaint, she did not state that she sought the imposition of penalties
respect of these contraventions in either the December Notice or the June
Amendment. Those documents contain Ms Readdie’s
pecuniary penalty claim.
They state that her claim for penalties relates (relevantly) to contraventions
of: s 44(1) of the Act in
respect of s 61(2)(a) maximum weekly hours and s
323(1) of the Act in respect of non-payment.
Accordingly,
I do not consider it was sufficiently apparent from Ms Readdie’s Complaint
that she sought penalties in respect
of contraventions of ss 535 and 536 of the
Act. The imposition of penalties is a serious consequence and I consider People
entitled to know which contraventions were the subject of the penalty
claim. Despite having determined that People Shop contravened
ss 535 and 536 of
the Act, I consider the Court is confined to imposing penalties only in respect
of those contraventions which Ms
Readdie identified in the December Notice and
the June Amendment.
Course of conduct considerations
2 is to apply s 557 of the Act to ascertain whether there should be an
aggregation for contraventions arising out of a course
of conduct. Section 557
relevantly provides:
(1) For the purposes of this Part, 2 or more contraventions of a civil remedy
provision referred to in subsection (2) are ... taken
to constitute a single
contravention if:
(a) the contraventions are committed by the same person; and
(b) the contraventions arose out of a course of conduct by the person.
(2) The civil remedy provisions are the following:
(a) section 44 (which deals with
contraventions of the National Employment Standards);
(g) subsection 323(1) (which deals with methods and frequency
of payment); ...
Unreasonable Hours Contraventions
were three separate contraventions of s 44, for the weeks of 14 February, 21
February and 7 March 2022. In each case, People
Shop required Ms Readdie to work
more than 38 hours. Those additional hours were unreasonable, in contravention
of s 62(1) of the
Act. Ms Readdie contended that these should not be treated as
a group or course of conduct, because in each week, the factors which
hours unreasonable varied, and the conduct escalated, compounding on each
occasion. People Shop did not make any submissions
in respect of this
contention.
Readdie relied on the decision in
Fair Work Ombudsman v Melotte
support of her contention. In
, the court considered an agreement
reached between parties as to penalties. This included treating
‘unreasonable hours’
contraventions in respect of two different
employees as two separate
contraventions.
The Fair Work
Ombudsman contended that because each employee worked their own roster, the
requirement upon each of them to work unreasonable
additional hours was separate
and the matters relevant to determining whether additional hours are
unreasonable were specific to
each employee. The court accepted that the two
contraventions should not be treated as a single course of conduct for the
decision in
does not expressly state how many contraventions
occurred in respect of each employee. However, I infer there were multiple,
they related to rosters for a period of over two
multiple contraventions for each employee were treated by the Court as a single
contravention despite treating the individual
employees separately. Here, the
contraventions each related to Ms Readdie and occurred over successive weeks
(leaving aside her absence
from work).
some specific matters as to Ms Readdie’s personal circumstances in each
relevant week differed, many of the circumstances
relevant to consideration of
the unreasonableness of the requirement, both in respect of her circumstances
and People Shop’s
conduct, were common and cumulative. Accordingly, I
consider People Shop’s ‘unreasonable hours’ contraventions
comprise a course of conduct for the purpose of s 557 and that the Court is
required to treat them as a single contravention. This
is consistent with the
treatment of multiple contraventions in respect of a single employee in
Accordingly, I will impose a single penalty in respect of the
contraventions of s 44(1) of the Act in respect of s 61(2)(a) maximum
Failure to pay contraventions
were two separate contraventions of s 323(1), in respect of each of the
occasions People Shop failed to pay Ms Readdie as required
by her Contract on 27
February 2022 and 27 March 2022.
Readdie contended that these should not be characterised as a course of conduct
for the purposes of s 557, as the failure to make
the first payment may have
been based on an inadequate or defective system, whereas the second could only
be characterised as deliberate.
People Shop did not make any submissions on this
question. However, I do not consider that the differential matters raised by Ms
Readdie derogate from the Court’s obligation to recognise these
contraventions as a course of conduct and treat them as a single
contravention
pursuant to s 557. Accordingly, I will impose a single penalty in respect of
the contraventions of s 323(1) of the
Determining appropriate penalties
Readdie contended that in determining appropriate penalties the Court should
have regard to what she characterised as: People Shop’s
deliberate and
malicious evasion of its obligations; the higher standard required of an
incorporated legal practice; previous contraventions
of the Act by Mr Shivesh
Kuksal (sole shareholder of People Shop); and People Shop’s abuses of
process and the making of vexatious
allegations against her in the proceeding
with the intent to force her into abandoning her claim.
was not in dispute that People Shop has not complied with my orders of 27
November 2024 which required compensation payments to
be made to and on behalf
of Ms Readdie to address the contravention of s 323(1) of the Act.
Shop contended that it had not made those payments because it intends to
challenge the Liability Decision on various grounds,
along with this decision.
People Shop further contended that the Court should not have regard to previous
contraventions of the Act
by Mr Kuksal.
considering the appropriate penalty, I have had regard to these submissions, and
have considered the relevant non-exhaustive
insofar as they are
raised by the parties in submissions or by way of the evidence and findings in
the Liability Decision. I have
considered each of these matters in the context
that they inform what penalty is reasonably necessary to achieve both specific
general deterrence of further contraventions.
Factors relevant to the Unreasonable Hours
Contravention
nature and extent of the Unreasonable Hours Contravention, the circumstances in
which it took place and its impact on Ms Readdie
led me to conclude in the
Liability Decision that the contraventions were particularly
The nature and extent
of the conduct is summarised in the Liability Decision as follows:
[136] The sheer number of hours [Ms Readdie] was required to work are, in my
view, self-evidently excessive. The times of the day,
night and weekends she was
required to work were arbitrary and unusual. ... The requirement that she work
excessive hours whilst
staying in a hotel room with Mr Kuksal and Ms Xu deprived
her of any form of personal autonomy or agency without any rational
justification
apparent. Whilst performing the additional hours, Ms
Readdie’s time was monopolised by People Shop. .... Mr Kuksal’s
requirement that Ms Readdie watch the Ice Hockey movie, unrelated to her work,
at around 1am on a Sunday morning after having already
worked approximately 14
hours on a Saturday, and maintain communication with him whilst doing so, was on
any view unreasonable.
circumstances in which the conduct took place included that Ms Readdie’s
employment with People Shop was her first job as
meaning she had no
experience of how law firms ordinarily operate by which to judge the
requirements on her.
they included that Ms Readdie was rarely provided with notice of the hours she
would be required to work, and was often
not aware what time she would start or
how long she would be required to work on any given
effect of the contravention on Ms Readdie was significant. The hours she worked
contributed to an exacerbation of her pre-existing
The requirement that
she work unreasonable hours impeded her ability to make arrangements for her
mother returning home from hospital
after a serious illness, caused her to be
unavailable to see her mother on her birthday, and she was required to work on a
which she had sought and obtained leave to attend her former
partner’s funeral.
unreasonable hours impeded her capacity to obtain a reasonable amount of sleep
and caused her to be isolated, both physically
and in her capacity to
communicate, from her family.
Further, in all the circumstances, they made her working environment so
repugnant that it constituted a repudiatory breach of Contract
leading to the
end of her employment by way of her acceptance of that
my finding that Ms Readdie only worked when required by People
it is evident that People
Shop’s requirement that Ms Readdie work the hours I have held to be
unreasonable was deliberate.
duration of the contravention was short, in the sense that it occurred only in
three separate weeks. However, those three weeks
comprised the entirety of Ms
Readdie’s employment, save for her period of unpaid personal
Factors relevant to the Failure to Pay Contravention
quantum of loss and damage sustained by Ms Readdie due to the contravention of s
323(1) is relatively modest. However, in context,
the amount represented the
whole of the salary Ms Readdie was entitled to for the entirety of her
employment, save for the single
$1000 payment made to her.
conclude that People Shop’s contravention of s 323(1) of the Act was
deliberate. The obligations in s 323(1) relate directly
to the obligations on
People Shop to comply with the terms of its own Contract with Ms Readdie. It
failed to do so. In respect of
the February Payment Month, the explanations
provided to Ms Readdie were variously that it needed to be ‘clear to
that People Shop was waiting for another employee’s
details to process both in the same pay run and the complexity of the payroll
However, there was no
evidence to substantiate any administrative difficulty and I am not persuaded
that this was a cause of the
non-payment. In any event, the deposit of $1000 to
Ms Readdie on 6 March 2022 illustrates that People Shop had capacity to pay Ms
Readdie despite any issues with the payroll system. In addition, the failure to
pay Ms Readdie for the February Payment Month occurred
in the context of Mr
Kuksal attempting to reduce Ms Readdie’s rate of pay for overtime hours by
way of the Second Contract.
attempt at all was made to pay Ms Readdie for the March Payment Month.
with the unreasonable hours Ms Readdie was required to work, the failure to pay
Ms Readdie was a repudiatory breach of the Contract,
accepted by Ms
Shop has not at any point accepted that it was required to pay Ms Readdie.
Further, despite the Court’s order of 27 November
2024, People Shop has
still not paid Ms Readdie the compensation she is owed. People Shop’s
explanation for this is that it
intends to challenge the Liability Decision,
along with this decision. In the absence of a stay, the order stands, and People
has failed to comply with it. This illustrates a striking lack of
contrition.
Factors relevant to both contraventions
Involvement of
senior management/similar previous conduct by the Defendant
Readdie contended that the decision of
Alvarez Nino v Kuksal (No
is relevant to determining
Alverez Nino
concerned underpayment claims by eight temporary
residents in Australia on either international student or working visas. Mr
was the Respondent to the Applications. The Court held that Mr Kuksal was
the employer of each Applicant,
and that Mr Kuksal had underpaid each Applicant pursuant to the applicable
Modern Award. People Shop contended that the Court should
not have regard to
Alvarez Nino
, because here, the Defendant is People Shop, which has not
previously contravened the Act. It would be unfair to attribute Mr
prior conduct to People Shop, and nothing in the Act permits that
accept People Shop’s submission that Mr Kuksal’s previous similar
conduct cannot be attributed to People Shop, in a
formal sense. These are the
first contraventions of the Act by People Shop, and I have approached the matter
on that basis.
Mr Kuksal was in reality ‘the
of People Shop. He
was the sole shareholder. Whilst not a Director, and whilst also described as
the ‘client,’
apparent from the totality of the evidence that he was the key decision maker as
to the activities of People Shop and in particular
as to Ms Readdie’s
hours of work and payment which gave rise to People Shop’s contraventions.
It is well established
that the involvement of senior management in a
contravention may be relevant to determining an appropriate penalty, as are the
circumstances
of the contraventions, in a broad sense. In any event, the matters
the Court may consider are not exhaustive. Ultimately, the primary
the imposition of a penalty is both specific and general deterrence and the
Court may have regard to any matter relevant
to that purpose.
consider that previous similar conduct by senior personnel is capable of being
relevant to both specific and general deterrence
because an employer should have
systems, processes or governance structures in place to protect against future
contraventions by
a senior manager who has engaged in similar previous conduct.
However, whilst Mr Kuksal’s previous contraventions in
Alvarez Nino
relate to employment which occurred in
the findings of
contravention were not made until 24 November 2023. The contraventions by People
Shop in respect of Ms Readdie occurred
in February and March 2022. Given no
findings of contravention had been made at the relevant time, I have determined
not to have
regard to Mr Kuksal’s contraventions as found in
. At the relevant time, it was not established that Mr Kuksal had
engaged in similar previous conduct and in these circumstances,
the additional
deterrence objective I have identified does not arise.
Whether the breaching party exhibited contrition, took
corrective action and cooperated with enforcement authorities
I have outlined above in respect of the ‘failure to pay’
contravention, People Shop has exhibited no contrition for
its contraventions
and has taken no corrective action.
addition, despite the multiple, overwhelmingly unmeritorious applications
brought by People Shop, the number of hearings conducted
and the number of
interlocutory decisions made in the
proceeding,
People Shop
ultimately failed to engage at all with the substance of Ms Readdie’s
Complaint and at no time articulated a viable
defence to Ms Readdie’s
It made no submissions in
respect of the process which ultimately led to the striking out of most of its
defence, and made no attempts
to amend its defence subsequently.
It failed to comply with discovery
orders and orders to file and serve any documents or a list of witnesses on
which it relied.
It refused to
cross examine Ms Readdie, and save for Ms Xu’s brief evidence, failed to
call any witnesses at the final hearing
and ultimately withdrew from the
People Shop’s
conduct unduly lengthened the
proceeding,
and Ms Readdie was
required to prosecute her claim throughout this period, despite the absence of a
substantive defence to her claim.
I conclude that People Shop’s conduct
during the proceeding demonstrates both a lack of cooperation and a lack of
contrition.
Size of the business enterprise involved
People Shop nor Ms Readdie made submissions as to this matter. There was no
evidence before me as to People Shop’s current
activities. Whilst I am
satisfied People Shop is a small company, there was no evidence that this would
limit its capacity to meet
the imposition of a penalty or that to do so would
cause undue hardship. Conversely, I am not persuaded that People Shop’s
status as an incorporated legal practice requires the imposition of a higher
penalty. Accordingly, this matter is neutral as to the
penalty to be imposed..
Maximum penalties
Readdie contends that the Court should impose the maximum penalties.
Alternatively, she contended that there is a generally accepted
practice of a
‘contrition discount’ of around 20 per cent for parties who have
cooperated with Fair Work Ombudsman Investigations,
displayed a genuine degree
of contrition or who have already taken steps to pay remuneration ordered.
Accordingly she contended,
given People Shop’s absence of contrition, that
any penalty should comprise no less than 20 per cent of the maximum.
to s 546(2)(b) of the Act, the maximum penalty in respect of a contravention of
a civil remedy provision for a body corporate
is five times the maximum number
of penalty units set out in the table at s 539(2) in respect of the relevant
provision. In the case
of each of the civil remedy provisions contravened, the
table at s 539(2) provides that the maximum penalty for a serious contravention
is 600 penalty units, or otherwise, 60 penalty units. Accordingly, the maximum
penalty for a serious contravention for a body corporate
is 3000 penalty units,
or otherwise is 300 penalty units.
contravention’ is defined in s 557A of the Act, as follows:
(1) A contravention of a civil remedy provision by a person is a serious
contravention if:
(a) The person knowingly contravened the provision and
(b) The person’s conduct constituting the contravention was part of a
systematic pattern of conduct relating to one or more
other persons.
Readdie contended that the contraventions are serious contraventions. However,
to constitute a serious contravention, the person’s
conduct must have been
part of a systematic pattern of conduct relating to ‘one or more
persons’ (italics added). There is no evidence before me of
any conduct of People Shop relating to any other person but Ms
Readdie. In any
event, the requirement in s 557A(6) that a person applying for an order in
relation to a serious contravention must
specify the relevant contravention in
the person’s application has not been met, as the serious contravention
allegation was
first raised in Ms Readdie’s penalty submissions. I
conclude that the contraventions are not serious contraventions within
meaning of s 557A of the Act.
value of a penalty unit at the time of the contraventions was
meaning the maximum
penalty for each contravention is $66,600.
Quantum of penalties to be imposed and totality
considerations
of the above considerations must be evaluated as a whole in imposing an
appropriate penalty for each contravention.
Readdie’s employment was short, the underpayment was modest, and People
Shop had not previously contravened the Act. These
matters lead me to conclude
that something less than the maximum penalties is sufficient to achieve general
and specific deterrence.
the contraventions had a significant impact on Ms Readdie. The
‘unreasonable hours’ contravention was particularly
egregious. The
contraventions were deliberate. They were undertaken by Mr Kuksal, who was in
reality the most senior person within
People Shop. People Shop has shown no
contrition, has taken no corrective action despite the order of the Court
requiring it to make
payment to Ms Readdie, and failed to cooperate throughout
the proceeding, unduly lengthening the proceeding and failing to engage
defend the substance of Ms Readdie’s claim. In light of these matters, I
conclude that it is necessary to impose significant
penalties in order to deter
People Shop from future contraventions of the Act and to give effect to the
purpose of general deterrence
as to similar conduct by other employers.
all of these considerations, for the Failure to Pay contravention, I consider a
penalty of $22,200 is appropriate. This
represents a third of the maximum
penalty. For the Unreasonable Hours contravention, I consider a penalty of
$26,640 is appropriate.
This represents 40 per cent of the maximum penalty. The
total penalty to be imposed is $48,840.
final step is to apply the totality principle, to ensure that the penalties are
appropriate and proportionate to the conduct viewed
as a whole, and make any
adjustments necessary. I consider that the total penalty is appropriate and
proportionate and no adjustment
is required. I consider a total penalty of
$48,840 is reasonably necessary to achieve objective of general and specific
deterrence.
Who the penalties should be paid to
to s 546(3), the Court may order that the penalty, or part of the penalty, be
paid to the Commonwealth, a particular organisation
or a particular person.
Readdie submitted that she is not seeking to have the entire penalty paid to
her, but a modest portion, with the balance payable
to whichever recipient the
Court sees fit. Ms Readdie seeks that she be awarded an amount which reflects
her unsuccessful damages
claim. She takes issue with the Court’s
determination as to damages in the Liability Decision and contends that the
Court should
have raised and allowed her to address the identified pleading
deficiencies at an earlier stage in the proceeding. She further seeks
which acknowledges the time she has been required to invest in prosecuting the
proceeding.
Shop made no submission as to who the penalties should be payable to.
power in s 546(3) ‘is ordinarily to be exercised by awarding any penalty
to the successful
applicant.’
Court may depart from that principle depending on the particular circumstances,
Ms Readdie has not articulated who the
penalty might otherwise be payable to or
on what basis. I consider that it is appropriate in these circumstances, given
has brought the claim and prosecuted the proceeding, to order that
the penalty be payable to Ms Readdie.
Readdie sought that the Court order interest in accordance with s 547(2). People
Shop did not make any submission in opposition.
Interest pursuant to s 547 is
payable in relation to an amount that a person was required to pay to, or on
behalf of, another person
under the Act. Section 547(2) requires that on
application, the Court must include an amount of interest in the sum ordered,
good reason is shown to the contrary. No good cause has been shown to the
contrary and accordingly, I will order that interest be
paid by People Shop.
sum required to be paid by People Shop to Ms Readdie pursuant to s 323(1) of the
Act is $7845.23.
Interest is
required to be determined taking into account the period between the day the
relevant cause of action arose, and the
date of the Court’s order. Ms
Readdie’s cause of action in respect of the amount of $4106.01, being the
amount remaining
payable in respect of the February Payment Month, arose on 1
March 2022. Her cause of action in respect of the $3739.22 payable in
the March Payment Month arose on 29 March 2022.
547 does not specify the rate at which interest is to be
calculated.
Court Act 1986
(Vic) empowers the Court to award interest in accordance with
at the rate specified in the
Penalty Interest Rates Act 1983
(Vic), which is 10 per cent. Those provisions have no application to this
proceeding in light of s 547. However, given the applicable
rate is at the
Court’s discretion, I determine to apply that rate as it is generally
applicable to the Court when awarding
interest. Accordingly, the interest
payable to 28 March 2025 in respect of the February Payment Month is $1263.30
and in respect
of the March Payment Month is $1,121.77. I will order that total
interest of $2,385.07 be paid.
EVENTS SUBSEQUENT TO THE PENALTY HEARING
reserved my decision following the penalty hearing on 11 March 2025.
Subsequently, on 12 March 2025, Ms Readdie emailed the Court
Registry attaching
a screen shot of a Company Summary for People Shop stating its status as
‘Strike-Off Action in Progress.’
Her email stated ‘it appears
that People Shop P/L is in the process of being wound-up’ and requested
that the Court provide
additional instructions in forthcoming orders about who
will be liable for monies owed to her. I have determined not to have regard
the screenshot or email. I do not consider the screenshot to be determinative of
the ongoing status of People Shop. Further, orders
in the proceeding can only be
made against People Shop, as the only Defendant.
Tuesday 8 April 2025 at 9.45am, the Court Registry advised the parties that this
decision would be handed down on Wednesday 9 April
2025 at 9.30am. At 10.20am on
Tuesday 8 April 2025, Ms Xu emailed the Court Registry stating ‘the
Defendant wishes to be heard
in relation to the Plaintiff’s
representations regarding its current registration [contained in the
correspondence of 12 March
2025] as well as her reliance on the judgment of the
Federal Circuit Court.’
have determined to refuse the Defendant’s application to be heard, for the
following reasons. Firstly, as I have not had regard
to Ms Readdie’s email
of 12 March 2025, it is unnecessary to hear from People Shop in respect of it.
Secondly, People Shop
has already had the opportunity to make submissions on the
‘judgment of the Federal Circuit Court’ during the penalty
and did so, as reflected earlier in this decision. Thirdly, the application was
not made in accordance with Order 46 of
the GCP Rules, contrary to my order of
21 November 2023 requiring this. Fourthly, People Shop’s conduct in the
proceeding has
already occasioned undue delay, and no grounds were articulated
as to why this application was not made until after the parties were
that this decision would be delivered. Fifthly, in light of these matters, I
consider it would be unjust to Ms Readdie to
delay delivery of this decision.
and in addition to the orders of 27 November 2024, the Court orders:
Fair Work Act
Defendant is ordered to pay a pecuniary penalty of $22,200 for contravention of
of the Act.
of the Act, the Defendant is ordered to pay a pecuniary penalty of
$26,640 for contravention of
of the Act in respect of
of the Act.
of the Act, the Defendant is ordered to pay the sums referred to in
Orders 1 and 2 to the Plaintiff.
of the Act, the Defendant is ordered to pay the sum of $2,385.07 to
the Plaintiff in respect of interest.
Between when Ms
Readdie’s Complaint was filed on 8 August 2022 and when the relevant
amendments were completed on 16 June
Magistrates’ Court
(Miscellaneous Civil Proceedings) Rules 2020
Miscellaneous
), r 13.02 and Form 13A.
Liability Decision, [6].
Ibid, [4]-[34].
Act, ss 548(1), (1A)(a)(i).
Ibid, s 548(1).
Ibid, s 548(1)(a).
Ibid, s 548(2).
Ibid, s 548(3).
Ibid, s 548(5), (6).
Ibid, s 548(8), (9).
[2019] HCA 21.
Ibid, [30], Keifel CJ,
Bell, Gageler, Keane, Nettle and Gordon JJ; citing
Rizeq v Western Australia
[2017] HCA 23
(2017) 262 CLR 1
, [15]-16], [32], Keifel CJ, [90],[103], Bell, Gageler,
Keane, Nettle and Gordon JJ.
Magistrates Court
General Civil Procedure Rules 2020
(Vic), r 1.14.
Ibid, r 2.04.
[2024] HCA 34.
Magistrates' Court
(Judicial Registrars) Rules 2015
Ibid, r 16(2), subject to
the discretion of the Court to extend time: r 16(3).
Australian Building and
Construction Commissioner v Pattinson
(2022) 274 CLR 450
[2022] HCA 13
Ibid, [17], citing
Singtel Optus Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2012] FCAFC 20
(2012) 287 ALR 249
, 265 [62].
Australian Building and
Construction Commissioner v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2017] FCAFC 113
; 271 IR 321, [98].
Ibid, [46]-[47].
Ibid, [55].
Ibid, [10], citing
v Reckitt Benckiser (Australia) Pty Ltd
(2016) 340 ALR 25 (
), 63 [156].
Ibid, [53], citing
Reckitt Benckiser
, [155]- [156] (citations omitted).
[18]; citing
Re Trade Practices Commission v CSR Limited
[1990] FCA 521;
(1991) ATPR
Kelly v Fitzpatrick
(2007) 166 IR 14
[2007] FCA 1080
Ms Readdie referred also to
Fair Work Ombudsman v Austop Natural
Therapy and supplies Pty Ltd
[2020] FCCA 2920
Fair Work Ombudsman v
Sushi Bay Pty Ltd (in liq) (No 3)
[2024] FCA 869
Reckitt Benckiser
Flight Centre Ltd v
Australian Competition and consumer Commission (No 2 )
[2018] FCAFC 53
(2018) 260 FCR 68
[2017] FCA 1301
(2017) 275 IR 148.
Ibid, [36] (citations
[2024] FedCFamC2G 1318.
Ibid, [5] (1(b)(iii) and
Ibid, [4] (8).
See paragraph
Liability Decision, [138].
Ibid, [135].
Ibid, [136].
Ibid, [134].
Ibid, [132].
Ibid, [133].
Ibid, [136].
Ibid, [150].
Ibid, [92].
Ibid, [48]-[51].
Ibid, [50]-[51].
Ibid, [88]-[89].
Ibid, [150].
[2023] Fed CFamC2G
Ibid, [298].
Liability Decision
Ibid, [67].
Alvarez Nino,
[111]-[202].
Liability Decision,
Ibid, [2]-[34].
Ibid, [10].
Ibid, [13].
Ibid, [14]-[34].
Ibid, [6]-[7].
Crimes Act 2014
(Cth), s 4AA.
Sayed v Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2016] FCAFC 4
, [101], [107].
Liability Decision, [122].
This reflects the sum payable to Ms Readdie less amounts in respect of
superannuation and reimbursement
of expenses.
In the Federal Court, this
matter is addressed by way of the
Interest on Judgments, General Practice
, 18 September 2017, which has no application to this Court.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (891 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter