URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BGW [2025] VMHT 3 (25 February 2025)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
. The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2025] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
24 January 2025
Treating service:
Metropolitan hospital
Mode of hearing:
Videoconference
Tribunal members:
Jennifer Ellis (Legal Member)
Sue Carey (Psychiatrist Member)
Joshua Fergeus (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from the health service
Consultant Psychiatrist
With online video
Treating team member
With online video
Treating team member
With online video
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal adjourned the
This statement of reasons:
After the hearing, your
treating team requested a written explanation of the Tribunal’s
A copy of this statement of reasons
will be given to your treating team
as well as to you.
statement of reasons was requested by your treating team, because it concerns
you it is addressed to you.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because you
an Inpatient Temporary Treatment Order (ITTO) due to end on 9 February
On 24 January 2025, your treating psychiatrist applied to the
Tribunal for an order to allow electroconvulsive treatment (ECT) to
part of your treatment. The Tribunal had to have a hearing to decide whether to
make an ECT order.
2. Reasons for adjournment
You had been admitted to the hospital on 12
January 2025. On 14 January 2025 and on 22 January 2025 you had applied to the
to have your ITTO revoked. You had also requested a second opinion, and
that process was due to take place on 28 January 2025.
Your treating team
applied for an ECT order a few hours before the hearing was scheduled. The
hearing was scheduled very quickly.
The application stated that it was urgent
but did not indicate the reason for this. The application appeared to have been
made shortly
after you had assaulted a member of the treating team on the
morning of the hearing. The progress notes provided to the Tribunal
mention any previous consideration of ECT treatment before the date of the
application on 24 January 2025.
At the commencement of the hearing, you
told the Tribunal that you had not been provided with the report for the
hearing. AP then
told the Tribunal that you had been handed the report less than
two hours before the hearing by another doctor who was in the process
interviewing you to provide an internal second opinion. You stated that, at that
time, you were on the telephone to a lawyer trying
to get legal advice and to
arrange legal representation for the hearing and that you had not had time to
read the report.
You told the Tribunal that you wanted the hearing to be
adjourned so that you could carefully consider the report and obtain legal
representation for the hearing. You stated that you felt that you had been
treated with a different medication each day. You stated
that you were opposed
to ECT treatment.
AP opposed the request for an adjournment and stated
that the application was urgent. While it is not the role of the Tribunal to
review a psychiatrist’s assessment that an application falls within one of
the categories of urgency specified in section 97(2)
of the Act, understanding
why a psychiatrist thinks it does is a relevant consideration to a decision
AP was unable to explain how the ECT
application was urgent in accordance with section 97(2) of the Act, and why the
circumstances
warranted proceeding so quickly as to severely restrict your
entitlement to procedural fairness.
The Tribunal noted that an
application for ECT must be heard within 5 working days (by 3 February 2025) and
that an urgent application
for ECT should be heard as soon as practicable. The
Tribunal explained to AP that it is bound by the rules of procedural fairness
and that the application for ECT could be heard in the next week which would
give you time to be able to read the report and engage
legal representation.
3. Determination
The Tribunal acknowledged that your treating team
wanted the hearing to proceed and that an adjournment may cause them
inconvenience
but considered that this was outweighed by the need to accord you
procedural fairness. The Tribunal therefore decided to adjourn
The Tribunal directed that the hearing should be relisted by 3
February 2025.
Date of determination: 24 January
[Signed by legal member]
Jennifer Ellis
member, on behalf of the Tribunal division.
Date: 25 February
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
When does a person have capacity to give informed
(1) A person has capacity to give informed consent if the person—
(a) is able to understand the information they are given for the purpose of
deciding whether or not to consent; and
(b) is able to remember that information; and
(c) is able to use or weigh that information in deciding whether or not to
consent; and
(d) is able to communicate the decision the person makes by speech, gestures or
any other means.
(2) The following must be considered in deciding whether a person has
capacity to give informed consent—
(a) the person's capacity to give informed consent is specific to the particular
decision that the person is making;
(b) the person's capacity to give informed consent may change over time;
(c) it should not be assumed that the person does not have capacity to give
informed consent only because of the person's age, appearance,
disability,
condition or behaviour;
(d) it should not be assumed that the person does not have capacity to give
informed consent only because the person makes a decision
that could be
considered unwise;
(e) whether the person may be enabled to give informed consent by providing the
person with appropriate supports.
(3) In assessing whether a person has capacity to give informed consent, the
person carrying out the assessment must take all reasonable
steps to ensure
(a) the assessment is carried out at a time, and in an environment, that the
capacity of the person being assessed can be determined
most accurately; and
(b) the person being assessed is provided with appropriate supports to enable
the person to give informed consent.
Application to Mental Health Tribunal for course of
electroconvulsive treatment – adult patient
(1) An authorised psychiatrist may apply to the Mental Health Tribunal for
authority to perform a course of electroconvulsive treatment
on an adult patient
(a) the patient does not have capacity to give informed consent to receiving the
electroconvulsive treatment; and
(b) the authorised psychiatrist is satisfied that in the circumstances there is
no less restrictive way for the patient to be treated.
(2) In deciding whether there is a less restrictive way for the patient to be
treated, the authorised psychiatrist must have regard
to the following—
(a) the patient's views and preferences regarding electroconvulsive treatment,
and any beneficial alternative treatment that is reasonably
available, and the
reasons for those views and preferences, including any recovery outcomes the
patient would like to achieve;
(b) any of the patient's relevant views and preferences specified in their
advance statement of preferences (if any);
(c) any of the patient's relevant views and preferences expressed by the
patient's nominated support person;
(d) the views of the patient's guardian;
(e) if the authorised psychiatrist is satisfied that the decision will directly
affect the carer and the care relationship, the views
of the patient's carer;
(f) whether the electroconvulsive treatment is likely to remedy or lessen the
symptoms of mental illness;
(g) the likely consequences for the patient if the electroconvulsive treatment
is not administered;
(h) any second psychiatric opinion that has been given to the authorised
psychiatrist.
(3) An authorised psychiatrist may make a further application under
subsection (1) during or after the course of electroconvulsive
Section 100
Determination of an application for an order
– adult patient
On receiving an application under this Division,
the Mental Health Tribunal must determine the application and—
(a) make an order authorising a course of electroconvulsive treatment if the
Tribunal is satisfied that—
(i) the patient does not have capacity to give informed consent to the
electroconvulsive treatment; and
(ii) there is no less restrictive way for the patient to be treated; or
(b) make an order refusing the treatment.
Mental Health Tribunal order authorising course of
electroconvulsive treatment
(1) If the Mental Health Tribunal makes an order authorising a course of
electroconvulsive treatment, the Tribunal must specify in
(a) the duration of the order and the date on which it will expire, which must
be no more than 6 months after the date on which the
order is made; and
(b) the maximum number of electroconvulsive treatments authorised to be
performed over the duration of the order, which must be no
more than 12
treatments.
(2) Nothing in this Part requires a course of electroconvulsive treatment to
be completed.
Section 362
General procedure of the Mental Health
(1) The Mental Health Tribunal—
(a) is not bound by the rules of evidence; and
(b) is bound by the rules of procedural fairness; and
(c) may inform itself on any matter as it sees fit; and
(d) must conduct each proceeding as expeditiously and with as little formality
and technicality as the requirements of this Act,
the regulations and the rules
and a proper consideration of the matters before it permit.
(2) Subject to this Act, the regulations and the rules, the Mental Health
Tribunal may regulate its own procedure.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (446 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter