URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2021/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Javam Pty Ltd at The Persian Room premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2021] VCGLR 25 (5 August 2021)
- ---4---.-- - -----J-t..._v-¥-tiG-tGr-i A-CGm i-ssi eA - feF-
- Gambling and Liquor Regulation
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application by Javam Pty Ltd under
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for internal review of a decision to
refuse to grant a renewable limited licence for the premises trading as The
Persian Room, located
at 248A Toorak Road, South Yarra.
Commission:
Mr Ross Kennedy PSM, Chair Ms Helen Versey, Deputy
Ms Danielle Huntersmith, Commissioner
Date of Decision: Date of Reasons:
5 August 2021
5 August 2021
The Commission has determined to set aside the
decision of the Delegate and, in substitution, grant the application for a
limited licence subject to the conditions set out in Appendix A
Ross Kennedy
tote overnment
1. On 27 November 2020, Javam Pty Ltd (the
) lodged an application with the Victorian Commission for
Gambling and Liquor Regulation (the
) for a renewable limited
licence (the
Application
) under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
) for the premises trading as The Persian Room, located at
248A Toorak Road, South Yarra (
2. The Premises operates as a restaurant and catering business, offering
Persian food. The Applicant sought to supply up to ten lines
of liquor at any
one time, for on-premises consumption with food. The maximum capacity at the
Premises is 40 patrons.
3. The Applicant sought the following trading hours for the supply of
to Friday – between 5pm and 10pm
and Sunday – between 12pm and 10pm.
4. In accordance with section 33(3) of the LCR Act, a copy of the Application
was provided to Victoria Police and Stonnington Council
November 2020.
5. On 15 December 2020, Victoria Police informed the Commission it did not
object to the Application.
6. On 7 January 2020, the Council informed the Commission that it did object
to the Application on the basis that a planning permit
was required to serve
liquor at the Premises, pursuant to clause
52.27 of the Stonnington Planning Scheme.
7. On 8 January 2021,
the Commission advised the Council that the reason for the objection was not a
valid ground under the LCR Act.
However, a copy of the correspondence from the
Council was provided to the Applicant for comment, and the Application proceeded
uncontested.
8. On 22 January 2021, the Applicant provided a written response to matters
raised by Council. In summary, the Applicant submitted
the Council was incorrect
in stating a planning permit application is required for a renewable limited
licence. The Applicant referred
the Commission to relevant extracts from the
Council’s planning scheme as well as the LCR Act.
9. The Applicant made the following submissions regarding the limited scale
and scope of the Application:
proposed trading hours are considerably less than ordinary hours, the Applicant
is seeking to supply liquor for up to 35 hours
per week compared to ordinary
liquor trading hour where businesses can supply liquor for up to 97 hours per
supply of liquor to lunchtime trade on weekends only is a significant
limitation;
will be supplied only with food;
is limited to 10 lines of liquor only at one time; and
Premises is a small venue, catering to a maximum of 40 patrons
10. On 3 February 2021, the Applicant provided additional written submissions
regarding the limited scale and scope of the Application.
The Applicant referred
to two previous decisions of the Commission, which it considered similar to its
business. The decisions referred
to by the Applicant are, the matter regarding
the premises trading as Garden Centre
and the matter regarding the
premises trading as York Street Café.
In summary the
Applicant submitted:
Eucalyptus Pty Ltd at Native Home, House of Plants premises
(Liquor - Internal Review) [2018] VCGLR 33 (8 August 2018).
Antem Mei Pty Ltd at York Street Cafe premises
(Liquor-internal review) [2020] VCGLR 60 (24 December 2020).
limited licences should not be so rigidly assessed, as not all businesses are
able to meet legislative requirements for
a restaurant and café licence,
especially when there has been an increase in business for takeaway meals;
decision regarding the premises trading as York Street Café is relevant
to the Application as that decision indicates trading
hours and patron numbers
are considered relevant limitation for a limited licence. In this matter, the
Applicant has proposed a further
limitation in seeking on-premises consumption
11. On 26 February 2021 a delegate of the Commission
) made a decision to refuse to grant the Application
Original Decision
). The Delegate was of the view that the Application
was not limited in scale and scope.
Application for Internal Review
12. On 10 March 2021 the Applicant lodged an
application for internal review of the Original Decision (
Application
13. The Applicant requested the Commission set aside the Original Decision
and substitute a fresh decision on review, on the grounds
that the Application
is limited in scale and scope.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
14. Under the LCR Act, an
application for a licence may be contested or uncontested. Pursuant to section
3(1) of the LCR Act, an uncontested
application relevantly includes “
application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation of a licence or BYO
permit in respect of which no objection is received
under Division 5 of Part 2
within the period set out in that Division for that objection (or that period as
extended under section
15. The Review Application is made pursuant to section 153 of the LCR Act.
The Original Decision made by the Delegate is a reviewable
decision and the
Applicant is an eligible person under Division 2 of Part 9 of the LCR Act.
16. Pursuant to section 157(1) of the LCR Act, the task before the Commission
with respect to the Review Application is to make a
fresh decision
or varies the reviewable decision; or
aside the reviewable decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers appropriate.
17. In doing so, the Commission must consider all the information, material
and evidence that was before the original decision maker.
Commission may also consider further information, material or evidence in making
a decision.
Conduct of an inquiry
18. Section 34 of the
Victorian Commission for
Gambling and Liquor Regulation Act 2011
) provides that
subject to that Act, gambling legislation or liquor legislation, the
Conversely, a “contested application” in the context of
a transfer application is defined in section 3(1) as being “
application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation of a licence or BYO
permit in respect of which any objections are
received under Division 5 of Part
2 within the period set out in that Division for those objections (or that
period as extended under
section 174)
Section 157(2) of the LCR Act.
See section 157(3) of the LCR Act.
may conduct any inquiry in any manner it considers appropriate. Relevant
provisions governing the conduct of an inquiry by the Commission
in this matter
include a provision that the Commission is bound by the rules of natural justice
but is not bound by the rules of
evidence and can inform itself in any way it
thinks fit.
Determination of an uncontested application
19. Where an application is an uncontested
application, pursuant to section 44(1) of the LCR Act:
“the Commission must grant or refuse an uncontested application at any
time after the expiry of the period for objection under
Division 5 (or that
period as extended under section 174).”
20. Section
44(4) of the LCR Act provides that before granting or refusing an uncontested
application under subsection (1), the Commission
“(a) have regard to any matter the Commission considers relevant;
(b) make any enquiries the Commission considers appropriate but is not
required to give any person an opportunity to be heard concerning
application.”
21. Pursuant to section 9(3) of the VCGLR
Act, in exercising its discretion to either grant or refuse an uncontested
application under
section 44(1) of the LCR Act, the Commission must have regard
to the objects of the LCR Act.
22. The objects of the LCR Act are set out in section 4(1), which
“(1) The objects of this Act are—
contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol,
including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes
to, and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products;
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and
reducing risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.”
23. Section 4(2) of the LCR Act provides further that:
“It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority,
discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or imposed by this
Act must be
exercised and performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks
associated with the misuse and abuse of
24. The Court of Appeal of the Victorian
Supreme Court has made it clear in
Kordister Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor
[2012] VSCA 325
) that harm minimisation is a
fundamental principle of the LCR Act and can properly be regarded as
“the primary regulatory
object of the Act and therefore the primary consideration in liquor licensing
. However, as was also noted by the Court of
this is not to say ... that it [harm minimisation] is to be
taken into account, or given such weight, to the exclusion of the other
25. The Commission considers
that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in section 44(2) are relevant
considerations, the ultimate
determination of an uncontested application is to
be made pursuant to sections 44(1) and 157(1) at the discretion of the
with reference to the objects of the LCR Act.
26. Under section 49 of the LCR Act, the Commission may impose any condition
it thinks fit on the grant of an application.
27. Section 26(1) of the LCR Act provides that the Commission may grant a
limited licence only if satisfied that the scale and scope
of the supply of
liquor the subject of the licence is limited in nature.
Material before the Commission
28. The Commission on review had before it and
considered all materials received by the Delegate. The Commission also received
considered the following materials:
Original Decision and reasons of the Delegate, dated 26 February 2021;
Application for Internal Review dated 7 March 2021 submitted by Martin Towey,
LGS Legal, on behalf of the Applicant;
submissions from the Applicant dated 23 July 2021; and
dated 2 August 2021 from the Applicant’s representative, proposing a
breakdown of the “10 lines” of liquor
proposed for
29. With the consent of the Applicant, the Commission decided that a public
hearing was not needed and proceeded to determine the
matter on the papers.
Reason for decision on review
Issues for determination on review
30. In deciding whether to
affirm, vary or set aside the Original Decision and in turn grant or refuse the
Application that is the
subject of the Review Application, the key issue to be
determined by the Commission in this matter is whether the supply of liquor
pursuant to the licence is limited in scale and scope.
Limited Scale and Scope
31. Section 14 of the LCR Act provides that a
renewable limited licence “
authorises the licensee to supply liquor at
the times determined by the Commission and specified in the licence
However, unlike other categories of licence, limited licences are subject to the
additional restriction found at section
26 of the LCR Act, “
scale and scope of the supply of liquor the subject of the licence is limited in
the Scale and Scope Requirement
32. There are no statutory signposts which prescribe specific factors for the
Commission to consider in determining whether the Scale
and Scope Requirement is
met. On previous occasions the
[2012] VSCA 325
, at [19] per Warren CJ and
Osborn JA; [188] per Tate JA.
[2012] VSCA 325
, at [188] per Tate JA.
Commission has considered
the nature, location, duration or frequency of the
hours of operation of a licence in question
as relevant to the Scale and
Scope Requirement.
33. Section 26(1) of the LCR Act
gives the Commission a wide discretion to determine, as a question of fact,
whether the Scale and
Scope Requirement is met. In the decision of
, VCAT considered that there was no warrant for an interpretation that the
limitation in question need to “contemplate a
substantial
significant
restriction”,
however this does not mean
that the Commission cannot consider whether a limitation is
substantial
significant
in the exercise of its discretion to determine whether
the Scale and Scope Requirement is met.
34. The first limitation proffered by the Applicant relates to the number of
lines of liquor which it proposes to supply, limited
to four types of wine, four
35. The second limitation proffered by the Applicant relates to trading hours
proposed for the supply of liquor. The Applicant seeks
the same trading hours
under the original Application, that being:
to Friday – between 5pm and 10pm
and Sunday – between 12pm and 10pm.
36. The Applicant informed the Commission that the Premises will continue to
open at additional “zero alcohol” times to
accommodate the local
cultural community dining at the Premises without being exposed to alcohol.
37. A third proposed limitation from the Application was that liquor would be
served with food only and only for on premises consumption.
38. In assessing the Scale and Scope Requirement for the Review Application,
the Commission considered the following factors:
the liquor proposed for supply was limited in the type or lines of liquor
proposed for supply;
the Application proposed sufficient limits to trading days at the Premises;
the Application was limited by other factors, such as the maximum patron
capacity available at the Premises.
39. The Commission notes the Premises caters to a maximum capacity of 40
patrons, and the Applicant has proposed that liquor will
be supplied for
consumption on-premises with food purchases only. The Commission is of the view
that both are valid considerations
for establishing whether the Review
Application meets the Scale and Scope Requirement.
40. The Commission has also taken into consideration the decisions pertaining
to York Street Café and the Garden Centre. In
this particular instance
the Commission is of the view that the Review Application can be considered
similar with regard to the small
size of the Premises (given the maximum patron
capacity), the limited trading hours at the Premises, as well as the limited
of liquor for on-premises supply which the Commission is of the view, will
be ancillary to food preparation and service.
41. Accordingly, the Commission is satisfied that the Review Application is
sufficiently limited in this instance. The combined factors
of the limited lines
of liquor which will be supplied with food only, the small patronage allowance
at the Premises, and limited
hours for supply of liquor sought by the Applicant
meet the Scale and Scope Requirement.
42. The Commission does not consider it relevant whether another category of
licence (such as a restaurant and cafe licence) might
be more appropriate than a
renewable limited licence. Although historically the
Liquor Control Act 1987
required the Commission to refuse to grant a limited
See decision of
Fynix Pty Ltd at 36A Vickers Street, Sebastapol
(Liquor-internal review) [2016] VCGLR 19 (25 July 2016) At
Club 8 Pty Limited v Director of Liquor Licensing (Occupational
and Business Regulation [
2009] VCAT 716
licence where the proposed supply of liquor would more appropriately be carried
on under a licence of another kind, that requirement
and legislation have since
been repealed.
Objects of the LCR Act
43. Given the limitations for the licence sought in
the Review Application, the Commission is satisfied that adequate controls will
exist over the supply and consumption of liquor at the Premises and that any
harm should be minimised. Accordingly, the Commission
considers that the grant
of a licence in this instance would not be contrary to the object of the LCR Act
concerning harm minimisation.
44. The Applicant has also provided proof that the Director of the Applicant
and manager of the Premises has completed responsible
service of alcohol program
as well as the Commission’s approved new entrant training. The Commission
is satisfied that the
Applicant will manage the Premises responsibly and has an
adequate knowledge of the LCR Act.
45. The Commission considers that granting the Review Application would be
consistent with the object of facilitating the development
of a diversity of
licensed facilities reflecting community expectations. It further considers that
granting the Review Application
would not be conducive to, or encourage, the
misuse or abuse of alcohol.
46. Based on the information provided to the Commission regarding the size
and nature of the Applicant’s business, the Commission
is of the view that
the Review Application meets the objects of the LCR Act and, in particular, will
not contribute to any increase
Decision on review
47. Based on the reasons detailed above and having
regard to the objects of the LCR Act, the Commission has determined to set aside
the Original Decision and, in substitution, grant the application for a
renewable limited licence for the Premises, subject to the
conditions as
detailed in Appendix A.
The preceding forty-seven (47) paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons
for Decision of Mr Ross Kennedy (Chair), Ms Helen Versey
(Deputy Chair), and Ms
Danielle Huntersmith (Commissioner).
This licence is a renewable
limited licence and authorises the licensee to supply liquor for consumption on
the licensed premises
during the trading hours specified below.
Supply of liquor
The supply of liquor shall be limited to no more than
four lines of wine, four lines of beer and two lines of cider.
Liquor must only be supplied for consumption on the premises with meals.
Responsible service of alcohol
At all times staff selling, offering or serving liquor
are to have completed an approved Responsible Service of Alcohol training
Noise and amenity
The licensee shall not cause or permit undue detriment
to the amenity of the area to arise out of or in connection with the use of
premises to which the licence relates during or immediately after the trading
hours authorised under this licence.
The licensee shall ensure that the level of noise emitted from the licensed
premises shall not exceed the permissible noise levels
for entertainment noise
as specified in the State Environment Protection Policy (Control of Music Noise
from Public Premises) No.
Maximum capacity
Trading hours for the supply of liquor
Wednesday to Friday – between 5pm and 10pm.
Saturday and Sunday – between 12pm and 10pm.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (984 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter