URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1627.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DPP v Horvath [2025] VCC 1627 (7 November 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
Case No. CR-25-00880
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
ARON HORVATH
HER HONOUR JUDGE ELLIS
DATE OF HEARING
29 October 2025
DATE OF SENTENCE
7 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
DPP v Horvath
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1627
REASONS FOR
Subject: CRIMINAL SENTENCE
Catchwords: Import commercial quantity on border controlled substance
Legislation Cited:
Criminal Code 1995
Crimes Act 1914
Cases Cited:
[2015] NSWCCA 138
DPP (Cth) v Peng
[2014] VSCA 128
DPP (Cth) v Estrada
[2015] VSCA 22
Phommalysack
[2011] VSCA 32
The Queen v Nguyen & Pham
NSWCCA 238.
Sentence: Imprisonment for a term of 7 years and 6 months
with a 4 year non parole period.
APPEARANCES
For the DPP
Mr S. Hogan
For the Accused
Mr P. Kilduff
Gemma Ross-McGlynn
HER HONOUR:
Horvath, you have pleaded guilty to one charge of importing a commercial
quantity of a border controlled substance namely methamphetamine
contrary to
s307.1(1) of the
Criminal Code 1995 (Cth)
. The maximum penalty for this
offence is life imprisonment.
Circumstances of Offending
circumstances of your offending are set out in a Summary of Prosecution Opening
dated 23 October 2025.
9.30 am on Wednesday 17 December 2024 you arrived at Melbourne Airport from
Los Angeles using a Hungarian passport. At
9.58 am you could be seen obtaining
the purple check-in luggage from a luggage carousel. You were stopped by
Customs five minutes
later and directed to participate in a baggage examination
at which time you confirmed you had packed the suitcase yourself. During
examination, three separate boxes with the branding 'Looy Organic Wild
Blueberry' were located. Clothing items had been placed
in and around the boxes
to conceal them.
Border Force examined the boxes revealing multiple packages inside each box and
within each packet a crystalline white
substance. Presumptive testing of the
substance returned a positive reading for methamphetamine. You advised the
examination officer
that you were to deliver the boxes to an individual named
who you had met in
America. You said that you had told him not to give you drugs as it would ruin
your modelling career. Border
Force Officers then took possession of the three
boxes which again returned positive results for methamphetamine. You were then
questioned further by Officers as to whether you knew what the substance was and
you responded, 'I know now that it is meth'.
were taken for an interview to continue the baggage examination where you told
(a) you were intending to stay at the Quest Hotel nearby to Melbourne
(b) you did not have a set date for departure from Australia;
(c) you received the luggage from another individual and you packed your
belongings inside; you did not know what was contained inside
(d) you were intending to meet somebody called Andrew at the Quest Hotel.
attendance by the Australian Federal Police at Melbourne Airport you were
arrested and participated in a Record of Interview
during which time you made
the following admissions.
(a) You had met an individual named 'Zac' four months prior at a party in Hong
(b) When he learned that you had a Hungarian passport he queried whether you
were interested in conveying items.
(c) You eventually agreed to the offer and you were to be paid US$9,000 for
(d) You were to travel from China to Los Angeles prior to the delivery to
Australia. Your flights and accommodation were to be paid
for by Zac and
another person called Jayden.
(e) Once you arrived in Los Angeles you were contacted by a male named Andrew
over Instagram. It is alleged that Andrew is a co-offender,
(f) When you met with Mr Rodrigo you were informed that another individual would
provide the items to you which you would be required
to transport to Australia.
(g) A few hours prior to your flight to Australia you met with Jayden and he
gave you a suitcase that was half full. You placed your
personal belongings in
the other half of the suitcase.
(h) Upon landing in Australia you were to meet Andrew at the Quest Hotel in
the Record of Interview you were charged with this offending.
obtained by investigators at the Melbourne Arrivals Hall depicts
Mr Rodrigo walking between Terminal 1 and Terminal 2 areas at around
midday on 17 December. It is alleged he attended in the area
in an attempt to
locate you following your failure to answer his phone
total weight of the methamphetamine was 8.4005 kilograms with a purity of 80.3
per cent resulting in a total pure weight of 6.75
investigations revealed that you had arrived in Los Angeles on 8 December 2024
and you were contacted by Mr Rodrigo who then
collected you from Los Angeles
Airport and you both travelled to the Sheraton Hotel. During the car ride you
advised Mr Rodrigo
that you would be transporting wine and watches for the
syndicate and you were to be paid US$9,000. You were advised by Mr Rodrigo
transporting the suitcase would not be safe, but he did not explicitly say that
it would contain a border controlled substance.
forensic analysis of your mobile phone revealed a series of relevant
conversations and media which pertained to the importation
(a) a conversation on 27 November 2024 with an Instagram user abc_richiee (also
known as Zac) where the pair of you discussed booking
you an airplane ticket
from Shanghai to Los Angeles. Zac routinely questioned when you could travel
and confirmed that the job would
pay US$9,500.
(b) On 5 December 2024 you advised Zac that your employer was holding your
Hungarian passport and would only return it if you paid
HK$15,500. Zac
confirmed that he would organise the payment for release of the passport
stressing the importance of you being able
to take the flight to Los Angeles.
(c) On 6 December 2024 you advised Zac that your flight would need to be changed
to the next day as you had not prepared the correct
US entry documentation and
Zac confirmed that he would pay for the flight change.
(d) On 7 December 2024 you confirmed to Zac that you had boarded the flight from
Shanghai to Hong Kong and then to Los Angeles and
you provided photo
documentation of yourself boarding the flight at Zac's request.
(e) You remained in contact with Mr Rodrigo between 9 and 10 December relating
primarily to obtaining funding for food, accommodation
and travel.
(f) On 12 December you had questioned whether Zac could provide additional
funding for food and accommodation stating that you had
'risked everything on
(g) On 13 December Mr Rodrigo questioned when you would be arriving into
Australia and when you confirmed that you were not certain,
he told you that he
must remain in Australia until your arrival.
(h) On 14 December you had a conversation with an Instagram user 'wavywavybaby'
also known as Jayden. During this conversation Jayden
advised you that he would
buy you a new suitcase to ensure that the 'customer' did not see the broken
wheel on your suitcase that
you had in your possession. On 14 December you
continued this conversation with Jayden providing personal information to assist
Jayden in booking flights and accommodation.
(i) On 15 December 2024 you continued speaking with Jayden questioning how many
kilograms the suitcase is stating 'I feel like it's
30 kilograms
then alleged that these messages were transmitted following you receiving the
suitcase with the border controlled drugs
inserted. Shortly thereafter, Jayden
requested a photograph of the suitcase being checked into the flight to confirm
that you had
not stolen it.
(j) When you arrived at Los Angeles you advised Jayden that the bag was
5 kilograms overweight, that you did not have the funds for
checked luggage, and in response Jayden sent 39 messages to you reiterating the
importance of checking in the bag on time,
and to do whatever it takes.
(k) When you stated that you had not received any money to pay for extra baggage
Jayden advised you to dump your clothes at the airport
and that he would come
and collect them later. You then sent a video of the suitcase being checked in
advising that you had thrown
away your hairdryer and a pair of pants. Jayden
then provided instructions on how to fill in the Australian Customs Declaration
Form advising you to check 'No' for each box.
(l) You then sent multiple images to Zac confirming that you had checked in the
suitcase and boarded the flight to Australia. You
then advised
Mr Rodrigo that you would be arriving on 17 December and then upon
arrival you advised him of same.
were charged at a filing hearing on 18 December 2024 and you have been in
custody since then.
come before the Court with no prior criminal
Sentencing Considerations
this charge is a Commonwealth offence, you fall to be sentenced in accordance
(Cth) ('the
Accordingly, I am required to have regard to a number of matters which are set
to the extent that they are relevant and known to the
court, and I do so, as I will elaborate. One of these factors is your personal
circumstances.
Circumstances
are currently 26 years of age. You were born and raised in Hungary and are the
younger of two children from your parents' marriage.
You also have a younger
half-brother.
childhood memories are reportedly marred by the death of your mother when you
were five years old. She died from brain cancer
at the age of 24 after a two
year illness. During her illness your family moved in with your grandparents so
that they could help
care for her. Following her death, it was very difficult
for you to be raised without your
Your grandmother was the
main source of your emotional support. She has had a significant influence on
your life and her recent
death caused you enormous grief.
father practiced a very conservative form of Christianity and placed very strict
behavioural controls on you and your older sister.
You have described your
father as being quite detached and note that personal issues were very rarely
father remarried and your stepmother was extremely strict and controlling. This
culminated in incidents of verbal abuse and
corporal punishment. You could not
wait to move out of home at the age of 20 years. You have since renounced your
father's religion
which has created further distance between the two of
have a closer relationship with your older sister. She has reportedly always
attempted to assist you with your personal issues.
You have only ever had a
superficial connection with your younger
half-brother.
developed a close relationship with an older woman Ildiko when you were
17 years old. You described her as a mother type figure
in life and she
has often provided you with accommodation, money and assisted you to find
employment. Your family are reportedly
aware of your legal
have had further conflict with your father and stepmother when you were
19 years old when you were in a relationship with a female
for two years.
They disapproved of this relationship because she was not part of your religion.
This ultimately led to the separation
between you and your partner. You are
currently single.
older sister and your close friendship with Ildiko remain your primary sources
of support now that your grandmother has passed
completed your secondary schooling in Hungary reportedly with no significant
learning or behavioural problems. After leaving
high school you worked in an
office and then in patient transport in a local hospital. During COVID this
required you to wear full
PPE and you worked long shifts, finding the work
challenging at times. You then obtained employment at a five-star resort in
where you worked for two years before deciding to pursue a career in
modelling. You were mainly involved in fashion modelling and
gained short term
contracts for work in Korea, Hong Kong and China. A significant recent contract
was in Beijing and you would often
do promotional work in between
moved to Hong Kong and the work was more sporadic. Your living expenses were
high. It was whilst living there that you met the
people involved in this
importation. You then returned to China but planned to return to Hungary. It was
during this time you encountered
difficulties with your employer in Shanghai and
it was during this time that you were contacted by Zac about the job. At this
you had about US$500 in your bank account. Shortly prior to your arrest
you had been offered a modelling contract in Italy, but you
were unsure if you
were going to accept the offer as you could not afford the expense of residing
living in China you met a woman with whom you began a relationship in March
2024. The relationship ended when you were arrested
and you have not heard from
psychological report prepared by Matthew Barth dated 17 October 2025 was
tendered on your plea. According to what you told Mr Barth,
you began drinking
alcohol when you were 15 years old and this steadily increased throughout your
teens and you began binge drinking
heavily on the weekend. Drinking provided
you with an increased sense of confidence at social events to help cope with
Your drinking escalated markedly in 2024, and you began to use it as a
way of dealing with increasing social demands of your work.
You were drinking
heavily three to four times per week which exacerbated your personal and
financial problems. This pattern of
alcohol consumption continued up until your
arrest. You have had a problematic period of using cannabis during your
mid-teens but
significantly reduced cannabis use from about the age of 16. You
have on one occasion used
have described self-esteem issues since your childhood years recalling feeling
insecure and experiencing self-doubt due to the
conflicted relationship with
your parents. You often felt sad and rejected and occasionally self-harmed.
Your self-esteem issues
continued to impact you at various times throughout your
adult years, particularly due to your employment and financial problems.
have been reluctant to pursue assistance from mental health
professionals.
have used your time in custody productively completing several courses. You are
currently undertaking a course in civil construction
and you have long term
ambitions of returning to
have described an intense emotional reaction to the aftermath of being charged
and placed on remand. The stress of your legal
situation has contributed to
your sense of shame and disillusionment. You have experienced periods of
transient suicidal ideation.
Your moods have apparently stabilised although you
have found it very difficult to adjust to the custodial environment.
explained to psychologist Matthew Barth that you had met a man called Zac whilst
you were working in China and he offered you
US$9,000 to transport watches to
Melbourne. You said that at this point you were stressed out about having no
money and that you
could not go to Milan for your career, although you initially
refused Zac's offer, you ultimately agreed because you were broke and
money. Zac organised for you to fly to Los Angeles to meet Andrew and the
transportation of the watches was organised including
your flights to Melbourne.
Another man reportedly packed your suitcase and you claim that you were unaware
that the drugs were concealed
in the boxes. You claim that the first time you
became aware that there was methamphetamine in the suitcase was upon your arrest
at Melbourne. You have expressed remorse for your offending stating '
so stupid, drugs are bad, I feel sorry about this. I don’t want to poison
another country (with
is the opinion of Dr Barth that given your history you would have previously met
the criteria for Alcohol Use Disorder which would
currently be specified as in
remission in a controlled environment. You have reportedly expressed a strong
motivation to commit
to concerted alcohol treatment. Your moods having
stabilised are not sufficiently severe for you to meet the criteria for any
disorder. You are not said to be suffering from an Adjustment Disorder,
Anxiety Related Disorder or Mood Disorder however, it is
the recommendation of
Dr Barth that when considering your limited coping skills and imprisonment in a
foreign country, that you should
be provided with psychological treatment to
stabilise your symptoms in the long
Imprisonment
as a foreign national
a foreign national, who came to Australia for the purpose of committing this
offence, with the intention of leaving the country
thereafter, little or no
weight arises from the inevitability of your sentence being served here, away
from your family and friends.
However, I recognise that you will have few, if any visitors, and your period of
imprisonment with thus have an added degree of burden
as opposed to the ordinary
prisoner. Furthermore the language difficulties have made it more challenging
for you to complete various
courses in custody. Communication with family and
friends overseas has been difficult and expensive to arrange. More recently, you
have had difficulties getting through to Ildiko and you have had no contact with
your former girlfriend as police have your phone
and you do not know how to
The fact of the
burden of being in custody is a matter I take into account however given that
you travelled to this country for the
sole purpose of committing this offence, I
do not give it enormous weight in the
circumstances.
counsel does not submit that the prospect of deportation will weigh heavily upon
you in the sense of a lost opportunity to settle
in Australia but rather the
stigma associated with deportation may have an impact on your ability to travel
to certain countries.
I accept that this may be
you were in custody when your grandmother passed away and you missed her
funeral. Despite efforts to arrange a live link to
watch the funeral, this was
unable to be arranged, and you were unable to watch or
participate.
number of character references have been tendered on your
You are described as
kind, reliable and a thoughtful individual by your friends. Your former employer
describes that you have demonstrated
honesty, humility and respect towards
others, and that you were known within the modelling industry for your
professionalism and
discipline. You have expressed your remorse to your
employer. I take these matters into account.
Plea of Guilty
take into account your plea of guilty.
You entered this at an early
stage and accordingly, you are entitled to a discount. You have accepted
responsibility for your conduct,
and in doing so you have saved the community
the significant expense of a trial. Your plea has a utilitarian value and
demonstrates
a willingness to facilitate the course of justice. It is also
reflective of your remorse.
were relatively forthcoming to investigators. Your admissions ultimately led to
the apprehension of a co-accused. I have been
advised by the prosecution that he
is a child and so issues of parity have not been raised on the
Prospects of
rehabilitation
accept that you are remorseful.
You have expressed your shame and remorse for this offending and have taken
responsibility, acknowledging the gravity of your behaviour.
You come before the
court with no prior criminal history and you are still relatively young being
only 26 years of age- a matter
I take into account. There is thus great scope
for you to be rehabilitated and you have already demonstrated this by
undertaking
courses whilst in custody. I find that you have strong prospects of
rehabilitation.
Crimes Act 1914
I have noted, you fall to be sentenced in accordance with the
Section 16A(1)
requires me to impose a
sentence that is of a severity appropriate to all of the circumstances of the
, the court shall not pass a sentence of imprisonment for a
Federal offence unless having considered all of the available sentences,
satisfied that no other sentence is appropriate in the circumstances. Given the
gravity of the offending, both parties agree
that no other sentence but a term
of imprisonment, is appropriate here. As indicated, I have had regard to the
matters set out in
Nature and Gravity of the Offending
accordance with
, I must take into account the nature and
circumstances of the offending.
In doing this, I must assess your level of criminality.
offending here is inherently very serious as is reflected by the maximum penalty
applicable. Higher courts in AustraliaEr have
emphasised often enough that those
who engage in offending involving commercial quantities of unlawfully imported
border-controlled
drugs must expect to receive significant punishment.
have had regard to the principles summarised in the Victorian Court of Appeal
decision in
Nguyen & Phommalysack v The
distilled in the New South Wales decision in
The Queen v Nguyen &
accordance with these principles, the quantity of the illegal drug involved is a
highly relevant factor in determining the objective
seriousness of the offence
and is often the main factor available to assess comparative seriousness of
criminality. In this case,
the quantity of drugs, being 9 times the commercial
quantity, makes the offending relatively serious. The prosecution accepts that
you were reckless as to the suitcase containing a border-controlled
That is you were
reckless as the real and substantial risk that the suitcase contained
methamphetamine and that it was unjustifiable
to take that risk. The prosecution
accept there is no evidence that you had knowledge of the weight of the drugs.
further consideration pursuant to the principles in
Phommalysack
, includes the role that you played and the activities that
you undertook. You were offered an opportunity to engage with the syndicate
December 2024 via an associate. You were to be paid approximately US$9000 to
bring the suitcase from Los Angeles. The incidental
costs of your travel between
Hong Kong, LA and Australia were to be covered by the syndicate. Other
arrangements were made by the
syndicate to pay for your employer to release your
passport, arrange flights, pay for your hotel in the USA and the purchase of a
new suitcase. You complied with the directions given to you in terms of packing
the case with your belongings and making sure it
met the weight requirements as
to ensure it was checked in on time The prosecution accepts that you were at the
lowest level of the
organisation.
carried a substantial level of risk and the reward offered was likely minimal in
comparison to the total value of the substance
imported. However as the
prosecution have pointed out, your role was instrumental in the success of the
importation. Your role was
not a transient or menial one and as I have said, you
carried a degree of responsibility. I accept that you played a trusted and
important role, albeit that it was fairly unsophisticated.
accept that the evidence does not establish that you expected to receive any
share of the profits of the enterprise. However clearly
you did so for financial
reward. Without people like yourself, being prepared to undertake tasks involved
in the facilitation of
this importation, these sorts of ventures would not be as
efficiently carried out.
a first time offender, this is a matter I must take into account. However this
is generally given less weight in offences of this
nature, but it is still a
relevant consideration.
Current sentencing practices
have had regard to current sentencing practices. However, this is only one
factor and not the controlling factor in the fixing
of a just sentence. As the
High Court set out in
The Queen v
when sentencing for a
Commonwealth offence, I must have regard to sentences that have been imposed in
other States and territories.
table was tendered by the prosecution which summarised cases involving sentences
for Federal drug offending concerning commercial
quantities of border controlled
drugs. The prosecution submits that these cases provide guidance as to the
application of relevant
sentencing principles and whilst are not truly
comparable they provide insight into sentencing for varying amounts of
and the roles played by those individuals. I have had regard to that
table and to each of the cases referred to therein.
your counsel has provided the Court with cases said to be comparable to the
offending here both with respect to the age
of the offenders and the quantity of
drug involved. I have had regard to these cases.
General and specific deterrence
the seriousness of the offending, general deterrence assumes prominence in the
sentencing exercise. This is prescribed in
s16A(2)(ja)
1914. Offences of this nature are often difficult to detect, and the
great harm that such drugs can cause within the community is
well-known. As the
Court said in
Phommalysack
'general deterrence is to
be given chief weight on sentence and stern punishment will be warranted in
almost every case.'
sentence 'must signal to would be drug traffickers that the potential financial
rewards to be gained from such activities are
neutralised by the risk of severe
punishment.'
sentence that I impose must reflect the significant punishment that is to be
expected by people who participate in enterprises
such as this.
have accepted that you have strong prospects of rehabilitation and as I have
already recognised you have made extensive efforts
to date, but this is not the
only sentencing consideration. The offending here was serious and the court
denounces your conduct.
formulating an appropriate sentence, I have had regard to each of the matters
discussed, the relevant provisions of
as well as the need to impose a
sentence that is just in all of the
circumstances.
Could you stand
up please, Mr Horvath.
the charge of importing a commercial quantity of a border controlled drug,
namely methamphetamine, you are convicted and sentenced
to seven years and six
months' imprisonment. That sentence commences today.
order that you serve a period of four years before becoming eligible for
Pre-sentence Detention
declare 324 days pre-sentence detention to be reckoned as served on the sentence
that I have imposed and deducted administratively,
and order that this be noted
in the records of the court. So just for the purposes of the interpreter, the
sentence imposed is a
sentence of seven years and six months' imprisonment and
that Mr Horvath serve a period of four years before becoming eligible for
parole. That sentence will commence today.
indicate that but for your plea of guilty, I would have sentenced you to nine
years' imprisonment with a non-parole period of five
years and eight
Amended Summary of Prosecution
Opening for Plea dated 23 October 2025 (‘
A pseudonym.
Exhibit A, 3 [12].
Exhibit A, 4 [17].
Exhibit A, 6 [19].
s16A(2)(m).
Psychological Assessment of Dr
Mathew Barth dated 17 October 2025 (
‘Exhibit 2’
Ibid 2 [10].
Ibid 3 [14].
Exhibit 2, 3 [11].
Ibid 3 [12].
Ibid 3 [13].
Ibid 4 [19].
Ibid 3 [14].
Exhibit 2, 3 [15]-[17].
Exhibit 2, 4 [21]-[24].
Ibid, 4-5 [25]-[28].
Ibid 3 [18].
Ibid 5 [28].
Exhibit 2, 5 [30]-[32].
Ibid 7 [43].
DPP (Cth) v Peng
[2014] VSCA 128.
Defence Plea Submissions
dated 28 October 2025 (‘
DPP (Cth) v Estrada
[2015] VSCA 22.
Exhibit 1, 4 [8].
Ibid 3 [7(g)].
Bundle of Character
References for the Accused authored by Szyani Ilona Maria and Noemi Szekely and
Bartoz Radziwinski dated 27 October
2025 & authored by Ildiko Lovasz dated
30 September 2025 (
‘Exhibit 3’
s16A(2)(g).
s16A(2)(n).
s16A(2)(f)(ii).
Nguyen & Phommalysack
[2011] VSCA 32
[2010] NSWCCA 238
Prosecution Written Outline
of Submissions on Plea dated 24 October 2025 (
‘Exhibit B’
[2015] HCA 39
[2011] VSCA 32
Phommalysack
[2011] VSCA 32
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (232 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter