URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2025/702.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Swann [2025] VSC 702 (13 November 2025)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
BENJAMIN JOSEPH SWANN
DATE OF HEARING
30 October 2025
DATE OF SENTENCE
13 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VSC 702
CRIMINAL LAW – Child homicide – Where offender struck
baby’s head causing non-survivable skull fractures and brain
– Where offender told baby’s mother not to call ambulance –
Where offender withheld information about
how injuries occurred to medical staff
– Where offender then sought to blame the baby’s mother for the
Where baby born prematurely and extremely vulnerable – Where
baby was in the offender’s care – Where offender was
treatment for anger issues – Plea of guilty after contested committal
– Absence of remorse – No deprived
background or psychiatric illness
– No relevant criminal history – Moderate prospects of
rehabilitation –
R v Dempsey
[2001] VSC 123
[2015] VSC 312
DPP v Woodford
[2017] VSCA 312
[2019] VSC 683
DPP v McDonald
[2020] VSC 845 –
Crimes Act 1958
APPEARANCES
For the Crown
Mr Mark Gibson KC with
Mr Leigh Crosbie
Office of Public Prosecutions
For the Accused
Mr Rishi Nathwani KC with Ms Lucinda Thies
Doogue + George
HIS HONOUR:
Benjamin Swann, you have pleaded guilty to child homicide contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
, by your killing of Elijah Kolini Vaihu on 20 January
2024, when he was 115 days old. The offence of child homicide carries a maximum
penalty of 25 years’ imprisonment. As a Category 2 offence under the
Sentencing Act 1991
, the Court must impose a custodial order unless
certain circumstances are found to
It is not suggested that
any of them do.
had first met Elijah’s mother, Ms Elyce Vaihu, some three or four years
earlier, but had lost touch. In July 2023, you contacted
Ms Vaihu again and the
two of you became a couple. Ms Vaihu was around three months’ pregnant at
this time. She was no longer
in a relationship with Elijah’s father.
was born at the Werribee Mercy Hospital on 27 September 2023 about 15
weeks’ prematurely following an emergency caesarean
section. He required
resuscitation and intubation and other medical treatment. Elijah was
transferred to the neonatal intensive
care unit at the Mercy Hospital in
Heidelberg and then returned to the Werribee Mercy Hospital.
did well in hospital, and on 13 January 2024, he was taken home (or initially to
her sister’s home) by Ms Vaihu.
18 January 2024, some five days’ later, you were staying at Ms
Vaihu’s house to help her care for Elijah. Elijah was
unsettled. You had
not stayed there the night before. Elijah had his scheduled feed at midnight,
following which you and Ms Vaihu
went to bed. Elijah awoke regularly and
remained unsettled, and you got up to settle him on at least one occasion.
crying. Ms Vaihu woke up and asked you if you wanted
her to attend to Elijah.
You responded ‘Don’t fucking worry about it because I am already
up’. Ms Vaihu thought
you were in a bad mood. A short time later, Ms
Vaihu heard a loud bang that sounded like something hitting a wall and Elijah
crying intensely before becoming quiet. You took Elijah into
Ms Vaihu’s bedroom and passed him to Ms Vaihu, saying
this fucking baby’. Elijah was crying again. Ms Vaihu settled
Elijah, and he stopped crying, so she passed him back to you
so he could be fed.
Ms Vaihu then noticed that Elijah was making a wheezing noise and appeared to be
struggling to breathe. His arm
was floppy. Ms Vaihu said she would call an
ambulance, but you asked her to wait. Elijah started to change colour. He was
breathing normally.
4:07am, Ms Vaihu called triple zero. She was instructed to provide
cardio-pulmonary resuscitation, and she remained on the phone
to the call
operator until paramedics arrived at the house. During this time, you were
performing mouth to mouth resuscitation on
Elijah. Paramedics arrived at 4:15am.
They saw that Elijah was purple. He had a pulse, but was only taking one breath
per minute.
The paramedics asked you what happened, and you said that Elijah had
been crying and wouldn’t stop for the last hour, and that
you only had
noticed his current state when you handed him over to Ms Vaihu.
care paramedics arrived at 4:19am. The paramedics took Elijah to Werribee Mercy
Hospital. You and Ms Vaihu followed the
ambulance. At Werribee Mercy Hospital,
further attempts were made to resuscitate Elijah and to provide him with
intravenous fluids.
He improved for a short period of time, before his breathing
deteriorated further. He was transferred to the Royal Children’s
arriving at 8am. He was critically unwell. Scans showed that he had suffered
significant cranial trauma, including occipital
and right parietal bone
fractures and a severe traumatic brain injury.
Ultimately,
no surgical intervention or any other form of life-saving treatment was
20 January 2024, Ms Vaihu agreed to Elijah’s life support being withdrawn,
and Elijah was allowed to die.
your plea, you accept that, while frustrated, tired and angry, you deliberately
caused blunt force trauma to Elijah’s head
and that this trauma caused the
injuries, including the fracture to his skull and associated brain injuries,
that resulted in his
death a day later.
I said, Elijah was born prematurely. He was only 11 days old in
‘corrected’ age at the time of his death. He had overcome
medical complications upon being born. His fragile health had only just began to
stabilise when you killed him. His vulnerability
at that time cannot be
overstated.
said, it is important to bear in mind that although by your plea you accept that
you caused the blunt force trauma with the intention
of causing serious injury
to Elijah, you are not to be sentenced on the basis that you intended to kill
Elijah, or that you intended
to cause him really serious injury. You have been
charged with, and pleaded guilty to, child homicide, not murder.
sentencing purposes
sentence to be imposed may only be for the purposes of punishing you to an
extent and in a manner which is just in all of the
circumstances, deterring you
or other persons from committing offences of the same or similar character,
establishing conditions
within which your rehabilitation may be facilitated,
manifesting the denunciation by the court of the type of conduct in which you
have engaged, and protecting the
In sentencing you, I
must have regard to the maximum penalty of 25 years prescribed for the offence
of child homicide, current sentencing
practices, the nature and gravity of the
offence, your culpability and degree of responsibility for the offence, the
impact of the
offence on the victims, your personal circumstances and the
personal circumstances of the victims, your plea of guilty and the stage
proceedings at which you indicated an intention to plead guilty, your previous
character, and the presence of any aggravating
or mitigating factors concerning
you or any other relevant
circumstances.
My task is to
arrive at a sentence that is just following an instinctive synthesis of all
these features. The sentence imposed
must be no greater than is required by
these considerations. Because that is the task involved in sentencing you, the
impose should not be seen as a reflection of the value of
Elijah’s life.
considerations
accept that you hoped to be like a father figure to Elijah in the future and
that you were at Ms Vaihu’s house that night
for the purpose of helping
her with Elijah, not for harming him, and that you had helped her with Elijah
earlier that night and on
previous nights (although not the immediately
preceding night). Your actions were unpremeditated, and short-lived, and
contributed
to by the frustration that all tired parents experience when a
newborn baby refuses to settle.
Nonetheless,
the killing of a child is always a serious
and I consider this to be
a serious instance of this serious offence. Elijah was newly born and entirely
defenceless. He was in
your care and his mother was trusting you to look after
him, which increases the gravity of your
By your actions, Elijah
will now never grow up or old or experience a life. His mother in particular
will now have to live with
an ongoing sense of grief and longing with only the
briefest of memories of her son to comfort her. I agree with and adopt the
of Vincent J, who said over twenty years ago:
When the life lost is that of a child for whose welfare the perpetrator was as
parent, guardian and simply as an adult human being
personally responsible, the
situation must be viewed very gravely. After all, the true value of any
community must be assessed in
terms of the degree of genuine recognition that it
gives to the rights and dignity of its most vulnerable and disadvantaged
... Perpetrators who criminally beat or otherwise hurt children as a
means of relieving their own sense of frustration or anger must
anticipate the
possibility that the law will respond in a fashion designed to vindicate the
victim’s rights and demonstrate
the commitment of the society, which they
represent, to its stated values.
the words of Kaye JA, who said some five years ago:
The law regards all human life as unique and sacrosanct. However, the life of an
infant or a young child is especially precious,
because children ... are so
vulnerable and defenceless. The ordinary natural instinct of any human being is
to feel tenderness and
protectiveness towards an infant or a young child. The
assault, that you inflicted on [the child], by which you brought his life
prematurely to an end, contravened the fundamental values of our
are now 31 years old. You have no relevant criminal record. You did not have a
deprived upbringing and you have led a productive
working life surrounded by a
large and loving family. Your actions were not the result of a psychiatric
illness. I have regard
to the numerous statements that have been filed that
attest to the assistance and friendship you have provided to your family and
friends. I accept that you have been a kind and loyal cousin and uncle and
nephew and friend to many people and have contributed
to the community both
through your work as a carpenter and in your basketball coaching.
has been, and will be, your first time in custody. As a person guilty of
killing a child, you will be at risk in custody and
will have to spend at least
a considerable amount of time in protection. In this way, your time in custody
will involve additional
hardship for you.
have successfully completed three educational courses while on remand. Those
courses are ‘Participate in workplace safety
arrangements’,
‘Received Goods’ and ‘Use hygienic practices for food
safety’. While on remand, you
have been ineligible for, and therefore have
been unable to access, any clinical offence-specific or rehabilitative treatment
You have, however, independently engaged with the Alcohol and Other
Drugs service and participated in an assessment. Your transfer
to a different
remand facility has precluded participation in that program. You have been
referred to a number of other programs
and educational courses, but your limited
time while on remand has prevented your completion of them. I accept that you
much as possible, engaged with prison programs.
were taking methylamphetamine at some time – whether that be days, weeks
or months – prior to this offending and traces
of methylamphetamine were
found on a toxicological analysis of Elijah’s hair. There is no
suggestion, of course, that Elijah
was ever administered methylamphetamine and I
am satisfied that the toxicological finding was due to Elijah’s exposure
of methylamphetamine from his time with you. Also, there is no
suggestion that you were affected by methylamphetamine on the night
January 2024. In these circumstances, your history of taking of illicit
substances is of no relevance when it comes to assessing
the seriousness of your
have a son who resides in Westen Australia with his mother. You have had
intermittent contact with him. Certain submissions
relating to your
relationship with him were put in writing in advance of your plea but were
withdrawn orally. It was submitted that
you hope to rebuild your relationship
with your son on your release and that this would serve as a strong incentive
for you then
to remain offence free, but it was clarified that his mother might
not be happy for this to occur. The true nature of your relationship
son and your son’s mother remains unclear. In these circumstances, I do
not consider that their presence materially
influences my sentencing
consideration.
seems that, after Elijah was born, your relationship with Ms Vaihu
deteriorated. Text messages show that you and Ms Vaihu fought
because she
suspected that you were using drugs, and that you broke up with her on 30
October 2023 but resumed the relationship the
following day. Further arguments
ensued in early November 2023, followed by another break up on 9 November 2023.
You argued at Ms
Vaihu’s house, culminating in Ms Vaihu repeatedly asking
you to leave and saying she would call the police. You apologised
later, sending Ms Vaihu a text message offering to ‘fix the wall’
and apologising for your ‘actions
the other night and the hurtful
words’. By 15 November 2023, Ms Vaihu told a social worker that she had
been unable to attend
the hospital as regularly, and was feeling bad about that
and that she was considering rekindling the relationship with you. That
on 22 November 2023, Ms Vaihu messaged saying that she was ‘done’
with your relationship, and you responded by threatening
to attend her house and
damage her car. On 25 November 2023, you messaged Ms Vaihu saying
‘let’s just hope ur safe place
is still in one piece it would be
unfortunate to come home to a great big mess hahahahahahaha’. In early
December 2023, you
and Ms Vaihu reconciled. On 20 December 2023, you apologised
to Ms Vaihu for your anger and offered to book in to see your general
practitioner so that you could ‘get back on my meds so I don’t get
angry again’. The following day, you sent Ms
Vaihu a threatening message
which stated ‘I swear to god if u about an AVO and fucking my chances of
ever having my son full
time ever it will be the last thing u ever do’.
You and Ms Vaihu broke up again on 26 December 2023 following another argument,
but rekindled the relationship that same day. On 8 January 2024, Ms Vaihu
obtained a Family Violence Safety Notice following an incident
violence alleged to have been committed by you on 6 January 2024.
are pending in relation to your conduct on 6 January 2024 and no part of this
sentence is directed at the events that took
place that day. But, the matters I
have referred to indicate that you have issues with anger management. The text
communications
between you and Ms Vaihu show your willingness to engage in
threatening and aggressive or violent behaviour, followed by apologies
protestations of affection. Your need to address your anger was recognised by
you (and Ms Vaihu) prior to Elijah’s death.
You first attended upon a
general practitioner in July 2018 in relation to your issues with anger,
following which you were referred
to a psychologist. On 30 December 2023, you
attended, with Ms Vaihu, on a general practitioner as a first step in
obtaining further
assistance. You saw that doctor again on 6 January 2024, when
you were prescribed sertraline and referred to a psychiatrist for
general practitioner thought was ADHD. You had not seen the psychiatrist before
you were taken into custody. Following
the incident of alleged family violence
on 6 January 2024, and after a referral from Victoria Police, Orange Door
engaged with you,
and you agreed to and were awaiting a referral for a
Men’s Behaviour Change Program.
tendency to violent or threatening behaviour raises a concern about your
prospects of rehabilitation, but, on the other hand,
the fact that you
recognised your problems with anger management, and were in the process of
taking steps to address it, together
with your supportive family and lack of
criminal history and your engagement in courses while in custody, are all
positive features
when considering your prospects of rehabilitation.
emphasise that you are not being sentenced for anything other than what you did
to Elijah on the morning of 19 January 2024. These
concerning aspects of your
relationship with Ms Vaihu are relevant only because they place your offending
in context and to the extent
that they impact on the need for specific
deterrence and your prospects of rehabilitation. I should say, also, that I
accept that
relationships are complex and multi-faceted and that there would
have been occasions where you provided valuable and kind support
to Ms Vaihu and
presence at Ms Vaihu’s house on the night of 18 January 2024 was contrary
to the terms of the Family Violence Safety Notice
that had been obtained by Ms
Vaihu. Ms Vaihu messaged you that day and said that she was struggling to cope
with Elijah’s
care as he was not sleeping well and asked you to help her.
Often, the fact that a person is also in breach of a family violence
intervention order, or like order, is an aggravating factor when they commit an
offence of family violence. I do not, however,
see the existence of this
order, or notice, as an aggravating factor of significance here. This is
because you were present that
night at Ms Vaihu’s specific request and in
circumstances where she had sought your assistance with looking after Elijah.
are, however, two highly significant, and related, aggravating features of your
offending that carry real weight. The first
is that you initially discouraged
Ms Vaihu from calling an ambulance and then failed to tell the paramedics
and doctors who were
desperately trying to save Elijah’s life (or Ms
Vaihu) that you had forcefully struck Elijah’s head shortly before his
concerning symptoms developed. The second is that you later suggested, once it
was apparent that Elijah had suffered head injuries
that resulted in his death,
that Ms Vaihu, Elijah’s mother, was or might have been responsible for
those injuries.
terms of the first of these, and despite being asked what had happened, you did
not mention what you had done, and indeed falsely
conveyed that nothing out of
the ordinary had happened:
(a) to the paramedics who arrived at Ms Vaihu’s house;
(b) to the doctors at the Werribee Mercy Hospital;
(c) to the doctors at the Royal Children’s Hospital; and
(d) to Ms Vaihu herself including when she sent you messages from the Royal
Children’s Hospital saying:
... tbh [to be honest] baby isn’t doing well at all. Did he fall or hit
his head with you?
If something happened I need you to tell me so that they know what
they’re dealing with
to which you replied:
No Ely I literally picked him up from his cot put him on the change table he was
still squawking tried giving him his dummy which
he took settled for about 2
seconds then I picked him up he started squawking again I walked to the kitchen
to make a bottle for
him he started squawking again I tried giving him his dummy
he didn’t want that at all he started squawking again I then gave
u, he settled for about 2 minutes then u gave him to me I tried feeding him he
wasn’t taking the bottle then both. u
and I noticed how limp he was going
and then obviously we called the ambo’s, so unless I am a complete and
utter fuckin retard
and don’t know how to pick up infants anymore I have
no idea what’s happened.
is no suggestion that if you had told any of these people what you had done then
Elijah’s life might have been saved,
notwithstanding that it seems that
his skull fracture and brain injury were not discovered for some time. But you
could not have
known this at the time and your failure, or refusal, to provide
this information indicates that you were, even when Elijah was fighting
life, putting your own interests above his.
when you spoke to the police, you repeated your denial that you had done
anything untoward and sought to divert attention to
Ms Vaihu. On 19 January
2024, you told police that you thought that Ms Vaihu was ‘not handling
being with Elijah and was having
suicidal thoughts’, but you omitted any
reference to your own violence that caused the blunt force trauma to
head. You also said that you gave Elijah to Ms Vaihu then went
to get his bottle and when you returned Elijah’s breathing
was unusual
– he was taking short and sharp breaths and then he stopped breathing and
changed colour. Then, on 8 February
2024, after saying again that Elijah
‘went quiet’ only after you had returned him to Ms Vaihu and he was
care’, in a formal police interview, when asked what you
thought had happened to Elijah, you answered:
I – I don’t know. I think his mother did something to him.
asked whether this thought that Ms Vaihu had ‘maybe done something’
to Elijah was a new thought, you replied that
you had thought that from the
beginning and that you had been trying to tell the police that Ms Vaihu was
depressed and wasn’t
coping and that, in your eyes, she was ‘not fit
to be a mother’.
was after you had already told the police in that interview that you thought
that Ms Vaihu was severely depressed, that she had
told you that, in your words,
she felt ‘guilty’ and that she ‘didn’t want’
Elijah, that she ‘wasn’t
coping at all that ... day’, and that
on one occasion you had seen what looked like her deliberately trying to cause
to fall out of his swing onto a tiled floor. You also denied in that
interview that you had done anything to cause the injuries
as I’m satisfied you then did when you said these things, that your own
actions were the probable cause of Elijah’s
death, you callously and
dishonestly sought to divert attention from yourself and to make the police
instead suspect that Ms Vaihu
had inflicted the injuries on Elijah that resulted
in his death.
conduct in this regard, again, significantly aggravates your moral
culpability.
and significantly, you have not demonstrated any remorse, either in the period
following Elijah’s death or since.
Your lack of remorse increases the
importance of specific deterrence.
were charged with murder on 8 February 2024. You offered to plead guilty to
child homicide on 14 August 2025 and this was accepted
by the Crown on
2 September 2025, resulting in your arraignment on and plea of guilty to
that offence on 17 September 2025. For
sentencing purposes, it is as if you
pleaded guilty on 14 August 2025. This was not an early plea because it was
after the committal.
The fact that you did not indicate that you would accept
responsibility for Elijah’s death until after the committal meant
Vaihu had to give evidence. When she was doing so, in March 2025, your counsel
explored Ms Vaihu’s mental state and
ability to cope with motherhood
prior to Elijah’s death and established that Ms Vaihu had a wooden bed
head and wooden side
tables next to her bed – which can only have been for
the purpose of raising the possibility that it was Ms Vaihu who had fractured
Elijah’s skull and damaged his brain after you had returned him to her.
I accept the statement made by Ms Vaihu in her victim
impact statement that she
was ‘traumatised’ from ‘20 months’ of being
‘blamed’ and ‘accused,
attacked and humiliated’ of it
being suggested that she was responsible for taking her son’s life.
fact that you have pleaded guilty does, however, entitle you to a utilitarian
discount, as it has prevented the need for what
would have been ‘a
difficult and highly emotional
indicative that you have, now, publicly accepted responsibility for having
inflicted the injuries that caused Elijah’s
have had regard to the victim impact statements of Ms Vaihu, her sister Jessica
Vaihu, Elijah’s aunt and godmother Rachelle
Kowalski, and one of the
paramedics who attended, Janelle Seet. Suffice to say that Elijah’s death
has impacted them all very
considerably. It must not be forgotten, however,
that the primary victim of your offending was Elijah himself, who had his entire
life before him and will now never grow up.
productive background, lack of criminal history, family support, insight into
your need for assistance with your anger management
issues and your behaviour in
custody all tend to suggest, as I have said, that you have reasonable prospects
of rehabilitation.
On the other hand, your lack of any remorse and your
preparedness not just to seek to avoid responsibility but also to seek to
blame to Ms Vaihu show that your prospects are in fact more
referred me to a number of cases involving child homicide and one of
manslaughter of a child. The head sentences have ranged
from between nine years
and 12 years of imprisonment. Case comparisons can be a useful tool in gauging
current sentencing practices,
but no two cases are alike. Particular reliance
was placed on
where, in 2020,
a head sentence of nine years was imposed with a non-parole period of six years
and eight months. In that case, the
offender initially concealed the fact that
he had inflicted the injuries that led to his child’s death from medical
practitioners
trying to save his child, and he also had longstanding anger
management problems and enjoyed the support of his family and friends.
offender showed some remorse: he told the mother that he was responsible once it
was ascertained that the baby had suffered
head injuries, then ran away and hid
for two days and tried to commit suicide, and then pleaded guilty without there
having been
a committal. Also, he did not try to blame the child’s
mother. Unsurprisingly, I was not referred to any other case where
the offender
has, after killing a child, not only shown no remorse and denied involvement but
also sought to attribute blame on the
innocent mother.
the sentence in
DPP v McDonald
, and indeed all but one of the sentences
in the other cases, were imposed at a time when the maximum sentence for child
was 20 years. In 2020, the maximum sentence for child homicide was
increased by the legislature to 25
This is relevant to
subsequent sentencing because it indicates that ‘Parliament regarded the
previous penalties as
inadequate’.
have now to impose a sentence that adequately takes into account all these
different considerations. This is a serious example
of child homicide with
weighty aggravating features for which you are morally culpable and for which
you show no remorse. To be
just in all the circumstances, the sentence must
adequately express the condemnation by this Court, on behalf of the community,
your wrongdoing, be of sufficient severity to deter others from engaging in
such violent acts against a defenceless child, and bring
further acts of violence of the kind in which you engaged will be met with
severe consequences. But, as I said
earlier, it must also take into account
your particular circumstances including your prospects of rehabilitation, which
to be moderate, and your plea of guilty, and, of course, it must be
no more severe than is necessary.
process is not an exercise in mathematics, but is a process of instinctive
synthesis of all the various considerations I have
referred to.
Swann would you please stand.
the child homicide of Elijah Kolini Vaihu on 20 January 2024 you are convicted
and sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 13 years.
fix a non-parole period of nine years and six months. I consider that period
necessary properly to vindicate the sentencing purposes.
for your plea of guilty, I would have sentenced you to 15 years of
imprisonment.
to s 28(4) of the
Sentencing Act 1991
, I declare that you have served a
total of 644 days of presentence detention and I direct that this be reckoned as
time already served
under this sentence.
Sentencing Act 1991
See, eg, the observations of
Croucher J in
R v Vinaccia
[2019] VSC 683
, [71] and in
[2015] VSC 312
R v Dempsey
DPP v McDonald
DPP v Woodford
[2020] VSC 845.
Crimes Amendment
(Manslaughter and Related Offences) Act 2020
R v AB (No 2)
[2008] VSCA 39
, 406 [51] (Warren CJ, Maxwell P and Redlich JA). See also
of Public Prosecutions v McMaster
[2008] VSCA 102
, [77] (Ashley JA, Lasry
AJA agreeing).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (306 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter