URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2024/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:43:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Flour Child Richmond Pty Ltd at Flour Child Richmond [2024] VicLiqComm 6; (18 April 2024)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application under
section 153
Control Reform Act 1998
by Flour Child Richmond Pty Ltd for an internal
review of a decision by a delegate to refuse to grant an application for a
and cafe licence to Flour Child Richmond Pty Ltd for the premises
trading as Flour Child Richmond, located at level 1, 432 Church
Commission:
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chairperson
Ms Danielle Huntersmith, Chairperson
Mr Steven Brnovic, Commissioner
Appearances:
Mr Martin Towey, LGS Legal, on behalf of Flour Child
Richmond Pty Ltd
Sergeant Alison Morris for Victoria Police
Ms Karan Kahlon, Counsel Assisting the Commission
Date Hearing: 7 February 2024
Date of Decision: 18 April 2024
Date of Reasons: 20 August 2024
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the delegate and grant the application for a restaurant and cafe licence
to the conditions set out in Appendix A.
Signed: James O’Halloran
Deputy Chairperson
Original Application
19 December 2022, Flour Child Richmond Pty Ltd (
) applied to the
Victorian Liquor Commission (
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for a restaurant and cafe
licence for premises located at level 1, 432 Church Street, Richmond
) trading as Flour Child Richmond (
Application
the Original Application, the Applicant sought the following trading
Sunday: Between
10am and 3am the following morning
Good Friday and ANZAC Day: Between 12 noon and 3am the following
On any other day Between 7am and 3am the
following morning
Applicant also sought a maximum patron capacity of 200.
accordance with section 33, a copy of the Original Application was served on the
Yarra City Council (
) and the Chief Commissioner of Police
Victoria Police
23 January 2023, the Council advised that provided the planning permit
application is successful, it had no objection to the Original
Application.
2 March 2023, Victoria Police through the Licensing Inspector, objected to the
Original Application on the ground of amenity and
advised that, if the
Commission were to grant a licence, conditions should be imposed to the effect
that there is to be no music
above background level and no trading past 1am.
12 October 2023, a delegate of the Commission decided to refuse the Original
Application on the basis that it had not been made
in accordance with the LCR
Original Decision
). Specifically, the Applicant was not satisfied
that the Applicant was seeking the appropriate category of licence given the
predominant
activity requirement specified in section 9A(1) as discussed below
Predominant Activity Requirement
29 November 2023, Victoria Police provided an updated objection, advising of a
conditional withdrawal of their objection if a condition
was imposed which
prevented electrically or electronically amplified music after 1am.
Internal Review Application
16 October 2023, the Applicant applied for an internal review of the Original
Review Application
Legislation and the
Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
of Part 9 governs internal review applications. Under section 152, the
decision made by the delegate in the Original Decision
is a reviewable decision
and the Applicant is an eligible person to apply for a review. The Review
Application was made pursuant
to section 153.
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the Original Decision; or
(b) sets aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Original Decision. In
this case, the Commission must decide whether to:
(a) grant the Original Application and, if so, whether to do so subject to
conditions; or
(b) refuse to grant the Original Application.
Determination of a contested application
the LCR Act, an application for the grant of a licence may be contested or
uncontested. The Original Application was contested
as an objection from
Victoria Police was received under Division 5 of Part 2 within the relevant
an application is a contested application, pursuant to section 47(1):
Subject to Division 3, the Commission must, after the period for
making an objection under Division 5 has expired, including any extension
time granted for making an objection, grant or refuse a contested application.
47(2) provides that the Commission may refuse to grant a contested application
on any of the grounds set out in section 44(2)
and section 44(3) applies
accordingly.
to section 44(2), the Commission may refuse to grant an application on certain
grounds, including that the granting of the
application would detract from or be
detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the premises to which the
application relates
are situated.
Exercising the internal review power
172D(3) and 172U(3)(b) require the Commission, in exercising its internal review
power, to have regard to the objects of
the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines in respect of the regulation of liquor issued by the Minister.
objects of the LCR Act are set out at section 4(1) as
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
4(2) further provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament
that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or
imposed by this Act
must be exercised and performed with due regard to harm
minimisation.
3(1) defines “harm” as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol,
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury or
property damage.
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker;
(b) may consider further information, material or
Conduct of an inquiry
Section 47(3)
provides that the Commission may have regard to any matter it considers relevant
and make any enquiries it considers
appropriate. The Commission must give the
applicant and each objector a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit;
and is bound by the rules of natural
Restaurant and cafe licences
to section 9A(1), a restaurant and cafe licence authorises the licensee to
supply liquor on the licensed premises for consumption
on the licensed premises
where the predominant activity carried out at all times on the premises is the
preparation and serving of
meals to be consumed on the licensed premises
Predominant Activity Requirement
9A(3)(a) further provides that a restaurant and cafe licence is subject to the
condition that “tables and chairs must
be placed in position on the
licensed premises so as to be available for at least 75% of the patrons
attending the premises at any
section 9A(1)(a) provides that a restaurant and cafe licence authorises the
licensee to supply liquor during ordinary trading
hours (as defined in section
3) and between 11pm on any particular day until 1am on the following day for
consumption on the premises.
Material before the
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the materials before the
delegate when making the Original Decision.
The Commission also received and
considered the following materials:
(a) updated written objection from Victoria Police, received on 29 November
(b) an acoustic report by Mr Peters of Renzo Tonin and Associates, dated 1
December 2023
(c) submissions on the Predominant Activity Requirement from LGS Legal (on
behalf of the Applicant), received on 5 December 2023;
(d) email from the Council regarding amendments to the planning permit –
dated 22 December 2023;
(e) email response, dated 28 January 202, from LGS Legal (on behalf the
Applicant) to the Victoria Police objection;
(f) statements of Mr Eddie Muto, Mr Simon Kouba and Mr Scott Pinn lodged by LGS
Legal (on behalf of the Applicant) on 22 January
(g) the Applicant’s business plan and letter from landlord, dated 22
November 2023 and received on 22 January 2024;
(h) Notice of decision to grant a planning permit, dated 2 February 2024; and
(i) final submissions from LGS Legal (on behalf of the Applicant) received 15
March 2024.
6 February 2024, the Commissioners attended the Premises to conduct a visual
inspection.
hearing with respect to the Review Application was held on 7 February 2024.
appeared on behalf of the Applicant. Mr Eddie Muto, director of the
Applicant, Mr Joshua Pinn (Assistant Manager
Flour Child St Kilda) and Mr Peters
(of Renzo Tonin & Associates), gave oral evidence in support of the Review
Application.
Towey submitted (in summary):
(a) the total number of patrons would be 120, being 40 external and 80 internal.
This is ‘extremely different’ from the
Original Application; and
(b) the concerns raised by Victoria Police appear to be associated with events
at the Applicant’s other venue in St Kilda.
The Applicant doesn’t
accept that these concerns apply to the Premises. The Premises will not be used
as anything but a restaurant.
Peters gave evidence as follows:
(a) his acoustic report of 1 December 2023 is still accurate;
(b) the proposed operation would be of ‘low risk’ from a noise
perspective. This is because the Premises is, at least,
10 metres from the
nearest residential dwellings, local traffic contributed to high environmental
noise, and the Applicant’s
proposal is conservative in terms of there
being up to 40 outdoor patrons in an enclosed outdoor area, with a closeable
(c) the Applicant’s noise mitigation measures are ‘above and
beyond’ a typical venue. In particular given the Applicant’s
significant upgrade to the Premises’ ceiling which incorporates heavier
than typical plasterboard throughout the building to
absorb noise;
(d) the Applicant’s noise mitigation strategies also include installing
laminated double glazing to the border windows;
(e) not having patrons congregating in an area on Dickmann Street further lowers
the risk of noise disturbance. Preventing access
and egress from the rear of the
Premises except in the case of an emergency, would remove noise peaks which
might otherwise be triggered.
Ceasing access and egress after 10pm is a
solution; and
(f) the imposition of a noise limiter condition by the Council in the planning
permit seems to be an ‘overkill’ measure
to mitigate music noise at
the Premises. A low powered sound system would itself prevent noise above
background music in any event.
Muto gave evidence to the Commission:
(a) he has been in the hospitality industry for about 20 years and has operated
around 25 venues;
(b) the door exiting onto Dickman Street is an emergency exit. It will have a
push lever on the inside and patrons will not be
able to open it from the
outside. After 10pm, there will be no access and egress from that door;
(c) the Premises are not intended to be a bar, rather the focus is on the
service of food. The Applicant has a ‘very special
pizza flour’ for
which the Applicant was the ‘first importers of it here in
Australia’.
The Applicant
also sells additional products that go with that pizza flour. There will always
be a full a la carte menu available
at the Premises;
(d) even with marketed beverage packages, customers must have food, and not just
alcohol. References in the Applicant’s marketing
“... Make it
boozy and add two hours of unlimited beer, wine and spirits for $39 per
refers to their masterclasses. The masterclasses are about
teaching people how to make pizza or gnocchi.
(e) there are different function areas across the Premises and there will be no
functions on Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and sometimes
even Sunday;
(f) functions will either be sitting down or cocktail style events. The sit
down style ones have bigger food offerings and the cocktail
style ones have
(g) patrons will get food to start with and get a drink on arrival. Then
the canapés start, and will be evenly spread throughout
a two-hour period;
(h) the Applicant’s standard operating procedures (
) specify a
minimum number of canapes required for the number of people. Mr Muto gave the
example of requiring closer to 10 or 12
canapés per person;
(i) the Applicant has a “QR ordering system”, which cuts off a
person who orders excessive amounts of alcohol in a limited
time and refers them
to the waiter;
(j) drinks are delivered to patrons by the waiters. Patrons cannot walk up to
the bar and order a drink;
(k) trading of the Premises will not exceed 1am on any day; and
(l) the Applicant has no intention to do home delivery or have on-line orders
for alcohol.
Morris asked Mr Muto whether Victoria Police members would be welcome to attend
the Premises to conduct checks, to which
Mr Muto responded in the affirmative
and confirmed that staff were instructed to do so in any event.
Pinn, the Assistant Manager for Flour Child St Kilda, gave evidence to the
Commission:
(a) he is the prospective manager of Flour Child Richmond;
(b) the Applicant intends to maintain high quality standards;
(c) the à la carte menu will be available until one o'clock (ie
1am). The reference on the website to a reduced menu after
10pm relates to when
the restaurant and the bar itself is quieter, but the kitchen would be open
‘the whole way through’,
(d) the number of kitchen staff and bar staff may be reduced during that
time. The food menu would be reduced to an ‘only
degree during the quieter
(e) the information on the Applicant’s website regarding event packages
was drafted some time ago. All of these events or
packages are
(f) the venue follows responsible service of alcohol expectations, rather than
just serving drinks. This is included in induction
plans as part of
training for staff;
(g) all event packages will involve service of canapes, pizza, or anything off
the standard menu;
(h) people are greeted by a host, one downstairs and one upstairs. People will
not be able to just enter the venue and order a drink;
(i) the only access for patrons would be through the front, via the
stairwell. In the case of an emergency, they would be able
back staircase.
Applicant’s Further Submissions
15 March 2024, Mr Towey provided further written submissions on behalf of the
Applicant, with an operations manual, venue management
plan, planning permit,
restaurant SOP, and responsible service of alcohol (
) SOP. Mr Towey
submitted (in summary):
(a) it would be appropriate to grant a restaurant and cafe licence. The
Predominant Activity Requirements will be met; and
(b) the Commissioners will surely appreciate from their site inspection on 6
February 2024 the Applicant’s hard work in getting
the Premises to a
position where it is ready to be licensed.
Reasons for decision on review
Issues for determination on
making its decision on review, the Commission must determine the following
central issues:
(a) first, whether the Commission is satisfied that the Predominant Activity
Requirement is met;
(b) secondly, whether granting the Review Application would detract from, or be
detrimental to, the amenity of the area in which
the Premises are situated for
the purposes of section 44(2)(b)(i); and
(c) thirdly, whether the grant of a restaurant and cafe licence would be
contrary to the objects of the LCR Act, in particular the
object of harm
minimisation.
of these issues are discussed in turn.
Whether the
Predominant Activity Requirement is met
applying for a restaurant and cafe licence under section 9A of the LCR
Act, the Applicant must satisfy the Commission that
the “predominant
activity” carried out on the Premises will “at all times” be
the “preparation and
serving of meals to be consumed on the licensed
the Hearing, Mr Muto indicated that he has extensive experience in the
hospitality industry and has operated over 25 venues. Mr
Muto advised that he
is no stranger to the restaurant and cafe licence category and operates other
licensed premises under the same
licence category.
following evidence has been provided by or on behalf of the Applicant, in
relation to the operation of the Premises:
a) the maximum patron capacity is 120;
b) the venue is intended to be a restaurant with an extensive à la carte
menu with food available at all times;
c) the venue will offer different packages including beverage packages however
all packages must include an appropriate meal. This
is managed through the
oversight of the managers at the time of booking;
d) the information on the Applicant’s website relating to event packages
was drafted some time ago, however it was confirmed
in Mr Muto’s evidence
to the Commission, that all packages must include a meal;
e) the Applicant will offer an extensive menu which includes canapes, gnocchi
f) the venue intends to employ two to three full-time chefs and another one or
two casual chefs; and
g) the meals will be prepared on site, for which a commercial kitchen, costing
approximately $700,000 or rather 30% of the refurbishment
budget for the
Premises has been installed.
red line plan for the premises shows that the Premises is fitted out with a
large-scale commercial kitchen, and this was evident
to the Commissioners during
the site inspection.
Commission accepts that the Applicant proposes to offer activities in the way of
packages, events and functions at the Premises
(ie such as tastings and
masterclasses). However, those activities are not the Applicant’s
predominant activity at the Premises.
The Commission is satisfied that the
Applicant’s predominant activity is the preparation and service of meals
to be consumed
on the Premises.
Muto gave evidence as to the particular style of pinsa pizzas he proposes to be
prepared at the Premises, including the unique
flour and ingredients
specifically sourced for that purpose. Mr Muto described the history behind the
flour, the nature and texture
of their ‘pinsa pizzas’ and how they
are crafted. The Commission accepts Mr Muto’s intention at the Premises
to showcase the Applicant’s particular brand and specialised food
Commission is further satisfied that this predominant activity will be carried
out at all times – even at the quieter times.
Packages, events and
functions will include the preparation and service of foods that the Commission
accepts are meals.
determining whether the Predominant Activity Requirement is met, the Commission
must look at the particular circumstances of this
Applicant at these Premises.
Muto was a credible witness. The Commission has accepted his evidence that this
Premises will operate differently to other Flour
Child premises: for example,
while there may be DJ competitions at the St Kilda Flour Child premises, such
activities are not intended
at the Premises. In considering the Predominant
Activity Requirement, the Commission does not put substantial weight on
experiences
at other Flour Child premises.
there is insufficient evidence before the Commission to satisfy it that the
predominant activity at all times will in fact,
be something other than the
preparation and service of meals at the premises (such as general entertainment,
functions, or dancing).
In cross-examination, Sergeant Morris questioned Mr
Peters regarding whether the fit-out that was described as ‘above and
beyond’ was more normally done in venues with sound amplifiers. Mr Peters
answered that it would be a ‘good step’
in such places, and that he
had worked with Mr Muto on a few premises where he had fitted out those premises
to a level that was
‘above and beyond’.
Commission does not draw an inference from the Applicant’s sound-proofing
activities at the Premises, that the predominant
activity in this premises, will
at all times, be the playing of loud music or other entertainment, as it is
inconsistent with the
weight of evidence put forward by the Applicant. In
particular, Mr Peters’ evidence that the ‘above and beyond’
fit-out was not unusual when dealing with Mr Muto.
any case, it is appropriate, in light of the evidence provided to the
Commission, that a condition be imposed on the licence reflecting
the intended
operation of the Premises and ensuring the Applicant’s business complies
with the Predominant Activity Requirement.
considered all available material, including evidence provided at the Hearing,
the Commission is satisfied that the Predominant
Activity Requirement is
Whether granting the application would detract
from or be detrimental to the amenity of the area
application may be refused under sections 47(2) and 44(2) if the grant of
the licence would detract from or be detrimental
to the amenity of the area in
which the Premises are situated.
Historically,
“noise levels” was one of the factors listed in section 3A(2)
that the Commission may take into account
when determining whether the grant of
a licence would detract from or be detrimental to the amenity of an
that time, an amendment to the LCR Act removed “noise levels” as a
factor (along with reference to parking facilities,
and traffic movement and
The removal of these
factors was intended to remove duplication with Council process, but was not
intended to limit the Commission’s
ability to grant a licence that has
conditions relating to parking, traffic or noise levels as it sees fit on the
basis of its consideration
Commission notes that the Applicant has applied for and been granted a planning
permit by the Council to use the Premises for
the purpose of a cafe and
restaurant, which imposes a number of conditions relating to noise mitigation
(a) installation of a noise limiter;
(b) a requirement for music and entertainment to be at background noise level at
all times and no amplified ‘live music or
vocals’; and ‘
(c) restrictions on the hours for waste collection, and delivery and collection
though the Council has considered amenity issues, in this case given the nature
of Victoria Police’s conditional objection,
the Commission considers it
appropriate to assess concerns regarding noise-related amenity so it can
consider whether the grant of
the Review Application would not detract from or
be detrimental to the amenity of the area.
the Hearing, Mr Peters from Renzo Tonin and Associates gave evidence that the
proposed venue is very unlikely to cause noise
issues for the surrounding
dwellings and that the measures that the Applicant has proposed are above and
beyond a typical venue fit.
Accordingly, the venue is considered to be
‘low risk’ from a noise perspective.
Commission acknowledges that the Applicant has accepted and agreed to adopt all
requirements of the planning permit issued by
the Council dated 1 March 2024.
The Commission notes that planning permit includes a number of specific
conditions which are required
to complied with prior to the sale and consumption
of alcohol, as well as the need for an Acoustic Report to be provided and
implemented
as part of the planning permit conditions.
applicant has agreed to adopt all recommendations included in the acoustic
report prepared by Renzo Tonin and Associates for the
Applicant in the report
dated 1 December 2023, which the Council endorsed in the planning permit.
this case, the planning permit has imposed conditions on the conduct of the
Applicant while using the premises that, in the Commission’s
appropriate to minimising the risk of detriment to the amenity of the area (as
‘amenity’ is understood in the
their direct relevance to the Commission’s task, and that s16 of the LCR
Act implies a condition prohibiting the use of
the premises in contravention of
planning scheme
that applies to the licensed premises, it is
appropriate to impose a positive obligation on the Applicant to comply with
and continue to comply with - those liquor-related conditions in the
permit, expressly under its liquor licence.
addition, the Applicant’s latest venue management plan submitted to the
Commission on 15 March 2024 indicates that the Applicant
recognises its
obligation to not cause or permit undue detriment to the amenity of the area.
In particular, this is demonstrated
by inclusion of:
(a) a provision relating to noise management – clause 18.1;
(b) systems for cleaning/waste management (clause 19); and
(c) a complaints register (clause 24 and appendix C).
Applicant has advised that the door exiting onto Dickman Street is an emergency
exit and has agreed to have no access and egress
from that door after 10pm
except in the case of an emergency.
the Hearing, Mr Towey again confirmed that the Applicant sought a maximum patron
capacity of 120, being ‘40 external, 80
internal ’ patrons and in
evidence, Mr Muto confirmed his statement that ‘the trading of the
Premises will not exceed
1am on any day.’
being so, Victoria Police’s objection would appear to have been resolved,
consistent with its updated objection received
on 29 November 2023.
Commission accepts the evidence of Mr Peters and that Mr Muto is willing and
able to implement protective measures, by way of
a surveillance recording system
and through the implementation of an appropriate venue management plan. The
Commission considers
that these measures will together sufficiently mitigate the
risk of unreasonable noise impacting the amenity of the area; accordingly,
determined that it is appropriate to impose conditions on the licence requiring
those measures be given effect.
Whether granting the application would be contrary to the objects of
the LCR Act, in particular the object of harm minimisation
Commission is satisfied that the Applicant has an understanding of responsible
service of alcohol principles and has built them
into the operation of the
licensed premises.
all the circumstances, the Commission is satisfied that adequate procedures and
controls will exist over the supply and consumption
of liquor at the Premises
and that any harm will be appropriately minimised. Consequently, the Commission
considers that the grant
of the restaurant and cafe licence in this instance
would not be conducive to or encourage harm and be contrary to the LCR
object concerning harm minimisation.
on the reasons set out above, the Commission is satisfied that granting the
Original Application the subject of the Review Application
is appropriate in the
current circumstances.
Commission has therefore determined to set aside the Original Decision and grant
the application for a restaurant and café
The preceding 70 paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Decision of Mr James O’Halloran (Deputy
Chairperson), Ms
Danielle Huntersmith (Chairperson) and Mr Steven Brnovic
(Commissioner).
This licence is a restaurant and cafe licence and
authorises the licensee to supply liquor on
the licensed premises for
consumption on the licensed premises during the trading hours
Restaurant & cafe conditions
This licence is subject to the
following conditions:
(a) the predominant activity carried out at all
times on the premises must be the preparation
and serving of meals for
consumption on the licensed premises; and
(b) tables and chairs must be
placed in position on the licensed premises so as to be available
at least 75% of the patrons attending the premises at any one time; and
the licensee must not permit -
(i) the live performance of any musical
(ii) the playing of any recorded musical works -
on the premises at higher than background music level at any time
outside ordinary trading hours.
(d) no music is to be played within
external courtyard after the following hours:
(i) Sunday to Thursday 10pm;
(ii) Friday and Saturday 11pm.
The licensee shall not cause or permit undue detriment to
the amenity of the area to arise out of or in connection with the use of
premises to which the licence relates during or immediately after the trading
hours authorised under this licence.
Special conditions
the licensee
must, at all times, comply with the conditions of any applicable Planning Permit
issued with respect to the licensed
prior to the
commencement of the supply and consumption of liquor, the licensee must
implement at the licensed premises the noise-minimisation
measures recommended,
in the Renzo Tonin and Associates Acoustic Report (Executive Summary) dated 1
December 2023, and the licensee
must thereafter ensure ongoing compliance with
the recommendations.
masterclasses, functions and events must include the service of meals to be
consumed on the premises, as part of the package or
supplying liquor must hold a valid RSA certificate.
the licensee
must keep all RSA certificates at the licensed premises and produce any RSA
certificates kept by the licensee, for inspection
on being asked to do so by a
member of Victoria Police or a Liquor Inspector.
the licensee
must at all times, comply with responsible service of alcohol principles,
including completion of approved responsible
service of alcohol programs where
the entrance to
the premises from Dickmann Street, Richmond is only to be used after 10 pm for
access and egress in an emergency.
at least seven
(7) business days, prior to the commencement of the supply and consumption of
liquor at the licensed premises, the
licensee must lodge with the Commission, a
Venue Management Plan that is consistent with and implements the conditions of
this restaurant
and café licence and the licensee’s
responsibilities under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
any amendment
that is made (as amended from time to time) to the Venue Management Plan in such
a way as to vary its provisions relating
to the implementation of these
conditions, the licensee must submit to Commission a copy of the amended venue
management plan within
seven (7) business days of the
the licensee
must ensure compliance with all aspects of the Venue Management Plan (as amended
from time to time).
Management Plan must be retained and made available for inspection at the
licensed premises, on request by a Liquor Inspector
or member of Victoria
the licensee
shall install and maintain a surveillance recording system able to clearly
identify individuals, which shows time and
date and provides continuous images
of all entrances and exits and bars and entertainment areas. The surveillance
recording system
must operate from 30 minutes before opening and until 30
minutes after closure.
a copy of the
recorded images must be available upon request for immediate viewing or removal
by Victoria Police or a Liquor Inspector,
or otherwise retained for at least one
month. The positioning of cameras is to be to the satisfaction of the Licensing
visible signs
are to be displayed in all areas subject to camera surveillance. Such signs
shall read: ‘For the safety and security
of patrons and staff this area is
under electronic surveillance’.
Maximum capacity
120 patrons overall with maximum of 80 patrons in internal area and 40
patrons in external area.
Trading hours
Good Friday and ANZAC Day between 12.00 noon and 1 am
the following morning.
Sunday to Thursday: between 12.00 noon and 1 am
the following morning.
Friday and Saturday (except Good Friday and ANZAC
Day): between 12.00 noon and 1 am the following morning.
All references to legislation
are references to the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
unless stated
Section 157(2)
to (5) further
prescribes the manner in which the Commission is to undertake internal
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2012] VSCA 325
confirms that harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act
and therefore the primary consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although
not to the exclusion of the other objects).
section 157(2).
section 157(3).
Transcript of Hearing –
evidence given by Mr Muto – page 19.
Transcript of Hearing –
evidence given by Mr Pinn – page 49.
section 9A(1).
sections 4 and 172D(3).
Liquor and Gambling
Legislation Amendment Act 2018
Explanatory Memorandum,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.15 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter