URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2025/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stewart v Victorian WorkCover Authority [2025] VMC 14 (4 August 2025)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
No. N11703361
Adam Stewart
Victorian WorkCover Authority
Magistrate M A Hoare
DATE OF HEARING
23-24, 28-29 April 2025 and final submissions filed on
30 May 2025
DATE OF DECISION
04 August 2025 (revised 26 August 2025)
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Stewart v Victorian WorkCover Authority
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VMC 14
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION – Mental injury claim by WorkSafe
inspector following claimed exposure to trauma – Significant
contributing
factor’ – ‘Management action’ – Reduction of
weekly earnings where employment terminated
on grounds of misconduct -
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation & Compensation Act 2013
39(1), 40(1), 40(3), 185(1), sch 1, cl 25.
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Ms S Bailey
Arnold Thomas Becker
For the Defendant
Mr A Middleton
Lander & Rogers
INTRODUCTION
Adam Stewart (
) brings a claim for mental injury arising out of or
in the course of employment as a workplace field inspector with the employer,
WorkSafe Victoria (
the employer
). He alleges injury due to exposure to
trauma performing his duties. He relied also upon: lack of return-to-work
support; bullying
and harassment; lack of support for vicarious trauma
throughout the course of employment and, in particular, on or about 5 October
separate claims were lodged by Stewart, the first of which was accepted. He
seeks to set aside the notices of decision dated:
10 March 2022, 29 March 2022
and 2 August 2023.
causation and capacity were in issue. The employer relied on various defences
Workplace Injury, Rehabilitation, and Compensation Act 2013
) including that the alleged injury was non-compensable under
s 40(1) of the Act and that he ceased work for reasons unrelated to
(and thus weekly payments were reduced to
credit came under heavy attack, the employer submitting his evidence was
dishonest, misleading and wholly unreliable
regarding disputed matters. It was
said that his evidence was embellished and exaggerated regarding the claimed
exposure to trauma.
treating psychologist and psychiatrist were cross-examined as was Dr Epstein,
medico-legal examiner. The employer
called various employees to give lay
turning to the evidence on contentious matters, it is useful to set out
chronologically the background and factual matters
relevant to the dispute based
on contemporaneous documents and records.
aged 39 years, Stewart is married with two children.
leaving school around the age of 15 years and working in casual roles, he
acquired a fish and chip shop leasehold aged about
18 years in 2005 with his
parents’ financial support. Later that year, the business ran into trouble
financially and Stewart
had two episodes of mental illness with psychiatric
admissions (at Frankston Hospital). First, in August 2005, he was admitted
a suicide attempt in the context of onset of depression with recorded
auditory hallucinations; and, second, in November 2005, he
was again admitted
involuntarily with recorded psychotic features and hallucinatory features.
around November 2005, he was working in a full-time sales role in a Telstra
call-centre for a period.
around May 2006, he was discharged from Peninsula Health out-patient care
(Frankson Hospital).
late 2008, he had ceased taking anti-psychotic medication (olanzapine).
February 2009, a Young Street Medical & Dental Centre clinical note records
a long discussion regarding stress and schizophrenia.
December 2009, after being sacked from a liquor store manager role for missing a
shift, he saw a GP, Dr Sendecki, who recorded
‘deteriorating
schizophrenia’ and referred him to Peninsula Health psychiatric services.
He attended emergency the same
day reporting stress and auditory hallucinations
in the context of homelessness.
13 January 2010, in the Young Street Medical & Dental Centre clinical notes,
an attendance note records: “schizophrenia,
currently not treated, ceased
himself 18 months ago”.
early 2010 he moved interstate where he did a truck driver training program with
a view to obtaining ‘fly in-fly out’
(FIFO) work in mines in Western
Australia (WA) and the Northern Territory (NT).
a diploma in occupational health & safety
(OHS) and performed safety and
emergency services work. He then studied part-time for about two years towards a
graduate certificate
in OHS via Edith Cowan University in WA (which he did not
ultimately complete).
2014, whilst interstate, there was an episode of depressive symptoms in March
for which he was treated twice at Palmerston Medical
Clinic and prescribed
Pristiq. Also in that year, in July, a history was reported at that clinic of a
black out episode in Bali after
consuming ‘12 beers’.
had married in November 2012 and his first child was born in December 2016.
Before the birth, he and his wife moved back to
Melbourne and from around then,
he was self-employed with a small lawn-mowing business.
The Employment
18 May 2017, Stewart underwent a pre-placement medical assessment with Sonic
Health Plus for the employer. This was based on a
three-page signed
questionnaire (the Sonic questionnaire) completed by the doctor during the
assessment based on Stewart’s
4 July 2017, he commenced full employment with the employer as a workplace field
inspector (
the employment
). His duties included a large amount of time
‘in the field’ attending workplaces in response to incidents or
of unsafe workplaces or work practices.
part of his remuneration arrangement and with the employer’s agreement he
exercised an option to use his ‘Tool of Trade
Worksafe’ work vehicle
for personal and domestic use (the work vehicle) for a fortnightly consideration
which was deducted
from his salary.
1 February 2019, in the course of his employment, he inspected a worksite in the
aftermath of a fatality (the February fatality
inspection). He completed an
entry report. Others attending for the employer were Sandra Fisher and Thinh
employee assistance program (EAP).
27 September 2019, in the course of his employment, he responded to a call out
to a workplace following a fatality (the September
fatality inspection). This
was at a domestic dwelling in the Dromana area where contractors including the
deceased were performing
carpentry work. He completed an entry report which
noted another inspector, David Steer, was also in attendance for the
week or so after the September fatality inspection, he took a period of approved
paternity leave following the birth of his second
9 December 2019, in the course of his employment, he inspected a worksite where
a worker had become trapped in a machine and sustained
facial and head injuries
including a suspected skull fracture (the December 2019 bread factory
inspection). Emergency services were
in attendance and the injured person was
transported to hospital before Stewart arrived. He completed an entry report
which recorded
another inspector, Steven Anderton, was in attendance for the
December 2019, over the Christmas holiday period, he became very unwell mentally
and was involuntarily admitted to hospital. He
resumed work after the Christmas
24 February 2020, he reported to the employer verbally that he was struggling
mentally and, with his manager’s assistance,
lodged a claim for
compensation form (the first claim) and ceased work from the next day. This was
due to ‘work trauma’
and recorded having ‘first noticed’
the injury/condition in February/March 2020.
around February 2020, he was under the care of Dr McIver, who remains his
current treating psychiatrist.
notice dated 4 March 2020, the first claim was accepted for weekly payments and
medical and like expenses (MLE) and he then remained
off work completely until
early 2021 under certificates of incapacity.
31 March 2020, he came under the care of Mr Martin Sharman, his current treating
psychologist (having been referred by Dr McIver).
around November 2020, whilst still off work, Stewart had an apparent seizure
party. This occurred
whilst cutting up pork and after having 10 standard drinks.
follow up to that event, Peninsula Health neurology registrars reported to his
GP clinic on 15 January 2021 and again on 15 March
2021 respectively. They
opined as to an acute symptomatic seizure, secondary to excessive alcohol
intake. Investigations including
brain scans were reported as normal. Both
reports refer to the need to obtain VicRoads clearance and the inadvisability of
after a seizure event.
11 January 2021, he returned to work (RTW) on certificates for modified duties
being administrative work only and restricted hours
(two days per week).
was still the situation regarding RTW at the time stage that the motor vehicle
accident occurred.
Motor Vehicle Accident
14 May 2021, Stewart’s work vehicle was heavily damaged and written off as
a result of a single-vehicle accident in the Arthurs
Seat area (the MVA). At the
time of the MVA, Stewart was off duty. There were no known witnesses and he was
apparently located by
police some distance away from the scene of the MVA. No
physical injuries were sustained by Stewart nor was there any evidence of
observed at hospital on examination. At some point, police conveyed him to
Frankston Hospital where he was admitted.
here, the circumstances of, and surrounding, the MVA were key matters of
controversy in the case. A central focus of the employer’s
Stewart’s credit involved the MVA and surrounding circumstances including
his reporting of it to the employer and
the contents of the hospital progress
day after the MVA, hospital progress note recorded variously
‘Presenting
intoxicated, paranoid delusional | [patient] required sedation and
restraints’;
‘Presenting
problem: ... Currently on Effexor 300 mg (increased 1 week ago) ... ...admitting
in heavy alcohol use but ... trying
to reduce ... but binge drank last night...
he admits he blacks out at times when drinking but remembers the activitys [sic]
night, he is adamant that he wasn’t involved in a car
denies crashing car, denies alcohol or drug use. But has later admitted to
Drinking at a bar tonight and smells strongly
of alcohol | [Patient] states car
was query stolen after being left in Mornington‘
‘Presenting
complaint: ... Police... after welfare check was initiated by patients aunty |
Patient allegedly crashed his car
with suicidal intent after [patient] allegedly
spoke with auntie over the phone expressing [suicidal intent] and stating he
crash his car | Highway Patrol found car with significant damage and
[patient] later found not with his car by police | Patient denies
suicidal ideation | states has full recollection of last nights events | denies
any illicit substance use’.
MVA, intentional ... car found with significant damage by Vicpol. ? Suicidal
intent’... [patient] maintained
and denied all claims of this. [Patient]
also does not show any physical injury of a large road trauma such as head
injury, wounds
or seatbelt injury’.
17 May 2021, Stewart phoned his team leader, Natalie Heriot, and reported that:
the work vehicle had been extensively damaged in
the MVA; he was in hospital;
and he could not have been driving as he sustained no injuries.
was discharged by Peninsula Health into the care of his sister and continued to
work on modified duties.
Employer’s management action
and the MVA
was not in doubt that the ‘management action’ relied upon by the
employer for the purpose of the s 40(1) defence referred
to actions taken by the
employer related to the MVA, namely: the investigation and the 17 August letter;
the 5 October meeting and
‘show cause’ letter; and his dismissal
from employment.
17 August 2021, the employer gave Stewart a ‘notification of
allegations’ letter related to the MVA (the 17 August
letter). The
allegations were: engaging in unacceptable behaviour namely driving the work
vehicle when it lost control and driving
the work vehicle when under the
influence of alcohol and drugs; engaging in unacceptable behaviour in his
dealings with police including
making misrepresentations and acting in an
aggressive manner; and misleading the employer about the circumstances of the
allegations).
17 August letter (authored by Kevin Hayes, a regional director of operations and
emergency management) informed Stewart the allegations
would be formally
investigated and he was invited to participate in an interview with the
appointed investigator. The letter advised
that if allegations were
substantiated, he may be in breach of the employer’s Operational Motor
Vehicle Policy and Code of
Conduct which may result in disciplinary action. He
was also informed that EAP was available.
in 17 August letter he was informed, under the heading ‘Alternative
Duties’, of restrictions on his duties as follows:
‘No driving in
relation to your work, including the Tool of Trade vehicle or any other vehicle;
No working as, or exercising
of powers as Appointed Officer/WSV Inspector; No
communication with external (outside WorkSafe) stakeholders unless explicitly
by me; Any communication with other members of WorkSafe to be discussed
with me prior to engagement.’
response to the 17 August letter was to deny all allegations and to maintain he
had no memory of the MVA. As for the
circumstances of the day of the MVA, he
contended these arose in the context of a medication-related dissociative
episode being an
adverse reaction to altered dosage of Venlafaxine (also known
as Effexor).
here, a typewritten document was tendered into evidence by the plaintiff which
was addressed to ‘Dear ...’; and
was undated, incomplete and
unsigned. It referred to annexures which were seemingly not included. Stewart
gave unchallenged evidence
that this incomplete document was probably his
written response sent to the employer. No other version was produced by either
5 October 2021, Stewart attended a meeting with the employer (the 5 October
meeting) at which he was handed a ‘show cause’
letter. The letter
informed him that, following the investigation, all allegations were
substantiated. It concluded that he had engaged
in serious misconduct. He was
suspended on full pay and reminded of the availability of EAP. It was proposed
to terminate his employment
subject to any response received by 13 October 2025.
He provided no written response.
subsequently provided a medical certificate indicating he was unfit for any
duties from 12 October 2021.
Post-employment
did not resume after the 5 October meeting and his employment was terminated
further to the ‘show cause’ letter.
completed a second claim for compensation form on 10 February 2022 with an
injury date of 5 October 2021 (the second claim).
The second claim alleged a
mental health condition caused by ‘acute stress, bullying/harassment
associated with an unjustifiable
workplace investigation process, exacerbation
of PTSD symptoms’. In response to ‘what task/s were you doing when
were injured?’ he answered: ‘data entry, misled re return to
preinjury duties, alternative duties as part of a RTW process
associated with a
prior PTSD inj 08190045904’.
notice dated 10 March 2022, the second claim was rejected for weekly payments
and MLE on the grounds the claimed injury was caused
by a mental injury of a
notice dated 29 March 2022, with respect to the first claim, he was informed
weekly payments would be reduced to the amount of
$nil dollars under s 185(1) of
the Act. That was on the grounds of having ceased work for reasons unrelated to
his incapacity arising
from the accepted psychological injury. The notice also
stated that he had ceased work ‘due to a further injury resulting from
management actions for which [he had] submitted a further claim’.
5 July 2023, he completed a claim for compensation form alleging psychiatric
injury sustained from ‘repeated exposure to
trauma whilst undertaking
workplace investigations’ over the course of employment (the third claim).
notice dated 2 August 2023, the third claim was rejected on grounds he had not
sustained a new injury arising out of or in the
course of his employment.
Certification
of incapacity for work has continued to date and he has not returned to any form
of work since that time.
have continued to be paid by the employer under the first claim.
has had multiple psychiatric in-patient admissions at the Melbourne Clinic
including: in around February/March 2022 (of 2-3
weeks); again, in around June
2022; and then in March 2023.
DISPUTED MATTERS
turning to the further evidence, it is useful to identify contentious matters
central to injury and causation. They were:
nature and extent of exposure to alleged trauma in the course of the employment
and factual circumstances of incidents relied
upon by Stewart including: the
February fatality inspection; the September fatality inspection; and the
December 2019 bread factory
inspection;
MVA and surrounding circumstances;
employer’s management action related to the MVA.
turn first to the work duties generally.
nature of work duties
majority of Stewart’s duties involved inspecting workplaces and preparing
entry reports following adverse incidents across
southern metropolitan Melbourne
usually after significant injuries or, more rarely, fatalities.
the time the inspection occurred, the injured person had generally been conveyed
from the site to hospital or for medical care.
at the workplace, tasks of an inspector involved: speaking with co-workers
and/or family members of the injured (or deceased)
worker as appropriate or
necessary; viewing the incident scene; from time to time, taking photos; and/or
obtaining and viewing any
available CCTV footage for the inspection or other
reports. Thereafter, entry reports and other reports would be prepared and
for further action by the employer’s
investigators.
February 2019 fatality inspection
had not carried out an inspection involving a fatality prior to the February
fatality inspection.
he attended the worksite, the injured person’s body was still on site in
the cool-room, following a fall of some 10 metres
to his death. The body was
covered by a blanket. He could not recall whether he took photographs. The
deceased’s adult son
(who worked with the deceased) was also in
attendance. Police were in attendance.
cross-examination, Stewart agreed there were no observable physical injuries to
the deceased person other than the fact that
he was dead. Under
cross-examination when Counsel put to him: ‘There were no signs of any
physical injury to the body?’
he responded: ‘He was
WorkSafe investigator, Thin Tran, also attended the worksite and he gave
evidence Stewart had been involved in taking photographs.
This necessitated
removing the blanket covering the deceased. There was a significant amount of
blood on and around the deceased’s
head and ear and on the floor. He also
said Stewart was present during onsite conversations with family members who
were upset.
inspector, Natalie Heriot, also attended the the February fatality inspection
and completed an entry report. She confirmed
the deceased was in the cool-room
and covered. Stewart had gone into the cool-room several times even though she
told him this was
not necessary and was the job of the investigators. When she
asked Stewart whether he had seen a deceased person before, he said
grandmother. Under cross-examination, she agreed she asked him that because it
was understood seeing a deceased person could
September 2019 fatality inspection
the same year, Stewart attended the September fatality inspection after hours
and whilst on call. Ordinarily, the protocol was
for inspectors to be informed
as to the names of persons involved, but that time he was not. Once onsite, he
realised he knew the
deceased person and another of the co-workers present. The
deceased was a ‘poker buddy’ whom he had last seen and played
with a couple of weeks before. The other worker was also someone he played poker
with. He nevertheless went into ‘inspector
mode’ and carried out his
deceased person had died without observable cause whilst seated in his car out
the front of the house after vomiting and complaining
to co-workers of feeling
unwell. By the time Stewart arrived, the deceased was on the ground covered with
a jacket and later a blanket.
Police were in attendance.
to Stewart, the deceased’s girlfriend was in attendance and
‘wailing’ although he agreed, under cross-examination,
entry report made no mention of knowing the deceased nor of a girlfriend being
WorkSafe investigator, David Steer, who also attended the worksite and gave
evidence he had no recall of the deceased’s
girlfriend being present,
rather, he recollected the site boss saying the deceased was a single man
estranged from family. Stewart
never mentioned knowing the deceased and if he
had, Mr Steer would have told him not to remain at the scene.
December 2019 bread factory inspection
the time Stewart arrived at the worksite (a bread-recycling factory), the
injured person had already been taken to hospital. What
stood out for him was
the injured person being a quite young woman who he understood from police had
sustained a facial degloving
injury. He thought this would have a big impact on
her life and the employer had seemingly showed a degree of callousness or lack
of concern.
cross-examination, Stewart denied deliberately embellishing the nature of the
injured person’s injury by use of the term
‘facial de-gloving’
to make it seem more traumatic.
investigator, Steven Anderton, also attended the worksite and said Stewart had
arrived before him and police were leaving
as he got there. He could not recall
specifics of the injuries other than being to the head. Stewart did not appear
cross-examination Mr Anderton agreed he had no basis to challenge
Stewart’s contemporaneous reporting in the entry report
that he was
informed by police that the CFA had rescued the injured worker from the machine,
that she was transported to the Alfred
with significant facial injuries and
suspected skull fracture.
for the nature of an entry report, Mr Anderton said an entry report was only a
summary, not a verbatim report. If an inspector
got a description of a
degloving, that is what is what would be put into entry report by some. Some
inspectors provide broad information
inspections
recalled a workplace inspection at Frankston Shopping Centre involving a worker
having fallen heavily from a tall ladder.
The injured worker had been
transported from the scene for treatment before Stewart arrived. However, he had
to view CCTV footage
multiple times.
incident involved an inspection of a storage facility worksite after an employee
had a steel frame fall on his head. Stewart
had to view the CCTV footage showing
what he described as a ‘very significant injury’.
was the evidence regarding the work duties.
Circumstances of and surrounding the MVA
gave evidence of having no recall of the MVA nor of events surrounding it.
last memory of the day was driving to a service station near his home to buy
milk. His next memory was of being in hospital. He
had no memory of various
circumstances referred to in the hospital progress notes, such as: being in a
bar or pub; drinking alcohol
or using illicit drugs; calling his aunt or having
conversations with her or other family members on the day of the MVA.
extended cross-examination, he could not explain many apparent inconsistencies
and contradictions contained in the progress
notes. He could not explain why, if
he had no memory whatsoever of the MVA or surrounding circumstances, he
apparently told hospital
staff he had ‘full recollection of last
night’s events’ and that he had been home. He could not explain why,
he remembered nothing, hospital staff recorded him being adamant he had not
been driving nor that the MVA was deliberate in the context
of having expressed
suicidal ideation; nor that had he been drinking. He also could not explain why
the progress notes would record
him at one point apparently admitting to binge
drinking that night.
for how he might have formed a belief the work vehicle was stolen prior to the
MVA as reported to the employer, that was because
of his own lack of memory of
being involved in a collision and his lack of any physical injuries whatsoever
such as a seatbelt injury.
explanation for his lack of recall was that around that time of the MVA, there
were changes to the dosage of venlafaxine and he
believed he had a dissociative
episode related to this.
was eventually discharged into the care of his sister and did not return to live
with his wife and children. This was due to his
wife’s concerns about his
mental state.
employer’s management action related to the MVA
first learned of the investigation when he received the 17 August letter. The
allegations were distressing because he wanted
to get to the bottom of things.
cross-examination, he denied his driver’s licence was ever cancelled by
VicRoads after the seizure event in November 2020
nor was he notified or
informed he was not to drive.
Heriot, his team leader at the time of his RTW in early 2021, gave evidence that
she asked him if he had medical clearance
to drive after the November 2020
seizure event. His response was that he had not been told not to drive and
anyway it was not a seizure.
fleet and travel manager between 2020 and 2021, Fiona Kilburn, gave evidence
confirming the personal use arrangement
of the work vehicle was approved and
accorded with WorkSafe policy. I found her evidence to be of little assistance
to the Court.
She was very vague regarding reporting requirements such as on
conditions being imposed on licences.
cross-examination, Stewart agreed that as a consequence of the show cause
letter: he was suspended on full pay; he did not take
a support person to the 5
October meeting although he was offered that option; and he made no formal
response in writing.
Overview of medical evidence
to a detailed analysis and evaluation of the evidence on injury, capacity and
causation, it is useful to set out an overview
of the medical evidence that was
before the Court.
David Young,
former treating psychologist, provided counselling seven times
in 2019 under the employer’s EAP. He wrote on 10 October 2019
Jayatilaka opining as to a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in
the context of a high level of distress
and a decline in psychological state. It
was considered psychiatric management with a medication review would be
appropriate.
treating psychiatrist, provided ten reports between 2 June 2020 and
13 March 2025. He has treated Stewart regularly over this period
and up until
the hearing. He opined from the time of initially treating Stewart that the
diagnosis included PTSD (with reduced capacity
for pre-injury duties).
Identified ‘triggers’ for him included vomit and certain smells
including pork and also bread.
treating psychologist, provided six reports (one undated) between
21 April 2020 and 13 March 2023. He has treated Stewart very regularly
(fortnightly then monthly) since around February 2020.
Diagnosis was
opined to be PTSD with dissociative features, major depressive disorder (MDD)
and Substance (ETOH) Misuse (In Remission).
Liyeng Cheng,
treating GP of Seaford Beach Family Clinic provided brief
reports dated 8 and 17 February 2023 regarding treatment needs and otherwise
held opinions consistent with Dr McIver regarding diagnosis, causation and
Michael Epstein,
medico-legal psychiatrist, examined Stewart on two
occasions, in June 2023 and July 2024, at the request of Stewart’s
He prepared three reports in total dated: 13 June 2023, 12 July 2024
and 12 February 2025. He opined that the diagnosis was chronic
severe PTSD and
MDD with passive suicidal ideation. He noted there was a period of drinking to
excess, but Stewart reported not having
done so since 14 May 2021.
Timothy Entwisle,
medico-legal psychiatrist, examined Stewart twice at the
request of the employer’s lawyers in May 2023 and March 2024 and provided
three reports dated: 24 May 2023, 2 November 2023 and 4 April 2024. The
diagnosis was initially opined to be PTSD, major depressive
illness and alcohol
abuse currently in remission, however he ultimately altered his opinion with
respect to PTSD (a matter to which
I will return later in these reasons).
medical reports related to past history were tendered into evidence by the
a treating psychiatrist, provided background referral letters dated
27 April 2006 and 26 May 2006.
Haputhantrige,
a treating psychiatrist, provided a report dated 5 August
2019 to a GP in which he opined as to various diagnoses including: major
depressive episodes and PTSD with a differential diagnosis of bipolar effective
disorder type II. He also noted alcohol use disorder
(which appeared to be in
remission for 9 months) and past illicit drug use (including heroin and ice),
the last time two years ago.
a treating psychiatrist, reported on 19 May 2020 to Dr McIver
regarding treatment recommendations based on his impression of significant
and depressive symptoms.
psychologist and clinical registrar, provided a detailed
psychometric report dated 14 December 2021. Based upon testing, interviews
assessment at the Melbourne Clinic, it was opined that a ‘synthesis’
of the material suggested the following diagnoses:
MDD and PTSD.
Additionally,
as indicated in the previously in the background matters, bundles of clinical
notes of GP clinics and the Peninsula
Health progress notes were tendered into
legal and evidentiary onus of proof rested with Stewart to establish compensable
injury, capacity and causation. Otherwise, the
employer had the onus with
respect its defences including the s 40(1) ‘management action’
for the employer referred to
Krygsman-Yeats v State of
well-established principles applying to reasonableness and management
written submissions of both Counsel were largely confined to the facts of the
there was no dispute regarding the law applicable which is well-established.
for the approach to be adopted where a worker has lodged more than one claim for
the same injury, I am guided by the following
Rennie v State of Victoria
Where two claims for the same
injury arising from different aspects of the work duties are both before the
Court, it does not compel
an analysis that one claim must be considered as an
aggravation of the other. Rather the claims may well identify two or more ways
in which a single injury arises out of or occurs in the course of employment
ensuring the court has jurisdiction to determine all
aspects of compensability.
The nature of any injury would no doubt be the subject of lay evidence and
medical opinion
Honour also said:
Compensability requires a worker to establish an
injury that arises out of or occurs in the course of employment. For particular
more is required, for example certain provisions in s 40(3) which
address a pre-existing injury or disease. There may be more than
one way that
employment is a cause of injury within the definition of s 39. Classically an
injury may arise because of the combination
of a single incident and the nature
of the work tasks more generally. Proof of an injury may be established by
reference to different
aspects of employment. This is not equated with any
concept of separate causes of action for the purpose of s 39 of the
issues therefore for the Court’s determination were:
and diagnosis of injury;
injury arose out of or in the course of the employment, in particular exposure
to trauma, or if injury was an aggravation
or exacerbation of underlying or
pre-existing injury, whether employment was a significant contributing factor to
such injury;
the mental injury was caused wholly and predominantly by management action taken
on reasonable grounds and in a reasonable
there is current work capacity or, if no current work capacity, whether such
incapacity continues and is likely to continue
for the foreseeable future;
incapacity results from or is materially contributed to by the employment;
by reason of s 185(1)(e) of the Act, he was not entitled to an increase in
weekly payments (reduced to $nil by notice dated
29 March 2022 on the grounds he
ceased work for reasons unrelated to
incapacity).
Credit of the plaintiff
is incontrovertible that in a case of this kind, an assessment of the
plaintiff’s reliability and credibility is critical
to a determination of
Medical opinions are of
either no or, at best, limited probative value if the history upon which the
opinion is based is flawed.
stated at the outset, the Court was urged by Counsel for the employer to find
that Stewart was not a truthful witness and that
his evidence needed to be
viewed in that light. That submission was made on four main bases:
a) His denial in the Sonic questionnaire of any prior mental health issues as
well as misleading histories to doctors about those
b) His account regarding any trauma exposure in the employment was deliberately
embellished and exaggerated.
c) His evidence was frequently evasive and self-serving, relying on poor
recollection when it suited his case, yet having seemingly
good recall on
matters that assisted.
d) His obfuscation regarding the MVA circumstances was deliberate and calculated
to misrepresent matters to protect and advance his
own interests.
cross-examination, Stewart conceded readily that the Sonic questionnaire
contained false answers as follows: the denials of
previous anxiety, depression
or other mental health issues; his disclosing of hospitalisation for an
appendectomy but omitting the
psychiatric admissions; the denial of prior
worker’s compensation claims; and the denials of prior drug use and
smoking and
of prior sleep problems.
the false answers in the Sonic questionnaire raise a valid concern as to
Stewart’s credit, yet that questionnaire
must nevertheless be considered
in context.
whilst the lack of frankness was not commendable, Stewart was then a 31-year-old
father of a child under one, with a dependent
spouse. I infer he was motivated
to ‘put his best foot forward’ and maximise prospects of obtaining
the role with the
and more importantly, it is necessary that the responses regarding his mental
health history nevertheless be examined and
weighed in the context of the
evidence overall
cross-examination, it was put to Stewart that he, in fact, had had a very
significant history of prior mental health issues
including a suicide attempt,
psychiatric in-patient admissions, and alcohol and drug abuse. Stewart conceded
that was the situation,
adding that the history was confined to his
‘younger years’.
my view, the weight of evidence overall supports Stewart’s perspective in
that regard.
for two GP attendances for depressive symptoms (for which he was prescribed an
anti-depressant briefly) occurring about three
years before the Sonic
questionnaire and an alcohol-related ‘black-out’ on holiday in 2014,
the unchallenged evidence
was that Stewart had not been mentally unwell since
the episode of some 7 or 8 years prior.
that episode (in December 2009/January 2010) which comprised two GP attendances
and a referral back to Peninsula Health was
apparently triggered by homelessness
and a job loss. There is no evidence of follow up, of ongoing treatment or
symptoms. The unchallenged
evidence was Stewart had not been admitted for mental
health in-patient care for over 11 years since his discharge from Peninsula
Health in 2005 nor been prescribed anti-psychotic medication since 2008 (a
period of about 9 years).
for historic references to ‘schizophrenia’ by GPs in clinical notes,
I will return to the issue of pre-existing or
underlying mental condition later
in my reasons regarding nature and diagnosis of injury.
Nevertheless,
Stewart’s apparent willingness to either not disclose or downplay prior
mental health issues went beyond the Sonic
questionnaire. When examined by Dr
Entwisle for the employer in May 2023, he denied any previous history of
psychiatric illness.
Perhaps even more ‘surprising’ was that his
past mental health history was apparently not provided to the treating mental
health clinicians (Dr McIver and Mr Sharman) by him. That was Dr Epstein’s
observation in his report of 13 June 2023.
example of an apparent willingness to mislead related to prior drug use. He
denied any drug use other than cannabis and alcohol
when questioned by Dr
Epstein; yet, as stated, Dr Haputhantrige had a past history of drug use that
included heroin and ice and the
progress notes after the MVA referred to
cannabis use in the recent past.
accept the employer’s submission that the plaintiff’s credit is
impugned by these matters, yet it is necessary that
some further observations be
to my mind, some aspects of the employer’s attack on Stewart’s
credibility were either over-stated or unfounded.
Much was made of his apparent
mis-information to, for example Dr Epstein, of the fiscal arrangement relating
to the work vehicle,
yet nothing turned on that. The situation - however
described - involved fortnightly salary deductions by which he paid indirectly
for the costs of personal use of the work vehicle (such as fuel and insurance).
There was also a significant emphasis on historic
matters such as the black out
while on holiday in Bali or an assault in Queensland years before.
it is true that Stewart was a vague historian, yet under pressure of protracted
cross-examination, overall he impressed
me as genuine in his efforts to
cooperate. I did not form the impression that he was attempting to mislead the
Court or misrepresent
matters in a deliberate sense by being defensive or
argumentative. For example, when it was put to him in cross-examination that
‘in actual fact – apart from two deaths – you did not witness
any injuries or any of the injured’, he agreed
readily saying: ‘no
they would have gone to hospital’.
also gave evidence against interest. An important example concerned the February
fatality inspection. He said he could not
recall if he took photographs and
there was no visible traumatic injury to the deceased person (other than death).
Yet Mr Tran, a
witness for the employer, said there was a significant amount of
blood on and around the deceased and also that Stewart did take
photographs
which necessitated removing the blanket covering the body.
the Court was assisted by the fact that Stewart’s lawyers had ensured
that, prior to hearing, complete histories were
put to the key medical witnesses
relied upon by the plaintiff: namely Dr McIver, Mr Sharman and Dr Epstein who
all provided supplementary
reports and
Further, the opinions of
all three were tested and challenged during rigorous cross-examination regarding
the prior mental health
history and other contentious matters.
on the question of credit, it is appropriate to give careful consideration to
the opinions of Dr McIver and Mr Sharmon both
of whom had clinical relationships
over five plus years with Stewart. Of course, caution is required as it is not
uncommon for long-term
treating health practitioners to take up the guise of
patient advocates.
accept the submission of Counsel for the employer that appeared to be the
situation with Mr Sharman who gave evidence he had never
found Stewart to be
‘anything other than frank and honest’. In this regard, I note
advocatory comments made regarding
the MVA investigation, for example, in his 9
May 2022 report such as: ‘I am wondering where others draw their certainty
other than prejudice’; and it ‘beggars belief that a respected
social institution like WorkSafe feels this is an adequate
response to an
employee’s wellbeing OR an appropriate use of independent mental health
professionals’.
McIver impressed me as a more objective and considered witness whose evidence
was quite matter of fact and I consider his opinion
to be persuasive. Under
cross-examination regarding Stewart’s honesty (given instances of him not
being truthful such as those
referred to previously), Dr McIver said this:
‘I have met people [in my practice] who have pulled the wool over my eyes,
I have become as result reasonably astute’ and that he believed the
on Stewart’s credit, a key area of attack related the contents of
Peninsula Health progress notes and the weight placed
by Counsel for the
employer on the content of the hospital progress notes recorded the day after
the MVA. That occurred in cross-examination
of Stewart and the medical witnesses
and in submissions.
in these reasons, I set out the main apparent contradictions and inconsistencies
recorded in the progress notes as to the
factual circumstances of and
surrounding the MVA.
is a well-established principle that whilst often probative, care must be
exercised in the use of a patient’s medical records
as evidence in a civil
trial. This is particularly so where the maker of the record is not called to
give evidence. Such records
maybe probative but are compiled for the purpose of
the clinical evaluation of a patient’s condition and not for selective
forensic cross‑examination at a
Such records usually
contain a selective summary in the doctor’s own words of what the patient
tells the doctor and cannot
be treated as a verbatim transcript of the
entire medical attendance. The records may be inaccurate through
miscommunication or misleading
a matter of context in assessing accuracy and weight as to what Stewart might
have said to health practitioners, the progress notes
also included the
following observations: (emphasis added):
strongly of alcohol | An observation of
mild confusion
at times [FADCB
[patient] crashed his car into a tree ...’); [FADCB225]
moderately sedated unable to remain awake
|Ongoing 1:1 Nursing Care
4 points restraints
removed (3 currently i
) [FADCB223]
history]: PTSD, Depression, ETOH Abuse,
Previous non organic
; [FADCB223]
and oriented ... awake and chatting... states has full recollection of last
nights events [FADBC219]
Considering
these observations including confusion, sedation and being so agitated as to
require restraint, it is plainly problematic
to rely upon notes of what Stewart
in particular apparently said during this admission as akin to verbatim
transcript.
the whole of the notes regarding Stewart’s state of mind during that
period, it seems to me that the record of conversations
must be approached with
caution and weighed accordingly.
hospital staff have apparently relied upon information given by the police when
other evidence pointed to him having been
found not with the vehicle and there
being no witnesses.
no one from Peninsula Health was called and there was no evidence regarding the
basis for any supposition or deduction apparently
formed by police or others.
Whilst it is true neither the aunt nor the wife were called to give evidence, it
was not suggested either
of these persons were or could have been witnesses to
the MVA. All that ether might have said (based on the progress notes being
accurate) was that: he had left home driving the work vehicle earlier that day;
he had been at a bar; he was going to have a drink;
he had expressed suicidal
for the employer made this
submission:
evidence of the Plaintiff’s wife and aunt recorded in the clinical records
of the Frankston Hospital [at DCB 239 and 240]
clearly demonstrates that
evidence given by the Plaintiff to hospital staff ... is untruthful and in the
Defendant's submission, a knowingly deliberate
attempt to avoid potential
problems relating to police prosecution and work repercussions (
submission is seemingly contrary to the principles stated in
Philippiadis.
Summaries of conversations with Stewart, the aunt and wife
and with police, contained in the progress notes are far from verbatim
transcript; rather they are summarised versions of conversations noted by busy
hospital staff whose focus was trying to establish
the basis of Stewart’s
presentation and treat him appropriately.
conclusion, therefore as to credit, I am accept there grounds to exercise
caution in accepting Stewart’s evidence about contentious
matters without
corroboration either of other witnesses or of contemporaneous documents.
However, also for the reasons stated, I
do not find Stewart was a deliberately
untruthful or dishonest witness as urged by the employer.
arrived at that conclusion and based on the whole of the evidence, therefore, I
find that Stewart’s exposure to potential
trauma in the course of
performing his duties as directed by the employer comprised:
fatality (the February fatality inspection) in which the deceased person had
blood on and around the head and the body was viewed
and photographed by Stewart
based on Mr Tran’s evidence. Ms Heriot gave evidence that it was
‘understood’ seeing
a deceased person could be traumatic and that he
was in and out of the cool-room multiple times.
fatality in which the deceased person was unexpectedly known to Stewart as an
acquaintance or ‘buddy’ (whilst not specifically
corroborated by Mr
Steer he did not challenge that and indeed noted that not all details are
included in entry reports).
serious face or head injury to a young female person who had to be rescued by
CFA and transported to the Alfred; Mr Anderton agreed
he had no basis to
challenge Stewart’s contemporaneous reporting in the entry report that he
was informed by police that the
CFA had rescued the injured worker from the
machine, that she was transported to the Alfred with facial injuries and
suspected skull
to view of CCTV footage of adverse incidents;
to numerous other entry reports were tendered into evidence, at least 25
inspections were attended by Stewart between 12
February 2018 and 28 January
2020 following reports of persons being injured. From reports it was apparent
the injured person was
not on the scene by the time Stewart attended and
injuries were of various types including falls, lacerations and so on; yet
were taken based on interviews and photographs were
(i) Nature and diagnosis of mental injury
set out previously, the consensus of medical opinion, including of all three
psychiatrists in the case was that the primary diagnoses
were PTSD and MDD.
Indeed that was also the opinion of other treating psychiatrists including Dr
Haputhantrige who assessed Stewart
in mid 2019 and Dr Korbel, a treating
psychiatrist, who reported in May 2020. Moreover, that was also the finding of
Dr Raspovic,
psychologist and Melbourne Clinic registrar, based on detailed
psychometric testing and evaluation in December 2021.
as stated, Dr Entwisle ultimately resiled from his opinion (regarding PTSD) a
matter to which I will return.
Notwithstanding
almost total unanimity of medical opinion regarding diagnosis, Counsel for the
employer challenged vigorously the
validity of the diagnosis of PTSD under
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth
(DSM-5). The criteria for
under criterion A (relevant
to this matter and emphasis added) includes:
Exposure to actual
or threatened
, serious injury ... in
one (or more) of the following ways:
1. Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).
2. Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others.
3. Learning that the traumatic event(s) occurred to close family member or
close friend. In cases of actual of threatened death of
a family member of
friend, the event(s) must have been violent of accidental.
Experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of the
traumatic event
(s) (e.g. first responders collecting human remains; police
officers repeatedly exposed to details of child abuse).
cross-examination, it was put to the medical witnesses that a diagnosis of PTSD
could not be sustained. That was because Stewart’s
claimed circumstances
were said to fall outside all of the categories (1) to (4) of criterion A.
Namely, he did not directly experience
or witness the events (as injuries and
deaths had already occurred); the persons known to him at the September fatality
were not family nor close friends; and there was no repeated or
extreme exposure.
despite heavy pressure in cross-examination, medical witnesses Dr McIver, Dr
Epstein and Mr Sharman did not resile from their
respective opinions regarding
the diagnosis of PTSD and the relationship to the employment.
Epstein, a most experienced medico-legal psychiatrist with substantial
familiarity with the operation of DSM-5, rejected that proposition.
maintained that exposure to ‘actual ... death’ in the sense of being
in the presence of a dead body in the February
inspection fatality and repeated
in the September fatality incident was sufficient for criterion A to be
it was put to him in cross-examination that the deceased persons in the two
inspections had no observable physical injuries,
Dr Epstein said this:
‘Except that they were dead’. (Moreover, as I have found, that was
not the evidence).
Epstein provided a supplementary opinion dated 12 February 2025 in response to a
request for opinion regarding a bundle of about
25 entry reports prepared by
Stewart for inspections carried out between 12 February 2017 and 28 January
2018. As stated, the entry
concerned lacerations
and crush-type injuries of varying seriousness as well as falls. It was opined
that the information reinforced
his opinion as expressed in his previous reports
and he saw no reason to change that opinion.
Epstein also referred to the ‘Cautionary Statement’ contained within
DSM-5 regarding its use and the need to exercise
caution in forensic settings
and observed that ‘quibbling’ about diagnosis was unhelpful.
Ultimately,
Dr Epstein maintained his opinion because, as he said under cross-examination,
Stewart ‘either saw or saw the aftermath
of these incidents and in that
sense was in an equivalent situation to a first responder’.
cross-examination, Dr McIver also opined that the fourth category of Criterion A
for PTSD covered ‘everything he has done
as a WorkSafe inspector’
and the trauma was the ‘repeated exposure to aversive details’ such
as that experienced
by first responders.
both Dr McIver and Mr Sharman gave persuasive evidence that irrespective of the
nature of acquaintanceship - ‘no matter
how passingly’ as Dr McIver
put it – with the persons in the September fatality inspection, it the
unexpectedness of
knowing the person that was an added trauma. As Mr Sharman
said, and I accept, people are sometimes very attached to acquaintances
according to the context in which they are known and the activity of playing of
cards and poker (which was how Stewart knew the persons
in the September
fatality) was something in life to which Stewart was very attached.
Additionally,
Dr Epstein said that viewing work-related CCTV can be very traumatic as the
Criterion A specifically makes clear.
stated previously, Dr Entwisle, alone of the doctors, after being provided with
entry reports and accounts of Mr Steer, Mr Tran,
Sandra Raguso and Natalie
Heriot, concluded ultimately that the circumstances of those incidents did not
fit the criteria for a diagnosis
of PTSD as defined by DSM-V.
here, regarding PTSD criteria such as experiencing flashbacks, it was contended
that Stewart had fabricated such flashbacks
and falsified recollections (such as
the presence of the deceased person’s ‘wailing’ partner and
mother at the
September fatality inspection). This was done deliberately to
enhance his narrative regarding the traumatic nature of the inspection.
apparent recollections were lies as they were neither corroborated in his own
entry report nor by Mr Steer who gave a contradictory
account. Relatedly,
so-called flashbacks were ‘made up’ as they were not reflective of
any of the actual inspections.
One example was a recurring flashback of a
drowning child in a lake. Another example was Dr Epstein’s history that
the December head injury inspection he began to see his sister's face
on the injured female worker which he himself found ‘confusing
never seen the woman’.
McIver explained this saying it was likely the unconscious mind re-interpreting
work-related matters and also flashbacks were not
necessarily
‘cinematic’ in a nature (as Mr Shaman put it). Dr Epstein gave
similar evidence.
these reasons, I prefer and adopt the very compelling opinions of Dr Epstein and
Dr McIver and conclude that the nature and diagnosis
of Stewart’s mental
health conditions were primarily: PTSD and MDD and substance use disorder
(alcohol) in remission.
according to Dr McIver, whose opinion as stated I found highly persuasive, I
conclude that Stewart’s PTSD was severe
with dissociation. Dr McIver noted
clinical evidence (in his report of 6 May 2022) of dissociative episodes
occurring well before
the MVA and indeed since first being seen by Dr McIver and
observed as a presenting symptom during reviews.
(ii) Whether injury arose out of or in the course of the employment, in
particular exposure to trauma, or if injury was an aggravation
or exacerbation
of underlying or pre-existing injury, whether employment was a significant
contributing factor to such injury
any view, as a very young man, Stewart had substantial mental health challenges
from around December 2005 until probably 2008 when
he ceased taking
anti-psychotic medication. Thereafter, there were very sporadic mental health
episodes. In around December 2009,
he was referred to out-patient services and
saw a GP in January 2010 in the context of losing his job and reported
In March 2014, when aged 28 years, there was an episode of
depressive symptoms requiring GP treatment and medication. A couple of
later, while on holiday in Bali, there was an adverse event after excessive
alcohol consumption.
his marriage in 2012 and the birth of his first child in 2016, the weight of
evidence is supportive of a conclusion that
Stewart was mentally well and on a
steady path in life with significant study commitments and continuous FIFO
employment until the
self-employment with the lawn-mowing rounds. That was the
position when Stewart commenced working for the employer, namely he was
from a mental health perspective and had been for some years. He was not taking
medication nor seeking any medical treatment
for mental health nor had he done
so (aside from the episode of depressive symptoms in mid-2014) for many years.
sharp contrast, the evidence was that from mid-2019 he required psychiatric and
psychologic support and by the end of 2019 he had
deteriorated to the point of
requiring inpatient psychiatric care.
Essentially
based on my findings of fact regarding the work duties and for the reasons
stated under this and the previous heading,
I conclude that Stewart’s
mental injury arose out of or in the course of his employment as a result of
multiple exposures to
trauma in carrying out his inspection duties. I also
accept and adopt the opinion of both Dr McIver and Dr Epstein that
doubt’ the PTSD was cumulative.
the evidence was incontrovertible that Stewart had past or pre-existing or
underlying mental health issues. Thus, in order to
succeed in his claim, Stewart
had to establish that employment was a significant contributing factor
to the recurrence, aggravation,
acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration of
any such pre-existing or underlying mental
task of assessing whether employment is a
significant contributing factor requires consideration of the cl 25
factors. The task
is involves resolution of an essentially factual enquiry, the
question being one of degree, requiring
evaluation.
turn now to the evidence regarding prior mental health and about which the
medical witnesses who gave
evidence were cross-examined
extensively. The focus of cross-examination was two-fold: the extent of
contribution of previous mental
health issues and the nature of any underlying
condition or diagnosis.
Dr Entwisle opined based on past medical records, Stewart was a somewhat
vulnerable man with a negative view of himself and perception
of others. That
view was expanded upon in his second report dated 24 May 2023 in which he
emphasised his vulnerability. He opined
further that Stewart’s
pre-existing psychiatric illness and compromised personality functioning were
significant contributing
factors to his current presentation, along with his
work-related experiences. Those factors must be considered under paragraphs (d)
and (e) of cl. 25.
both Dr McIver and Mr Sharman, based on their clinical familiarity with him and
knowledge and expertise, rejected the proposition
that Stewart had underlying
schizophrenia simply based upon references by a GP in clinical notes in 2009 and
2010 or based on a past
psychotic episode. Mr Sharman said in his experience it
would be very unwise to diagnose schizophrenia based on one psychotic event.
broadly, Dr McIver, upon review of full Peninsula Health records, ruled out
persuasively an underlying, enduring psychotic disorder;
instead, the prior
mental condition was at worse a reactive depressive disorder with psychotic
features from which he had quickly
recovered (after the 2005 admissions).
Haputhantrige, the treating psychiatrist in 2019, alone raised a differential
diagnosis of bipolar affective disorder type 11,
a view not shared by any other
psychiatrist.
for the factors in cl 25, especially (d) and the probable development of the
injury occurring if that employment had not taken
place, Dr McIver concluded
that the episodes of 2005, 2009 and 2010 had no contribution to current state.
Similarly, in his initial
report of 13 June 2023, Dr Epstein could see ‘no
clear connection’ between the apparent psychotic illness in 2005 and
and the current situation. The symptoms complained of in 2023 were ‘quite
different’ from those he experienced then.
accept and adopt the evidence of Dr McIver and Dr Epstein in that regard for the
reasons stated being the compelling nature of their
evidence and being
consistent with my findings regarding Stewart’s mental status as at the
time of commencement of the employment.
now turn to the cl 25 factors being (f) lifestyle of the worker and (g)
activities outside the workplace and the evidence regarding
drug (particularly
cannabis) and alcohol use. For example, the reference in the Peninsula health
progress notes on the day after
the MVA of apparently having recently stopped
was submitted that cannabis use would ‘clearly’ affect his mental
capacity to perform his work duties. Yet there was
no evidence of any impact
with respect to his work prior to the occurrence of the MVA. Moreover, under
cross-examination, Dr McIver,
the treating psychiatric clinician, rejected
specifically the proposition that alcohol and drug could be a contributor to his
health presentation in a ‘major’ sense.
these reasons, I conclude on the balance of probabilities that Stewart’s
employment was a significant contributing factor
to a recurrence, aggravation
and acceleration of any pre-existing mental condition such as a depressive
(iii) Whether the mental injury was non-compensable having been caused wholly
and predominantly by management action taken on reasonable
grounds and in a
reasonable manner
reiterate, the ‘management action’ for the purpose of the s 40(1)
defence comprised the actions taken by the employer
related to the MVA, namely:
the investigation and the 17 August letter; the 5 October meeting and
‘show cause’ letter
in which the allegations were said to be
substantiated; and termination of employment for serious misconduct
to recap briefly, the key allegations were of driving and losing control of the
work vehicle at the time of the MVA when under
the influence of alcohol and
drugs; and of misleading the employer about the MVA and circumstances. As a
consequence of the MVA,
in addition to the investigation being instigated,
Stewart was banned from driving in relation to work or exercising inspector
plus other restrictions on communication with external stakeholders and
fellow employees.
Whether taken on reasonable grounds
on the apparent circumstances of and surrounding the MVA, I am satisfied that
the employer, particularly as a regulator of workplace
safety, had reasonable
grounds in undertaking the investigation of the MVA. On any view, it was a major
collision of a work vehicle
that occurred in circumstances that were perplexing
but of justifiable concern including some evidence of alcohol use (smelling of
alcohol). For the same reasons, the matters alleged comprise reasonable grounds
to impose restrictions on Stewart such as from driving
whilst the investigation
was under way.
it seems to me that the finding in the ‘show cause’ letter that some
allegations were ‘substantiated’
was probably on reasonable grounds,
namely: he likely was drinking on the day of the MVA and (although no
irrefutable evidence such
as any eye-witness account) he likely was driving at
the time of the MVA. Also, he probably did mis-represent what occurred in his
reporting to the employer although to my mind (given my other findings) not
necessarily deliberately but having regard to the substantial
surrounding the events as the progress notes make clear.
I have also concluded that the employer has not discharged the burden of proof
to establish that it acted on reasonable grounds
in proceeding to termination of
employment for serious misconduct.
Importantly,
the show cause letter stated as follows: ‘Clause 62.3(d) of the Enterprise
Agreement requires [the employer] to
consider any mitigating circumstances put
forward by the employee where termination is recommended as the appropriate
disciplinary
have concluded, on the weight of evidence, that there were multiple mitigating
circumstances regarding and surrounding the MVA.
at the time of the MVA, he was on certificates for modified duties and being
treated and medicated for a work-related psychiatric
condition for which the
employer had accepted liability.
his rambling, voluble, obviously incomplete written response to the 17 August
letter was plainly that of a markedly unwell
person. It contained ‘cut and
paste’ definitions of ‘adverse reaction’ and
‘dissociative episode’
and select extracts from the hospital
progress notes of the day after the MVA and missing annexures.
then apparently failed to respond at all (by way of a written response himself)
to the show cause letter although I find that medical
evidence was provided.
in a ‘to whom it may concern letter’ dated 23 August 2021 (five days
after the 17 August letter) and - thus
I infer was provided to the employer
during the investigation - Dr McIver said this:
At that time Mr
Stewart was being taken off a relatively high dose of medication (venlafaxine).
As stated in my report to VicRoads
at the time, Mr Stewart experienced an
unusual adverse response either to the medication or the withdrawal of it (or
both). This
reaction involved, among other symptoms, an atypical dissociative
state. This was also in the context of severe Post Traumatic Stress
which can also involve dissociative episodes, and some use of alcohol. The
combination at the time resulted in Mr Stewart
having little or no memory of the
events and during such states, would have had no conscious control over his
actions. Mr Stewarthad
previously been withdrawn from this medication with a
similar effect at the time. That he has not to my knowledge been charged by
Police and has been re-issued with his Drivers Licence suggests that these
organisations understand the situation was not malevolent,
purposeful, or likely
to recur. Now that Mr Stewart is no longer taking this or any similar
medication, not using alcohol, and is
progressing well with the treatment of his
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, the likelihood of any recurrence is extremely
in a report dated 8 October 2021 - which I again infer was provided after the
show cause letter - Dr McIver repeated those
views, indeed opining as his
psychiatrist it was open to conclude he was genuinely not responsible for his
that opinion was maintained by Dr McIver under pressure of cross-examination. As
for whether it was credible that Stewart
would have a complete lack of recall of
events of the day of the MVA, Dr McIver gave a persuasive explanation about
this. He said
that if a patient experiences a dissociative episode, then memory
is affected. Moreover, he had had clinically observed Stewart having
dissociative episode and of afterwards having no memory of what occurred during
completeness, the Court heard that that opinion of Dr McIver (shared by Mr
Sharman who also provided letters to the employer as
noted previously) was also
held by Dr Epstein. He opined that it was more probable than not that Stewart
had a dissociative episode
at the time of the MVA and there was ‘probably
a combination’ of both his underlying mental health issues and withdrawal
from medication. He opined that the dissociative episodes were as a result of
his work-related injuries and he likely had a further
dissociative episode in
the context of withdrawing from medication.
summary, therefore, there were compelling mitigating circumstances including a
persuasive medical explanation for the MVA circumstances,
for Stewart’s
lack of recollection and for the apparent mis-information or lack of adequate
information provided to the employer
afterwards. That included the provision of
his psychiatrist’s view that it was open to conclude he was genuinely not
responsible
for his actions by reason of a dissociative episode related to his
PTSD condition or a medication alteration for that condition or
Notwithstanding
those matters, there was scant (if any) evidence before the Court of the
employer having undertaken consideration
of highly relevant mitigating
circumstances of which I find it was aware.
these reasons, I have concluded that the employer has failed to discharge the
burden of proof to establish that management action
was taken on reasonable
grounds in proceeding beyond the show cause letter, in apparently failing to
consider adequately or at all
mitigating circumstances and the action of in
concluding Stewart had engaged in serious misconduct and in ultimately
terminating
his employment.
Whether taken in a reasonable
Alternatively,
if the management action of proceeding to act on the ‘show cause’
letter and termination of employment
was on reasonable grounds, I conclude that
it was unreasonable to do so apparently without properly or fairly considering
the mitigating
circumstances which provide a medical explanation for the
substantiated allegations.
arriving at this conclusion, I have had regard to the requirement that the
action and manner in which it is taken should be assessed
at the time taken
without the benefit of hindsight, taking into account the attributes and
circumstances including the emotional
state of the
completeness, It was said that it was unreasonable to only inform Stewart of the
investigation in the 17 August letter some 12
weeks after the MVA. Having
already found aspects of the management action were not taken on unreasonable
grounds, it is unnecessary
to also examine that matter in detail. However,
although there was no explanation about this by the employer, I infer on the
and am satisfied that the MVA circumstances were sufficiently complex
and indeed perplexing such that time was required to arrive
at the point of
making the allegations.
predominantly
I have concluded management action relied upon was not taken on reasonable
grounds or otherwise was taken in a reasonable matter,
the employer’s
defence fails.
completeness, even had I accepted on the evidence that the management action was
taken on reasonable grounds and in a reasonable
manner, the employer needed to
establish that such management action reasonably taken was the cause which must
exceed the other or
all other causes combined in power and
McIver opined in his 6 May 2022 report that Stewart had been recovering to the
point of return to work, but the failure of Work
Safe to follow the return plan
was a major set-back to his mental health. His view was subsequent actions by
the employer related
to the MVA were detrimental to both mental health and RTW.
He also stated in his report of 14 March 2023 that ‘[w]ithout
the diagnosis has been caused by the employment and
‘perpetuated by the management of his injury claim’.
Entwisle opined that matters ‘in regard to serious misconduct’ have
complicated and clouded the clinical picture, and
it is the latter which appear
to be significantly contributory to his failure to progress.
am of the view based on the evidence including the evidence of Dr McIver that
the management action was a cause of Stewart’s
mental condition by the
time he ceased work.
overwhelmingly, having regard to the whole of the evidence regarding the impact
of exposure to trauma in the course of the
employment and in accordance with my
previous findings, I have concluded that the management action was not the cause
which exceeded
the other or all others in power and influence.
(iv) Whether, Stewart has been, and continues to be, incapacitated for
remained off work on weekly payments under the accepted first claim until his
partial RTW in January 2021. He was then working
duties up until the restrictions placed upon him after the MVA such as no
cross-examination, Stewart agreed that in around April 2021, he had discussed a
happen. At the time, whilst
evidence was limited, performance of inspector duties may have been partially
impacted by pandemic lockdowns.
In any event, he had continued to have symptoms
and appeared to struggle even with the modified work duties.
Epstein opined that as a result of the work-related injury, his capacity for
coping became damaged and this situation has continued.
McIver in his final report of 13 March 2005 in which the diagnosis was PTSD,
work related. Severe, with dissociation and resultant
MDD concluded there was
total incapacity for employment which was likely to continue for the foreseeable
medical opinion, including of Dr Entwisle, was unanimous that Stewart had no
capacity for employment at any point since ceasing
work in October 2021. There
was no contrary evidence of capacity for either pre-injury or suitable
employment. Despite a variety
of treatments there was no evidence that his
mental state has improved over the last four years nor that he could attend work
a regular or consistent basis. Stewart had applied for no jobs since October
2021 and felt he could not.
am of the view that the weight of evidence overwhelmingly supports the
conclusion that was that Stewart has no current work capacity
and that such
incapacity is likely to continue indefinitely.
(v) Whether such incapacity results from or is materially contributed to by
the employment
reasons already stated, the evidence was also overwhelming that Stewart’s
incapacity for work resulted from, or was materially
contributed to by his
compensable injury pursuant to s
of the Act.
opinion including that of Dr Entwisle was unanimous that Stewart’s
incapacity remains materially contributed to by the
claimed injuries suffered
with the employer.
(vi) Whether by reason of s 185(1)(e) of the Act he was not entitled to an
increase in weekly payments (reduced to $nil) under the
first claim on the
grounds he ceased work for reasons unrelated to incapacity.
have concluded on the weight of evidence particularly the medical evidence and
opinions of Dr McIver and Dr Epstein that the events
of 14 May 2021 including
the MVA leading to the unreasonable management action occurred only by reason of
his accepted work-related
have found the employer’s finding of serious misconduct, and the dismissal
was management action taken on unreasonable grounds.
To the extent there was any
contribution to incapacity by the unreasonable management action that was
probably transitory, and Stewart
would not have been able to continue working in
any event because of his ongoing substantive injury (as opposed to any
aggravation).
reasons stated and my findings regarding the management action, the evidence
does not support a conclusion that Stewart ceased
work for reasons unrelated to
incapacity.
conclude that weekly payments were reduced unlawfully with respect of the first
conclusions are as follows:
mental injury arose out of or in the course of his employment as a result of
multiple exposures to trauma in carrying
out his inspection duties.
employment has been a significant contributing factor to a recurrence,
aggravation and acceleration of any pre-existing or underlying
employer’s defence that injury was caused wholly and predominantly by
management action taken on reasonable grounds and
in a reasonable manner is not
supported by the weight of evidence and must fail.
has had no current work capacity since 5 October 2021, continues to have no
current work capacity and such incapacity is likely
to continue indefinitely and
the incapacity results from or is materially contributed to by the
entitled to an increase in weekly payments from the date of the reduction (when
reduced to $nil by the notice dated 10 March
2022 which I set aside}.
requires a continuation of appropriate and adequate medical and like treatment
in accordance with the Act.
will hear from parties regarding the form of final orders.
Magistrate M A Hoare
04 August 2025
Revision note 26/08/2025: numbering revised to correct error in number
sequence from paragraph 35.
Stewart’s entitlement to
compensation for mental injury is governed by the Act prior to enactment of the
WorkCover Scheme Modernisation Act 2024
[2011] VMC 54
, Magistrate
Rennie v State of
[2023] VSC 762
Johns v Oaktech Pty
[2020] VSCA 10
(Beach, Kaye
JJA and Croucher AJA).
Petrovic v Victorian WorkCover Authority
[2018] VSCA 243
(Beach, Kaye
and Niall JJA);
Popal v Transport Accident Commission
[2023] VSCA 222
per Beach JA, J Forrest and Tsalamandris AJJA (Popal).
Pulling v Yarra Ranges Shire
[2018] VSC 248
See, e.g., letter to Mr Sharman
dated 17 August 2023.
Defendant Submissions at
[52.iii[, [59]; Defendant Reply at [3], [16].
Philippiadis v
Transport Accident Commission
[2016] VSCA 1
–[106], Redlich
and Kyrou JJA and Ginnane AJA.
DS at [59].
Ibid at [309.81 F43.10],
APCB [94] – [209].
Ss. 3, 40(3), clause 25 of
St Mary’s School v
2011 [VSCA] 90 at [13], Warren, CJ, Ashley JA & Kyrou
Krygsman-Yeates
Pulling v Yarra
Ranges Shire Council
[2018] VSC 248
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (699 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter