URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2025/675.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stathopoulos v Welner Lawyers Pty Ltd [2025] VSC 675 (3 November 2025)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
AT MELBOURNE
COMMERCIAL COURT
S ECI 2024 04879
STATHOPOULOS
WELNER LAWYERS PTY LTD
First Defendant/
DAVID JONATHAN WELNER
Second Defendant/
Second appellant
DATE OF HEARING
29 September 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT
3 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Stathopoulos v Welner Lawyers Pty Ltd
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VSC 675
APPEALS – PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE – Appeal from a decision of
an Associate Judge granting the plaintiff summary judgment
against the
defendants – Whether a clause in a loan agreement limited the
trustee’s liability – Held that it limited
the lender’s
recourse in enforcing the Trustee’s liability – Appeal dismissed
Section 17(3)
Supreme Court Act 1986
, r 77.06 of the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2025
Copper (Qld)
Investment Pte Ltd v Hallion
[2025] VSCA 221
[1942] VicLawRp 22
[1942] VLR 177
Agusta Pty Ltd v Provident Capital Ltd
[2012] NSWCA 26
General Credits Ltd v Tawilla Pty Ltd
[1984] 1 Qd R 388
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr D Clough
Kalus Kenny Intelex
For the Defendant
Mr J Korman
Welner Lawyers
HIS HONOUR:
INTRODUCTION
1 This is an appeal against a decision of
an Associate Judge granting the plaintiff (the
) summary judgment
against the first defendant (the
) and second defendant (the
) in the sum of $2,559,900 pursuant to
the Lender’s claim in paras 39–45 of the statement of claim. An
appeal pursuant
Court Act 1986
(Vic) and r 77.06 of the
Supreme Court (General Civil
Procedure) Rules 2025
is not by rehearing de novo but by rehearing which, in
the absence of further evidence or a change in the law, ordinarily requires
appellant to show error on the part of the Associate Judge before appellate
power may be exercised. The Court has all of the powers
of the Associate Judge
and shall have the power, inter alia, to give any judgment and make any order
which ought to have been given
or made and to make any further or other order as
the case may require.
2 I will dismiss the
3 Relevantly, it is common ground:
(a) the Trustee is the trustee
of the Welner Lawyers Trust (the
) established by a trust deed made
14 April 2020 (the
(b) cl 8.4 of
the Trust Deed provides for the Trustee’s indemnity out of the Trust Fund
(as defined in the Trust Deed) (
(c) on 26 June 2024, the parties entered
into a loan agreement (the
Loan Agreement
) and annexed guarantee (the
(d) on 26 June 2024, the amount of
$530,000 was advanced by the Lender to the Trustee pursuant to the Loan
(e) interest has accrued on the amount of
(f) cl 6 of the Loan Agreement
6 Repayment
The Borrower must repay and finally discharge the Loan on the Repayment Date.
The Borrower must also pay any Interest accrued on
the Loan and not then paid,
and all other amounts payable to the Lender under this Agreement that remains
unpaid on or before the
Repayment Date.
(g) the Guarantor guaranteed
the Trustee’s obligations under the Loan Agreement on the terms in the
(h) on and from 26 August 2024, the Lender
made demands for payment under the Loan Agreement and
(i) no payment has been made by the
Trustee or the Guarantor pursuant to the Loan Agreement and Guarantee
respectively.
4 The key dispute between the parties on
this appeal concerns whether the liability of the Trustee is limited by cl
8.1(l) of the
Loan Agreement. Clause 8.1 relevantly provides:
8 Representations and Warranties
8.1 Borrower’s representations and warranties
The Borrower represents and warrants that:
(k) the Borrower is a trustee (
) of a trust (
Trustee enters into this agreement in that capacity and is bound by this
agreement only in that capacity and in no other capacity;
(I) the recourse of the Lender to the Trustee in respect of any obligations of
the Trustee under or in connection with this agreement
(whether that liability
arises under a specific provision of this agreement) for breach of contract,
tort (including negligence)
or otherwise) [sic] is limited to the extent to
which the Trustee's liability is satisfied out of the trust assets out of which
Trustee is actually indemnified in respect of such obligations;
(m) the Lender may not sue the Trustee in any capacity other than as trustee of
the Trust, including seeking the appointment of
a receiver (except in relation
to property of the Trust), a liquidator, an administrator or any similar person
to the Trustee or
prove in any liquidation, administration or arrangement of or
affecting the Trustee (except in relation to property of the Trust);
(n) if the vendor does not recover the full amount of any money owing to it
arising from non-performance by the Trustee of any of
its obligations under or
in respect of this agreement, the Lender may not (except in the case of breach
of trust by the Trustee)
seek to recover the shortfall by:
(i) bringing proceedings against the Trustee in its personal capacity; or
(ii) applying to have the Trustee wound up; and
(o) the parties acknowledge and agree that:
(i) the liability of each beneficiary of a Trust (in that capacity) (
Beneficiary
) is limited as set out in the trust deed or constitution of the
(ii) a party has no recourse to a Trust Beneficiary and may not seek to make any
claim or bring any proceedings against a Trust Beneficiary
in relation to any
obligations of the Trustee of the Trust under or in connection with this
agreement (whether that liability arises
under a specific provision of this
contract, for breach of contract, tort (including negligence) or otherwise).
5 The Guarantee, inter alia,
1.1 Obligations guaranteed
The Guarantor unconditionally guarantees to the Beneficiary:
(a) the due and punctual payment by the Borrower of:
(i) all moneys which the Borrower:
(A) pays; or
(B) is or becomes actually liable to pay to the Lender or Beneficiary, for or
on behalf of, or for the accommodation of the Lender
or Borrower either alone or
jointly with any other person whether or not that payment is made or that
liability arises under or by
covenants and provisions of any agreement, security or instrument;
circumstances connected with such agreement, security or instrument; or
reason of the Beneficiary being or becoming a party to any bond, letter of
credit, indemnity, guarantee or other instrument; and
(ii) all other moneys which the Borrower either alone, jointly, severally, or
jointly and severally with any other person, now or
from time to time is,
becomes actually liable to pay to the Beneficiary under or by virtue of any
agreement, security or negotiable
or other instrument or as a result of any
matter or thing; and
(b) the due and punctual observance and performance by the Borrower of all its
other liabilities, obligations and agreements (whether
monetary or non-monetary,
present or future, actual or contingent) to the Beneficiary pursuant to or in
connection with any agreement,
security or instrument.
1.2 Result of non-payment
If the Borrower defaults in the due and punctual payment of any money referred
to in clause 1.1(a), the Guarantor must pay that money
to or as directed by the
Beneficiary immediately on demand.
1.3 Result of non-performance
If the Borrower defaults or fails in the due and punctual performance of any of
its liabilities, obligations and agreements referred
to in clause 1.1(b), the
Guarantor must indemnify the Beneficiary immediately against all losses,
liabilities, damages, costs and
expenses (including legal expenses on a full
indemnity basis) which may be incurred (directly or indirectly), by the
Beneficiary
by reason of that default or failure.
No requirement to proceed
The Beneficiary is not required to proceed against the Borrower, exhaust any
remedy it may have against the Borrower or enforce any
security it may hold with
respect to the Borrower’s Obligations.
6 Relevantly, the Lender alleges in his
further amended statement of claim:
under clause 6 of the Loan Agreement, the First Defendant was obliged, by the
Repayment Date, being 26 August 2024, to repay
and finally discharge the Loan,
being $530,000, plus any interest on the Loan and all other amounts payable to
the Plaintiff under
the Loan Agreement.
and from 26 August 2024, the Plaintiff demanded payment of the amounts payable
to him under clause 6 of the Loan Agreement.
breach of clause 6 of the Loan Agreement, the First Defendant has not made any
payment required under that term.
amounts payable under clause 6 of the Loan Agreement are debts due and owing to
the Plaintiff.
under clause 1.3 of the Guarantee, the Second Defendant is obliged to indemnify
the Plaintiff immediately against all losses,
liabilities, damages, costs and
expenses (including legal expenses on a full indemnity basis) which may be
incurred (directly or
indirectly) by the Plaintiff by reason of the First
Defendant’s default under the Loan Agreement.
breach of the Guarantee, the Second Defendant has failed to so indemnify the
monies that the Second Defendant is required to pay under the Guarantee are a
debt due and owing to the Plaintiff.
THE PLAINTIFF CLAIMS AGAINST THE FIRST DEFENDANT:
pursuant to the Loan Agreement dated 26 June 2024 between the Plaintiff and the
First Defendant (
Loan Agreement
and other amounts pursuant to the Loan Agreement.
THE PLAINTIFF CLAIMS AGAINST THE SECOND DEFENDANT:
pursuant to the Guarantee in the Loan Agreement.
and other amounts pursuant to the Guarantee and the Loan Agreement.
7 In response, the appellants allege:
deny paragraph 39, and say further that the First Defendant (as trustee for the
Welner Lawyers Trust only), entered into the
transaction as Borrower with
limited liability.
40. They admit paragraph 40.
deny paragraph 41, and say that the First Defendant in its own right has no
obligations under the Loan Agreement.
cover of objection that paragraph 42 pleads evidence and a legal conclusion and
is liable to be struck out, they do not plead
to the allegations paragraph 42 as
it contains no allegation of material fact or law against them.
43. They deny paragraph 43 and refer to and repeat paragraph 39 herein.
cover of objection that paragraph 44 pleads evidence and a legal conclusion and
is liable to be struck out, they do not plead
to the allegations paragraph 44 as
it contains no allegation of material fact or law against them.
cover of objection that paragraph 45 pleads evidence and a legal conclusion and
is liable to be struck out, they do not plead
to the allegations paragraph 45 as
it contains no allegation of material fact or law against them.
the circumstances, the Defendants say the Plaintiff’s claim must fail, is
liable to be struck out and the Plaintiff is not
entitled to any loss or
PARTICULARS
Refer to clauses 8.1(k) to 8.1(o) of the Loan Agreement.
8 In reply, the Lender alleges:
paragraph 39 of the Defence, the Plaintiff says:
8.1(l) of the Loan Agreement is incomprehensible or uncertain and therefore void
or unenforceable; and
of clauses 8.1(m) and (n) of the Loan Agreement is against public policy and
therefore void or unenforceable.
and alternatively, to paragraph 39 of the Defence, the Plaintiff says that for
each the reasons described in paragraphs 35(a)(vii)–(ix),
35(b)(iia)–(iib), 37(a)(vii)–(ix) and 37(b)(iia)–(iib) of the
Amended Statement of Claim dated 28 October 2024,
it would be unconscionable, at
general law and in contravention of ss 20 and/or 21 of the ACL, for the First
Defendant and/or the
Second Defendant to rely on any of clauses 8.1(k) to 8.1(o)
of the Loan Agreement.
and alternatively, to paragraph 39 of the Defence, the Plaintiff says:
Loan Agreement is:
contract for services;
by the First Defendant in the course of carrying on a business at a time when it
employed fewer than 100 persons;
small business contract within the meaning of s 23(4) of the
the Loan Agreement is a standard form contract within the meaning of s 27 of the
of clauses 8.1(m) to (o) of the Loan Agreement is:
unfair contract term within the meaning of s 24 of the ACL; and
pursuant to s 23(1) of the ACL.
and alternatively, to paragraph 39 of the Defence, the Plaintiff says that
clauses 8.1(m) to (o) of the Loan Agreement are
not agreements of limitation but
rather merely warranties and representations.
paragraph 41 of the Defence, the Plaintiff refers to and repeats paragraphs 1 to
paragraph 43 of the Defence, the Plaintiff:
a. refers to and repeats paragraphs 1 to 4 above; and
further that:
Second Defendant’s liability under clause 1.2 of the Guarantee is not
limited by clauses 8.1(m) to (o) of the Loan Agreement;
Second Defendant’s obligation of indemnity under clause 5.1 of the
Guarantee is not limited by clauses 8.1(m) to (o) of
the Loan Agreement.
9 The Lender did not rely upon the
matters set out in his reply at paragraphs 2 (unconscionability) or paragraph 3
(causes of action
and remedies under the
Australian Consumer
before the Associate Judge
or on this appeal.
REASONS OF THE ASSOCIATE JUDGE
10 The Associate Judge carefully set out
the background, including the relevant pleadings, factual matters concerning the
Loan Agreement and the Guarantee that were not in dispute, the
material filed by the parties, relevant terms of the Loan Agreement
Guarantee, the Trust Deed and the parties’ submissions. The Associate
Judge carefully set out the applicable law concerning
a summary judgment
application.
11 The Associate Judge stated that any
resistance to the application by the appellants based on the identity of the
Trustee was abandoned.
12 The Associate Judge
stated that the distinction of capacity, as between personal and that of the
trustee, is only relevant to whether
the Trustee has an indemnity against the
Trust Fund. Her Honour stated that it is both factually and legally correct that
the Trustee
is liable under the Loan Agreement, and that having entered the Loan
Agreement as trustee it has an indemnity against the Trust Fund.
13 The Associate Judge found that cl 8.1(l) was so
unclear that an objective reader could not ascertain its intended meaning, with
the result that there was no real prospect of the clause bearing any sensible
construction. The Associate Judge found that, as a
result, no defence relying
on cl 8.1(l) warranted being determined at trial. It is convenient to set out
the reasons of the Associate
Judge in relation to this issue:
is a further issue on which Counsel for the plaintiff addressed the Court,
namely the meaning of the words “actually indemnified”.
Counsel for
the plaintiff submitted that the phrase was ambiguous and could be read either
as a statement of law or a statement of
fact, such that an objective reader
would be unable to discern its intended meaning. On that basis, it was argued
that the clause
had no reasonable prospect of bearing a coherent or commercially
sensible meaning. In this sense, Counsel for the plaintiff contended
that if the
phrase “actually indemnified” were to be understood as a statement
of law, that is, the trustee has a right
of indemnity, then the inclusion of the
word “actually” is inexplicable. Alternatively, if the phrase was
intended to
mean trustee’s recourse, and therefore, the plaintiff’s
recourse to the Trust assets was limited to the amount that the
trustee, in its
discretion, elects to “
pay from the Trust assets
pursuant to the indemnity, then the clause would operate to give the trustee
complete discretion as to whether
the plaintiff is paid at all. On this latter
construction, Counsel submitted the clause would be illusory as it would afford
trustee complete discretion as to whether or not to comply with the
fundamental term of the Loan Agreement, namely, the obligation
to repay the
debt. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that such an interpretation would
amount to a commercial absurdity in the
context of a Loan Agreement, in which
repayment is the borrower’s fundamental obligation.
respect of this clause, Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the clause was
so unclear that an objective reader could not ascertain
its intended meaning,
with the result that there is no real prospect of the clause bearing any
sensible construction. On that basis,
it was submitted that no defence relying
clause warranted being determined at trial. I accept that submission, noting
that reliance
was placed on the decision in
Watson v Phipps
where it was
The function of a court of construction is to ascertain what the parties meant
by the words which they have used. For this purpose
the grammatical and ordinary
sense of the words is to be adhered to, unless they lead to some absurdity or to
some repugnance or
inconsistency with the rest of the instrument, in which case
the grammatical and ordinary sense of the words may be modified so as
that absurdity or inconsistency but no further...
(citations omitted)
14 The Associate Judge also found, in the
alternative, that the Lender’s recourse to the Trust Fund was limited to
such an amount
that the Trustee, in its discretion, decided to actually pay from
the Trust Fund pursuant to the indemnity. The Associate Judge
said that the
practical effect of this alternative interpretation is that the Lender’s
recourse to the Trust Fund is entirely
at the unfettered discretion of the
Trustee, who is also the borrower under the Loan Agreement, and
‘unquestionably’
that consideration is illusory and unenforceable.
This alternative interpretation was the subject of submissions made by the
and not the appellants to her Honour. In accepting this submission, her
Honour implicitly rejected the appellants’ interpretation
Honour set out in her reasons at [52] and [74]). It is convenient to set out the
Associate Judge’s reasons in relation
to this matter in full:
alternate interpretation was to the effect that the plaintiff’s recourse
to the trustee's assets was limited to such an
amount that the trustee, in its
discretion, decides to actually pay from the Trust assets pursuant to the
indemnity. In my view,
the latter interpretation would have the practical effect
of permitting a trustee to have complete discretion as to whether or not
plaintiff gets paid. That would effectively defeat the very terms of the Loan
Agreement and Guarantee themselves, making the
terms agreed to, as Counsel for
the plaintiff properly identified, illusory. The interpretation favoured by the
defendants would
permit the trustee to have complete discretion as to whether to
honour the fundamental terms of the Loan Agreement, which is the
obligation to
repay. I do not accept the defendants’ argument, nor do I consider it to
be a matter that warrants trial.
for the plaintiff otherwise relied on the decision of the Court of Appeal in
Sino Strategic International
where the Court
noted that it is trite law, that a contract made for consideration that is
illusory is unenforceable. Consideration
is illusory if its payment or
fulfilment depends upon the unfettered discretion of the promisor. The
interpretation of the Loan
Agreement urged upon me by the defendants’
Counsel, which I do not accept, would depend on the unfettered discretion of the
trustee. The effect of the submission advanced by the defendants’ Counsel
would be that the trustee would have full discretion
to determine the extent to
which it is actually indemnified from the Trust assets. The practical effect of
this is that the plaintiff’s
recourse to the Trust assets would be
entirely at the unfettered discretion of the trustee, being the first defendant,
who was also
the borrower under the Loan Agreement. Unquestionably, that
consideration is illusory and unenforceable. It must therefore follow,
arguments advanced by the defendants regarding the interpretation of the Loan
Agreement have no reasonable prospect of success.
(citations omitted)
15 The Associate Judge then said:
102 I am fortified in my conclusions by the fact that:
(a) the Defence does not plead the interpretation now urged on the Court. At
paragraphs 39 and 41, the Defence positively pleads
that the first defendant,
(as trustee for the Trust) entered into the transaction as borrower with limited
liability and that the
first defendant, in its own right, has no obligations
under the Loan Agreement. Both those defences are distinct from the argument
that the plaintiff’s recourse to the trustee’s assets was somehow
limited to the amount that the trustee, in its absolute
discretion, decides to
actually pay from the Trust assets pursuant to the indemnity;
(b) no evidence was filed by Mr Welner with the Court, apart from the Direction
(c) exhibited to the First Stathopoulos Affidavit were a series of text messages
passing between he and Mr Welner, in which Mr Stathopoulos
repayment of his loan. In response to those demands, Mr Welner made various
statements, including:
I’ll pay you as soon as I can;
working very hard. Should be around $500K coming to you early next week;
I am working very hard on this I am working on it; and I am doing everything I
None of the messages in evidence before me from Mr Welner was consistent with
the interpretation of the Loan Agreement, Guarantee
and Trust Deed urged upon me
by his Counsel. Similarly, none of those messages from Mr Welner were disputed
by him nor were they
explained in terms which supported his interpretation of
the Loan Agreement, Guarantee and Trust Deed; and
(d) taking the defendants submissions regarding the validity of clauses 8.1(k)
through to 8.1(m) at their highest, as the plaintiff
is suing the company in its
capacity as trustee, and given that the clauses are directed only towards
recourse to assets, rather
than limitation of liability, the plaintiff should
nevertheless be entitled to judgment against the defendants.
16 The Associate Judge then addressed the
liability of the Guarantor. Her Honour said that the Guarantor’s defence
against any
liability under the Guarantee relied upon the Trustee’s
17 The Associate Judge also did not accept
that a non-party needed to be joined to the proceeding, that any issue arose
from a document
titled ‘Direction to Pay’ or that there is an issue
that necessitates a trial.
18 Finally, her Honour
addressed her conclusions. Her Honour said:
power in s 63 of the CPA is expressly made subject to s 64, which permits the
Court to allow a matter to proceed to trial if the
Court is satisfied that,
despite there being no real prospect of success the civil proceeding should not
be disposed of summarily
because (a) it is not in the interests of justice to do
so; or (b) the dispute is of such a nature that only a full hearing on the
merits is appropriate.
, the Court of Appeal also expressed the cautionary note that the
power to terminate proceedings summarily is one that should be exercised
caution and should not be exercised unless it is clear that there is no real
question to be tried.
the reasons discussed above, I am not satisfied that there is any question that
ought to be tried, or any other reason why there
ought be a trial of the
plaintiff’s Claim as set out at paragraphs 39 to 45 of the pleading.
those circumstances, there is no reason why those parts of the proceeding that
were the subject of the Application before me should
not be disposed of
reaching that view, I have had regard to the CPA and its overarching purpose of
facilitating the just, efficient, timely and cost-effective
resolution of the
real issues in dispute.
the foregoing reasons, the Court is of the view that the Defence has no real
prospect of success and that it is appropriate that
paragraphs 39 to 45 of the
proceeding be disposed of summarily. Accordingly, subject to hearing from the
parties, orders will be
made for judgment to be entered for the plaintiff
against the respective defendants along the lines set out in the minute of order
previously provided to my chambers by the plaintiff on 12 December 2024 together
with the updated interest calculations provided
(citations omitted)
19 The Associate Judge ordered:
Civil Procedure Act 2010
(Vic), summary judgment is
given for the plaintiff with respect to the claims contained at paragraphs 39 to
45 of the plaintiff’s
statement of claim filed 4 October 2024 as amended
on 28 October 2024 and further amended on 11 November 2024 (‘
defendants pay to the plaintiff the sum of $2,559,900.00 comprised as
(a) $530,000.00 pursuant to the Loan Agreement and Guarantee, as those terms are
defined in the Statement of Claim;
(b) interest of $159,000.00 due on the first interest payment date of 26 July
2024 under the Loan, as that term is defined in the
Statement of Claim;
(c) interest of $159,000.00 due on the second interest payment date of 26 August
2024 under the Loan, as that term is defined in
the Statement of Claim; and
(d) interest of $1,711,900.00 due on the Loan, as that term is defined in the
Statement of Claim, calculated at the interest rate
of 30% per calendar month
from 27 August 2024 to 15 July 2025, being 323 days at $5,300.00 per day.
defendants pay the plaintiff’s costs of and incidental to the
plaintiff’s summons filed 28 October 2024, such costs
to be paid on a
standard basis taxed in default of agreement.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL AND THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS
Grounds of appeal
20 The appellants’ notice of appeal
has nine grounds, but the appellants expressly confined the appeal to grounds 1
abandoned the remainder:
learned Associate Justice erred in finding that the defence had no real
prospects of success.
4. The learned Associate Justice erred in construing the terms of contract.
21 Ground 1 does not adequately identify
any substantive ground of appeal. Grounds of appeal 1 and 4 must be read and
considered together.
The parties conducted the appeal on this basis.
Appellants’ submissions
22 First, the appellants submitted that
cls 8.1(k)–8.1(o), despite being preceded by the chapeau of cl 8.1,
stating ‘[t]he
borrower represents and warrants that’, should be
understood as agreements of limitation so as to make commercial sense. They
submitted that it was ‘sloppy drafting’ to include them as
representations and warranties but it is clear that the parties
intended these
provisions to have legal effect as agreements and not ‘idle chatter’
of the Trustee. They submitted that
they are not ambiguous. However, they
submitted that if the Court finds they are ambiguous then the appeal should be
allowed as there
should be a trial to determine matters such as the factual
23 Second, the appellants submitted that the
Trustee’s liability is limited to the value of the
‘realisable’ assets
in the Trust Fund at the time the loan was
liable to be repaid (ie 26 August 2024). They submitted that the Associate Judge
by failing to take this into account. They submitted that the expression
‘is satisfied’ in cl 8.1(l) should be construed
be’ or ‘is notionally satisfied’.
24 They submitted that it is only those assets in
the Trust Fund that may be realised that are relevant, and submitted that
interpretation
is confirmed by the term ‘actually indemnified’. They
submitted that ‘actually’ means ‘in fact’
reality’. They submitted that this would exclude assets which are only
‘paper assets’ and cannot be
realised. As a result, they submitted
that cl 8.1(l) only makes sense if it applies to Trust assets that are
‘available’
to exonerate the Trustee’s debts, in which case it
restricts the Lender’s recourse to such assets. Alternatively, they
submitted that the word ‘actually’ should be
25 They submitted that if
cls 8.1(k)–8.1(n) are construed with a view to making commercial
sense of the Loan Agreement, their
meaning is plain: ‘The parties entered
into a limited recourse loan, whereby the Lender’s recourse, and hence the
liability, was limited to the extent of certain assets. Those
assets are the Trust Fund out of which, pursuant to the general law
(subject to
modification by the Trust Deed), the Trustee was
indemnified’.
26 They submitted that it is
artificial to draw a distinction between the limited nature of the
Lender’s agreed recourse and
the obverse, being the limited nature of the
Trustee’s liability. They submitted that they are one and the same. They
that the Associate Judge erred in finding that cl 8.1(l) concerns
a limitation on the Lender’s recourse to assets rather than
a limitation
on the Trustee’s liability.
27 Third, the
appellants submitted that the Lender adduced no evidence of the value of the
realisable assets in the Trust Fund. They
submitted that the Associate Judge
erred in suggesting that it was for the appellants, rather than the Lender, to
establish this.
The appellants submitted that the Associate Judge erred in
granting summary judgment in a fixed amount in circumstances in which
no evidence of the value of the realisable assets in the Trust Fund.
28 Fourth, they submitted that, as the
Trustee’s liability was limited to the value of the realisable assets in
the Trust Fund,
the Guarantor’s liability could not exceed this amount.
They also submitted that cl 1.1(a) of the Guarantee further supports
submission that the Trustee’s liability was limited to realisable assets
in the Trust Fund, but this submission was not
29 Fifth, they submitted that, upon the
Lender’s proper construction, the Lender cannot be subrogated to the
right of exoneration from the Trust assets. This is because,
upon the Lender’s proper construction, ‘actually indemnified’
means used to make a payment. As a result, in the event that the Trustee
actually indemnifies themselves, there would be no Trust
assets. The appellants
submitted that subrogation would not be available to enable the Lender to take
some kind of step (which the
Trustee refused or otherwise failed to take) that
would have the effect of increasing the amount of Trust assets to which the
has recourse for exoneration of the debt. There is no such step. The
appellants submitted that if ‘actually’ is construed
‘actual exercise by the Trustee of the Trustee’s right of
indemnity’, there are no circumstances in which
the Lender himself could
take action to be subrogated.
30 Sixth, they
submitted that, upon their proper construction, the Lender can take action to be
subrogated to the Trustee’s
right of exoneration from the Trust assets.
31 Seventh, they submitted that the Court should
allow the appeal and then find that the appellants are liable to the extent of
Trustee’s right of exoneration from the Trust Fund and set this down
for determination or, alternatively, dismiss the application
for summary
32 Finally, the appellants allege in
their defence that the Trustee has no obligations ‘in its own right’
under the Loan
Agreement (see paragraph 41 of the defence). But this was not
pressed at the appeal. It is hopeless and contrary to authority. A
person acting
as trustee does not assume an additional or qualified legal
personality.
Lender’s submissions
33 First, the Lender submitted that
cls 8.1(k)–(o) are not expressed in clear and unambiguous terms and
that such terms are
a requirement for a limited recourse loan to be
He submitted that it fails
the ‘stringent requirement’ that limited recourse clauses should be
expressed in clear and
unambiguous terms. He submitted:
(a) these clauses are
expressed to be representations and warranties and not agreements as the chapeau
to cl 8.1 includes the words
‘[t]he Borrower represents and
(b) the reference to
‘actually indemnified’ in cl 8.1(l) is ambiguous and confusing.
It might mean that the Lender may
have recourse to all of the assets of the
Trust Fund from which the Trustee may potentially be indemnified or might refer
to an amount
that the Trustee, in its sole discretion, in fact elects to pay
from the Trust Fund pursuant to the indemnity in cl 8.4 of the Trust
(c) he adopts the Associate Judge’s finding
that cl 8.1(l) is so unclear that an objective reader could not ascertain
its intended
34 Second, the Lender submitted that the
only way in which cl 8.1(l) can be construed as being ‘clear’
is to give ‘actually
indemnified’ its plain meaning which is a
reference to an actual payment. He submitted that the primary debt obligation in
cl 6 of the Loan Agreement is limited to the amount by which the Trustee is
‘actually indemnified’. The Lender submitted
that this makes the
Loan Agreement and Guarantee illusory as its practical effect is that it gives
the Trustee the discretion as
to whether there are available Trust assets within
the Lender’s ‘recourse’, and therefore whether to repay the
Lender at all. He submitted:
(a) the Trustee’s
liability is limited to actual payments out of the Trust Fund and not merely the
extent of the Trustee’s
indemnity. As a result, the Trustee has the
practical discretion to make actual payments from the Trust Fund. The Lender
this in the following terms:
CLOUGH...there is a primary debt with interest and other payments payable under
clause 6, that for whatever reason the Trustee
decides to indemnify itself out
of Trust assets for that primary debt, pays itself a dollar and then says to the
lender, well, I've
only paid myself a dollar and that's all I need to pay you in
defence to your claim for this overall debt.
adopts the Associate Judge’s findings that this would defeat the terms of
the Loan Agreement and Guarantee and make the
terms agreed to
35 Third, the Lender submitted that the
appellants impermissibly seek to rewrite cl 8.1(l) to seek to give it
meaning. They seek to
do ‘violence’ to the clause, including by
ignoring certain words and seeking to insert others. The appellants seek to
ignore ‘[t]he Borrower represents and warrants’ and replace them
with ‘[t]he parties agree’. The appellants
seek to make ‘is
satisfied’ become ‘could be satisfied’. The appellants seek to
make the word ‘actually’
now ‘realisable’, or
alternatively, to sever it. The appellants now seek to impose a matter of timing
on the valuation
of the Trust Fund. But there is no term as to when this should
be determined.
36 Fourth, the Lender submitted that
the only way in which cl 8.1(l) is clear is to give ‘actually
indemnified’ its plain
meaning which is a reference to an actual
37 Fifth, the Lender accepted that the
appellants’ construction of cl 8.1(l) does not make the Loan
Agreement and Guarantee
38 Sixth, the
Lender submitted that even if cl 8.1(l) concerns a limitation upon the
rights of enforcement against the Trustee and
not upon the Trustee’s
liability, it would nonetheless be illusory as:
(a) the Lender’s
exercise of the right of subrogation is not applicable as such a right does not
result in the Trustee being
‘actually indemnified’ as the right of
subrogation is properly viewed as a remedy of the Lender to have direct resort
to the assets of the trust, rather than as an indemnification of the
(b) even if the Lender’s exercise of
its right of subrogation may logically and practically result in the Trustee
being ‘actually
indemnified’ within the meaning of clause 8.1(l),
the Trustee retains the power and discretion to distribute the assets of
Trust prior to repaying the loan, with the effect of leaving nothing available
to indemnify the Trustee, whether as a payment
by the Trustee or as a payment
compelled by the Lender’s right of
subrogation;
(c) because the Lender’s right of
subrogation is purely derivative of the Trustee’s right of indemnity, the
latter right
must be ‘soundly based’, for example, upon the debt in
question being incurred in the proper performance of the Borrower’s
as trustee.
39 Finally, the Lender submitted that
even if the appellants’ construction of cl 8.1(l) is accepted and it
concerns the Trustee’s
liability, then that is a matter that is a defence
and not something that the Lender needs to prove. The Lender submitted that they
failed to establish this.
Introduction
40 The appellants admit the Loan
Agreement, the Guarantee, the Lender’s advance of $530,000 to the Trustee
and their non-payment
of any amounts under the Loan Agreement and Guarantee. The
central issue on this appeal is whether cl 8.1(l) limits the liability
the Trustee.
Trustee’s liability is not limited by the Loan Agreement
41 The liability of a Trustee is normally
but it may be limited or
qualified if there are ‘clear words’ to this effect in the contract
in question.
It is necessary that
there are ‘words negativing the personal liability which is an ordinary
incident of trusteeship’.
Muir v City of Glasgow Bank
, Lord Penzance said that a trustee’s
unlimited personal liability would only be limited to the amount of the trust
on a proper construction of the agreement in
the intention of the parties to that
contract was apparent that [the trustee’s] personal liability should be
excluded; and that
although [the trustee] was a contracting party to the
obligation the creditors should look to the trust estate
Copper (Qld) Investment Pte Ltd v Hallion
the Court of Appeal
101 The principles of contractual construction
were not in dispute between the parties; rather, what was in dispute was the
application
of the principles to the 2018 SSA. In summary, the relevant
principles are as follows:
(a) The rights and
liabilities of parties under a provision of a contract are determined
objectively, by reference to the text, context
and purpose of the contract. The
context includes the entire text of the contract as well as any contract,
document or statutory
provision referred to in the text of the
(b) The determination of the meaning of
the terms of a commercial contract is an objective exercise. It is necessary to
reasonable businessperson in the position of the parties would have
understood the terms to mean. That will require consideration
of the language of
the contract, the circumstances addressed by the contract and the commercial
purpose to be secured by the contract.
Relatedly, a court will generally
approach the task of construing a commercial contract on the assumption
‘that the parties
... intended to produce a commercial result’. A
commercial contract should be construed so as to avoid it ‘making
nonsense or working commercial
inconvenience’.
(c) Ordinarily, a contract is
construed by reference to the terms of the contract alone. If an expression in a
contract is unambiguous,
evidence of surrounding circumstances (events,
circumstances and things external to the contract) cannot be adduced to
its plain meaning.
(d) However,
sometimes, recourse to events, circumstances and things external to the contract
is necessary.
(i) First, such recourse may be
necessary in determining the proper construction where a provision is ambiguous,
such that there is
a constructional choice to be
(ii) Secondly, such recourse may be necessary
in order to identify the commercial purpose of the contract. In that context, an
understanding
of the genesis of the transaction, the background, the context and
the market in which the parties are operating may assist in identifying
commercial purpose.
(e) Even if recourse is had to
events, circumstances or things external to the contract, those matters are
nonetheless objective.
That is, what may be referred to are external events,
circumstances or things that are known to the parties or which assist in
identifying
the purpose or object of the transaction. What is inadmissible is
evidence of the parties' statements and actions reflecting their
intentions and expectations.
102 I note that some
caution is required in relation to the proposition that courts will construe a
commercial contract so as to avoid
it making commercial nonsense or working
commercial inconvenience. In particular, as this Court has said, this is not a
to alter the meaning of a term to achieve a result’ the
court might consider reasonable. Furthermore, ‘business common
sense’ is a topic upon which minds may reasonably differ. And, as Lord
Mustill said in
Charter Reinsurance Co Ltd v Fagan
, ‘there comes a
point at which the court should remind itself that the task is to discover what
the parties meant from what
8.1(l) is poorly drafted. But it is not vague, unclear or ambiguous. The clause
appears within cl 8.1 which includes the
heading ‘Borrower’s
representations and warranties’. But on its terms, cl 8.1(l) is an
express term that is objectively
intended to prescribe limits on the recourse of
the Lender. It would be absurd for the prescriptive terms of cl 8.1(l) to
as a mere description of a factual matter represented and warranted by
the Trustee.
Clause 8.1(l) is a
term that was intended to have legal effect independent from the chapeau to
cl 8.1. This is also confirmed by
cl 8.1(l) being part of a number of
clauses in cl 8.1 that are intended to have legal effect independent from
the chapeau to cl
8.1 (see cls 8.1(k) and
44 Clause 8.1(l), upon its proper
construction, is a limitation upon the Lender’s enforcement of the
Trustee’s liability
and not a limitation upon the Trustee’s
liability itself.
45 First, cl 8.1(l) concerns
an express limitation on the ‘recourse of the Lender’. The parties
did not expressly limit
the Trustee’s liability. It is the actions of the
Lender against the Trustee that are limited and not the Trustee’s
46 Second, cl 8.1(l) only operates
in circumstances in which the Trustee’s liability has been established.
This is because the
clause uses the terms ‘that
the Trustee’s liability
satisfied’ (emphasis added). The reference to the ‘Trustee’s
liability’ is not a reference to any form
of limited liability. Clause
8.1(l) operates in circumstances where the Trustee has a liability to the Lender
‘under or in
connection with’ the Loan Agreement. It presupposes
that the Trustee has liability in an amount, rather than placing a limit
47 Third, the reference to ‘the
Trustee’s liability
is satisfied out of trust assets
reference to the ‘Trustee’s liability’ in fact being satisfied
from assets in the Trust Fund. It may
be satisfied out of the assets in the
Trust Fund by the Trustee exercising its right of indemnity from the Trust Fund
under cl 8.4
of the Trust Deed and then making a payment to the Lender. It
is common ground that this has not occurred. In addition, depending
circumstances, the Lender may also have a right to be subrogated to the
Trustee’s own right to resort to the Trust
I further address the
issue of subrogation later in this
48 Fourth, the words ‘out of which
the Trustee is actually indemnified in respect of such obligations’
identify the relevant
‘trust assets’ in cl 8.1(l). But these
words are not necessary and merely confirm the position. This is because the
can only satisfy its liability out of assets in the Trust Fund in
respect of which the Trustee is ‘actually indemnified’.
that these words are not necessary does not make the clause vague, unclear or
ambiguous. Upon the appellants’ construction
of cl 8.1(l) these words
are also not necessary and add nothing to the clause.
49 Fifth, the answer to the question of what a
reasonable businessperson in the position of the parties would have understood
terms to mean, is that the Lender’s recourse to enforce the
Trustee’s liability is limited to the terms set out in cl
8.1(l). The
limitation was not upon the Trustee’s liability. This makes commercial
sense of both the Loan Agreement and the
50 Sixth, I do not accept the
appellants’ submission that it is artificial to draw a distinction between
the limited nature
of the Lender’s agreed recourse and the obverse, being
the limited nature of the Trustee’s liability. This distinction
critical importance, especially given the existence of the Guarantee. A
limitation of the Trustee’s liability would also
Guarantor’s liability (see cl 1.1(a) of the Guarantee), whereas a
limitation on recourse (ie enforcement) does not.
51 Seventh, I do not accept the appellants’
submission that cl 1.1(a) of the Guarantee further supports its submission
the Trustee’s liability was limited to realisable assets in the Trust
Fund. This submission was not developed.
the appellants submitted that the words ‘is satisfied’ should be
read as referring to the extent to which the
Trustee’s liability
notionally satisfied
out of the Trust Fund.
However, a liability ‘is satisfied’ if it has been discharged. This
relates to enforcement. In
my view, it is not possible to simply construe the
word ‘is’ as ‘could be’ or ‘notionally
satisfied’.
The express words are clear. This is also supported by the
operative part of the clause being the ‘recourse of the Lender’
not the ‘Trustee’s
liability’.
53 Ninth, the Associate Judge did
not err in giving summary judgment in the absence of any evidence concerning the
value of the assets
in the Trust Fund at the time of repayment (ie 26 August
2024). This is because the value of the assets in the Trust Fund is irrelevant
to the liability of the Trustee and the Guarantor. Clause 8.1(l) does not limit
the liability of the Trustee.
54 Tenth, the proper
construction I have identified is not illusory. The Associate Judge found, in
the alternative, that cl 8.1(l)
is illusory. But this was based upon her
Honour’s alternative finding that cl 8.1(l) limited the
Trustee’s liability.
The Associate Judge found it was illusory as it gives
a discretion to the Trustee to make a payment. Clause 8.1(l) is not illusory,
based upon the proper construction I have set out. I have already referred to
the fact that the Lender may have a right to be subrogated
Trustee’s own right of indemnity.
of subrogation refers to the substitution of one party for another, such that
the party that has been substituted to ‘stand
in the shoes’ of the
other can acquire and enforce the rights of the other party against a third
O’Bryan J expanded
upon the right of a creditor to be subrogated to a trustee’s indemnity in
There appears to be no reason in
principle why a creditor must pursue his common law rights to judgment before he
will be allowed
to be subrogated to the trustees’ indemnity against the
estate. It is one thing to refuse him an order for administration as
a matter of
discretion if no more appears than the facts of the debt, but if he has demanded
payment from his debtor and has failed
to receive payment and the circumstances
are such as to lead to the reasonable conclusion that a judgment, if obtained,
fruitless, it would be a harsh and unnecessary rule that required him
first to proceed to
Agusta Pty Ltd v Provident Capital Ltd
the New South Wales Court of
Appeal said:
basis on which equity thus protects the unpaid creditors lies in the right to be
subrogated to the debtor-trustee's own right
to resort to the trust
It is pertinent to quote, in that connection, the following
passage at para 21–38 of
Lewin on Trusts
(18th ed, 2008,
J Mowbray, L Tucker, N Le Poidevin and E J F Simpson
Although unsecured creditors and
other claimants do not have a direct claim against the trust property in respect
of unsecured liabilities
incurred by trustees in the administration of the
trust, and cannot levy execution upon trust property they may by subrogation
a right to stand in the place of the trustee and enforce their liabilities
against the trust property to the extent that the trust
will be so entitled.
“right” of subrogation might perhaps be better viewed as a
“remedy” of subrogation (P W Young, C Croft
(2009) at 868). That characterisation seems appropriate
in a case such as the present where equity would allow creditors with an
unsatisfied money judgment at law to bring proceedings in which the creditors,
for their own benefit, asserted in respect of the
trust property in the
trustee's hands, the beneficial interest enjoyed by the trustee by virtue of the
right of indemnity.
Boscawen v Bajwa
[1995] EWCA Civ 15
[1996] 1 WLR 328
at 335, in a passage approved by the
High Court in
Bofinger v Kingsway Group Ltd
[2009] HCA 44
Millett LJ described the foundation of subrogation as an equity that arises
from the conduct of the parties on well-settled principles
and in defined
circumstances which make it unconscionable for the defendant to deny the
proprietary interest claimed by the plaintiff.
In the situation under
discussion, it is unconscionable for the trustee to retain for itself the
preferred beneficial interest in
trust assets when it is the unsatisfied debts
of the trustee to the creditors that gives rise to that interest of the trustee.
trustee therefore cannot deny the right of the creditors to the benefit of
preferred beneficial interest.
74 The trustee will be compelled to deal
with the preferred beneficial interest for the benefit of the unpaid creditors
and, in order
to give a particular creditor the fruits of that beneficial
interest, equity will appoint a receiver, thereby facilitating a sale
property and ensuring that the proceeds, having been brought under the control
of the court, are, to the appropriate extent,
put into the hands of the
creditors entitled by subrogation rather than the hands of the trustee: see, for
Levasseur v Mason & Barry
[1891] UKLawRpKQB 65
[1891] 2 QB 73
[1893] UKLawRpKQB 44
[1893] 1 QB 648
Re Marquis of Anglesey
[1903] UKLawRpCh 136
[1903] 2 Ch 727
at 731. The
creditor thereby obtains equitable execution of the
also stated by McPherson J in
General Credits Ltd
v Tawilla Pty Ltd
The trustee has the right to
indemnity out of the trust assets in respect of liabilities properly incurred in
the affairs of the trust;
and the claim of creditors in equity to be subrogated
to that right has often been recognized...But the creditors’ claim
necessarily
depends on the existence of a right exercisable by the trustee to be
indemnified... If the liability incurred by the trustee was
not authorized or
properly incurred; or if, through some misapplication of trust assets, the
trustee is in debit on the trust accounts,
no right of indemnity can exist, nor
any claim to subrogation arise in favour of a
creditor...
right of subrogation is a remedy.
59 In this case,
the Lender has proceeded to apply for a judgment debt and has not, at least
presently, sought to be subrogated to
the Trustee’s indemnity against the
Trust Fund. This may be explained by the Lender taking a position that
cl 8.1(l) is unenforceable
as it is uncertain or, alternatively, that it is
illusory. But this does not mean that the Lender cannot seek such a remedy in
future upon obtaining a judgment
60 The Lender
submitted that cl 8.1(l) is illusory as it limits the
‘Trustee’s liability’ to actual payments out
of the Trust
Fund. I do not accept this submission. This is because, as I have already said,
cl 8.1(l) does not limit the Trustee’s
liability. I do accept that it
limits enforcement of the Trustee’s liability to the extent to which it is
satisfied out of
the Trust Fund. But I do not accept that this makes the Loan
Agreement and Guarantee illusory, as if the Trustee does not pay the
Lender may seek to be subrogated to the Trustee’s right of indemnity
against the Trust Fund to exercise the right
exoneration.
61 The Lender also submitted that even
if the Lender has a right of subrogation, it would not result in the Trustee
being ‘actually
indemnified’ within the meaning of cl 8.1(l) as
the right of subrogation is properly viewed as a remedy of the Lender to have
direct resort to the assets of the Trust, rather than an indemnification of the
Trustee. I do not accept this submission. It is contrary
to well established
authority. A person who is subrogated to another stands in their
The exercise by a
creditor of their remedy of subrogation means that the trustee would be
compelled to deal with the preferred beneficial
interest of the unpaid
To give the creditor
the fruits of that beneficial interest the Court, by exercising its equitable
to facilitate the sale of the trust
Clause 8.1(m)
specifically refers to the right of the Lender to appoint a receiver in relation
to the ‘property of the Trust’.
Lender submitted that even if the Lender has a right of subrogation,
cl 8.1(l) is illusory as the Trustee retains the power
and discretion to
distribute the assets of the Trust prior to repaying the loan. He submitted that
if the assets are exhausted then
there would be no repayment to the Lender in
‘practice’. I accept that the Trustee retains such a power. But this
not make cl 8.1(l) illusory. It was open to the parties to address and
avoid this risk by agreement. This does not mean that the
Loan Agreement and
Guarantee are illusory. In
ALYK (HK) Ltd v Caprock Commodities Trading Pty
, Black J said:
I accept that that possibility of distributions or other transactions that would
reduce the assets of the Fund ... is left open by
a construction of that
provision which allows its application at, inter alia, the date of an arbitral
award or judgment against Caprock.
it would readily be open to the
contracting parties to avoid the risk of transactions that reduced the amount
recoverable under an
arbitral award or judgment, for example, by expressly
providing that particular transactions that dissipated the assets of the Fund,
such as distributions to beneficiaries, transactions with related parties or
transactions not on arm’s length terms, would
be disregarded in applying
the limitation of liability in the Contract
The parties did not do so in
the present case, but that does not seem to me to be reason to strain to
construe the clause to avoid
a result which could have been avoided by a
straightforward contractual provision.
In some circumstances, a transaction
that reduced the amount that may be recovered under a judgment may also be open
to attack as,
for example, a breach of an implied term in a contract or a breach
of a duty of good faith, to the extent to which such a duty is
recognised in
Australian law. I accept that ... there may be limited scope for such duties
after the Contract was terminated. In
some circumstances, such a transaction may
be voidable on the liquidation of a company which undertook it, and I note that
highlighted the possibility that it may ultimately seek to wind up
Caprock in the course of this
application.
63 The Lender also submitted that even if
the Lender has a right of subrogation, cl 8.1(l) is illusory as such a
right is purely derivative
of the Trustee’s right of indemnity. He
submitted that the Trustee would not have a right of indemnity if, for example,
Trustee entered into the Loan Agreement otherwise than in the proper
performance of its duties as Trustee. As a result, he submitted
that the Trustee
has a discretion to render its right of indemnity nugatory, resulting in the
Lender’s right being worthless.
Again, it was open to the parties to
address and avoid this risk by agreement. This does not mean that the Loan
Agreement and Guarantee
are illusory by reason of
64 I accept the Lender’s
submission that he is not required to exercise his remedy of subrogation against
the Trustee prior
to seeking relief against the Guarantor. I refer to
cl 2.2 of the Guarantee.
65 Finally, the
Trustee’s liability to the Lender under the Loan Agreement is not limited
simply by reason of the Trustee entering
into the Loan Agreement and Guarantee
as a trustee.
This was not
pressed, in any event, on this appeal. A mere description that the person
contracts as ‘trustee’ is insufficient
to qualify the
trustee’s personal
Conclusions on findings of the Associate Judge
66 As a result of my findings concerning
the proper construction of cl 8.1(l) and its operation and effect, the Associate
(a) was incorrect in finding
cl 8.1(l) of the Loan Agreement was
(b) was incorrect in finding, in the
alternative, that cl 8.1(1) was illusory;
correct in finding, in the alternative, that cl 8.1(l) is a limitation on the
Lender’s recourse on enforcement of the
Trustee’s liability and not
a limitation on the liability of the Trustee.
The appellants’ defence to the Lender’s claim pursuant to the
Loan Agreement and Guarantee, alleged in paragraphs 39 to
45 of the further
amended statement of claim, has no real prospects of success
67 I refer to and adopt the Associate
Judge’s statement of the applicable law concerning an application for
summary judgment.
Clause 8.1(l) does not provide any defence for the appellants
to the Lender’s claim pursuant to the Loan Agreement and Guarantee,
alleged in paragraph 39 to 45 of the further amended statement of claim. It does
not limit the liability of the Trustee. The defence
has no real prospects of
success. The Lender is entitled to summary judgment against the appellants.
CONCLUSION AND ORDERS
68 There was no dispute between the
parties that if the Lender is entitled to summary judgment, he is entitled to
judgment in the
amounts set out in the order of the Associate Judge. I will
dismiss the appeal. My preliminary view is that the appellants should
Lender’s costs of the appeal, but I will hear the parties on this issue if
they wish to address it. The parties are
directed to provide a draft form of
order to Chambers by 4.00pm on 7 November 2025, marked up with any differences
between the parties.
Competition and Consumer
(Cth) sch 2.
Elders Trustee and
Executor Co Ltd v EG Reeves Pty Ltd
[1987] FCA 332
(1987) 78 ALR 193
, 253 (Gummow J)
Elders Trustee
The Lender relied upon
Austrust Pty Ltd v Astley
[1993] SASC 3969
(1993) 60 SASR 354
, 373 (Mullighan J), citing
Muir v City of Glasgow Bank and Liquidators
(1879) 4 App Cas 337
(Earl Cairns LC).
Helvetic Investment
Corporation Pty Ltd v Knight
(1984) 9 ACLR 773
, 774 (Glass JA, Samuels JA
agreeing) (
Elders Trustee
Investec Trust (Guernsey)
Ltd v Glenalla Properties Ltd
[2018] UKPC 7
[2019] AC 271
, 307 (Lord Hodge). See also at
344 (Lord Mance) and 356 (Lord Briggs).
(1879) 4 App Cas 337
[2025] VSCA 221
[101]–[102] (Beach, Walker and Kenny JJA) (citations omitted).
Fitzgerald v Masters
[1956] HCA 53
(1956) 95 CLR 420
, 426–7 (Dixon CJ and Fullagar J), 437 (McTiernan,
Webb and Taylor JJ).
[1942] VicLawRp 22
, 183 (O’Bryan J).
See Charles Mitchell and
Stephen Watterson,
Subrogation: Law and Practice
(Oxford University
Press, 2007) 3.
[1942] VicLawRp 22
[1942] VLR 177
[2012] NSWCA 26 (Barrett
JA, Campbell JA and Sackville AJA agreeing)
[1984] 1 Qd R 388
Mitchell and Watterson (n
[74] (Barrett JA, Campbell JA and Sackville AJA agreeing).
[2016] NSWSC 764
(emphasis added).
Super 1000 v
Pacific General Securities
[2008] NSWSC 1222
(2008) 221 FLR 427
, 446 [80] (White J);
Psevdos v Commonwealth Bank of Australia (No 2)
[2017] FCA 19
[59]–[61] (Charlesworth J).
(Glass JA, Samuels JA agreeing).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (473 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter