URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICCAT/1998/1324.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lawonnue PL v Port Phillip CC Lawonnue PL v Port Phillip CC [1998] VICCAT 1324 (31 December 1998)
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND NO: 1998/14394
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
NATURE OF APPLICATION
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING/OVERLAY CONTROLS
PLANNING CONTROLS
AMENDED PLANS
Impact on the amenity of neighbours
Liveability of proposed dwelling
(a) In her evidence Ms Hanson drew our attention to the internal layout of these proposed apartments and the opportunities for daylight
penetration for rooms located towards the center of each apartment.
Parking and Access
Exceedance of 9 meter height control
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND NO: 1998/14394
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
PERMIT APPLICATION NO 1267/97/C
HEARD AT MELBOURNE FROM TUESDAY 18 AUGUST 1998 TO WEDNESDAY 26 AUGUST
R J Ball - Senior Member
Jane Monk - Member
Applicant for Review/
Permit Applicant Lawonnue Pty Ltd
Responsible Authority City of Port Phillip
Respondents/Objectors Ian Macrae, Adair Bunnett, Peter
Wilson, Bruce Ward, Geoffrey Mills
Lynn Harrison, Dr Nick Cominos &
Patrick Casey & Others & National
Trust of Australia (Victoria)
Other Heritage Victoria and Liquor
Licensing Commission
NATURE OF APPLICATION
Application under S.77
Planning and Environment Act
(the Act) for
review of a decision
to grant a permit.
To grant a permit for the purposes of development and use of residential
apartments, demolition of certain existing buildings/structures,
internal and
external works to the Hotel Victoria building to be used for
café/restaurant and residential purposes and associated
parking, access,
landscaping, recreation and service areas and facilities.
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING/OVERLAY CONTROLS
Port Phillip Planning Scheme. The land is zoned Residential "C" with Urban
Conservation Area No 1 and Height Controls Area 0818
121 - 123 Beaconsfield Parade, Albert Park.
GROUNDS OF REFUSAL
1. The proposal is inconsistent with the objectives of the Urban Conservation
2. The proposal would lead to the demolition of a locally significant historic
building at 121 Beaconsfield Parade.
3. The proposal would lead to the demolition of significant sections of the
Victoria Hotel building.
4. The proposal is excessive in height and there are no grounds to permit the
variation to the extent sought.
5. The proposal would adversely affect the amenity of adjacent residential
properties.
6. The proposal fails to comply with the objectives and techniques of the Good
Design Guide.
7. The proposal represents an overdevelopment of the site.
8. The proposal would detract from a regionally significant historic building
and is unsympathetic to it.
9. The proposal is unsatisfactory in terms of bulk and mass.
10. The proposed height is unsympathetic to abutting and adjacent buildings.
11. The demolition proposed cannot be justified.
APPEARANCES
Mr C Canavan, QC and Mr J Gobbo, Barrister, instructed by Deacons Graham &
James, Solicitors, for the Permit Applicant. They
called as witnesses Mr Daryl
Jackson, Architect, Professor Roz Hansen, Planning Consultant of Hansen
Partnership, Mr David Whitney,
Planning Consultant of Perrot Lyon Matheson Pty
Ltd, Mr Bruce Trethowan, Specialist Heritage Consultant of Robert Peck von
Trethowan, Architects, Dr Jan Penney, Professional Historian, Ms Carol
Frank-Mas, Landscape Architect and Mr Russell Symons, Traffic
Engineering
Consultant of Ratio Consultants.
Mr I McP Pitt, Solicitor of Best Hooper, Solicitors, for the Responsible
Authority. He called as witnesses Mr James Holdsworth,
Manager of Urban Design
and Architecture for the City of Port Phillip and Mr Andrew Ward, Architectural
A number of Objectors made submissions on the following topics:-
- Mr Ian Macrae (Neighbourhood Character)
- Ms Adair Bunnett (Heritage Value)
- Mr Peter Wilson (Duart)
- Mr Bruce Ward (Carparking/Traffic)
- Mr Geoffrey Mills (Problems with Building)
- Ms Lyn Harrison (Amenity)
- Dr Nick Cominos and Mr Patrick Casey (Overlooking/Privacy)
Dr Miles Lewis, Architectural Historian was called as a witness by the
Objectors who supported their submissions with a number of
models, a video,
overhead projection slides, photographs and other documentation.
Written submissions were received from a Mr K A Wyatt and from the Conservation
Manager of the National Trust of Australia (Victoria).
The Registrar of the Planning List of the Tribunal also received from the
Office of the Minister for Planning and Local Government
on 7 August 1998 a
copy of a letter which the Minister apparently forwarded to Deacons Graham and
James the Solicitors for the Applicant.
The letter contained the following
paragraphs:-
"Council has recently adopted its new format planning scheme and submitted
it for my approval. The adopted scheme contains height
controls that have been
translated from the existing scheme and have not been strategically reviewed.
This was recognised by the
Advisory Committee/Panel appointed to hear
submissions to the scheme as it recommended that the controls should expire on
31 December
Council had adopted this expiry date and I understand that it has commenced
the review of height controls, which includes an assessment
of urban character
and heritage. Given this commitment, I would expect that any appeal heard
during the transition period between
adoption of the new scheme and its
approval, would take a wider strategic view of the issues associated with any
proposal and not
be limited by the translated controls."
PLANNING CONTROLS
The following is an extract from the written submission made by Mr Pitt,
Solicitor on behalf of the Responsible Authority:-
PLANNING CONTROLS
2.1 The appeal site is situate within a Residential C (South Melbourne)
zone, to which clause 126 applies.
2.1.2 Pursuant to clause 126-1.2 "flat" is "permit required".
2.2.1 Under the adopted new format planning scheme [VPP] the appeal site
would be situate within a Residential 1 zone in which zone
the use is "permit
not required".
2.2.2 A permit would be required to construct two or more dwellings on a lot
pursuant to VPP clause 32.01-4.
2.3.1 The appeal site is within an Urban Conservation Area No 1 to which
clause 154 applies.
2.3.2 Within that Area a permit is required, inter alia, to construct a
building and for a building to be demolished, removed or altered
externally.
2.3.3 Pursuant to clause 154-3 before deciding on an application mandatory
considerations include, as appropriate:
* the character and appearance of the building or works and their
significance to the architectural and historic character and appearance
* whether the location, bulk and appearance of the proposed building or
works will be in keeping with the character and appearance
of adjacent
buildings and the area.
2.4.1 The appeal site is situate within Height Control Area 0818 under
clause 144, which came into operation on 23 March, 1990.
2.4.2 Clause 144-3A makes specific reference to the special character of the
South Melbourne foreshore and adjacent area.
2.4.3 Pursuant to Table 2 to clause 144 the maximum height limit for the
site is 9 metres.
2.4.4 Pursuant to clause 144-3A a permit may be granted to exceed the
maximum height limits.
"...where this is done to achieve the following urban conservation
objectives:
to conserve and enhance areas of architectural and historic significance
and encourage development that is in keeping with them;
to match the façade, parapet, wall or roof height, scale and bulk
of adjacent buildings graded as either A or B in the South
Melbourne Urban
Conservation Study 1987;
to restore or reconstruct missing and altered architectural elements on
buildings graded A or B in the South Melbourne Conservation
Study 1987;
to develop new infill structures which complement but do not necessarily
imitate the existing buildings listed as being of heritage
significance in the
South Melbourne Urban Conservation Study 1987;
to ensure that any new structure is in harmony with the existing
streetscape and heritage area characteristics.
2.4.5 The Hotel Victoria is graded A under the South Melbourne Urban
Conservation Study 1987.
2.4.6 Duart is graded B under the South Melbourne Urban Conservation Study
1987. (As is the row of terraces adjoining to the west
at 113 - 120
Beaconsfield Parade).
2.5.1 Victoria Hotel is also listed in the Heritage Overlay Schedule under
clause 140A which makes that site subject to clause 6R
in the State
2.5.2 Under clause 6R-1 a permit is required to remove or demolish a
building and to construct a building unless, pursuant to clause
6R-3 a permit
for the development has been granted under the
Heritage Act 1995
2.6.1 Under the adopted VPP Scheme the Heritage Overlay under clause 43.01-1
and a Design and Development Overlay under clause 43.01-1
would apply.
2.6.2 Clause 43.03-1 is substantively the same, for present purposes, as
2.6.3 Under the Design and Development Overlay control in clause 43.02-2 a
permit is required to construct a building unless exempt
under the schedule."
AMENDED PLANS
Following a directions hearing on 17 April 1998, Mr R Byard, then a Deputy
President of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, directed
that the appeal
should be conducted on the basis of plans prepared by Daryl Jackson Pty Ltd,
Architects, (Revision A) which amended
the plans originally lodged with the
application to the Responsible Authority.
At this hearing the Permit Applicant sought to substitute a further set of
plans (Revision D) prepared by Daryl Jackson Pty Ltd,
Architects and after
having hearing evidence as to the amendments to the plans from Mr Daryl
Jackson, Architect the Objectors sought
a ruling from the Tribunal that the
hearing should be adjourned to enable the amended plans to be further
advertised to give the
Objectors an opportunity to consider the amendments in
detail and prepare themselves for an adjourned hearing.
After hearing submissions from all the parties the Tribunal announced that it
would permit the Applicant to substitute the amended
plans Version D for
Version A and stated that it did not believe that the substitution would unduly
prejudice the Objectors in the
presentation of their submissions or deny them
natural justice. The Tribunal stated that it believed that the details of the
were now clear to all the parties and that if necessary leave would be
given to the Objectors to make additional submissions after
the Responsible
Authority and the Permit Applicant had completed their submissions and
The hearing then proceeded to consider the permit application with the plans
prepared by Daryl Jackson Architects Pty Ltd (Revision
D) in substitution for
those lodged with the permit application.
REASONS FOR ORDERS
On day of September 1998 the Tribunal gave oral reasons for its
decision. The following is a transcript of those reasons:-
It is our conclusion based on the submissions and evidence and following our
inspection of the site and surrounding areas that this
appeal raised the
following principal issued for determination:-
. Whether by constructing buildings in excess of the 9 metre height control the
development will achieve the urban conservation objectives
listed at Clause 144
- 3A of the Port Phillip Planning Scheme.
. Whether it is appropriate to demolish Duart, a B graded building in the South
Melbourne Urban Conservation Study of 1987 given
its local significance and its
contribution to the special heritage character of the urban conservation area
within which it is located.
. The likely impact on the amenity of occupants of adjacent residential
properties, more particularly in terms of visual impact and
overlooking, having
regard to the Residential "C" Zone objectives, the purposes of an Urban
Conservation Area No 1 and the Ministerial
statement on Urban Design Objectives
for residential development to which the Good Design Guide does not apply.
. The of the proposed dwellings having regard to the objectives
in the Ministerial statement for design excellence
and the Residential "C" Zone
purpose of ensuring that adequate provision is made, among other things for
. The provision to be made for off-street parking and access to such parking
spaces and whether an unreasonable level of reliance
is made on kerb side
parking spaces.
Our principal finding in this appeal is that the development falls at the first
hurdle of the height control. Simply it is our conclusion
that the additional
height above 9 metres cannot be justified on the basis of achieving the urban
conservation objectives set out
in Clause 114-3A. Our reasons for reaching
this finding are set out in more detail later. By falling at the first hurdle
is arguably little need for setting out of detailed reasons in respect of
our findings on the other issues in dispute. However,
having regard to the
likelihood that as a result of this decision a future application may be made,
it is appropriate we believe
to set out briefly our findings in order that any
such future development may respond to those findings.
Despite the very interesting historical research undertaken by the various
conservation experts as well as Mr Peter Wilson's carefully
prepared submission
(a) We have been unable to find that Duart is a building which must be
preserved "for ever". We recognise however, as was admitted
by Ms Penny, that
a communities opinion about the cultural and architectural significance of
individual places can and does change
over time. A good example of this change
is that which has occurred in relation to the Werribee Mansion. When purchased
State the additions of the seminary which coincidentally were designed
by at least one of the members of the Kempson and Conolly
Partnership which
designed Duart. The intention was originally to demolish the seminary this
however is no longer the case and Heritage
Council now regards the seminary as
a culturally significant part of the whole site.
(b) We do say however that Duart makes an important contribution to this
seaside streetscape and as such we disagreed with Mr Trethowan's
opinion that
the existing building fails to "celebrate its beachside location". We see
little difference, other than in its setback,
between the way Duart addresses
Beaconsfield Parade and the Port Phillip Bay beyond and that of the terraces to
the west or indeed
many other dwellings along the parade. It may not
incorporate view seeking towers as later versions of the Queen and style appear
to have done but then not many other dwellings in Beaconsfield Parade have done
this either. We prefer Mr Lovell's analysis of the
buildings significance.
His analysis accompanied the original application and we find both that and the
report on the Victoria Hotel
to be comprehensive and in our opinion well
researched. As in a side it is somewhat extraordinary in our view that Mr
not called to give evidence. At page 12 of his report on Duart Mr
Lovell concludes, in relation to the level of significance of
the building
"The residence at 121 Beaconsfield Parade is considered to be significant at
a local level. The significance of the building relates
principally to its
role as one of a group of surviving late nineteenth and early twentieth century
elements in this stretch of Beaconsfield
Parade. Its historical association
with former Victorian Premier and long-time politician, Allan McLean, is of
interest and adds
to this local significance.
In terms of its external architecture, and when considered on an individual
basis, the building is of only limited interest, being
one of a relatively
large number of houses of this general type surviving in the metropolitan area
and elsewhere in Victoria.
In this context, the B grading accorded the building in the 1987 South
Melbourne Urban Conservation Study is considered to be warranted."
It is useful to refer also to Mr Lovell's findings in relation to the
historical significance of the Victoria Hotel. At page 16
of that report a
positive benefit is acknowledged from the fact that the block of Beaconsfield
Parade within which the hotel stands
and which includes Duart next door but
still conveys a strong sense of its history as a seaside residential
and recreational precinct and is substantially intact to its
century appearance."
Accordingly we find that Duart
contributes to the setting of the Victoria Hotel.
(c) It was Mr Pitt's submission that a building with the significance of Duart
should be removed only if any replacement building
made an equal or greater
contribution to the Urban Conservation Character of the Precinct.
Appended to Mr Pitt's submission was a decision by the former Administrative
Appeals Tribunal, comprised of Mr Russell Barton then
Deputy President and Mr
Gerard Sharkey, in
Royal United Group v City of St Kilda
1993/73854 (unreported). This was an appeal against the decision to refuse a
permit to demolish 82 Queens Road, an 1880's
villa, and to construct an eight
level building comprising 84 apartments over basement car parking. In that
case Mr Pitt also represented
the Responsible Authority and he called Mr
Trethowan to give expert evidence. In Trethowan's opinion - as set out in his
century buildings of St Kilda - under which study the
building had been Graded A despite not being a 20
where a graded building was proposed to be demolished any new development
should contribute to an equal or greater extent to the urban
character of the
precinct or streetscape in which it was located."
(e) We accept Mr Pitt's submission. We do not regard the proposed building -
particularly as manifested in Wing A - to contribute
a worthy architectural
substitute to Duart. We say this not only in relation to its impact on the
Beaconsfield Parade streetscape
- where rather than celebrating the we
wonder whether it might be better termed exploiting bay views - but also in
to its impact on other properties to the rear which form part of this
Urban Conservation Area No 1.
Mr Casey was concerned that the proposed development was not as respectful as
"Duart in terms of its contribution to the heritage
character of the
neighbourhood and we accept this submission. A person such as Mr Casey who has
purchased his dwelling mindful that
his and his neighbours dwellings are within
an urban conservation area should we consider be able to be confident that the
of the controls over demolition and all new development - including
external decoration - will be pursued. The purpose of the Urban
Conservation
Area Control is "to conserve and enhance areas of architectural and historic
significance and encourage development
that is in keeping with them."
(f) The Report of the independent panel which considered the Victoria Planning
provisions (VPP) former, Port Phillip Planning Scheme
- an extract of which was
included among Ms Hanson's appendices - made eloquent reference between
maintaining the heritage character
of an area where this has been recognised in
statutory controls, and the maintenance of urban character in a more general
The following relevant extracts are from pages 34 and 35 of that
"The difficulty is that the quest to maintain a range of choice (in dwelling
confused with the issue
of maintaining urban character and the issue of urban character is being
confused further by frequently acquainting
it with heritage
character....
Maintaining urban character is not synonymous with maintaining existing
building stock. Maintaining urban character pre supposes
change, but change
which respect the characteristics and elements which produce the evident
character of the place.
Maintaining heritage character pre supposes that
change will be
. Most frequently it is the existing building stock which
contributes to the heritage character of an area. Buildings, either
individually
or collectively, will have a heritage significance which should be
conserved and enhanced. For this reason, there are controls over
places in respect of demolition alterations or additions to buildings to ensure
that the heritage significance of heritage
places (be they individual buildings
or precincts) is not adversely affected. This is not to say that new buildings
cannot be constructed
in greater heritage places,
but greater respect
and restraint will usually be required than in other locations
Impact on the amenity of neighbours
(a) We have said already that as a replacement for Duart the proposed
development does not make an equal or greater contribution
to the heritage
character of this urban conservation area. The scale and monolithic block like
character fails to respond, in our
opinion, to the pattern or rhythm of
development within the precinct. A dramatic illustration of this was provided
by Dr Cominos
before and after architectural models.
(b) Be even in the absence of this area being an urban conservation area we
would have found that the visual impact in terms of a
monolithic block like
structure would have an inappropriate addition to this Residential "C" Zone.
The Ministerial statement in response
to the report of the advisory committee
appointed to review development controls techniques to achieve good built form
outcomes - the essence of which statement is now to be found within
the Clause 19-03 of the VPP State Policy Framework. The relevant
principals of context and consolidation of are for development to take
into account the natural, cultural and strategic
context of its location and
for new development to contribute to the complexity and diversity of the built
environment. We could
find nothing in either Mr Jackson or Ms Hanson's
analysis of context which would justify a building of this magnitude
interfacing
in the manner proposed in the abutting residential precinct.
(c) There was substantial concern also with the extent of window and balcony
openings on the north and part of the west facing facades
and the prospect of
overlooking to the two dwellings in Kerferd Road, Phillipsons Street and
Ashworth Street. Whilst we agree that
the perception of overlooking given the
seeming five storey high wall of overlooking opportunities which this
development presents,
we find on analysis that actual overlooking, due to the
nature and dimensions of nearby properties is not as extensive as might first
appear. We are confident that with careful attention such as suggested by Mr
Morrison the angle of vision for residents of any proposed
development of this
site could deflective above and beyond any neighbouring rear yards.
Liveability of proposed dwelling
(a) In her evidence Ms Hanson drew our attention to the internal layout of these proposed apartments and the opportunities for daylight
penetration for rooms located towards the center of each apartment.
In order to maximise the number of dwellings with a sea view each dwelling is
to have a single area glazing facing Beaconsfield Parade
- one per dwelling
within Wing A - and, which window is to provide light to the main living room
and kitchen and then some 24 metres
back from this window is the rear facing
bedroom window. The center of each of dwelling in Wing A is proposed to be lit
by two small
light wells having dimensions of 1.2m
and 1.2 x 2
metres. Under cross-examination by Ms Hanson admitted that this provision for
light and ventilation to the center of
these dwellings was "a bit mean". We
would go further and suggest that it is "very mean" and we do not accept Ms
Hanson's suggestion
that by widening the court out to the offers
much of a solution given that for some dwellings this light and ventilation
must travel through five storeys before reaching the air or light.
The design principles set out at Clause 19-03 of the VPP's and as introduced by
the aforementioned Ministerial statement, include
principals for energy and
resource efficiency and for architectural quality as follows:-
. all building, subdivision and engineering works should promote more efficient
use of resources and energy efficiency.
. new development should aspire to the high (sic) standards in architecture and
urban design.
At a time when designers are being encouraged to give greater consideration to
daylight penetration in buildings and the energy
efficiency of such designs it
is extraordinary we consider that buildings with what can only be described as
century internal lighting are being designed here. Indeed we
would go so far as to say that the 19
century dwellings within
this area given their one and two storey heights have far better provision for
lighting towards the center
of the dwelling through the use of light courts
than is suggested for this development. Accordingly we seriously question
the advantages of a single window per apartment facing the bay
outweighs the undesirable internal lighting provisions made.
Parking and Access
The evidence demonstrated that the availability of kerb side parking spaces for
persons resident within this neighbourhood is at
a premium. This is due
primarily to the fact that most dwellings within this area make no provision
for off street parking and must
therefore rely upon kerb side parking spaces.
Given car ownership levels and the ratio of dwelling frontages to kerb side
it is understandable that persons within this neighbourhood should be
concerned at the prospect of greater demands being placed upon
the already
limited number of kerb side parking spaces. The availability of kerb side
parking is exacerbated by the proximity of
this neighbourhood to the popular
South Melbourne beaches.
The proposed development provides a vastly superior ratio of off street car
parking spaces to dwelling units than is the norm within
this neighbourhood.
We are satisfied, given the relatively small size of these dwellings,
particularly those within the fabric of
the existing hotel, that the provision
to be made for residents is sufficient. It would be fair to say that most of
the concerns
raised in relation to parking related to the provision to be made
for visitors to both the apartments and the restaurant which will
replace the
It was Mr Symons evidence that for the 9 one bedroom apartments and the 49
larger apartments a total of 83 off street car parking
spaces would be required
for residents at a ratio of 1 space for a 1 bedroom apartment and 1.5 spaces
for larger apartments. Given
the 89 off street car spaces this would leave 6
available for use by restaurant staff with the result that any visitors to the
would be required to park on the street. In Mr Symons opinion a credit
for the existing potential for kerb side parking demands
generated by the hotel
should be applied and that having regard to this the net result would be a
reduction in demand for kerb side
parking. The only flaw to this analysis is
the fact that hotel patrons are at present restricted in the places to which
park for more than half an hour or at maximum one hour. It was Mr
Symons evidence that high density residential development sites
within parts of
the City of Port Phillip - namely St Kilda Road and Queens Road - had been
observed to be higher than that suggested
in the Good Design Guide which for 58
apartments leads to a potential visitor kerb side demand of 29 spaces at a
ratio of 0.5 spaces
per residential unit compared to 0.2 spaces as suggested in
the Good Design Guide.
Persons resident in these apartments would presumably be as eligible as any
other residents of Albert Part for resident parking permits
which enable them
to ignore the one hour and half hour restrictions which hotel patrons and for
that matter metropolitan beach
, must observe.
Would this change from hotel patrons to visitors associated with such future
apartments make a material alteration to the availability
to kerb side parking
within this neighbourhood? Having given some consideration to this issue we
are of the opinion that whilst
it would make some change it would not be an
unreasonable change given the potentially greater reduction in hotel patrons
proposal provides for.
Exceedance of 9 meter height control
Clause 114 - 3A of the Port Phillip Planning Scheme is entitled South Melbourne
Foreshore Areas. The purpose of this Clause is:-
"* To recognise the special character of the South Melbourne Foreshore and
adjacent area.
* To reinforce the objectives of the South Melbourne Urban Conservation
Study, 1987.
* To protect and enhance the built form and streetscape character of the
South Melbourne Foreshore and adjacent areas.
* To specify the maximum building height for all new development, works and
alterations in the South Melbourne Foreshore Area."
Under this amendment the South Melbourne Foreshore bounded by Beaconsfield
Parade, Pickle Street, Frazer Street and an in land line
formed by Cameron
Place, Beaconsfield Lane and Ashworth Street is included in a Height Control
Area which controls apply in addition
to existing Urban Conservation Controls
in the area. These controls were introduced by amendment RL 63 approved by the
for Planning and Environment on 13 March 1990. The explanatory report
to Amendment RL 63 notes that:-
"Three separate height control areas (are proposed, with maximum height
levels of 6 metres, 9 metres or 14 metres the new
development.........Developments
may be allowed to exceed the set maximum
height limits where this is done to achieve urban conservation objectives, eg
to match the
height of an adjoining building of heritage significance.
The new controls are intended to ensure that new development is compatible
with the scale and character of existing buildings and
streetscapes identified
as being of architectural or historic importance."
Except for a small area between the Mount School and Mills Street where a
14 metre height limit is introduced the majority
of the properties within this
Height Control Area is limited to 9 metres with, for the most part, 6 metres
being applicable at the
Clause 144-3A provides that:-
"A permit may be granted for a development to exceed the maximum height
where this is done to achieve the following urban conservation
objectives:-
To conserve and enhance areas of architectural and historic significance
and encourage development that is inkeeping with them.
to match the façade, parapet, wall or roof height, scale and bulk
of adjacent buildings
graded as either A or B in the South Melbourne
Urban Conservation Study 1987
To restore or reconstruct missing and altered architectural elements on
buildings graded A or B in the South Melbourne Urban Conservation
To develop new
infill structures which complemen
do not necessarily imitate
existing buildings listed as being of
heritage significance
in the South Melbourne Urban Conservation
Study, 1987.
To ensure that
any new structure
is in harmony with
the existing streetscape and heritage area.
(Tribunal's emphasis).
It was Mr Canavan's submission that this Clause should be read to mean that
only one of the listed urban conservation objectives
needed to be met in order
to justify an exceedence of the 9 metre height control. In support of his
contention he relied upon a
legal opinion from Mr Pitt's own firm to the City
of Port Phillip which was provided in relation to Appeal No 1997/72859
(unreported)
R & J McIntyre and Others v City of Port Phillip and Riddle
Radcliff, Architects
. That opinion sought to make a distinction between a
requirement to meet "objectives" as set out in a scheme control and a
requirement
to meet three conditions for the grant of a permit. It concludes
"The better interpretation of Clause 144-3A is that Council has the
discretion to grant a permit for a development which exceeds the
maximum height
limit provided one or more of the urban conservation objectives set out is
The opinion noted also how many instances it would not be possible to satisfy
for example, * points 3, 4 and 5 at the same time where
a new structure was
opposed as opposed to the restoration or reconstruction of missing and altered
architectural elements on an existing
building graded A or B. Referring to the
decision of the then Tribunal in
Brown v Frankston City Council
Best Hooper Solicitors pointed out that in relation to the
objectives of a planning scheme the Tribunal had noted that it would be
that proposals would be consistent with all objectives of a scheme. The
Tribunal said that "
the important consideration was whether the proposal
generally conformed with one or more of the relevant objectives."
Mr Pitt, arguing against Mr Canavan on this point, contended that whilst it
might be not necessary for all objectives to be met he
contended that all
relevant objectives need to be met and that it would be distorting that
language of the Clause to attempt to include
within the phrase "
achieve the following urban conservation objectives the words done to achieve
at least one of the following urban conservation
objectives."
In our opinion Mr Pitt's approach is more supportive of the purposes the Clause
which as we said is to reinforce the existing predominant
build form scale and
to only allow variation for urban conservation reasons. Adopting Mr Canavan's
approach one might be found to
be endorsing something which whilst complying
with one objective failed to meet another. We believe there is a distinction
drawn between justifying an exceedence in the height controls and
demonstrating a warrant for those height controls to be exceeded.
In our view
the better interpretation is that the Clause required a proponent to
demonstrate that there is a warrant, for urban
conservation reasons, to exceed
the height the control.
Mr Canavan and the witnesses called by him and Mr Gobbo, sought to demonstrate
that this development should be permitted exceed the
9 metre height control for
the following reasons:-
1. The boulevard character of Beaconsfield Parade would be better achieved is a
uniform built form edge of about 5 storeys was to
be constructed to its inland
2. That the visual prominence and landmark qualities of the Victoria Hotel
, that is to say that the hotel will be made more
visually prominent and have greater landmark qualities, by the addition of Wing
A as this would make the building read as a larger element overall within the
Beaconsfield Parade streetscape. In respect to this
latter issue our attention
was drawn to the inter war addition to the George Hotel in Fitzroy Street, St
Kilda which, in Mr Trethowan's
opinion, had added to the visual prominence of
that structure giving it more of a landmark quality within Fitzroy Street.
We could find nothing in the material presented to us to justify the contention
that a five storey built form edge to this beach
side boulevard was either an
original 19
century design intention or a design objective under
current planning policies.
It appears to us that Mr Jackson in making his claim for a higher built form
edge placed excessive reliance on the findings of the
South Melbourne Urban
Conservation Study of 1987 - which we note was prepared by Mr Lovell's firm -
where in relation to the heritage
significance of Beaconsfield Parade it is
noted at page 6/8 of Volume 3 as follows:-
"Beaconsfield Parade is a component of a boulevard that originally extended
from Port Melbourne to Ellwood. Since the section through
St Kilda and Ellwood
has been landbound, the section from Frazer Street to Pickle Street is an
important major component that retains
its original design concept. The
location and layout of such a major beach promenade is reminiscent of the beach
resort of the South
Coast of England, for example Brighton."
We find that this reference is more to the actual geographical and physical
qualities of the parade in relation to its foreshore
location than to the
buildings which front it. Indeed under the heading significance of
Beaconsfield Parade it is noted that it
the basalt wall and broad
pavement provide a promenade that clearly evokes the period in which it was
constructed. The direct view
of and access to, the beach is of primary
importance to Beaconsfield Parade."
Accordingly we find the significance of Beaconsfield Parade as a boulevard to
lie with its physical and geographic qualities rather
than with any building
height or style which abuts it. If the height of an appropriate built form
edged to the boulevard is to be
suggested then in our opinion it is the height
suggested in the height controls of Clause 114-3A which, as demonstrated by the
of Ms Hanson arose following the preparation in 1988 by the South
"Foreshore Master Plan Committee"
in their Report Foreshore -
Height Control Proposal which translated into Amendment RL 63 that introduced
Clause 114 - 3 (or Clause
126-3A as it then was to the South Melbourne Planning
There was no disagreement that the visual prominence and landmark quality of
the Victoria Hotel contributes to its heritage significance.
Indeed Heritage
Victoria's statement of significance for the Hotel includes:-
"The Victoria Hotel is of architectural and historic significance
A prominent and substantial reminder of the recreational activities along
Beaconsfield Parade in the 1880's;
A substantial hotel which is which is an outstanding example of 1880s
hotel architecture;
Important illustration of the prominence of hotels in a late nineteenth
century community;
Rare example of an octagonal open tower.
Important surviving example of the work of architect Richard
We do not accept the opinion of Mr Trethawon that the new buildings, by
increasing the overall size of the structures associated
with the hotel, will
the visual prominence of the hotel. Rather, we adopt Mr
Holdsworth's opinion that the prominence and thus significance of the hotel
compromised
not complemented by these new works. This, in our
opinion is contrary to the Urban Conservation Objectives set out at Clause 144
- 3A. We agree with Ms Bunnett's submission that the additions to the George
Hotel provide an example of how a larger structure
attached to something which
may once have been visually prominent can serve to diminish or belittle the
original component. Having
inspected the George Hotel it is our opinion that
the original structure now has the appearance of a tact on or secondary
Not only do the new additions fail to complement the hotel and thus the
historic significance of the area with which is dominated
by it, they also fail
as was put by Mr Holdsworth, to response sympathetically to the terraces next
door to the west and to the dwelling
at 202 Kerferd Road.
We agree with Mr Holdsworth that in order not to compete with the prominence of
the hotel and to respect the abutting buildings the
development should be
reduced overall by at least one storey - including at the west end adjacent to
the terraces and at the north
east and adjacent to No 202 Kerferd Road. We do
not go so far as to say that in Wing A anything above second floor level should
be set further back than the ground and first floors but we do accept Mr
Holdsworth's opinion that the whole of Wing A - including
any balconies -
should be set back from the street. Such a set back should serve to reveal
sufficient of the hotel's western wall
to enable it to read as an individual
structure. It would also provide a more appropriate setting for the terraces
to the west.
In are opinion such a frontage set back should be located between
the first and second windows in the hotel's western wall.
The visual scale of Wing A is of concern also in that, despite its vertical and
horizontal divisions, it has a monolithic quality.
As was demonstrated by Mr
Geoffrey Mills' analysis of visual bulk, this causes the structure to read as
an out of scale element
in the streetscape and could compete with the hotel for
prominence. This might be able to be addressed by a more clear division
structure into two parts for example by the use of a four storey and a three
storey section which could at the same time provide
some transition between the
terraces and the hotel. It may be possible also, as was suggested by Mr
Holdsworth, to deal with this
issue of visual scale, by the application of a
heavier masonry base for the lower façade.
Our final issue is that of the weight to be given to the permit issued by
Heritage Victoria for that part of the proposed development
occupying the
actual hotel site.
Mr Canavan submitted that such permits, and the fact that pursuant to Clause 6R
of the State Section, the issue absolves the applicant
from the need to obtain
a planning permit pursuant to the individual building controls of Clause 140A,
is evidence for the fact that
the new buildings do not detract from the
heritage significance of the hotel. He contended that as a result the Tribunal
was relived
of any obligation to assess the new buildings and works against the
Urban Conservation Area No 1 controls of Clause 154 - particularly
buildings and works on the hotel site itself.
We accept that some weight must be given to Heritage Victoria's permit due to
the acknowledged status and expertise of that body.
We disagree however that
we are prevented from making our own assessment pursuant to Clause 154. The
matters to had regard to when
assessing a development against the Urban
Conservation Area Controls are quite different from those to be taken into
account by Heritage
Victoria - particularly in the absence of the hotel being
part of a heritage precinct as can now be provided for under the
We believe a distinction can be drawn between the assessment of the heritage
impact of these new buildings and works on the architectural
and historic
significance of the hotel itself and the broader impact on the architectural
and heritage significance of the area within
which the hotel and terraces are
located. We have found that the hotel's visual prominence is an important
element of the character
and appearance of the area and we find that it is
important in order to conserve and enhance this area of architectural and
significance that this quality be maintained and not eroded.
The order of the Tribunal is that the decision under review is affirmed and no
permit must be granted.
SENIOR MEMBER
RJB:PF 3108
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter