URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1611.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Eaton v Victorian WorkCover Authority [2025] VCC 1611 (7 November 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
LAW DIVISION
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
SERIOUS INJURY
Case No. CI-23-06334
NATHAN EATON
VICTORIAN WORKCOVER AUTHORITY
HIS HONOUR JUDGE PURCELL
DATE OF HEARING
14 and 15 October 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT
7 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Eaton v Victorian WorkCover Authority
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1611
REASONS FOR
Subject: ACCIDENT COMPENSATION
Catchwords: Work accident – burn injury to the hip – work
Legislation Cited:
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Cases Cited:
Advanced Wire & Cable Pty Ltd v Abdulle
[2009] VSCA
State of New South Wales v Moss
[2000] NSWCA 133
(2000) 54 NSWLR 536
Margripilis-Hampton v Spendwatt Pty Ltd
[2022] VSCA 15
Judgment: Application dismissed.
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr A B Ingram KC with
Mr P Haddad
Slater & Gordon
For the Defendant
Mr S Scully
Wisewould Mahony
HIS HONOUR:
Introduction
is an application for a “serious injury” brought by Nathan Eaton
(“the plaintiff”) pursuant to s325 of
Workplace Injury
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
2013 (“the WIRC Act”).
plaintiff seeks the leave of the Court to commence a common law proceeding for
both pain and suffering and pecuniary loss damages.
plaintiff is now 25 years of age, having been born in October 2000. A few weeks
after his 17
birthday, on 25 October 2017, he was working at a
fast-food restaurant when a pressure cooker released hot steam and hot water,
him to suffer a burn injury to the area in the vicinity of his left hip
(“the accident”).
at the date of the accident, in addition to part-time work at the fast-food
restaurant, the plaintiff was undertaking a Victorian
Certificate of Applied
Learning (“VCAL”) course as part of his ambition to become a
the accident, the plaintiff did not return to the fast-food restaurant, but he
returned to complete a Certificate II in
Mechanics as part of the VCAL course
and then went on to obtain and complete an apprenticeship as a mechanic. He now
light vehicle mechanic. To his credit, he works full-time, including
significant overtime. For the last financial year, he earned
$109,068.90
the hearing, the plaintiff claimed that he had suffered a “serious”
physical injury within the meaning of s325(1) of
the WIRC Act by way of a
“permanent serious impairment or loss of body function”. Before the
hearing, he had also claimed
to have suffered a “serious” injury by
way of disfigurement or by way of a mental disturbance, but those claims were
plaintiff claimed that because of the accident he suffered ongoing impairment
consequences referable to the physical burn injury,
and that the consequences
were “very considerable”.
focus of the hearing was on the claim for pecuniary loss. Although the
plaintiff did not abandon the claim for “serious
injury” based on
pain and suffering consequences, he effectively conceded that he could not
establish “very considerable”
pain and suffering
consequences.
plaintiff focused on the fact that he was under the age of 26 years when injured
and how that was relevant to his application
for leave to commence a proceeding
for pecuniary loss.
is well established that if a plaintiff obtains the leave of the Court to
commence a proceeding for pecuniary loss damages, then
the plaintiff is also
entitled to commence a proceeding for pain and suffering
plaintiff’s claim for pecuniary loss damages was based on the contention
that his ambition in life from his early teenage
years was to qualify as a heavy
vehicle diesel mechanic and to seek “fly-in fly-out”
(“FIFO”) work in the
mining industry in Western Australia.
plaintiff submitted that the evidence established that because of the burn
injury he could no longer pursue FIFO heavy diesel
work in Western Australia.
He highlighted in his affidavits and during his oral evidence the claimed
difficulties he has even with
light mechanical work, and working in hot
environments,
in support of the argument that FIFO
work as a heavy diesel mechanic was now beyond his physical capabilities. He
highlighted the
evidence of the high earnings that could be achieved in FIFO
work. He said that the FIFO scenario had been “locked
by the demonstrated
evidence. He said that the evidence he had provided went beyond the field of
speculation about FIFO work to
a point where he had established a very
considerable pecuniary loss.
plaintiff accepted that if the Court rejected the FIFO scenario, then he
“probably wouldn’t get the 40 per
defendant broadly contended that the plaintiff had not established that he had
suffered a “serious injury”.
the defendant contended that the evidence established that the plaintiff had
recovered from the burn with no ongoing pain.
Related to this submission, was
an attack on the reliability of the plaintiff, when some of his evidence was
compared to the objective
evidence in medical records from treating
practitioners. Later in closing submissions, the defendant put it bluntly and
its primary submission was “that there’s nothing wrong
the defendant contended that the plaintiff had not established “very
considerable” pain and suffering consequences.
It highlighted what the
plaintiff had retained by way of ability to engage in day-to-day activity, as
compared to what, if anything,
he had lost, in support of this submission.
in what it said was really the “heart of the
it submitted that the
plaintiff’s claim for pecuniary loss based on the FIFO scenario was
“far-fetched”
required the Court to embark on an extensive hypothetical exercise, such that
the Court could not be satisfied that the plaintiff
had satisfied the test for
pecuniary loss serious injury.
there are two issues for resolution.
is the assessment of the evidence to determine what, if any, ongoing impairment
and impairment consequences the plaintiff has
from the burn injury. If, as the
defendant contended, there is nothing wrong with the plaintiff, then obviously
his claim fails.
if there are ongoing impairment consequences, whether on the evidence the
plaintiff has established a “serious injury”.
This issue further
distils down to whether the plaintiff had proven the FIFO scenario to establish
pecuniary loss “serious
into each of the issues is an assessment of the credit or reliability of the
plaintiff, where the defendant raised that as an
consideration.
Legal Principles
this proceeding the legal principles are mostly not in dispute.
plaintiff has the overall onus to establish an ongoing compensable injury and
then to establish the ongoing impairment and impairment
consequences from such
respect to pain and suffering, the plaintiff must establish “very
considerable” impairment consequences.
because the plaintiff was a worker under the age of twenty-six at the date of
the accident, to succeed for pecuniary loss he
must establish pursuant to
s325(2)(e)(ii) of the
Act that he has a loss of earning capacity
which will be productive of financial loss of 40 per cent or more on a permanent
statutory formula prescribed for under s325(2)(e)(i), (f) and (g) of the
Act does not apply and so the analysis of loss of earning capacity
is to be undertaken on common law principles as set out in cases
State of New South Wales v
onus is on the plaintiff to establish based on the evidence that he has the
requisite 40 per cent loss. But, as was confirmed
by the Court of Appeal in
Margripilis-Hampton v Spendwatt Pty
the assessment in
accordance with common law principles is one that may often have to be made
based on imperfect evidence and may
require broad assessments.
the enquiry is directed to the plaintiff’s residual earning capacity, and
the earning capacity that he would have had
had he not been
The plaintiff’s evidence
The plaintiff’s affidavit evidence
plaintiff swore or affirmed a total of four affidavits that he relied on in
support of this application.
his first affidavit sworn 26 June
the plaintiff described
how the accident occurred and his ongoing consequences. He described how at
times he either had pain or
discomfort from the burn injury and “There are
no times when I feel just
He described
having altered sensation over the injured area. He described scarring of the
left hip that was sensitive, painful
and annoying when he wore pants and a belt.
He said he got a lot of discomfort at night when trying to sleep. He said that
worse in summer and was 5/10 in winter and 8/10 in summer. He described
some restrictions for recreational activity such as basketball.
plaintiff set out claimed restrictions for work. He said:
work as a mechanic can be strenuous. Most of the time I just put up with it. In
summer it worse. Strenuous jobs like putting
in a transmission are quite
painful. I have my hands up extended and it feels like I’m tearing my
skin. I tried to avoid this
at the start, but I have responsibilities and
can’t escape it. I just take the
plaintiff then swore a further affidavit on 24 May 2024. In that affidavit he
described how the scarring remained the same.
By then he was working six days a
week. He said he continued to have pain and discomfort daily from the scarring
and that it remained
sensitive. He described how wearing pants and a belt
irritated the scarring.
the second affidavit the plaintiff described working through the pain every day.
He described pain as 3-4/10 every day, probably
“better described as
discomfort at times – but I’m constantly noticing
He described that
every few days he would take Panadol and on a bad day would take four tablets.
He described having a bad day
perhaps twice a week.
to the pecuniary loss “serious injury” application, the plaintiff
then swore a third affidavit on 5 June
where for the first time he
mentioned the FIFO work. In that affidavit, the plaintiff described how he had
a conference with a barrister
on 4 June 2024 and was asked whether the work he
was doing as a mechanic was what he had wanted to do before he was injured. The
plaintiff said that was not a question he could recall being asked in the
context of his case. He then said:
“From around the age of 14
years, I had plans to be a heavy diesel mechanic. I spent a lot of time from
that age researching
on the topics of heavy diesel mechanics and the mines. This
led me to commence the mechanical trades course I was performing at the
my injury. My plan was to get an apprenticeship as a fly-in fly-out
”) worker in the Western Australian mines and then drop
out of school. I wanted to set myself up to buy my first home at a young
When my injury occurred, the pain set me back. I decided to stay at school
longer as my pain was disrupting my ability to study and
perform mechanical
work. I continued trade school with difficulty. My mechanical trades course
involved the necessary components
to obtain a heavy diesel mechanical
qualification. During my studies, I came to see many heavy diesel machinery
parts in person.
I also watched YouTube videos to get an idea of how physical
heavy diesel mechanical work is.
After the injury, I got to know a few students who were also passionate
seen heavy diesel parts in person, watched videos of the work being performed
and spoken with my peers, I formed the view
that heavy diesel mechanical work
was too difficult for me to perform due to the pain from my scarring. Whereas my
current light
mechanical role is physical, many arduous tasks can be performed
by lifting the vehicles onto a hoist to avoid dragging and rubbing
my waist and
aggravating my injury. This is not possible in heavy diesel mechanics, as the
machines are too large to be hoisted –
the work is much heavier and more
arduous. The job also requires frequent climbing onto, into and under vehicles
(whilst handling
tools and equipment), requiring a lot of contact with the
torso. I could not perform that type of work, so I decided not to pursue
diesel mechanical work.
Had I not been injured, I most certainly would have pursued heavy diesel
mechanical work as a FIFO worker working on mining vehicles.
necessary qualifications for the work; the thing that stopped me was my injury
and the pain associated with the more physical
nature of that work.
Had I not been injured, I would have over 5 years’ experience in that
work by now and believe I would be earning in excess
of $200,000 per annum
(excluding superannuation) in such work. Whereas my present role generates me
$30 per hour as a base rate,
heavy diesel FIFO work pays around $80 to $100+ per
the third affidavit the plaintiff went on to say:
was able to return to work as a mechanic, my present role generates me less than
$100,000 per annum (exclusive of
superannuation). I am still saving a deposit to
buy my first home. I believe I would have a house by now if not for the injury.
Having regard to my vocational experience, educational history, and the
nature of my scarring injury (including pain and restrictions),
I believe I have
an incapacity for unrestricted work as a heavy diesel mechanic, in particular
due to my inability to perform the
inherent duties of such a role on a
merchantable, reliable and consistent basis. As a result, I believe my injury
has caused me to
suffer a 40% loss of earning
on the contents of the third affidavit, the plaintiff apparently amended his
serious injury application from pain and suffering
only, to include an
application for pecuniary loss serious injury. The details of that amendment
are not before the Court, but the
parties proceeded on the basis that a valid
amendment had been made and therefore no issue about that arises.
I shall get to when discussing the plaintiff’s oral evidence, part of the
defendant’s case was built around the fact
that it took the plaintiff
until the third affidavit to discuss FIFO work and how that supported its
contention that the prospect
of that work was not seriously entertained by the
plaintiff and was put forward as a speculative argument.
plaintiff then affirmed a fourth affidavit on 22 September
In that affidavit he set
out some limited evidence of treatment and of ongoing pain and suffering
consequences. More relevantly
“I confirm that I continue to work at my maximum
This involves:
(a) For the financial year ended 2023/2024, I earned $98,925 from person
exertion in my present employment as a motor vehicle mechanic;
(b) the financial year ended 2024/2025, I earned around $109,068.90 from
personal exertion in my present employment as a motor vehicle
mechanic, although
this amount is slightly higher than I would ordinarily earn as I have been
working more overtime due the departure
of the experienced colleagues, I
referred to at paragraph 10 above.
As deposed to at paragraph 8 and 9 of my Third affidavit, if I had not been
injured, I would have pursued heavy diesel mechanical
work at the mines. I would
have pursed employment which gave me the highest income. In my mind, that was
Western Australian work,
which is what I had planned.
I know from experience that the heavy diesel FIFO roles pay much better than
I presently earn. The only reason I did not pursue such
employment was due to my
injury. In particular, for the reasons deposed at paragraphs 6 and 7 of my
previous affidavit, namely that
such work was too physically arduous for me to
perform with my scarring condition.
Having regard to my vocational experience, educational history, and the
nature of my scarring injury (including pain and restrictions),
I believe I have
an incapacity for unrestricted work as a heavy diesel mechanic, in particular
due to my inability to perform the
inherent duties of such a role on a
merchantable, reliable and consistent basis.
As a result, I believe my injury has caused me to suffer a 40% loss of
earning capacity.”
The affidavit of plaintiff’s mother
addition to his affidavits, the plaintiff relied on an affidavit sworn by his
mother, Brooke Catania on 19 September
In that affidavit, Ms
Catania described how, from his early teenage years, the plaintiff was always
very hands on, displayed a love
for auto mechanics and signed up for a
school-based apprenticeship in Year 10, while working one day a week for a motor
Ms Catania said:
“From his mid-teenage years,
Nathan said that he wanted to do FIFO work so he could earn big money and set
himself up. A lot
of the kids talked about it and he started looking into it
quite seriously. I recall that he would watch YouTube videos of FIFO workers.
would often say that he is going to earn big money, get into his own home and
pay it off. He was very driven and a hard worker.
One of the big things that happened was that he stopped expressing an
interest in FIFO work, which before that time he talked about
regularly –
to anyone and everyone who would ask him about schooling and work plans.
Whilst Nathan is not a complainer, he still complains to me about a (sic) his
pain. He told me that he saw a pain specialist earlier
this year and that he is
now using tropical creams. He says that he continues to have a lot of pain from
work, especially at the
end of the day.
I think the injury has had a very significant and adverse impact on Nathan. I
have no doubt that if not for the injury he would have
done bigger and better
things, including FIFO work. In my view, it is due to the injury that he has not
pursued that potential career
The plaintiff is cross-examined
plaintiff was cross-examined about what he had said in his affidavits and to
some of the doctors.
in the cross-examination it was put to the plaintiff that there were times when
he did not feel any pain or discomfort around
the scarring and he said that was
He then agreed that he
occasionally had numbness, that the scarring remained sensitive and he could not
wear a belt, and that the
waistband of pants irritated the
plaintiff was then taken to some evidence in clinical records that were
ultimately tendered. The cross-examination took him back
in time to soon after
the accident, commencing with an attendance on Dr Salehi, a general practitioner
at the Mill Park Family Practice
on 3 December
Not surprisingly, the
plaintiff said he did not have any direct memory of that attendance and
commented that he was only seventeen
he was taken to an entry from Dr Salehi of 2 January 2018 in which the doctor
recorded “‘he has had no discharge/no
tenderness’”.
plaintiff was asked whether the record of Dr Salehi of 2 January 2018 was an
accurate reflection of what was going on at that
time and he said
the plaintiff was taken to another entry from Dr Salehi, this time dated 28
January 2018.
cross-examined about how at that attendance he was given a clearance certificate
for work to which he agreed with that but
said, “With some pain,
was then taken to another entry from Dr Salehi, this time on 26 February
where the doctor gave him
some advice about applying moisturiser and the like to the area of the burn. He
said he did that for about
was then taken to an entry from a Dr Ramasamy, also at the Mill Park Family
Practice, dated 29 March 2018.
Specifically, he was taken to Dr Ramasamy’s note that “the wound has
completely healed”. The plaintiff said physically
it would have looked
healed, but it is not.
he was cross-examined about histories given to medico-legal examiners,
commencing with an examination with Professor Vernon
Marshall on 27 March 2019.
He was taken to a history recorded by Professor Marshall that the burns took two
months to fully heal.
The plaintiff agreed that Professor Marshall’s
examination finding of a red and tender area over the left hip was a fair
of what was going on at that
It was then put to him
that he did not describe pain as such to Professor Marshall, to which he
responded he would have had “At
tenderness”.
cross-examiner then returned to the topic of what had been recorded by treating
practitioners, based on a report dated 2 August
2018 from Dr Philip Smith, a
general practitioner at the Andrew Place
Dr Smith had reported
that he first saw the plaintiff on 27 April 2018 and had seen him on a total of
4 occasions at the date of
the report.
Smith reported that the plaintiff’s current symptoms “are only
psychological” and that “he no longer experiences
any pain from the
physical burns”.
plaintiff said, “I don’t doubt that. I don’t get pain from the
physical burn itself. It is the damage it has
the proposition was put that by the time he first saw Dr Smith on 27 April 2018,
the plaintiff had been examined by a number
of doctors and none had noted any
ongoing pain. Therefore, it was put squarely to the plaintiff that he did not
have any pain by
that point in time. He said, “Ah I had pain on my pants
line and I wasn’t working full-time. So I didn’t get the
sensation”.
the plaintiff was cross-examined by what he said to a medico-legal psychiatrist,
Dr Hillol Das, in June 2018. Dr Das’s
history that the plaintiff was in
no pain was put to him, along with some matters of history in the report and he
the pain part, but
it was highlighted that there was then a gap in time from the report of Dr Das
and no medical material until 2021, when the
plaintiff lodged an impairment
benefit claim, which triggered an examination with Mr John Buntine for the
purpose of a report that
Mr Buntine provided and dated 11 February
Buntine recorded that the plaintiff described discomfort affecting mainly the
region of his left superior iliac spine due to rubbing
on the belt or whatever
garment he was wearing, that it was worse while working under hot conditions,
and because of which he could
not sleep on his left side. The plaintiff
accepted that to be an accurate reflection of what his condition was like at
cross-examiner then moved to the plaintiff’s first affidavit sworn in June
2023, and the plaintiff’s description of
pain in it and how before then to
doctors he had described discomfort, but not pain as such. The plaintiff
responded to that by
saying, “I hadn’t been working full-time before
that”, but he then corrected himself and acknowledged he had worked
time from 2019 after finishing school. There was then an exchange as follows:
Q: “2023 is when you swore your affidavit?---
Q: And at no stage, prior to 2023, did you refer to any pain in the area
after the healing of the wound to any of these doctors?---
A: Did I not do that at my doctor's appointment?
A: Um I remember saying something but - - -
Q: Okay. You didn't complain of any numbness, only discomfort and
hypersensitivity?---
A: That would be pain, wouldn't it?
Q: Hypersensitivity?---
Q: Okay. Didn't seek any medical treatment for your physical symptoms after
March 2018?---
Q: In fact, between that period, you completed Year 12?---
Q: You found work as a mechanic?---
Q: Gone from earning 20 grand a year or so in 2019, which I presume is an
apprentice's wage?---
Q: Up till 2023, you were earning about 43 grand or so?---
Q: And, again, that's an apprentice or was that - - -?---
Q: When did you start? When did you become fully qualified?---
A: Ah I believe it was in 20 – end of 2022, I believe.
Q: Okay?---
A: Could be wrong.
Q: You met your girlfriend. When did you meet your girlfriend?---
A: Ah that would've been February of 2019.
Q: Okay. So your life moved on?---
Q: And the complaints of pain and discomfort you've made in your affidavit
and you continue to make now are exaggerations, aren't
Q: Because the wound had healed beforehand?---
Q: You're having some irritation or some discomfort, but no pain?---
A: Sorry, could you repeat that?
Q: You're having some irritation and some discomfort, but not to the level of
A: I had pain.”
cross-examiner then moved back to histories given to medico-legal examiners,
including to a Mr Thomas Robbins, dated 22 September
The plaintiff was asked
whether he would say that the history Mr Robbins obtained of no tenderness or
physical restriction in the
area of the scar was incorrect, and the plaintiff
said he would.
plaintiff was asked then again questions about the contents of medico-legal
reports, this time about reports prepared by Dr Olivia
Ong, pain specialist, at
the request of his solicitors. He was asked questions about what was recorded
by Dr Ong in her report of
including his description
to Dr Ong of discomfort and pain at the site of the scar when trying to sleep,
and severe pain flare-up
mentioned those type of symptoms to anyone before Dr Ong and the plaintiff said
“Probably not”, but agreed that, at that point in time, he could do
“normal activities”.
the plaintiff was asked questions about his more recent attendance on another
general practitioner, Dr Naeem Chaudhry, at the
Greensborough Medical &
Dental Centre. He was taken to a clinical entry of 24 November
and the history recorded by
Dr Chaudhry of the plaintiff having constant discomfort and difficulty in
sleeping at night, but “not
in pain”. The plaintiff gave a pithy
response to that, about how he disagreed that he would have told Dr Chaudhry
was not in pain because “I was going to - going to - for a
referral to see a pain specialist. So
the plaintiff was cross-examined about an attendance on a treating pain
specialist, Dr Navid Hamedani and what was recorded
by Dr Hamedani in a letter
, namely the recording that
the plaintiff was suffering pain, described as the feeling of skin stretching,
particularly noticeable
when lying flat at night and that the pain interfered
with his ability to sleep, but was seen to be manageable during the day thanks
to his distraction of work as a mechanic. The plaintiff accepted that to be a
reasonable summary.
plaintiff also accepted as accurate Dr Hamedani’s recording that his
physical function and movements were not significantly
impacted, but he did have
discomfort after a long day at work, particularly after heavy
the plaintiff was cross-examined about the fact he works full-time as a
mechanic, including overtime, more than fifty hours
the plaintiff was cross-examined about his plan to do FIFO work. It is easiest
to simply set out the cross-examination about
FIFO work in full as
Q: “Underselling you. Definitely. You say it was your
plan - and you've said this from your third affidavit onwards - it was
plan to become a fly-in, fly-out heavy diesel mechanic?---
Q: And that this was a plan of yours from a young age?---
A: Since a wee boy.
Q: Since a wee boy. And so just to get straight what you're doing at the time
of the injury: so you were doing school full time, Year
11 at the time?---
A: Ah I was doing VCAL.
A: So three days a week.
Q: And part of that you were doing a Certificate III in light vehicle
mechanical technology or something?---
Q: And that's what you did through 2019. So you must have been doing the
Certificate II before that at school, were you?---
A: I did do a Certificate II, yes.
Q: Okay. And then as of 19, you graduated on to do the Certificate
Q: Had you made inquiries as to what you needed to do to become a heavy
diesel mechanic?---
A: Ah I spoke with teachers at TAFE and other students at TAFE of what I
would need to transfer.
Q: Yes. Okay. What would you have needed to transfer?---
A: Ah I believe it's about 16 modules of 32.
Q: Okay. Did you do those 16?---
Q: What did you do?---
A: I did my 32 modules for light vehicle.
Q: Okay. Were you doing any of 16 while you were at school?---
A: Ah I would have done some of them, yeah.
Q: Okay. And you have since decided not to pursue that job?---
A: We're talking about heavy diesel?
Q: And you decided not to pursue that job after your injury?---
Q: And you decided not to pursue it because you'd spoken to people and you
thought it was beyond your abilities?---
Q: Did you try?---
A: Ah my work - the work that I was doing at the time - and I am still doing
- was physically demanding to my capabilities already.
Q: Yes. And if the work as a heavy diesel mechanic is equivalently demanding,
why couldn't you do it?---
A: It's not equivalent.
Q: okay. What is it about the work you say you can't do?---
A: Ah everything is a lot heavier.
A: Ah a lot of spaces are usually tighter and you're bent over a frame rail
trying to get to hydraulic hoses, and you're rubbing up
against a lot of things,
usually, what would make my pants line worse.
Q: Okay. At the time of 2018, you're seeing these doctors and you're saying
there's no pain, no tenderness. Did you make an effort
to try to become
qualified to be a heavy diesel mechanic at that point in time?---
A: At that point in time, no.
Q: Ultimately, it wasn't your goal, was it, to become a heavy diesel
mechanic?---
A: Trying to put words in my mouth?
Q: Ultimately, it wasn't your goal, was it, to become a heavy diesel
mechanic---
A: It was my goal.
Q: If it had been your goal, you would have tried to gain the qualifications
after the burn, when the burn had healed, wouldn't you?---
A: No. Because I understood what the workload was.
Q: Okay. Had you tried to find a job and find a, you know, try the work
A: I do the job on a light vehicle basis, and I know on a heavy vehicle basis
it would be too much.
Q: Yes. Okay. And you know that through what you've been told, not through
what you've done?---
A: I know that from when I work on big heavy four-wheel drives at work, it
can be too much.
Q: Have you said that in your affidavit?---
Q: In fact, your assertion about the FIFO work as being something you wanted
to do has come up in 2014, hasn't been something that
arose in this case until
then?---I hadn't been asked that question until that
The plaintiff is re-examined
re-examination commenced with questions about the plaintiff’s pain after a
day of light vehicle repair work. He said he
would be in a bit of pain usually,
but not what he would call extreme. He said “I can feel it
the plaintiff confirmed a history recorded by Dr Mary Wyatt that he had
researched heavy diesel mechanical work in Western Australia,
by watching
videos. He was then asked what he had observed about the physical demands of
that work and said:
A: “Ah everything's a lot bigger and a lot
heavier. Um hydraulic lines are hard to get to, where automotive light vehicles
have hydraulic lines, besides brake lines, but they technically count as
hydraulic, um but different styles. And there's not as –
any rubbing that
I have to do to get to a part on a light vehicle is with my arms, or my legs in
some cases, but it's not the middle
of my body like a heavy
plaintiff was then asked why he had stayed in light mechanical work and not
attempted to work in heavy diesel mechanical work.
He said he had not done that
because he did not think he would be capable of doing the physical work without
extreme pain.
The plaintiff was
then asked what it was that stopped him from doing the heavy vehicle work and he
said he would feel the skin overstretching
and over-rubbing on the
plaintiff was asked whether he thought he was working at full capacity now and
said he believed he was at full capacity. He said
he did not think he could do
the heavier work because of the amount of long days that would be needed and
said that even though he
works long hours now he did not do a lot of heavy work
next to the relevant medical evidence, some of which has already been discussed
in the context of the plaintiff’s evidence
and commencing with the
evidence relied on by the plaintiff.
Dr Philip Smith, general
practitioner
mentioned, Dr Smith is a general practitioner who provided a report dated 2
August 2018.
The main takeout
from that report is that, as at the date of it, Dr Smith did not consider the
plaintiff to have any pain or ongoing
restriction of movement. Dr Smith opined
that there was not likely to be any preclusion in the future of any physical
Overall, he said the prognosis “to be very good. He has
recovered well physically. He is currently pursuing work as a mechanic,
hopefully this won’t affect him much
long-term”.
Navid Hamedani, pain specialist
treating pain specialist, Dr Hamedani provided a report dated 8 October
Based on one consultation
with the plaintiff on 17 January 2025, he reported that the plaintiff had a
“chronic pain post burn
injury in the left lower abdomen and hip skin with
mixed neuropathic and nociceptive features since
Overall, he said
that cases with chronic pain following a burn injury would have a guarded
prognosis, but as he had not reviewed
the plaintiff, he could not back that
opinion with good clinical
Olivia Ong, specialist in pain medicine
mentioned, Dr Ong is a consultant specialist in pain medicine who saw the
plaintiff at the request of his solicitors and prepared
her first report of 12 April 2024, Dr Ong obtained a history of the
plaintiff’s education and employment, current work duties,
the accident
and the injuries. Having done so, she noted current treatment to be regular
Panadol to help with the pain. About that,
Dr Ong recorded the
plaintiff’s pain status as follows:
“[The plaintiff]
reported that he either has pain or discomfort or both from the injury every
day. There are no times when he
feels just nothing. [The plaintiff] experiences
permanent altered sensation over the injured area. It feels like he is touching
else’s skin almost when he touches it. It feels like there’s
a skin covering there, like a bandage being there. At times,
he gets numbness,
but not very often – in fact, he said that numbness would be a relief.
[The plaintiff] reports symptoms of painful dysaesthesia – constant
itch and discomfort, feeling as if pants are sticking on
him, and if he does
pull his pants off due to discomfort, it feels like a ripping sensation. A
factor that exacerbates his pain is
wearing a belt. His pain level at its best
is 3/10 in severity, and at its worst, 8/10. He gets a severe pain flare-up once
when lifting things such as gearboxes and control arms in his fulltime
mechanic role, which he works from 07:00 to 18:00 on weekdays,
and he also works
most Saturdays. He takes Panadol to help his pain, but it doesn't help much with
his pain. He has not trialled
anti-neuropathic pain agents to help manage his
pain. He has also never seen a pain specialist.
[The plaintiff] reported that he has been left with scarring on his left hip,
right where his belt goes. This hasn’t healed
well and is very sensitive,
painful, and annoying when he wears pants and a belt. He must wear these every
day. [The plaintiff] really
doesn’t like the look of the scarring, and he
covers it up in public. He has been told it is sensitive to the sun and that
should minimize any sun exposure for the next five years at least. He avoids
attending the beach. Things like sand make it worse.
Swimming can hurt and is
uncomfortable. He had been a good river swimmer.
[The plaintiff] experiences a lot of discomfort and pain when he is trying to
sleep at night. He has this problem most nights of every
week. There are many
nights it keeps him awake. Some nights this can be hours, and other nights it
can be 15 minutes.
[The plaintiff] reported that his pain is worse in summer. On a scale of
1–10, it will be a 5/10 in winter and 8/10 in summer.
In summer it feels
sticky, and it hurts.
His pain varies from day to day. He avoids direct hot water in this area in
the shower.”
respect to the plaintiff’s present function, Dr Ong noted that, despite
experiencing some pain, the plaintiff was independent
in all personal
activities. She noted a longstanding passion to be a mechanic ever since he was
a child. She noted that basketball
was now out for him and he did not do
at-home car work because that was too uncomfortable given his injury and he
would need to stretch
and reach in difficult and awkward positions, without the
benefit of the equipment that he had at his
Ong then opined there was a diagnosis of chronic neuropathic pain following
burns or burn-related nerve pain. She made that diagnosis
in a situation where
she also commented that the burns had otherwise healed. Dr Ong then said that
the plaintiff’s pain condition
had not stabilised and he needed a
multidisciplinary pain management
respect to work, Dr Ong said, “[the plaintiff] can work full-time in any
Ong reported again on 3 June
after being provided some
other medical reports for comment. Having done so, she said the
plaintiff’s:
“... biopsychosocial consequences and
restrictions from his current pain condition, chronic neuropathic pain, which is
of [the plaintiff’s] burns injury, are permanent and likely to
last for the foreseeable
Dr Murray Stapleton, plastic and hand surgeon
Stapleton is a plastic and hand surgeon who examined the plaintiff via
Telehealth at the request of his solicitors and then provided
a report dated 15
Dr Stapleton took a
history of the injury and the plaintiff’s current complaints. He said
that the area of hypopigmentation
over the left hip remained tender, such that
the plaintiff could not tolerate wearing a tight belt and tight trousers. Dr
said these symptoms had reached maximum medical improvement. He noted
that the plaintiff had been a motor mechanic since leaving
Stapleton went on to note that the plaintiff required no particular treatment
and had reached maximum medical
improvement.
John Buntine, hand, plastic and reconstructive surgeon
Buntine is a hand, plastic and reconstructive surgeon, who saw the plaintiff for
the purposes of an independent impairment assessment
and provided a report dated
11 February 2021.
is some limit to Mr Buntine’s opinion given the passage of time, but in
respect to work, he reported the plaintiff telling
him of significant trouble
and discomfort affecting the burn area at work, especially on hot days when he
sometimes left early, but
otherwise had no
Buntine reported the plaintiff as being equally troubled by the physical effects
of the burning (discomforts and abnormal appearance)
and by the psychological
effects (such as anxiety near a boiling
Buntine also noted the plaintiff had resumed lighter aspects of his
apprenticeship work and was then working full
Awad, consultant in occupational medicine
Awad is a consultant in occupational medicine who examined the plaintiff at the
request of his solicitors and provided a report
dated 9 October
Awad obtained a history of the accident and of the plaintiff’s current
symptoms, which he recorded as hypersensitivity over
the left hip, a pulling
sensation of pain when stretching and the area becoming irritated by contact
with clothing, which was painful
Awad took a history that the plaintiff was able to undertake all activities of
daily living, with the exception of being around
boiling water, although he
tended to wear looser-fitting clothing when not at work. There was no history
of any interference with
social activity or
recorded that:
“He indicated that he never returned to the KFC
role and he did not undertake any further part-time employment thereafter. He
completed his apprenticeship and worked as a car mechanic whilst completing his
apprenticeship and undertaking his full-time studies.
Once qualified he took up
employment as a car mechanic with Heidelberg Automotive Repairs from April 2023.
He works full-time in
a permanent position. His core hours are Monday to Friday
7 am till 6:30 pm and this includes overtime. He has a range of duties
is able to perform. However he reflected that the activities he undertakes
causes his trousers to rub against his scar which
causes him irritation. In
particular leaning on the vehicles and undertaking positions where he is
stretched. In the summer working
in a hot environment he finds these symptoms
are exacerbated.
In September 2024 he had a workplace injury unrelated to his burns. He had a
fracture of his left hand little finger secondary to
a spring exploding. He had
the day of the injury as sickness absence and returned to work the following
day. He was placed in a more
administrative role undertaking management type
work. He states that his employer was impressed with his ability and he has
in a more senior role managing the workshop. Initially he was supposed
to work 60-40 with 40% being office type work but this has
been not realistic
and he estimates that he only spends 20% of his time doing office based work. He
has aspirations to progress.
He has had no sickness absence in relation to his
injury. He enjoys his role immensely and is keen to remain in employment.
He indicated that initially he had aspirations to become a diesel mechanic
and travel to Western Australia to work in the mines as
a fly-in fly-out
mechanic. He indicated that he was aware that he would need to upskill but that
he was only required to do a further
8 modules of training to be able to attain
the required qualifications. He stated that due to the weather conditions in
Western Australia,
he chose not to pursue this career path as he felt the heat
would irritate his
Awad was then asked to consider a report prepared by a vocational assessor, Ms
Anne Forsyth, dated 23 February 2025 and to express
an opinion about the
plaintiff’s ability to undertake the role of heavy diesel mechanic in the
Western Australian mines. Dr
“[The plaintiff] is a
stoic with a high work ethic. This has allowed him to remain in his current role
as a vehicle mechanic.
Whilst on the surface the roles would appear similar,
they are not. A heavy diesel mechanic has a higher exertional requirement.
requires a greater degree of lifting and adopting far more awkward positions due
to the size of the parts and the size of the
vehicles. This is likely to put
additional strain onto his scar which in my opinion is likely to cause him
increased pain and discomfort.
Furthermore Western Australia temperatures are
much higher and therefore cause him more irritation. This is in my opinion this
(sic) not a suitable role therefore and he would not be able to do so
secondary to his scar in a reliable and consistent manner.
He is likely to have
increased flares of pain which may become
unmanageable.”
it is unclear whether Dr Awad’s opinion about the requirements of a heavy
diesel mechanic are expressed from some knowledge
or expertise that Dr Awad
holds or are based on Ms Forsyth’s opinion (which I shall get to in a
Professor Vernon Marshall
defendant relied on a report from Professor Vernon Marshall dated 9 April
There is not much useful
evidence in that, beyond how it was used in cross-examination to suggest that
the plaintiff had no pain
at the time that he attended Professor
Mr Thomas Robbins, hand, plastic and reconstructive
Robbins is a hand, plastic and reconstructive surgeon who examined the plaintiff
at the request of the defendant and produced a
report dated 22 September
Again, the relevant part
of that report was put to the plaintiff and I have already set it out, in
particular, the examination findings
from Mr Robbins that there was a small area
near the left hip where there was superficial scarring, but no tenderness or
restriction.
Mr Robbins summarised his opinion as follows:
“In summary, the
worker sustained a superficial steam burn to the left side of his trunk near his
left hip. This has since healed
with only a very small residual area near his
left hip which has slight superficial scarring almost invisible even to (sic)
inspection. There is no physical encumbrance or tenderness and no reason
for the residual symptoms the worker claims. I consider
the worker has made a
full recovery without any residual physical or aesthetic
impairments.”
Dr Mary Wyatt, occupational physician
Wyatt is an occupational physician who examined the plaintiff at the request of
the defendant and first reported on 8 August
Dr Wyatt took a history
of the accident and recorded the plaintiff telling her that the skin had healed
satisfactorily, though he
always noted an abnormal sensation in the burn area
and the skin was irritated by his jeans or clothing. Dr Wyatt obtained a
“[The plaintiff] indicates that he had planned
to go to work in the mines after completing his car mechanic’s
apprenticeship.
He said that the mines were offering to train light mechanics to
become heavy diesel mechanics and he did not feel that he could
manage that
because of the physical requirements of those roles and the ongoing burn
irritation.
He talked about wanting to work on buckets on excavators and crawling around
on the ground. When asked about other concerns, he was
concerned about needing
to lean over heavy machinery, he does that with light machinery but thought that
the heavy machinery would
be more problematic as the work is
Wyatt conducted a clinical examination and found some slight sensitivity to
light touch, but no thickening or thinning of the skin
at the site of the
Dr Wyatt said the plaintiff had some continued irritation, but that “this
would not generally be a significantly limiting
condition”.
the FIFO work, Dr Wyatt noted that there would be a range of opportunities to
work in mines that were not in the higher-heat
areas, and she nominated mines
across southern Australia, including Victoria. About the work as a diesel
mechanic, Dr Wyatt noted
the plaintiff’s current employment and said
“[t]he extra demands on the scar that is largely over the left hip area do
not seem major compared to the demands of his current
Dr Wyatt reported again on 20 June 2025, having been asked to comment on
documents provided to her and to re-examine the
respect to the burn area, Dr Wyatt recorded the plaintiff saying the problem was
not so much pain, but irritation from clothes.
She recorded the plaintiff
managing his current job without difficulty, but there was some irritation when
he lent over cars.
FIFO work, Dr Wyatt reported that:
“We again spoke about the
job opportunities in mining. I explored more about the underground or other
work. [The plaintiff]
said that he had watched YouTube videos about roles and
saw that he would need to be lifting 30-40 kg drums, on and off devices,
over and doing heavy machinery work in the above ground roles he viewed. He did
not seem to have an awareness of underground
work or different types of roles
with more elevated platform
Wyatt went on again to hypothesise about mining work and the temperatures
involved. She said:
“There are several factors to consider in
providing an opinion on [the plaintiff’s] capacity to work in mining.
In relation to temperature and providing more detail, underground mines
operate under regulations that limit the wet-bulb temperature
to a maximum of 27
°C. While transient exceedances likely occur, these environments are
typically more controlled and temperate
than suburban vehicle workshops during
the summer months.
Mining sites—particularly in Victoria and Tasmania—offer climates
broadly comparable to or cooler than metropolitan Melbourne.
In relation to the nature of work and postural demands, light-vehicle
mechanical work commonly involves sustained forward flexion
trunk—over engine bays, under dashboards, and during underbody work on
creepers. In contrast, heavy equipment workshops
(especially underground) often
involve elevated work platforms, swing arms, and the use of cranes, reducing the
need for prolonged
stooping or trunk flexion. While component sizes and weights
are larger, mechanical handling aids are standard, and postural load
typically better distributed.
[The plaintiff] has demonstrated his functional capacity, employed full-time
as a car mechanic in suburban Melbourne and performs
his duties without reported
restriction, although he experiences symptoms related to his burn during hotter
weather. These symptoms
are manageable and do not limit function. It is
reasonable to infer that, with role selection and basic risk controls, similar
lower exposure levels could be achieved in mining settings.
While [the plaintiff] has reviewed some job videos online, this appears to
have given him a limited view of mining roles.
The oil and gas industry presents another viable pathway. In Victoria and the
Bass Strait region, offshore and onshore facilities
regularly recruit mechanical
tradespeople into maintenance roles on rigs or at processing facilities. These
are typically fly-in
fly-out high paid positions that would be suited to his
trade background.”
(Footnotes omitted.)
Wyatt reported for a third and final time on 3 October 2025, in a report that
the plaintiff ultimately
In that report she
commented on various jobs that had been identified to her in a suitable
employment report from Recovre dated
17 September
and she endorsed jobs as
automotive service adviser, automotive parts interpreter and motor vehicle parts
interpreter as “suitable
employment”.
here, not much turns on Dr Wyatt’s third report or indeed the Recovre
report, as all the identified jobs in fact pay
less than what the plaintiff is
currently earning.
Relevant vocational evidence
Anne Forsyth, occupational rehabilitation consultant/vocational
away from the medical evidence, I now arrive at the vocational evidence relied
on by the plaintiff, commencing with the report
of Ms Anne Forsyth, occupational
rehabilitation consultant/vocational adviser, dated 23 February
dealing with the contents of the report, there arises a consideration of Ms
Forsyth’s expertise relevant to the issues
for determination in this
proceeding, namely FIFO work and the claim for pecuniary loss “serious
on Ms Forsyth’s professional
, she was a registered
nurse Division 1 for a period of forty-six years. Her professional
qualifications include general nursing,
early childhood development and aged
care. In addition, during her nursing career she provided vocational training,
including for
personal care
Forsyth has also been a director of Vocational Directions Pty Ltd since 2014.
In her professional profile she says that she has
written “a vast number
of expert opinions [sic] and provided labour market analyses for the purpose of
Occupational
Rehabilitation”.
here, Ms Forsyth may have provided a vast number of reports, but that does not
necessarily equate to being able to provide
relevant expert opinion in this
proceeding. For example, it is entirely unclear what expertise she has as a
heavy diesel mechanic
or in the mining industry, or even for placing workers in
that type of job. The appendixes to her report suggest she has no direct
expertise and instead extracted information from various websites or
there is a more fundamental problem with much of her evidence, because, as I
shall get to in a moment, she expressed opinions
clearly outside her area of
expertise and ventured into being an advocate on behalf of the plaintiff.
any event, the plaintiff highlighted the evidence in Ms Forsyth’s report
relevant to the issue of FIFO work, including her
opinion that had the plaintiff
chosen to pursue that work, his earning potential would have been far in excess
of his current income.
her report, Ms Forsyth set out some of the relevant medical evidence, including
the medical evidence that perhaps did not support
the plaintiff’s claim
for pecuniary loss. Next she recorded the plaintiff’s subjective
complaints of pain. About the
pain, she noted the plaintiff subjectively
reported discomfort around the scar and surrounding neuropathic pain that was
unrelenting,
could be extreme, was exacerbated by hot weather and materials
rubbing on the scar. She noted difficulty with humid weather, dragging
objects and the like.
here, the description of symptoms to Ms Forsyth is not consistent with the bulk
of the other objective evidence and is not
a description I accept.
Forsyth then said:
“Based on the information above, and the
physical and environmental demands of working as a Heavy Diesel Mechanic in the
industry, despite medical opinion to the contrary, I respectfully believe
that [the plaintiff’s] pain experience and discomfort
would be exacerbated
to very extreme and possibly intolerable levels based on the information noted
above regarding pain triggers
and his poor pain management, given he has not
been provided with, nor participated in, the recommended Multidisciplinary Pain
Had he remained uninjured, by virtue of his vocational aptitude and
completion of a pre-apprenticeship certificate in automotive whilst
school (pre-injury), I believe that [the plaintiff] may well have been a viable
and marketable candidate for a Heavy Diesel
Mechanical Apprenticeship in the
mining industry, or in the general heavy vehicle industry and then transferred
his trade skills
to the mining industry, and have sustained the physically
arduous duties in harsh environments for long hours over continuous day
longer term, earning a very high level of remuneration, especially in comparison
the his current wage as a Light Vehicle
However, post-injury, due to his apparently stoic nature, had he chosen to do
so, he may have successfully attained an apprenticeship
as a Heavy Diesel
Mechanic and work in the mines discussed above, but I believe that such work
would have been unsustainable into
the short to medium term due to the harsh
physical and environmental demands of such work and the extreme exacerbation of
his untreated
neuropathic pain, poor sleeping patterns sue to increased night
time pain, and the impact this could have on work safety, work performance,
out of work time, and his limited ability to recuperate over long shifts over
consecutive days. Conversely, he may not have passed
the strict pre-employment
medical examinations required of potential trade based mine workers. Had he
passed the medical examination,
I believe that due to the high likelihood of
substantially increasing pain levels with the work demands of work as a Mining
Heavy Diesel Mechanic, and the impact unrelenting severe pain would
likely have on his consistent and reliable work performance,
work attendance and
work safety, his employability as a
“merchantable
” candidate
would decrease over time and he would eventually be forced to seek a new career
[The plaintiff] is coping with his current, lighter role, because he must yet
his current work is having an adverse impact on his
to Ms Forsyth’s report were various ads for jobs as a heavy diesel
mechanic in the mining industry in several States
in Australia. For example, a
heavy diesel mechanic – FIFO job ad that had been posted on Seek had been
exhibited to Ms Forsyth’s
report, which identified potential earnings in
the range of $180,300-$220,000 per year. There was another job appended to her
which describes earnings up to $250,000 per
I think the parties agree that, had the plaintiff been able to take up FIFO
work, he would have been earning more than he
is now and probably a lot more,
consistent with the job ads attached to Ms Forsyth’s report.
that regard, there is relevant evidence in Ms Forsyth’s report, but as I
have said, some of her evidence cannot be accepted.
For example, her comment
that, despite medical opinion to the contrary she respectfully believed the
plaintiff’s pain, experience
and discomfort would be exacerbated by
certain tasks, is a matter which I consider to be wholly outside her area of
expertise and
cannot be accepted. It is sheer advocacy.
do not wish to go down the rabbit hole of the utility in many of the vocational
reports that are tendered in serious injury applications,
but much of Ms
Forsyth’s report contains commentary, opinions outside her area of
expertise and ventures into advocacy. But
not much turns on that because, as
already mentioned, it seems tolerably clear to me that if the plaintiff was
undertaking FIFO work,
he would be earning considerably more than he is
insofar as Ms Forsyth’s report contains evidence about rates of pay in
FIFO work, I am prepared to accept that evidence.
But I am not prepared to
accept that she has sufficient expertise to opine that the plaintiff cannot now
undertake that type of
I do not accept that Ms Forsyth has expertise to opine about what is involved in
the work as a diesel mechanic or in the
mining industry. I do not accept that
her nursing or vocational qualifications enable her to express a medical opinion
diesel work may exacerbate the plaintiff’s pain to possibly
intolerable levels. Those comments go well beyond any vocational
expertise that
short, while there is some relevant evidence in the report from Ms Forsyth, it
is of limited use for the critical issues of whether
the plaintiff might have
pursued FIFO work and what is involved in such work, where she appears to have
no direct knowledge or involvement
in the mining industry. About that, Ms
Forsyth’s opinions about work as a diesel mechanic or in the mining
industry are all
based on second hand, or even hearsay sources that she has
researched. There is no suggestion she has ever directly been involved
placing a young person into a FIFO role.
Belinda Iatrou, human
resources consultant
remaining piece of vocational evidence is the report from Ms Iatrou, human
resources consultant at Flexi Personnel that was provided
plaintiff’s solicitors and dated 31 March
Ms Iatrou has
qualifications, including a Certificate IV in Workplace Training and Assessment
and in Adult Language, Literacy and
Numeracy Skills. Apparently, she has twenty
years’ experience in recruitment, human resources and the like.
Therefore, Ms
Iatrou may have some relevant expertise in the field of
recruitment or human resources.
whether Ms Iatrou’s expertise translates to the ability to express
opinions about employment as a heavy diesel motor
mechanic in the mining
industry is unclear from her reports.
for the purpose of her report, Ms Iatrou sets out how she accessed websites from
Rio Tinto, BHP Australia, Seek and the Hays
Salary Guide. That suggests she has
some expertise in the use of a computer to research salary information. She
then said that:
“In my recruitment experience and from the
research I conducted from two of the leading mining companies in Australia ...
potential earnings of an experienced
Heavy Diesel Motor Mechanic
(will be dependent on a number of factors ...
Iatrou then set out those factors. Having done so, she then provided data from
current roles advertised on Seek.
pontificating further about her expertise or the relevant evidence within that
expertise in her report, like Ms Forsyth, at
the end of the day Ms Iatrou
exhibited several job advertisements, which I accept as relevant evidence,
perhaps with some qualification.
One qualification is that she exhibited a job
available in Far North Queensland, which is not something the plaintiff ever
he intended to pursue. However, she did exhibit a job as an underground
heavy diesel mechanic (I am uncertain as to whether working
underground would
mean the temperature would be different) which paid up to $250,000 per year and
another job as a diesel mechanic
in Perth which paid between $175,000-$220,000.
Ms Iatrou set out information from the Hays Salary Guide about a heavy diesel
fitter working in the mining industry, which had
a range in Western Australia
between $200,000-$250,000 and a typical average salary of
What is the level of any pain and impairment currently suffered by the
first of the two broad issues for resolution is an assessment of the
plaintiff’s current level of pain and impairment, if
any, based on the
evidence that I accept.
Ultimately,
if I accept the primary contention of the defendant that there is not much wrong
with the plaintiff, then the FIFO issue
falls away because it would follow that
the plaintiff remains fit for that type of work.
before dealing with the issues for determination, it is necessary to say
something about the issue of the reliability or the credit
of the plaintiff,
because the defendant raised it as an issue.
his oral evidence, I found the plaintiff to be a subdued but reasonable witness.
But there was a disconnect between his subjective
evidence about his current
pain as opposed to what was revealed in the objective evidence from the treating
practitioners, which
is hard to reconcile. Whether he consciously or
subconsciously embellished his description of symptoms is hard to say, but the
plaintiff’s
description certainly differed from the evidence from the
treating doctors, such as Dr Smith or even Dr Chaudhry.
I accept that the plaintiff’s subjective evidence of pain should not be
uncritically accepted. This is a case where
the objective evidence needs
careful consideration before an acceptance of what the plaintiff had to say
or impairment.
Evidence of pain and
objective evidence establishes that within a few months of the accident, the
plaintiff when attending for general practitioner
assessment of the irritated
skin caused by the burn, was not describing any pain as such. For example, Dr
Smith reported that on
27 April 2018, while the plaintiff had scarring, the
physical injuries had healed with no ongoing
plaintiff’s last attendance with Dr Smith was in October
but Dr Smith’s
notes reveal the last few attendances were either for psychological assessment,
or for unrelated conditions
and there was no mention of any pain symptoms.
the time he last attended Dr Smith, the plaintiff had effectively ceased any
treatment for any physical injury, although he may
have continued for a period
to use some sort of ointment on the actual scar. Objectively, by then the
plaintiff had no pain or restriction
for work as a mechanic, but may have had
some irritation, hypersensitivity or discomfort from the scarring.
it should be remembered that the plaintiff does not rely on the scarring as a
“serious injury”. Rather he relies
on the physical injury, although
on reflection he did not clearly articulate what that injury was. I will
proceed on a broad description
of it as a physical burn injury, or perhaps a
neuropathic pain condition.
the last attendance with Dr Smith, the plaintiff did not seek any treatment
until 24 November 2024, when he attended Dr Chaudhry.
Therefore, during a
period of 5 years he had managed to finish his apprenticeship, qualify as a
mechanic and work full time, without
any treatment. Neither did he seek any
medical assessment in that period to determine if he could undertake FIFO work.
he has never sought such assessment.
24 November 2024 Dr Chaudhry recorded the plaintiff describing “c/o
constant discomfort and difficulty sleeping at night”
and “not in
pain”. In addition, Dr Chaudhry recorded “seeing a solicitor and
wants referral to pain clinic”.
Dr Chaudhry then made a note
“Referred for further assessment and management as requested by
is no report form Dr Chaudhry. The clinical records suggest that the doctor
made the referral to a pain specialist because
that was what the plaintiff
requested, as opposed to an opinion by the doctor that such an assessment was
necessary. Notably, like
Dr Smith, Dr Chaudhry recorded that the plaintiff was
not in pain.
referral for pain management was then made to Dr Hamedani, who saw the plaintiff
for the first and only time on 17 January 2025
and recorded a description of
chronic pain and discomfort. But about that, Dr Hamedani reported to Dr
Chaudhry that the plaintiff
“described the pain as a feeling of skin
stretching, particularly noticeable when lying flat at night. This pain
with his ability to sleep but seems to be manageable during the day
thanks to the distractions of work” and that “his
physical function
and movements are not significantly impacted, but he does experience discomfort
after long days of work, particularly
after heavy lifting
his report to the plaintiff’s solicitors dated 8 October 2025 Dr Hamedani
said the plaintiff had chronic pain post burn injury
with mixed neuropathic and
nociceptive features since
Dr Hamedani went on to
say that cases with chronic pain following a burn injury would have a guarded
prognosis but he could not
back that opinion up with good clinical support
because he had not reviewed the plaintiff.
on a consideration of all the evidence from the treaters, I do not accept that
the plaintiff has any significant ongoing pain,
if there is any pain at all. I
do not accept that he has had chronic pain since the burn injury because that is
not supported by
the objective medical evidence and is inconsistent with the
fact that he was able to get on with his life without the need for any
for about 5 years. Therefore, I am not persuaded by Dr Hamedani’s opinion
injury with neuropathic or nociceptive
accept that the plaintiff may have some irritation from the scar when wearing
tight fitting clothes, and some hypersensitivity or
pulling sensation when
stretching or lying flat. But regardless, whatever symptoms he might have does
not appear to limit him much
Accordingly,
like Dr Hamedani, I also do not accept the opinion from Dr Ong about the
existence of a neuropathic pain condition because
I also do not accept that Dr
Ong was given an accurate description of the symptoms. In addition, the weight
to attach to Dr Ong’s
opinion is reduced because Dr Ong blended the
consequences from any neuropathic pain condition with what she identified as a
psychological
condition, hence her opinion that the plaintiff required
multidisciplinary pain management and review by a psychiatrist to assess
“likelihood of PTSD, trauma symptoms and psychological
a consideration of the plaintiff’s level of pain and impairment, to some
extent the diagnosis is irrelevant. For example,
even if I was to accept that
there is a neuropathic pain condition, as contended for by Dr Hamedani and Dr
Ong, neither doctor placed
any real restriction on the plaintiff’s work
capacity. Dr Ong opined about work: “Mr Eaton can work full-time in any
Hamedani said nothing at all.
Ong’s opinion about work capacity fits with the objective evidence of pain
and impairment. After the accident, the plaintiff
completed VCAL and an
apprenticeship as a mechanic, without any modification of the apprenticeship.
The plaintiff is now employed
in a manual job as a mechanic and does at least
some moderately heavy work. He works long hours, without any medical
restriction.
He effectively has no treatment for any claimed physical injury.
Further, there is no suggestion that he needs to take time off
for work, for
example in the summer months. The referral for pain management seems to have
been made by Dr Chaudhry without any
enthusiasm, and even the plaintiff himself
seems to have little enthusiasm for it, as illustrated by only consulting Dr
on the one occasion.
the medical opinion supports a conclusion that whatever symptoms he might have,
the plaintiff has an unrestricted capacity
strongest evidence about any restriction for work is from Ms Forsyth, but as I
have made clear, I do not accept her to be suitably
qualified to express medical
opinions about work capacity. In addition, Ms Forsyth ignored a lot of the
objective medical evidence
and made her own assumptions about the
plaintiff’s true level of pain.
I acknowledge that Dr Awad supported the plaintiff’s submission that there
was an incapacity for FIFO work. About that,
Dr Awad recorded the plaintiff
saying that he did not pursue FIFO work in Western Australia because the heat
would irritate his scar.
Awad also expressed opinions about the higher temperatures in Western Australia
and how that might irritate the scar or increase
the plaintiff’s pain
the weight to attach to Dr Awad’s opinions is limited because it is
inconsistent with the other medical evidence as set
out that I accept. In
addition, Dr Awad uncritically accepted the plaintiff’s account to him
that his current work “comes
at a cost to pain that he has to
which I consider
is a description of pain that does not fit with the objective evidence and is
one I do not accept.
Awad also dismissed FIFO work as suitable, but his opinion about that seems to
have been influenced by the provision of Ms Forsyth’s
report to him for
comment and his acceptance of her opinions about the unsuitability of heavy
diesel or FIFO work, rather than any
expertise by Dr Awad to opine about FIFO
work in general. Further, Dr Awad generally described the plaintiff as having
with activity from the
and I am not persuaded
that such discomfort means that the plaintiff has pain and impairment at a level
that precludes FIFO work.
on this topic, Dr Wyatt described objectively that the plaintiff had some
sensitivity to light touch
and that any ongoing irritation would not “generally be a significantly
irritating factor”.
Wyatt noted the current nature of the plaintiff’s work as a mechanic and
raised a valid issue whether heavy diesel work
would be much more demanding.
True it is that she then proceeded to discuss hypotheticals for mining jobs in
cooler climates, or
even underground, that could be said to indicate she
accepted that he could not now work in hotter weather. But on my assessment
Dr Wyatt’s reports, she was simply discussing such hypotheticals because
of the questions asked of her.
also accept Dr Wyatt’s opinion that even if the plaintiff is restricted
for some work in hotter weather, that with role selection
and basic risk control
settings, similar or lower restrictions to the plaintiff’s current work
could be achieved in a mining
I conclude that the evidence does not support a conclusion that because of the
plaintiff’s burn injury he cannot work
as a heavy diesel mechanic, or that
he cannot work in hotter weather. I do not accept his subjective evidence that
he cannot undertake
short, I conclude that the plaintiff is medically fit for FIFO work, should he
want to go down that path.
Accordingly,
the claim for pecuniary loss is not made out.
is sufficient to dispose of this case, but as significant time was devoted to
the FIFO scenario, for completeness I will deal
with that topic, as it is the
second broad issue that fell for determination.
accident occurred in October 2017. The plaintiff made no mention at all
anywhere in the evidence of any interest in FIFO work
until his third affidavit
sworn 5 June 2024. There is some merit in the defendant’s submission that
the lateness in which
FIFO work was raised suggests it was not really something
that the plaintiff had seriously considered.
to give him the benefit of the doubt given his young age at the time of the
accident and the fact that his working life was really
yet to commence, overall,
his evidence and his mother’s evidence supports a conclusion that from his
early teenage years the
plaintiff had wanted to be a mechanic and had considered
the idea of FIFO work as an option after completing his apprenticeship.
the lateness in which that scenario was raised in the evidence suggests this is
not a case about a young man with a clear objective,
plan or passion in life but
for being injured. In support of that conclusion is the fact that he has not
discussed with any treating
practitioner whether that type of work is an option
for him, which it might be thought he would have done if this really was his
ambition or intended career path.
accept that the assessment of loss of earning capacity for a very young person
is often based on limited or imperfect evidence.
Nevertheless, the plaintiff
still bears the overall evidentiary onus. His evidence was that he had watched
some YouTube videos
detail about his knowledge of what the work involved.
to the last point, the plaintiff gave no useful evidence about the age people
start that type of work, or how he would have
gone with FIFO work as a teenager.
Further, he was only nineteen years old when he met his current domestic partner
at a time when
he was still an apprentice mechanic. Happily, for him, that
relationship has flourished and they now live together. Notably, as
defendant highlighted,
is no evidence from his partner. There is no evidence about whether FIFO work
would be an option for them as a couple. About
that, the plaintiff said nothing
in his affidavit or oral evidence. In other words, FIFO work might never have
been an option for
him from the time he settled into a long-term domestic
relationship in Melbourne.
on the issue of FIFO work, the plaintiff simply did not produce a lot of useful
evidence. He did not produce evidence of
an actual mining job that he had
applied for, or even a job he had identified, other than what was in the
vocational reports. He
did not provide any specific evidence about a
‘real FIFO job’ and why he could not do such a job, beyond broad
impacted him.
even if there was a possibility of FIFO work that had been lost because of a
physical burn injury – which, to be clear,
is not the conclusion I have
reached – as Dr Wyatt opined, there may still be a residual capacity for
other mining type work
“after injury”.
plaintiff did not address the evidence from Dr Wyatt that there may be jobs in
the mining industry that are still within his capacity,
instead just broadly
asserting that mining jobs in Western Australia must be harder and hotter than
what he does now, without any
actual objective evidence about that.
FIFO work, the plaintiff failed to provide clear or direct evidence from anyone
in the FIFO industry, to assist in an assessment
of whether the plaintiff was
ever going to be a realistic candidate for the lifestyle that comes with FIFO
work. There is no family
history of that work, and no evidence that he knows
anyone in the industry.
plaintiff proceeded on the assumption that it was enough to establish a claim
for pecuniary loss if the Court was to accept that
before injury, he had an
ambition and intention to pursue FIFO work, that he cannot now pursue. But in
my opinion, something more
was needed by way of evidence beyond just proving an
ambition or intention.
other words, just because he might have had an ambition or intention, or even if
he would have undertaken FIFO work for a period,
that does not mean that
overall, he has a loss of earning capacity that is productive of the requisite
financial loss of 40% or more.
This is even more so where he continues to work
as a mechanic, working long hours and increasing his salary to a point where he
is now earning over $109,000 gross per annum, which is more than 60% of some of
the jobs identified in the vocational reports.
short, even if I accept that the plaintiff had an ambition or intention to
undertake FIFO work, that is not the end of the ballgame.
The plaintiff must
still establish that he has a loss of earning capacity that will be productive
of an actual financial loss of
40% or more on a permanent basis.
is the second part of the test that is important in the context of the dearth of
when assessed in accordance with common law principles, the plaintiff simply has
not produced sufficient evidence for the Court
to conclude that FIFO work was a
realistic option for him before the accident. In addition, even if it was a
realistic option, he
has not proven that he has suffered an actual loss of
earning capacity that is permanently productive of financial loss of 40 per
whichever way it is approached, the plaintiff has failed to establish an
entitlement to commence a proceeding for pecuniary loss.
completeness, I also conclude that the evidence does not disclose “very
considerable” pain and suffering consequences.
plaintiff’s ongoing sensitivity and restrictions form the burn injury are
simply not “very considerable”. He
works full time in his chosen
career. Apart from some difficulty with tight fitting clothes, he could not
point to any real impairment
consequences from the physical burn injury. He
drives a car, socialises, works on cars in his spare time, has been able to
an intimate relationship, and is able to perform a full range of
domestic and personal activities.
in mind that the Court must consider the full range of impairments and
impairment consequences and not just those that come
before the Courts, whatever
consequences he has now are a long way below being capable of described as
“very considerable”.
Disposition
the reasons expressed, the plaintiff’s application for “serious
injury” is dismissed.
parties are invited to prepare a minute of orders to finalise the
proceeding.
Plaintiff’s Court Book
(‘PCB’) 277
Transcript Day Two
(“2T”) 10, Line (“L”) 22-28
Advanced Wire & Cable
Pty Ltd v Abdulle
[2009] VSCA 170
2T 23, L 27-28
2T 12, L 8-10
[2000] NSWCA 133
(2000) 54 NSWLR 536
[2022] VSCA 15
PCB 32-33 at paragraphs
PCB 35 at paragraphs [6]
and [10]-[12]
Transcript Day One
(“T”) 23, L 22-23
T 23, L 22 ꟷ T 24, L
T 24, L 10-12; DCB 46
T 31, L 18-22
T 32, L 19-22
T 35, L 10 ꟷ T 36, L
T 37, L 21-29
T 38, L 26-28
T 42, L 21 ꟷ T 44,
T 45, L 19-26
T 45, L 31 ꟷ T 46, L
T 46, L 3-12
T 47, L 8-12
PCB 131-132
2T 17, L 28-31
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (391 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter