URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2024/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:44:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Endeavour Group Ltd [2024] VicLiqComm 12; (14 August 2024)
Endeavour Group Ltd [2024] VicLiqComm 12 (14 August 2024)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter regarding seven internal review applications made under
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
as to a decision of a delegate
to grant an application for a packaged liquor licence for the premises known as
Dan Murphy’s,
Commission:
Mr John Larkins, Acting Chair
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair
Ms Susan Timbs, Commissioner
Appearances:
Mr Jason Kane, Counsel for the Hepburn Shire
Internal Review Applicant
Cr Jennifer Bray, Internal Review Applicant
Ms Lynda Poke, Internal Review Applicant
Mr Mark Dickenson, Internal Review Applicant
Ms Michelle Stephenson, Internal Review Applicant
Mr David Moore, Internal Review Applicant
Ms Sarah Porritt, Counsel for the Licensee, instructed by
Mr Murray Kellock of King & Wood Mallesons
Mr Benedict Coxon, Counsel Assisting the Commission
Date of Hearing: 3-6, 9-12 October; 15, 21-22, 27-28 November 2023; 29-30
January 2024
Date of Decision: 14 August 2024
Date of Reasons: 14 August 2024
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the Delegate and refuse the application
Original Application
11 July 2022, Endeavour Group Limited (
) applied to the Victorian
Liquor Commission (
) under the
Liquor Control Reform Act
) for a packaged liquor licence (
for proposed premises located at 63 Central Springs Road, Daylesford
) trading as Dan Murphy’s (
Application
red line plan lodged by the Licensee indicates a trading area of 626.66 square
Licensee initially sought the following trading
Sunday: Between 10am and 11pm
ANZAC Day: Between 12noon and 11pm
On any other day other than
Good Friday and Christmas Day: Between 9am and 11pm
Licensee has since indicated that it would accept a condition on its Licence in
relation to the hours of trade in the following
other day other than Sunday Good Friday or ANZAC Day or Christmas day –
Between 9am and 9pm.
On Sunday – Between 10am and 8pm
ANZAC Day – Between 12 noon and 8pm on Sunday and 9pm on any other
accordance with section 33 of the LCR
a copy of the Original
Application was served on the Chief Commissioner of Police and the Hepburn Shire
) on 13 July 2022. On 26 July 2022, Victoria Police
advised that it did not object to the Original Application.
12 August 2022, the Chief Executive Officer of the Council advised that the
Council objected to the Original Application. There
were 204 objections lodged
to the Original Application.
Licensee responded to these objections by way of written submissions prepared by
King & Wood Mallesons and dated 18 October
2022. The submissions were
accompanied by several documents, including a document entitled “Proposed
Dan Murphy’s Daylesford:
Response to submissions”, prepared by Deep
End Services and dated 18 October
Original Decision
9 December 2022, a delegate of the Commission (
) determined to
grant the Original Application (
Original Decision
). The Delegate reasoned
that, in determining if the risks of amenity detriment, nuisance and anti-social
behaviour, domestic/family
violence, and the misuse and abuse of alcohol by
members of the community are likely to come to fruition, it is relevant to
whether there is application-specific or site-specific evidence to
support the likelihood of such outcomes occurring. In the Delegate’s
the objections had not adequately substantiated the claims made regarding these
risks. In the absence of substantial evidence,
the Delegate was unable to place
much weight to the claims made, and therefore could not be satisfied that there
was a likelihood
that the inferred risks would materialise from the grant of the
liquor Licence.
Applications for internal review
5 and 9 January 2023, the Commission received applications for internal review
from Ms Krystyna Szokolai, Ms Gina Butera,
Mr Mark Dickenson, Cr Jennifer Bray,
Hepburn Shire Council, Ms Irene Holub and Ms Lynda Poke (
Internal Review
Applications
application for internal review lodged by Ms Butera was said to represent the
following objectors: Ms Cheryl Bittman, Ms Michelle
Stephenson, Ms Robyn Rogers,
Ms Helen Greenwood, Mr Andy Greenwood, Ms Sam Anderson, Ms Margie Thomas, Mr
David Moore, Ms Kate McCrae,
Ms Trish Kevin, Ms Lisa Brophy and Ms Sue Wright.
Three of those persons – Ms Rogers, Mr Greenwood and Ms McCrae – had
not in fact lodged objections to the Original Application and were therefore not
treated as Internal Review Applicants. In these
reasons, all of the persons
identified in the previous paragraph and those listed in this paragraph who had
objected to the Original
Application, are referred to collectively as
Internal Review Applicants
. A number of other persons (most of whom had
objected to the Original Application) who had not lodged internal review
applications,
but who wished to be heard at the hearing, were designated as
Interested Persons
18 January 2023, the Commission invited objectors to indicate or confirm their
positions of “Objection” or “No
Objection” to the
Internal Review Applications by 27 January 2023. Between 18 and 27 January 2023,
the Commission received
63 responses maintaining objections to the Original
Application.
The Commission’s
internal review power
of Part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under
section 152, the decision made by the Delegate in
the Original Decision is
a reviewable decision and each of the Internal Review Applicants is an eligible
person to apply for a review
of that decision. The Internal Review Applications
were made pursuant to section 153.
to section 157(1), the task for the Commission with respect to the Internal
Review Applications is to make a decision that:
(a) affirms or varies the Original Decision; or
(b) sets aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original
decision-maker and makes a fresh decision with respect to
the Original
Application. In this case, the Commission must decide whether:
(a) the Original Application should be granted and, if so, whether any
conditions should be imposed;
(b) the Original Application should be
Determination of a contested application
the LCR Act, an application for the grant of a licence may be
“contested” or “uncontested”. The Original
Application
was contested, with more than 200 objections received under
5 of Part 2 within the relevant
section 47(2), the Commission may refuse to grant a contested application on any
of the grounds set out in section 44(2). Section
44(2) empowers the
Commission to refuse to grant the Internal Review Applications on various
grounds, including that the granting
of the application would detract from or be
detrimental to the “amenity” of the area in which the premises to
application relates are
and that the granting of
the application would be conducive to or encourage
3(1) defines “amenity” by reference to section
(1) For the purposes of this Act, the amenity of an area is the quality
that the area has of being pleasant and agreeable.
(2) Factors that may be taken into account in determining whether the
grant, variation or relocation of a licence would detract from
or be detrimental
to the amenity of an area include—
(d) the possibility of nuisance or vandalism;
(e) the harmony and coherence of the environment;
(f) any other prescribed matters.
(3) Nothing in subsection (2) is intended to limit the definition of
3AA is also relevant to the definition of amenity:
Evidence constituting detraction from or detriment to amenity of
For the purposes of this Act, evidence of any of the following factors,
which may occur inside, or a place outside a licensed premises
sufficiently proximate to, that premises, are taken to constitute evidence of
detraction from, or detriment to, the amenity
of the area in which the licensed
premises is situated—
(a) violent behaviour;
(b) drunkenness;
(c) vandalism;
(d) using profane, indecent or obscene language;
(e) using threatening, abusive or insulting language;
(f) behaving in a riotous, indecent, offensive or insulting
(g) disorderly behaviour;
(h) causing nuisance;
(i) noise disturbance to occupiers of other premises;
(j) obstructing a footpath, street or road;
(k) littering.
3(1) defines “harm” as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol,
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury or
property damage.
same provision separately defines “family violence” as having the
same meaning as in the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
of that Act defines “family violence” as
(1) For the purposes of this Act,
family violence
(a) behaviour by a person towards a family member of that person if that
(i) is physically or sexually abusive; or
(ii) is emotionally or psychologically abusive; or
(iii) is economically abusive; or
(iv) is threatening; or
(v) is coercive; or
(vi) in any other way controls or dominates the family member and causes
that family member to feel fear for the safety or wellbeing
of that family
member or another person; or
(b) behaviour by a person that causes a child to hear or witness, or
otherwise be exposed to the effects of, behaviour referred to
in paragraph
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), family violence includes the
following behaviour—
(a) assaulting or causing personal injury to a family member or
threatening to do so;
(b) sexually assaulting a family member or engaging in another form of
sexually coercive behaviour or threatening to engage in such
(c) intentionally damaging a family member’s property, or
threatening to do so;
(d) unlawfully depriving a family member of the family member’s
liberty, or threatening to do so;
(e) causing or threatening to cause the death of, or injury to, an animal,
whether or not the animal belongs to the family member
to whom the behaviour is
directed so as to control, dominate or coerce the family member.
(3) To remove doubt, it is declared that behaviour may constitute family
violence even if the behaviour would not constitute a criminal
Exercising the internal review power
172D(3) of the LCR Act requires the Commission, when performing functions or
duties or exercising powers, to have regard to
the objects of the LCR Act.
objects of the LCR Act are set out in section 4(1) as
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
4(2) further provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament
that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or
imposed by this Act
must be exercised and performed with due regard to harm
minimisation.
the Commission stated in
Woolworths Limited at Dan Murphy’s
Cranbourne East
premises (Liquor-internal review)
[2016] VCGLR
... while the grounds outlined under section 44(2) provide
relevant criteria for consideration, specifying as they do bases upon which
refusal to grant an application may be made, the ultimate determination of the
application is made pursuant to section 47(1) with
reference to the objects of
the LCR Act.
172U(3)(b) of the LCR Act also requires the Commission, when performing
functions or exercising powers under the LCR Act,
to have regard to any
decision-making guidelines issued by the Minister under section 172U(4). A
decision-making guideline that was
in effect immediately before 1 July 2022 in
relation to the regulation of liquor remains in effect on and after that day as
had been issued under section
guideline that is applicable here was issued on 7 June 2012 by the then Minister
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation Act
“Assessment of the Cumulative Impact of Licensed Premises”. This
guideline relevantly states that it is the
policy of the Victorian Government
that the Commission may assess the contribution of a new licensed premises to
the cumulative impact
concentration of licensed premises in an area. The Commission has had regard to
that guideline, and is conscious that it may
assess the contribution of the
Premises, were the Licence to be granted, to the cumulative impact of a
concentration of licensed
premises in the area. In light of the evidence before
it, the Commission has not, however, decided to refuse to grant the Licence
the basis of cumulative impact of a concentration of licensed premises in the
Conduct of an inquiry
Section 47(3)(a)
and (b) respectively provide that the Commission, before granting or refusing a
contested application, may have regard
to any matter the Commission considers
relevant and make any enquiries the Commission considers appropriate. Under
section 47(3)(c),
the Commission also must give the Internal Review Applicants
and each objector a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
172W(3) relevantly provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of
evidence but may inform itself in any way it
thinks fit, and is bound by the
rules of natural justice.
Commission held a hearing in this matter on 3-6, 9-12 October; 15, 21-22, 27-28
November 2023; and 29-30 January 2024. The parties
submitted initial written
submissions in May and June 2023. On 15 September 2023, the Commission invited
the parties to submit relevant
information as to various matters and submissions
as to matters arising from recent amendments to the LCR Act. The Commission also
indicated that it would be assisted by hearing from persons to be involved in
the day-to-day operations of the proposed store, and
in the supervision,
management and control of the proposed store. The parties submitted information
and submissions in response to
the Commission’s invitation on 25 and 26
September 2023. Subsequent to the close of evidence, the parties submitted final
submissions in January 2024, which were followed by final oral
submissions in the same month.
Harm minimisation – the
primary regulatory object
Victorian Court of Appeal addressed the concept of “harm
minimisation” in section 4 of the LCR Act in
Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
(2012) 39 VR 92
reference to earlier authority. Warren CJ and Osborn JA endorsed the explanation
of the ordinary meaning of the concept of harm
minimisation adopted by the judge
harm minimisation is a concept which has been central to
the National Drug Strategic Plan (1993–1997) which guided the development
and implementation of alcohol and drug policies across Australia through the
1990s. The concept was defined as an approach that aims
to reduce the adverse
health, social and economic consequences of alcohol and other drugs by
minimising or limiting the harms and
hazards of drug use for both the community
and the individual without necessarily eliminating use ... The approach includes
anticipated harm and reducing actual
their Honours held that “the general concept of harm minimisation does not
mean that every application for a liquor
licence should be
Their Honours
endorsed the observation of Ipp J of the Supreme Court of Western Australia in
considering the harm minimisation object
in liquor licensing legislation in that
State, that the relevant object is “to ‘minimize’ harm or
ill-health, not
to prevent harm or ill-health
absolutely”.
Their Honours
elaborated:
... [T]he objectives recognise that the manner of
supply and consumption of liquor may positively contribute to the amenity of
life and may encourage a culture of responsible consumption of
alcohol. It follows that the notion of harm minimisation is not simply
limiting the supply of alcohol. Rather, it is concerned with regulating supply
of alcohol so as to ensure, as far as practicable,
net community
... Ultimately, the tribunal was required to balance each of the objects
and arrive at an appropriate synthesis in the particular
circumstances of the
case by the way of a discretionary
Honours also adopted part of the reasoning of the judge below in emphasising the
importance of harm minimisation to the scheme
Section 4(2) emphasises that in making the relevant
discretionary judgment the decision-maker must have due regard to harm
minimisation
and the risks associated with the misuse and abuse of alcohol. For
the reasons explained by Tate JA, we accept that the text, context
and purpose
of s 4(2) lead to the conclusion that harm minimisation is a fundamental
principle of the Act and can properly be regarded
as “the primary
regulatory object and therefore the primary consideration in liquor licensing
decisions”, as the judge
relevant passage of Tate JA’s reasons was as follows:
view, the singling out of the object of harm minimisation in the context of an
explicit statement of how the Act must be interpreted
and applied, in s 4(2),
reveals that harm minimisation is a fundamental principle of the Act and
reinforces its importance as a value
which informs and guides the whole of the
Act. Combined with the legislative history that I have described, including the
materials set out, in my opinion the judge was correct to conclude
that the object of harm minimisation is “the primary regulatory
therefore the primary consideration in liquor licensing decisions”. This
is not to say, and the judge did not so
suggest, that it is to be taken into
account, or given such weight, to the exclusion of the other
CJ and Osborn JA also endorsed the proposition, emerging from the reasoning of
Judge Bowman in
v Director of Liquor Licensing
because the concept of harm minimisation is itself
anticipatory there may be cases in which a conservative approach should be
In this context, a conservative approach may mean a precautionary
approach leading to the conclusion that if an appreciable risk
identified, harm minimisation favours avoiding such potential risk unless it can
be positively justified.
, Judge Bowman had said:
[t]here may indeed be
circumstances in which a cautious conservative approach to the granting of a
licence should be adopted. However,
this does not mean that applications should
be virtually automatically rejected upon the creation of the slightest doubt or
As I have stated earlier, and as was stated in
, the logical extension of an argument such as this would be that no new
] would be granted, in order to minimise harm. The proper
foundations should exist so as to justify a decision, fairly and properly
to refuse an application for a licence. In my opinion, such foundation is
missing in the present case. It may be that, at some
future date, more research
and material is available in relation to this issue of density of outlets in
relation to socially disadvantaged
areas, but I am not satisfied that the
material put before me in this case warrants the refusal of the
application.
Hansen v Director of Liquor Licensing (Occupational and Business
Regulation)
[2006] VCAT 2544
, Senior Member Davis indicated that possible
harm must not be fanciful, and the risk must be more than
... while it is
harm may be caused by
the grant of a liquor licence and that may be taken into account when
considering the grant of a licence, I
do not believe that it was the intention
of Parliament that matters which are fanciful should be considered. Put a
different way,
the risk must be more than trivial.
I accept what was said by the Full Court of Western Australia in
Executive Director of Health v Lily
] (Ipp Owen Miller JJ)
(unreported 12 September [2]000) at paragraph 28 where it is stated:
The potential for harm or ill health is to be taken into account
irrespective of whether the prospect of harm or ill health is a
possibility
probability
. (emphasis added)
However, in my view, what their Honours were referring to was something
that was real, rather than fanciful or imaginary. In this
case, where there is
unlikely to be any increase in the sale of alcohol in the centre, in my view, it
is difficult to say that the
increased risk of harm by the granting of this
licence can be anything but fanciful. However, as a matter of caution, in
with what was stated by the Court in
take the risk into account when making my decision, but that cautious approach
means I consider that risk or take it into account,
it does not necessarily mean
a refusal of the
and Liquor Licensing Victoria
, Kellam J and Member
Angell, in the context of considering underage drinking, emphasised the
importance of considering the “particular
local, social, demographic and
circumstances”.
, Judge Bowman summarised expert evidence presented to his Honour
that was said to warrant a conservative approach in that
Increased density of outlets leads to increased consumption
of alcohol. Increased consumption leads to increased problems and abuse.
Increased density of packaged liquor outlets sends the wrong message and makes
packaged liquor more readily available to underage
drinkers. A conservative
approach is warranted, as the area in question is already well served by a
number of licensed premises and
the conservative approach is particularly
recommended when the additional licence would be located adjacent to a
neighbourhood of
low socio-economic status, and one that is already exposed to
alcohol-related problems, including
Bowman rejected this approach:
the real problem with [t]his
evidence as a principal supporting plank of the Nardis’ case seems to me
to be that, to succeed,
it basically must establish that increased availability
leads to increased consumption which leads to increased harm. If this
proposition
is correct, and were taken to its logical conclusion, no further
licences should be granted in this state because so to do would
be conducive to
or encourage the misuse or abuse of
, Warren CJ and Osborn JA, addressed both
We agree with the judge that the tribunal misread
the effect of prior tribunal decisions. ... The prior decisions of the tribunal
did not state that in applying the concept of harm minimisation it is always
necessary to determine by site-specific evidence whether
a licensee was or would
be individually responsible for harm arising from the misuse or abuse of
alcohol. Nor did those decisions
reject the relevance of general evidence
relating to risky drinking and associated problems of harm to the
In particular, in
Black and Cooke v Liquor Licensing Victoria
Kellam J and Angell M held, when considering an application for a packaged
liquor licence at a supermarket, that it was necessary
to determine whether the
licence would be contrary to the object of harm minimisation in the sense of
whether “the object of
harm minimisation stands out as being poorly served
by reason of particular local, social, demographic and geographic
circumstances”.
That approach involved evaluation of general evidence led
before the tribunal concerning the nature of potential alcohol misuse and
possible social impacts and its application to the local context.
Likewise, in
Nardi v Director of Liquor Licensing
, ... Judge Bowman
again had to consider an application for a packaged liquor licence at a
supermarket. His Honour heard general evidence
relating to the consequences of
probable increased consumption of alcohol and alcohol abuse. He was not
persuaded that this general
evidence should be determinative in that case and
held that it should be evaluated in the light of evidence as to the relevant
context. The tribunal in the present case was however wrong to find:
“His Honour made it clear that the expert evidence in
relation to harm
minimisation needs to be treated with considerable caution”. In turn the
tribunal was wrong to adopt this
Tate JA explained:
Black and Cooke
make plain that while a decision-maker should take into account any general
evidence adduced about the use and misuse of alcohol,
a significant factor in
determining how important the general evidence of harm minimisation is to a
particular application is whether
the general evidence has a connection with, or
is reinforced by, the particular local, social, demographic and geographic
circumstances
of the relevant premises: the “locality evidence”. In
my opinion, it is the determination of whether the object of harm
minimisation
is “poorly served by reason of particular local, social, demographic and
geographic circumstances” that
provides a proper factual foundation for
deciding whether, in the circumstances of the case, the object of harm
minimisation will
be advanced. By reference to such locality evidence a
decision-maker can avoid the object of harm minimisation resulting in an
negative answer to the issuing of further licences and an invariably
positive answer to any application for reduction of trading
hours. As these
consequences of “proving too much” were clearly not what was
intended under the Act, as acknowledged
Black and Cooke
, and by the judge, site-specific locality evidence is of
considerable importance.
some legislative amendments that have been made since the decision of the Court
of Appeal in
, the Commission does not consider that any
amendments have had any substantial impact on the applicability of the
principles outlined
above. The Commission approaches its task on the basis of
these principles.
Transitional provisions
Licensee submitted that certain amendments made to the LCR Act in 2022 did not
apply to the Original
Application.
Most of these
amendments related to the requirement under section 28(1)(ac) that an
application for a licence that applies to a large
packaged liquor outlet include
a community impact assessment. The Licensee relied on clause 13 of Schedule 6 to
the LCR Act:
An application for a licence that applies to a large
packaged liquor outlet that was made but not finally determined before the
commencement
of section 27AA and the amendment of sections 28, 29 and 44 by the
Liquor Control Reform Amendment Act 2021
(as applicable) is to be
determined in accordance with Division 4 of
as in force immediately
before that commencement as if section 27AA had not been enacted and those
amendments had not been made.
the trading area of the Premises would be 626.66 square metres, the Premises
would not be a “large packaged liquor outlet”
as defined by section
Clause 13 of Schedule 6 to
the LCR Act therefore does not apply to the Original Application.
of the amendments identified by the Licensee as not applicable to the Original
Application was the substitution in section 44(2)(b)(ii)
for “the misuse and abuse of alcohol”. Counsel Assisting submitted
that this amendment did apply
to the Original Application, as it is consistent
with the text, context and purpose of clause 13 of Schedule 6 to read its
to section 44 as referring only to the potential ground of refusal in
section 44(2)(d), not to the amendment of section
44(2)(b)(ii).
The Licensee
appeared to accept this as correct in its final written
submissions.
before the Commission
Commission has considered all the materials before the Delegate. The Commission
has also considered the materials described in
the appendix to these
Commissioners viewed the site of the proposed Premises on 21 March and
13 December 2023.
is useful to record at this juncture a number of features of Daylesford and of
the Original Application, based on the evidence
and the Commission’s site
(a) As recorded by the 2021 census, Daylesford has a population of 2781 and the
Hepburn Shire, within which Daylesford is located,
has a population of
(b) Daylesford is a popular tourist destination, with large influxes of visitors
particularly at weekends;
two existing specialist packaged liquor outlets in Daylesford have limited floor
spaces of 150 and 230 square metres (totalling
approximately 380 square metres)
and are located on or near the main street, namely Vincent
(d) The Premises would have a floor space of 626.66 square metres, nearly three
times the size of the larger of the two existing
specialist packaged liquor
outlets (with the effect that the total floor space of specialist packaged
liquor outlets in Daylesford
would more than double if the Premises were to
(e) The Premises would be located on the periphery of the commercial area of the
evidence as to particular characteristics of Daylesford, and the site and
context of the proposed Premises, is set out where
relevant below in the
Commission’s reasons.
number of persons submitted witness statements, not all of whom gave evidence at
the hearing. The Commission placed less weight
on the statements of persons who
did not give oral evidence, and whose evidence was therefore not tested at the
hearing. The relevant
persons are Ms Bridie De Vecchi, Mr Daniel J McDiarmid, Mr
Edwin Beacham, Ms Philippa Burne, Mr Simon O’Keefe and Ms Vanesa
Commission records its gratitude to the Internal Review Applicants and
Interested Persons who gave evidence (and to the witnesses
called by one of the
Internal Review Applicants), none of whom were legally represented. All invested
significant time in assisting
the Commission, and much of the evidence was
Internal Review Applicants
the exception of the Council, each of the Internal Review Applicants who
appeared at the hearing gave evidence, and one called
witnesses. Cr Jennifer
Bray, Mr David Moore, Mr Mark Dickenson, and Ms Michelle Stephenson each gave
evidence. Ms Lynda Poke also
gave evidence, as well as calling witnesses:
Prof Hal Swerissen, Dr Gregory Stewart, Ms Andrea Furness, and Dr Shelley
Cr Jennifer Bray
Jennifer Bray is an English and performing arts teacher who has lived at Hepburn
Springs since 2005.
taught at local schools in the Hepburn Shire for three years, and for 14 years
has run a youth performing arts program for
local children aged 4-18 years in
which 90 local children are currently
Her two children
attended Daylesford Preschool, Daylesford Primary School and the secondary
Daylesford College and are now
She was a member of
the Daylesford College School Council for three
was elected as a Councillor for Hepburn Shire in
At the hearing, she
represented herself as an individual community member, not as a Councillor, but
she said that her role as Councillor
had given her valuable insights into the
unique situation of Hepburn Shire’s local government, services, budgets,
constraints.
Hal Swerissen
Hal Swerissen was called as a witness by Ms Poke. He is an Emeritus Professor in
Public Health at La Trobe
University.
He previously held
the position of Pro Vice-Chancellor (Regional) and Executive Dean of Health
Sciences at La Trobe University, and
was the Head of the School of Public
He was also the
foundation director of the Australian Institute for Primary
In those roles, he was
involved in a number of research studies and evaluation studies on alcohol and
drug policy.
Prof Swerissen is
also a resident of Daylesford, splitting his time between there and
He has lived on and
off in Daylesford for 25 years.
He is the Chair of the Daylesford Neighbourhood Centre and the Daylesford
District Community News
Association.
Gregory Stewart
Gregory Stewart was called as a witness by Ms Poke. He is a General Practitioner
) who has been a resident of the Daylesford area since
He practised as a GP
obstetrician in Daylesford for about 20 years, first as a visiting medical
officer at Daylesford Hospital, then
as an owner at Springs
He retired from the
latter in 2021 and now does locum GP work in small country towns in
qualifications is a Graduate Certificate in Addiction Studies from Flinders
University.
Andrea Furness
Andrea Furness was called as a witness by Ms Poke. She is the Principal of the
Daylesford Dharma School, a role she has held for
The primary school
currently has 33 students, but normally pre-Covid had 60 students aged
Shelley Bowen
Shelley Bowen was called as a witness by Ms Poke. She is a founder and the Chief
Executive Officer of Health Futures Australia
and a resident of the Hepburn
She was previously the
principal policy advisor for Chronic Disease Prevention and the Senior Public
Health Advisor for the Victorian
Health Department up to about 2017, for nine
years overseeing the Victorian Government’s policy and action on
preventive health.
heavily involved in community activities in Lyonville and is a member of the
Hepburn Shire Council’s Municipal Public
Health and Wellbeing Planning
Working Group, and has participated in Council planning processes including the
Municipal Public Health
and Wellbeing
Lynda Poke is a Certified Practising Accountant who has lived in Daylesford and
the Hepburn Shire for the last 27
During that time, she has
worked as General Manager of Springs Medical Group for eight years, the key
provider of primary health
care services in Daylesford, Trentham and Kyneton,
from 2011 to 2019.
She was also
the Chief Financial Officer of Health Futures Australia until 2022, and for the
last four years has operated a local
enterprise.
She is also involved
in several local organisations, including the Daylesford Neighbourhood
David Moore
David Moore is an architect and a resident of the Hepburn
He has lived there since
2006, and has regularly spent time in Daylesford since
He is involved in various
community groups in the
Mark Dickenson has been a resident of the Daylesford and Hepburn Springs areas
for 19 years.
He currently works
part-time in the local area in
hospitality.
His two children
attended the Daylesford Preschool and Daylesford Primary
Michelle Stephenson
Michelle Stephenson is an Organisational Change Manager and has been a resident
of Daylesford for 18 years.
participates in several community organisations and
activities.
Interested Persons gave evidence at the hearing: Ms Debra Rauber, Mr Peter
O’Mara, Mr David Ferguson, Mr Basil Eliades,
Cr Lesley Hewitt, and Dr
Jennifer Beacham.
Ms Debra Rauber
Debra Rauber is a retired primary school teacher who has lived in Mount
Franklin, 10 kilometres from Daylesford, for 42
She taught at several
schools, including Daylesford Primary School and Yandoit Primary School (an
annexe of Daylesford Primary School),
for 27 years in
Peter O’Mara
Peter O’Mara has lived and worked in the Daylesford area for 30
His work has mostly been
around young people (primarily 12-25 years of age) and he described himself as
the lead community outreach
He is the convenor of
the Daylesford Community Park and, in that capacity, the author of the
Daylesford Community Park Management
Plan prepared for the Hepburn Shire Council
and updated every two years.
said that this has given him a good overview of what happens in public spaces
for young people in
Daylesford.
David Ferguson
David Ferguson is a software engineer and resident of Daylesford, whose property
is on the other side of Central Springs Road from
the Premises, a few doors
He has lived in Daylesford
for nine years.
He and his wife
run a boutique accommodation business and he occasionally volunteered at the
Daylesford Football Club.
children went to the local schools in Daylesford, and he participated in primary
school activities when they were
Basil Eliades
Basil Eliades has been a resident of Daylesford for almost 30
He is an artist, author
and distiller who owns a small business in the
His two adult children
attended the
Lesley Hewitt
Lesley Hewitt is a retired social worker and a Hepburn Shire
Councillor.
She has been a
Councillor since November 2020, a ratepayer in the Shire since 1996 and a
permanent resident since 2008.
Her work history as a social worker has related to dealing with interpersonal
violence, including experience in child protection
services and personal
development.
For six years, she
was a director of Hepburn Health prior to its amalgamation to form Central
Highlands Rural Health in 2016, including
as Deputy Chair for 18 months prior to
the amalgamation.
participates in a number of local community organisations, including as the
Secretary and the Equestrian Coach at Riding
for the Disabled Association of
) in Daylesford since
Jennifer Beacham
Jennifer Beacham has been a resident of the Hepburn Shire for 34 years and is a
tourism operator.
She and her
husband run a guest house in
Daylesford.
Dr Beacham has
participated in a number of community organisations, including the Daylesford
Neighbourhood
Licensee initially proposed to call two expert witnesses: Mr Chris Abery and
Ms Colleen Peterson. Following the Commission’s
invitation on 15
September 2023 (see above at [
Licensee called two further two lay witnesses: Mr James Scott-Mackenzie and Ms
Rosie Prezioso. All four of the Licensee’s
witnesses gave oral evidence at
the hearing.
Mr Chris Abery
Chris Abery submitted a report dated 18 October 2022, entitled “Response
to submissions”, which was a response to submissions
made by objectors to
the Original Application, and was lodged before the Original Decision (
2022 Report
). He submitted a second report dated 15 June 2023, entitled
“Expert witness statement to the Victorian Liquor Commission”
Abery 2023 Report
Abery has over 35 years’ experience in retail research, spatial analysis
and modelling, and property market and project
evaluation.
He is a Director of
Deep End Services, which Mr Abery described as an applied spatial planning and
Colleen Peterson
Colleen Peterson submitted a report entitled “Social Impact Assessment:
Proposed Dan Murphy’s Packaged Liquor: 63 Central
Springs Road,
Daylesford”, dated 8 June 2023 (
Peterson Report
Peterson is a qualified town planner who has practised town planning since
She is the Chief Executive
Consultants.
James Scott-Mackenzie
James Scott-Mackenzie is the Business Development Manager for the
His role involves
managing new packaged liquor applications; managing all liquor licence
applications for the Licensee in Victoria,
South Australia, the Northern
Territory, Tasmania and southern New South Wales (including applications for new
licences as well as
applications to transfer, vary, redefine and alter existing
licences); managing community and stakeholder engagement on liquor licence
applications; and managing compliance with licensing laws and
regulations.
Rosie Prezioso
Rosie Prezioso is the Dan Murphy’s State Manager for Victoria and
Tasmania, employed by the
Submissions
Internal Review Applicants and the Licensee submitted written submissions in
May/June 2023, September 2023, and January 2024.
They also made final oral
submissions on 29 and 30 January.
Council submitted three sets of written submissions. The first was prepared by
Russell Kennedy Lawyers, dated 31 May 2023 (
Council May Submissions
Subsequent to the directions hearing held on 27 June 2023, that firm ceased to
act for the Council, which instructed Mr Jason Kane
by direct brief. Mr Kane
submitted the second and third sets of submissions on behalf of the Council,
dated respectively 25 September
Council September Submissions
15 January 2024 (
Council January Submissions
Council May Submissions set out some of the background to the planning process
that preceded the Original
Application.
It provided
demographic information, identified sensitive use facilities in the community,
and identified liquor licences in
Daylesford.
The Council
submitted that the granting of the Licence would be detrimental to the amenity
of the area and that there is a real potential
that the granting of the Licence
would be conducive to or encourage the misuse or abuse of
Council September Submissions included a submission that there is an evidentiary
onus and burden on the Licensee in this application
to demonstrate that the
proposed packaged liquor outlet will not result in harm through the misuse and
abuse of alcohol, and that,
as the applicant for the packaged liquor Licence,
the evidentiary burden to satisfy these tests rests with the
The Commission does
not accept that there is an onus on a licence applicant as asserted by the
Council also referred to the Second Reading Speech for the amendment to the
definition of harm:
The government commenced a review of the Act
in November 2016. This review was divided into two phases. The first phase
resulted in
Liquor and Gambling Legislation Amendment Act 2018
introduced several important amendments that strengthened the harm minimisation
measures in the Act, whilst also cutting red
The second phase of the review has considered a range of more complicated
matters, including the extent to which liquor regulation
can play a part in
reducing family violence. During this, the government undertook extensive
consultation with industry, health,
community and family violence stakeholders
on the reform proposals. The outcomes of the second phase of the review will be
implemented
in this Bill.
I now turn to the provisions of the Bill before the House.
The Bill will introduce significant amendments to ensure that the Act is
effective in minimising harm and supports a responsible industry.
The primary object of the Act is to minimise harm from the misuse and
abuse of alcohol. However, harm is not currently defined in
the Act. The Bill
amends the Act to introduce a definition of harm. This definition will provide
greater clarity and certainty for
the regulator, the Victorian Commission for
Gambling and Liquor Regulation (VCGLR), which must consider the objects of the
its decisions. The definition will include family violence and other
community level harms, including injury and property damage.
Including family
violence in the definition of harm is an important measure in acting upon the
recommendation of the Royal Commission
into Family Violence that the review
consider family violence and alcohol-related harms, and confirms its relevance
in relation to
liquor regulation for the VCGLR and the
Commission notes the emphasis on community-level harms, which accommodates
evidence relating to the relevant community, including
input from the relevant
community itself. Such evidence was a feature of the hearing in this
Council addressed the issue of the density of liquor
It submitted that
there is a genuine risk that the proposed Dan Murphy’s will increase
family violence within the Hepburn Shire
through: the misuse and abuse of
alcohol; the concentration and density of packaged liquor outlets within
Daylesford; the greater
density of packaged liquor outlets will increase the
risk of higher levels of alcohol consumption, misuse of alcohol, anti-social
behaviour, and potentially an increase in family violence; the convenience and
accessibility of alcohol that Dan Murphy’s will
offer to the community,
including discounted and cheap alcohol; and the proposed hours of
The Council
submitted that there is a tipping point where a small regional town such as
Daylesford is not suitable for another packaged
liquor outlet, and that the
approval of a fourth packaged liquor outlet in this small town will result in a
saturation of these outlets
Daylesford.
circumstances, the Council submitted, it is the LCR Act’s expectation that
a liquor licence for the Dan Murphy’s
Council also addressed the potential for harm to minors, again submitting that
there is an evidentiary burden on the Licensee
to establish that such harm will
not result from the proposed packaged liquor
This was said to
arise from the location in a “family friendly precinct” containing
sensitive community facilities that
are heavily frequented by families,
teenagers and children every
The Council submitted
that, due to its proposed location, young people will be directly exposed to the
Dan Murphy’s, which
could increase positive beliefs about alcohol and
promote underage drinking.
Such an outcome was said to be inconsistent with the LCR Act’s focus of
harm minimisation, and the objective of encouraging
a culture of responsible
consumption of alcohol and reducing risky drinking of
The Council also
submitted that the location of the Premises is inconsistent with the objective
of minimising harm by encouraging
a culture of responsible consumption of
alcohol and reducing risky drinking of alcohol, through a risk of impulsive
purchasing of
alcohol by parents and other adults who attend this area each
Council in its January Submissions maintained its earlier September
Submissions.
submitted that, in accordance with
at [17], the Commission must
assemble all the material before it and conduct an assessment of net community
The Council
submitted that:
based on all the material now before it, the
Commission must conclude that:
a. Daylesford is [a] vulnerable community, with vulnerable groups within
the community.
b. In the context of Daylesford, the Dan Murphy’s is a high-risk
application that will greatly increase the availability of
packaged liquor and
the risk of alcohol related harm.
c. The Dan Murphy’s will facilitate greater access to cheap packaged
liquor in an extremely convenient location. There is a
real risk that a change
in price, and greater competition between packaged liquor outlets in Daylesford,
will result in an increase
in the consumption of alcohol. This in turn will
increase the risk of alcohol related harm and the risking [
of alcohol. Accordingly, this application is not conducive to minimising harm,
but rather is conducive to encouraging alcohol
related harm.
d. The application does not generate a net community benefit. The many
negative impacts that the Dan Murphy’s will generate
outweighed by the generic benefit of providing an increase in the availability
of packaged liquor and the cheaper pricing of
e. The proposed Dan Murphy’s is fundamentally inconsistent with the
fundamental objective of the Act being harm minimisation.
f. Dan Murphy’s has failed to call any evidence regarding the
relationship between alcohol supply and family violence. The consideration
family violence is a fundamental component of the definition of
a key plank of the Victorian Government’s reform to the Act.
g. A Liquor Licence should not
Council quoted from the reasons of Tate JA in
at [152], [188],
[191], [198] in referring to the concept of harm
minimisation.
Council anticipated criticism that the Internal Review Applicants’
evidence was not independent or was not based on relevant
expertise, which it
submitted would be an unfair
Council’s submission, all witnesses, including those called by the
Licensee, made appropriate concessions when required
to do so and were not
evasive in their answers.
Many of the Internal Review Applicants were said to be highly qualified and had
particular expertise in their relevant field: Prof
Swerissen (Public Health), Ms
Poke (Medical), Dr Stewart (Medical), Mr O’Mara (Youth Worker/Educator),
Ms Furness (Education)
and Cr Hewitt (Domestic
Council described as a critical shortcoming that neither the Licensee, nor its
expert witnesses (Mr Abery and Ms Peterson), undertook
any consultation with
local stakeholders or the
It referred to the
recommendation of the Darwin Independent Panel Review
with which it
submitted the lack of any consultation was completely at
That the Woolworths Group [of which the Licensee was
formerly part] takes a more inclusive approach to identify, engage and listen
a wider range of stakeholders concerned with the impacts of new proposals
– particularly, but not necessarily exclusively,
when it comes to the sale
of alcohol in communities with a strong First Nations presence. In this respect,
the Panel recommends that
Woolworths Group takes steps to provide multiple
direct and indirect channels for stakeholder
engagement.
Council also referred to an internal Governance Committee risk assessment
provided by the Licensee to the Commission, dated 7
October 2021, which
contained the following executive summary:
Daylesford is a
tourist town known for its natural mineral springs, forestry flora and fauna.
~50% of the residents are in the mature
age group. Daylesford forms part of the
Hepburn LGA which covers a vast area in central Victoria just over an hour from
A recent community satisfaction survey released by the Hepburn Shire
specifically identifies greater consultation in planning and
development are
areas of critical importance to the community. Given the views of the community
in a tourist town, coupled with the
high licence density of this type,
it’s recommended that the situation be monitored off the back of any
during the application
Council submitted that this risk assessment was significant because it
recognised that around 50% of the residents of Daylesford
are in the mature age
group; it acknowledged that greater consultation in planning and development are
areas of critical importance
to the community, and it acknowledged that
Daylesford has a high licence density of this
The Council referred to
people over the age of 65 years being a priority population group at risk of
harmful alcohol consumption
National Alcohol Strategy 2019-2028
prepared by the Commonwealth Department of Health, which was addressed by Ms
Peterson in her
Jennifer Bray
Bray concluded her final written submissions (
Bray January Submissions
as follows:
I submit that the vulnerabilities inherent in this
community, the increased density this proposal represents, the store policies of
cheaper prices and convenience, the choice of location close to a kindergarten,
primary school, swimming pool and school bus stop,
will likely increase the risk
of harm to this community, such as underage drinking, family violence, and an
early propensity to alcohol
consumption for young children exposed to alcohol on
a daily basis for many
Bray addressed in her final oral submissions the issue of whether there is an
onus of proof on an applicant under the LCR Act.
She submitted that while the
LCR Act does not explicitly make a statement about onus of proof, it is
implicit, based on the objects
She submitted that the
applicant must present a case that would allow the Commission to assess those
criteria (the objects).
with the Council’s submissions in this respect, the Commission does not
accept that there is an onus on a licence applicant.
Bray echoed the Council’s submissions in submitting that the Commission
must weigh up if the net community benefits are outweighed
by the negative
impacts of this proposal and whether these negative impacts will pose a likely
risk of harm to members of this community,
now and in the
Poke outlined five key points in her final written submissions (
Poke January
Submissions
): for the Daylesford town and community, establishing a packaged
liquor outlet to be known as Dan Murphy’s in Daylesford, with
floor space of 627 square metres, is a “game changer” in the context
the granting of the
Daylesford Dan Murphy packaged liquor Licence will increase packaged liquor
density in an already saturated liquor
market, especially for packaged
the prominent nature
of the proposed site for children, the increased availability of low cost
alcohol at the site, and the site’s
lack of integration with the community
shopping precinct increases the likelihood of underage drinking in Daylesford
and Hepburn
Daylesford is a vulnerable
and that there is
a lack of access to services, in that there is inadequate community support and
health and medical
to the first of these key points, she referred to the nature of the proposed
outlet as what she called a “big box packaged
liquor outlet” as a
“game changer” for the Daylesford town and community in the context
In this regard, Ms
Poke criticised the evidence of Mr Abery and Ms Peterson for, respectively, a
lack of regard for the local demographics
and situation, and a failure
adequately to analyse the local environment and
She referred to
the fact that the Premises would not be a large packaged liquor outlet under the
LCR Act, before continuing:
For a population the size of
Daylesford, the proposed Dan Murphy’s at 626.66 square metres, is by
comparison, a large packaged
liquor outlet (LPLO) in a Daylesford context. The
combined size of the floor space of the existing packaged liquor outlets
(Cellarbrations,
Liquorland and Blakes Grocers bottle shop) would be less than
50% of this new development. Perhaps policy makers and legislators
forgiven for not foreseeing the impact of a new development in the context of a
small rural town with such a small
population.
Mr Mark Dickenson
Dickenson concluded his submissions (
Dickenson January Submissions
the following way:
... this appeal revolves around the definition
of harm. ... it is impossible for any discount liquor outlet to be located on a
facing a kindergarten, primary school, swimming pool and bus depot, and
minimise harm
. There is no opportunity to reduce risky drinking in a
location that caters to families, young adults and public transport users.
introduction of a major discount liquor outlet in a town of less than 4,000
people, and placement of this development in an area
primarily used by young
locals, in fact incites risky drinking and causes
Ms Michelle Stephenson
Stephenson summarised her final written submissions (
Stephenson January
Submissions
) as follows:
It is not in our community’s
interest whatsoever to have Dan Murphy’s liquor outlet establish and
operating in our small
town. There is no evidence to support there are any
benefits that will be brought to our community as a result.
Through my personal observations and lived experience in my 18 years
living in Daylesford, I have witnessed the detrimental impacts
to people’s
lives as a result of alcohol abuse and misuse. Adding another large packaged
liquor outlet will only add fuel to
Our vulnerable members of our community will be put at higher risk as
there no outreach support services available in our community.
As a result, Dan
Murphy’s will have a significant negative impact on the wellbeing of our
The Commission’s decision on this case may not directly improve the
outcomes of the individual’s stories I have shared
but if the license is
revoked it can contribute to broader solution rather than contribute to a
growing problem.
Mr David Moore
Moore submitted (
Moore December Submissions
) that too much of Ms
Peterson’s evidence relied on what can be gathered from the desktop, and
not enough of it is properly
“road-tested in the
The Commission
acknowledges that there are limitations in relying on statistics, as they
reflect what is occurring in a particular
area at a particular point in time.
Where evidence is available from persons with local knowledge, this offers
potential utility
beyond the limitations of statistical analysis. In this
matter, such evidence was given by several persons. The Commission has carefully
weighed both types of evidence in relation to the specific issues
Licensee lodged written submissions dated 18 October 2022, addressing objections
to the Original Application that had been lodged
before the Original Decision
Licensee October Submissions
). It referred to the Abery 2022
It then outlined what
it identified as the relevant objects of the LCR Act, making reference in this
context to the new definition
of harm in section
Licensee submitted that the objections, at their highest, merely suggest the
possibility as a general proposition that the relevant
“problem” issue raised may be caused, or contributed to, by the
granting of the application.
It submitted that that is an insufficient basis for refusing a licence
application.
The Licensee
also relied on its Responsible Service of Alcohol (
initiatives.
The Licensee
addressed issues raised by the objections, including the “availability
theory” (more supply, in larger bulk
outlets, leads to more consumption);
trading hours; “cheap liquor”; traffic; insufficient need for a
further liquor outlet;
and positive effects on
Licensee submitted three sets of written submissions on the internal review
applications, dated respectively 21 June 2023 (
Licensee June
Submissions
), 26 September 2023 (
Licensee September Submissions
15 January 2024 (
Licensee January
Submissions
Licensee in its June Submissions set out what it identified as the relevant
legislative provisions.
then quoted at length from various cases, including cases outlined
Licensee in its June Submissions also addressed the planning process that
preceded the Original Application, and set out conditions
of the permit which it
said addressed many of the amenity issues raised in the
objections.
Licensee addressed the Council May Submissions, including by criticising the
Council for not calling evidence in the hearing –
criticism that was
repeated in the Licensee January Submissions and in its final oral
submissions.
Licensee addressed matters raised by the Internal Review Applicants and
Interested Persons, including: whether Daylesford is more
alcohol-related harm due to its demographic profile; whether Daylesford is a
vulnerable community; whether Daylesford
is more at risk of alcohol-related harm
due to its socio-economic status; signage; underage drinking; whether the
proposed location
is appropriate; whether another packaged liquor licence would
mean that harm would arise; Dan Murphy’s as a corporate entity;
and public consumption of
Licensee in its September Submissions submitted that there is nothing in the
limited changes to the objects of the LCR Act made
Liquor Control
Reform Amendment Act 2021
(Vic) that imposed an onus of proof or any burden
as compared with previous applications, citing authorities from the area of
regulation.
the Licensee in its January Submissions, and in its final oral submissions,
submitted that the changes made to the LCR
Liquor Control Reform
Amendment Act 2021
(Vic) are subtle and minor and do not make any
substantial change to the way the Commission should approach this Application as
with previous
applications.
The Licensee
submitted that it bore no onus of proof and that it would be wrong to conclude
that the Licensee is required to bring
evidence beyond that required in the
application.
The Licensee
submitted that the additional material brought before the Commission had
provided further detail.
noted above, the Commission does not accept that there is an onus on a licence
Licensee relied on its June Submissions and its September Submissions as to the
appropriate approach to the
application.
further extracts from case law, including case law outlined
Licensee submitted that the appropriate approach is for the Commission to
consider whether the Internal Review Applicants have
proved that the affirmation
of approval of the Licence will produce a change in the community which can be
identified and is of sufficient
magnitude to be said to be conducive to or
encourage harm, and, if any are found, to weigh those findings in its
decision-making.
Branbeau Pty Ltd and Victorian Commission of Gambling Regulation
[2005] VCAT
(2005) 24 VAR 56
, the Licensee submitted that the Commission should focus
on the marginal impact of approval of the Application – not the impacts
drinking, liquor consumption or even packaged liquor consumption
across the community – and to do otherwise would be to deprive the
Licensee of approval on the basis of a level of risk accepted
by the Government
on behalf of the people of Victoria in permitting liquor to be freely available
across the community.
Licensee described its case as that, where assertions are based on mere
supposition or represent mere possibilities, they should
not be afforded
significant weight, and not such as to cause the Commission not to affirm the
Delegate’s decision to grant
Licensee submitted that certain categories of evidence should be weighed in
order of reliability, with its independent expert
evidence sitting atop a
proposed hierarchy.
Commission has exercised judgment as to the weight to be accorded to various
items of evidence, including in light of the Commission’s
assessment of
the reliability of particular evidence and whether it was tested, but it does
not consider that the Licensee’s
suggested categorical hierarchy is
Licensee, relying on
Ocean Grove Bowling Club v Victorian Commission for
Gambling Regulation
[2006] VCAT 1921
, submitted that the only
experts in the hearing who are independent are those called by the Licensee, who
are both expert in their
relevant fields and skilled in matters relevant to this
Application.
Licensee identified what it described as omissions in the evidence presented to
the Commission: direct, specific and verifiable
incidents of harm arising from
the sale of packaged liquor in Daylesford; evidence from any person who
expresses actual concern for
their own personal well-being or that of close
friends or family members; any independent expert witness qualified and briefed
support the propositions about density relied upon by the Council (or any
other Internal Review Applicant) despite discussions having
been conducted with
Assoc Prof Michael Livingston, upon whose broad body of work much reliance
appears to be placed; any evidence
or expert evidence as to the economic or
other impact (other than a newspaper report in a local publication, which is
broadly consistent
with Mr Abery’s evidence); and any media, Council
minutes or other material pre-dating the Original Application which suggests
that there is an historical or disproportionate problem or vulnerability to
alcohol within the community of
Daylesford.
Licensee in its January Submissions addressed Prof Swerissen’s evidence,
including his reliance on figures for alcohol consumption
for the Daylesford
area and his explanation
that his argument was not that Daylesford is particularly different from other
parts of country Victoria,
but rather that it has a higher than recommended
alcohol consumption for lifetime risk at the
The Licensee
submitted in this context that, if a situation exists across the Victorian
community, there may be numerous policy interventions
at a State or federal
level which may assist, but it does not follow that licensing decision-making
should be asked to shoulder that
burden by requiring the Commission to refuse
applications where there is a cohort of people said to be drinking more than the
limit by reference to average
Similarly, in the
context of family violence, the Licensee submitted that the Commission should
not be drawn into State level policy
interventions in making licensing
Licensee submitted that there is no explicit need to achieve a net benefit, but
that that does not preclude consideration of positive
aspects which flow from
the granting of the Licence.
These were said to include: increased consumer choice and product
diversification; increased short-term (construction) and long-term
opportunities; increased provision of landscaping opportunities along street
frontages; provision of a vibrant commercial
use on vacant land; development of
vacant land at a cost of approximately $7.5 million; and increased market
competition in the form
of potential for the provision of a new bottle shop to
result in lower consumer prices for goods and services provided as retailers
for customers.
The Licensee
addressed in final oral submissions whether a test of “net community
benefit” (as advocated by the Council)
would be appropriate for the
Commission to adopt, with reference to
at [17]. The Licensee
submitted that the relevant passage in that case referred to a concept of
balancing the different objects within
section 4(1)(a) of the LCR Act, and did
not say that every application must produce a net community
for decision on review
Issues for determination on review
deciding whether to exercise its discretion to affirm, vary or set aside the
Original Decision, and in turn grant or refuse the
Original Application that is
the subject of the Internal Review Applications, the Commission must consider
the following key issues:
granting the Licence would be conducive to or encourage
or contribute to
minimising harm;
granting the Licence would detract from or be detrimental to the amenity of the
area in which the premises are
(c) whether granting the Licence would facilitate the development of a diversity
of licensed facilities reflecting community
expectations;
(d) whether granting the Licence would contribute to the responsible development
of the liquor, licensed hospitality and live music
industries.
issues are discussed in turn.
granting the Licence would be conducive to or encourage harm, or contribute to
minimising harm
application may be refused if granting it would be conducive to or encourage
In addition, the
Commission must exercise its discretion whether or not to grant a licence with
regard to the objects of the LCR
Act, particularly the primary object of harm
minimisation.
definition of “harm” in section 3(1) of the LCR Act is set out
above. The Commission notes that it means harm arising
from the misuse or abuse
of alcohol, and expressly includes (but is not confined to) various forms of
such harm as set out in paragraphs
(a) to (c). The prospect that the Licence
would be conducive to or encourage harm as so defined was the subject of
evidence and submissions
throughout the hearing.
Ultimately,
the Commission finds that granting the Licence would be conducive to or
encourage harm, specifically to minors. This means
that a ground for refusal is
made out. The Commission’s reasons for this are explained
Harm to minors
Introduction
(a) of the definition of “harm” confirms that harm arising from the
misuse and abuse of alcohol includes such
harm to minors.
was evidence that there is a problem with underage drinking in Daylesford.
Youth Census Survey conducted by the Council in December 2020 (
Youth Census
) recorded that 121 of 135 15-19 year olds surveyed (90%) said that
they had used alcohol before.
The sample size of the survey relative to the total population of 15-19 year
olds was 18.65%.
Accordingly,
the Youth Census Survey covered “youths” who are not
“minors” within the meaning of the LCR Act.
However, only 15 of the
participants in the survey were aged 18 years or
The figures for 15-17
year olds were 106 of 120
way of comparison, the national Australian Secondary Students’ Alcohol and
) survey for 2017 found that 66% of students aged 12-17 years
reported having tried
No percentage figure
was specifically given for the age group of 15-17 years, but the percentages for
the individual age groups within
that range were 74% of 15 year olds, 81% of 16
year olds and 85% of 17 year
It appears, therefore,
that there is a higher incidence of underage drinking in Daylesford – at
least for the 15-17 year old
demographic – than the national average.
Youth Census Survey also recorded that 28% of 15-19 year olds, and 30% of 15-17
year olds, selected “Reducing harmful alcohol
and drug use” as one
of their top three areas for the Council to focus on to improve health and
wellbeing across the Hepburn
Commission received other evidence, including of an anecdotal nature, as to
underage drinking in Daylesford.
O’Mara referred to the results of the Youth Census Survey, saying his work
experience corroborates these results, noting
that there is a high demand by
local youth and families for youth alcohol reduction work and support
strategies.
Bray estimated that between 20% and 30% of 14-17 year olds might be drinking
occasionally or frequently, noting that any drinking
is a problem for
is one secondary school located in Daylesford: Daylesford
The student
population in 2023 was 441 students aged 12-18
Cr Bray gave evidence
that she had conducted interviews with seven to 10 secondary school students,
aged 15-16 years, attending Daylesford
on the information she gathered from these interviews, Cr Bray gave evidence
that students bring alcohol into classrooms at
school; and that there is
drinking with friends on weekends and after school; and at parties on the
She referred to
Daylesford College students bragging about their drinking and other risky
behaviour aimed at getting very drunk very
quickly and doing dangerous
activities while drunk for thrill-seeking, including: driving; having sex;
climbing up structures or
on buildings; and riding kangaroos and other
Bray gave evidence based on her interviews with Daylesford College students that
they obtained alcohol from their parents’
supply; by an older person
buying it for them; and by buying online with an older person picking it
Cr Bray elaborated on
this, claiming that regulation at the point of sale is not a rigorous enough
safeguard to prevent minors from
She said that
underage drinkers are not presenting at the point of sale to purchase liquor,
yet they are still obtaining
This was said to be
shown by the ASSAD
Dickenson said that he was aware that there is a culture of boasting of
drinking, the bringing of flasks into the school and running
off to the toilets
Licensee in its January Submissions submitted that no weight should attach to
“survey evidence engaged in by hearing participants”
including Cr
It submitted that the
notion that children would tell their friend’s mother who is a Councillor
that others were using alcohol
irresponsibly but they themselves were not, gives
no reliable understanding of the basis of these assertions or whether they are
fairly or properly based.
However, the Commission considers that it is unrealistic to expect secondary
school students to give evidence to the Commission in
a hearing of internal
review applications.
Commission exercises caution with respect to the anecdotal (and
“hearsay”) evidence referred to above, notwithstanding
rules of evidence do not apply.
Commission does not regard the anecdotal evidence as reliable as to the precise
proportion of minors who have drunk, or who drink,
in Daylesford. In respect of
that particular issue, the Youth Census Survey is more reliable. Nevertheless,
the Commmission considers
that, on the whole, the anecdotal and
“hearsay” evidence is of some value in understanding underage
drinking in Daylesford,
noting (in particular) the obvious difficulties in
obtaining direct evidence from minors who may engage in underage drinking.
Bray submitted a letter from the Principal of Daylesford College, Mr Steve
MacPhail, in which he said that the school is investing
significant time and
resources into addressing student wellbeing related to alcohol
He added that the
school is actively engaged in implementing educational programs and awareness
campaigns to promote responsible
behaviour and discourage alcohol consumption
among students.
Bray identified various locations as ones to which Daylesford College students
regularly walk after school, where they socialise,
meet friends and family or
wait for a ride home. These include the swimming pool, the bus stop, the Coles
supermarket and the public
library on the northeastern corner of Bridport and
Albert Streets.
She estimated
that around 200 adolescents would be exposed to the Premises on a weekly
The Commission regards
the supermarket and the library as too far from the Premises to be causes for
concern. However, the swimming
pool and the bus stop are both directly opposite
the Premises, and possible risks arising from their proximity to the Premises
require careful consideration.
below is a map submitted by Cr Bray showing the location of the Premises, the
swimming pool and the bus stop.
Peterson, who was called by the Licensee, referred to the 90% figure from the
Youth Census Survey in describing the Hepburn Shire’s
Development Strategy”.
Ms Peterson’s firm (and King & Wood Mallesons, and the Licensee) was
unable to find any other data on underage drinking
in Daylesford or the Local
Government Area (
Ms Peterson noted that the Hepburn Shire’s strategy document indicated
that reasons for youth engagement in underage drinking
included a lack of
entertainment, boredom and stress
Cr Bray also gave
evidence of a lack of recreational activities for children and teenagers in
Daylesford and the Hepburn
Ms Peterson stated in evidence, teenagers and young adults are a group that is
at risk of alcohol-related
The Australian
Guidelines to Reduce Health Risks from Drinking Alcohol released by the National
Health and Medical Research Council,
informed by a comprehensive evaluation of
scientific evidence, states: “[t]here is no clear ‘safe’ level
consumption for children and people under 18 years of age. This is
because of the increased risks of harm from alcohol for young
people, including
from injury and potential adverse effects on brain
development.”
“The harms of concern include injury, alcohol poisoning, risk taking,
altered brain development and the potential for developing
harmful drinking
patterns later in
particular, Ms Peterson referred to evidence that alcohol is a contributing
factor in 13% of deaths amongst 14-17 year
She said that the risk
factors for teenagers are to do with exploring and pushing boundaries around
alcohol consumption and cultural
values and peer
this evidence, the Commission understood Ms Peterson to suggest that the
Commission, in making its decision, should put less
weight on any risks to
teenagers arising from the proposed Premises on the basis of the relatively
small proportion of teenagers
in the Daylesford
The Commission
does not accept this. The number of minors in Daylesford is not trivial,
irrespective of whether the proportion of
minors in Daylesford is relatively
small compared with other
communities.
And, as noted
above, the harm that may be caused to minors by consuming alcohol is
significant.
“Generational” drinking
Bray was one of several witnesses to give evidence of underage drinking
occurring at specific locations around
Daylesford.
She described
students drinking at night at Lake Daylesford and other parks and outdoor
natural settings.
particular, she identified a track down from Central Springs Road to the lake,
and various spots around the lake that are not
easily viewed where groups of
young people meet.
those young people are underage and some are older; alcohol is a part of those
group gatherings.
O’Mara identified Lake Daylesford, the Daylesford Skate Park and Cornish
Hill Nature Reserve as the areas of highest incidence
of public underage
All these sites
were said to have undisclosed walking pathways and hidden nature-based sight
lines from the Premises; once a young
person leaves the Premises, they could be
“unseen” within 50
characterised the Premises as, in this sense, having a “fringe”
element when compared with the other
packaged liquor outlets in
Daylesford.
The Licensee
itself noted, in its June Submissions, the “relative isolation” of
the subject site from the tourist centre
of town (compared with Foxxy’s
Liquor/Cellarbrations and
Liquorland).
on his local knowledge and observations, Mr O’Mara said that he believed
that young people will seek out outlets which
best suit their needs, being quick
and unsighted access to the locations identified above, which he described as
“generational”
He said that he had
observed young people drinking at these
O’Mara said that work had been done on the sight lines at Daylesford Lake
and Daylesford Community Park, but was not aware
of any collective project to
minimise the risk of harm from alcohol at those
He said that the
forest or bushland surrounding Daylesford provides great opportunity close to
the township for underage people to
Licensee in its January Submissions criticised Mr O’Mara’s
Mr O’Mara’s evidence was heartfelt but
ultimately did not provide a solid information on which the Commission can rely.
He says there are some people who drink near the lake and in other identified
places where liquor consuming is not permitted. There
are some disenfranchised
young people. They can obtain alcohol now and he sees no benefit to them in
having a packaged liquor outlet
closer to Lake Daylesford. His evidence was
passionate but lacked key details such as how many people (he was unable to
answer this
question despite being asked it several time [
transcript at page 453, line 35 and following). He was unclear as to whether he
really expected further alcohol to be purchased.
Realistically, he acknowledged
that there were other places where liquor could currently be purchased and made
no claims that there
would be additional alcohol purchases – just that
some added level of convenience to (which coming from his perspective) he
ascribed no benefit. He could give no evidence as to whether this was different
to other communities.
Licensee also submitted that
The evidence of Mr O’Mara
provides little if any evidence on which the Commission could conclude that the
youth of Daylesford
are particularly at risk. There will be some who drink and
some who engage in risky behaviour, and Mr O’Mara has identified
there are some in Daylesford. He has not been able to provide any evidence as to
how many or how the presence of Dan Murphy’s
would realistically affect
them (aside from slightly shortening a short walk for those attending the
Commission accepts that Mr O’Mara did not provide specific evidence about
precisely how many minors drink at locations such
as Lake Daylesford.
Nevetheless, for the reasons outlined above, including the difficulties in the
Commission receiving direct evidence
from minors who may engage in underage
drinking, the Commission considers that his evidence as to underage drinking at
such locations
the Commission considers that Mr O’Mara’s point about the location
of the proposed Premises (as distinct from
existing packaged liquor outlets in
Daylesford), and in particular the undisclosed walking pathways and hidden
nature-based sight
lines, to be significant. On the view conducted on 13
December 2023, the Commission observed the proximity of the Premises to tracks
leading to the lake from both Bridport Street and Millar Street South.
Swerissen said that he was aware through local knowledge that the Premises is
relatively isolated from the shopping precinct,
which reduces the opportunity
for passive observation.
matters because underage people are likely not to want to run into their parents
or others they know in circumstances where
they are going into liquor
Furness referred to Mr O’Mara’s evidence as to
“generational” drinking spots in Daylesford.
She said that the lake was a
place where young people congregate, and that the area near the trout hatchery
building (in the vicinity
of Cornish Hill Reserve) is a drinking place for
Ferguson, who resides close to the Premises, described seeing beer bottles and
bongs in a forest area near the lake accessible
from Millar Street South and
Bridport Street.
He said that
the lake is a popular area for swimmers and summertime activities, including at
night, although he had not seen young
people in that area
He also said that
there are other parts in the bush that have similar spots, such as Cornish Hill,
where among the pine forests one
will see the same sort of scene, including
evidence of fires and
He described there
being rocks to sit on and somewhere to have a fire, which he said was an area
not so much for people who have
a place to go and drink, such as families and
older people.
Eliades referred to Messrs O’Mara’s and Ferguson’s evidence of
teenagers drinking in the bush, and said that
he had seen them and heard stories
from other teenagers.
later clarified that he had last observed them 15 years ago, before he moved out
of the area.
He identified
the relevant areas as Lake Daylesford, Lake Jubilee (to a lesser extent) and
Cornish Hill.
He said that he
had seen bottles and bongs at those sites more
of the Licensee’s witnesses addressed the evidence of underage drinking
occurring at specific locations around Daylesford.
Peterson referred, in her report and her oral evidence, to the Hepburn
Shire’s General Local Law No. 2 of 2019, concerning
Community Amenity and
Municipal Places, clause 2.19 of which deals specifically with the Consumption
of Alcohol in Municipal
Council may declare any municipal place to be an area where alcoholic beverages
must not be consumed or held in open containers
or may only be consumed or held
during specified times or in accordance with a permit.
2.19.2 A person must not consume or hold any alcoholic beverage in an open
container in any area or place which is subject to a declaration
sub-clause 2.19.1.
“[M]unicipal
place” is defined in clause 1.6 as “a public place which is owned,
occupied or controlled by, or vested
in, the Council in respect of which the
Council has the care and management, to which the public has access whether or
not on payment
of an admittance fee”. Cr Bray told the Commission that
there is a local law in force prohibiting people from drinking around
Park, but was not sure whether there is one around the
The Commission is not
able to make a finding that any declaration has been made under clause
Peterson noted in her report that the location of the proposed bottle shop, away
from the main street, assists in reducing its
exposure to people going about
their day-to-day activities.
She gave estimated distances between existing packaged liquor outlets in
Daylesford and the Skate Park, Cornish Hill car park and
the Lake Daylesford car
park, in order to demonstrate that these locations have existing proximity to
packaged liquor outlets.
Under examination by Counsel Assisting, she indicated that she could not speak
to the level of underage drinking occurring at the
locations identified in her
which were the Skate
Park, lake and Cornish Hill
However, she
speculated that if there is an issue with the abuse of alcohol by underage youth
hanging out in various locations, the
number of incidents of drunk and
disorderly offences could reflect
As noted below at [
], Ms Peterson accepted that the
lack of a police presence after hours might impact on the reporting of such
Peterson was asked by counsel for the Licensee about Mr O’Mara’s
She noted that
underage drinking is a prevalent issue throughout society, both in metropolitan,
regional and rural Victoria, and
She identified the
question as whether or not the opening of the store will encourage the youth
within town to drink more or at greater
frequencies, which she thought it should
This was because there
is already ready access to the supply of alcohol within the town (including
online); the hours of operation
would fall within the hours of Liquorland; and
the Licensee has best practice in terms of its responsible sale of and service
On this basis,
she was satisfied that there would not be an increase in risk to that segment of
the community.
issue here is whether the granting of the Licence would be conducive to or
encourage harm, specifically to minors. The Commission
agrees that underage
drinking is prevalent across society (although there is also evidence it is
particularly prevalent in Daylesford).
The Commission agrees that the focus is
on whether granting the Licence would be conducive to more underage drinking
occurring (having
regard to particular local, social and geographic
circumstances). Contrary to the view of Ms Peterson, the Commission finds that
conclusion is driven by a number of considerations.
of those considerations is the location of the Premises relatively close to
“generational” drinking spots, and relatively
isolated from the town
centre and shopping precinct (and with therefore relatively limited
opportunities for passive observation
by community members, including on routes
from the Premises to drinking spots).
characteristics of the location of the Premises, in the Commission’s view,
mean that the Premises would be significantly
more conducive to facilitating
“secondary supply” of alcohol to minors – that is, the supply
of alcohol to minors
that has been purchased or collected by adults – as
compared with the existing packaged liquor outlets. And logic suggests
the location of the Premises would be significantly more conducive to
facilitating secondary supply, then there is at least
a risk of increased
secondary supply occurring and (therefore) increased consumption by minors and
(therefore) increased harm from
the misuse and abuse of alcohol by minors.
Commission accepts that there are other ways that minors can obtain alcohol in
Daylesford. In particular, the Commission accepts
that the advent of online
purchasing of alcohol poses its own risks. Parliament has responded to those
risks in various ways.
However, the Commission does not accept that the existence of particular risks
of minors obtaining alcohol purchased online means
that the grant of a licence
that would create its own additional risks is immaterial or irrelevant.
are the risks of online purchasing and the risks arising from the Premises
entirely separate. The risks may interact and compound.
For example, there might
be an online request for alcohol, which is then completed by an adult collecting
the alcohol at the Premises
for secondary supply to minors. Ms Prezioso gave
evidence to the effect that when alcohol ordered online is collected by car, the
Licensee would check the photo of the person collecting the alcohol (e.g. the
driver) but, if the identification matches the person
nominated in the online
purchase and shows that that person is over 18, then the Licensee would load the
alcohol into the car, even
if there were other underage people in the car. And
the Commission considers that the location of the Premises makes it more
to facilitating secondary supply, including by this means, compared
with the existing outlets.
are two additional features of the location of the Premises – beyond those
discussed above – that compound the Commission’s
concern that the
Premises would be conducive to or encourage harm to minors. These are the
proximity of the Premises to the swimming
pool and to the bus stop. Both of
these sites are locations where minors of secondary school age congregate,
bringing them to the
area away from the main street, again with routes to the
“generational” drinking spots and attended by less opportunity
passive observation by others. These are discussed
Swimming pool
response to the Commission’s invitation, Cr Bray submitted the following
information about usage of the swimming pool:
Shire Council records show that 12,000 people visit the pool each
key users of the pool are families with young children and
the summer months the pool is a very popular social meeting place for young
pool is generally open between
the school term, several schools hold their annual Swimming Carnivals at the
Daylesford Pool, including Daylesford Secondary
College running an All-School
swimming carnival involving 441 students aged 12-18 years, 43 teachers and up to
100 family members
school activity and celebration events are held at the Daylesford pool
involving, among others, Daylesford Secondary College
(ages 12-18 years) and
youth activities run by the Hepburn Shire Youth Events team for young people
aged 12-22 years;
annual regional LGBTIQA+ ChillOut Festival (Australia’s largest regional
pride event) has held an annual Pool Party at the
Daylesford pool for the past 5
years, which is an all-ages event for families and adults attended by around 300
Peterson gave the opening hours of the pool as 2pm-6pm at weekends; 3pm-7pm on
weekdays during school term; and 2pm-6pm on weekdays
during school
witnesses gave evidence as to use of the swimming pool by minors.
Bray told the Commission in oral evidence that 150 families and between 30 and
50 teenagers frequent the pool throughout the summer
Rauber explained that school swimming programs run for 10 days, and are separate
from swimming carnivals.
Furness told the Commission that students from the Daylesford Dharma School
attend swimming lessons once per week for four weeks
during the summer
She also said that
most of the school’s families, if not all, use the pool after school from
December to April, and as a mother
she could not count the number of times that
she had attended pool parties for children with birthdays at that time of
Licensee’s expert witnesses addressed the swimming pool.
Abery noted that the swimming pool is open for 14 weeks a year, with a closure
policy on days of less than
He referred to
proposals for a new indoor heated pool, which would be situated elsewhere and
therefore result in the disposal of
the current pool
He described the
existing pool as well-screened from other uses by shrubs, trees and covered
cyclone fencing along the Bridport Street
and Central Springs Road
boundaries.
observations about screening were not borne out by the Commissioners’ site
visit on 13 December 2023. The
Commission finds that the building housing the
Premises would be visible through the fence along Bridport Street, although the
frontage would be located facing Central Springs Road, with
another tenancy to the east.
Peterson addressed the proximity to the swimming pool by noting that are no
“synergies” between it and the Premises,
the entrance being on
Central Springs Road with no access provided via Bridport
She also noted that
the pool is closed for 8.5 months a
Ms Peterson gave
estimated distances between existing packaged liquor outlets in Daylesford and
the pool, in order to demonstrate
that it has existing proximity to packaged
liquor outlets.
Licensee in its January Submissions submitted that, in respect of arguments
based on occasional visits to the pool, this constitutes
no more exposure to the
outside of a licensed premises than already occurs in the
Commission holds concern over the proximity of the Premises to the swimming
pool, given that the evidence suggests that this is
a site frequented by
secondary school students. The concern is ameliorated somewhat by the limited
season for which the pool operates.
However, the Commission finds that the
location of the Premises near the swimming pool, which attracts minors of
secondary school
age, is relevant to the question of whether the granting of the
Licence would be conducive to or encourage harm to minors. Specifically,
is an appreciable risk of an increase in instances of secondary supply to
minors, given that minors (and young adults) will
congregate in significant
numbers at certain times of year near the Premises thereby increasing the
opportunities for secondary supply
(especially noting the other concerns that
the Commission has identified about the location of the Premises relatively
close to “generational”
drinking spots and relatively remote from
the town centre, as outlined above).
witnesses gave evidence as to use of the bus stop by minors.
Bray described the bus stop as the key public transport hub for Daylesford and
surrounds, and that it is predominantly used by
secondary school students
travelling to Ballarat schools each day and by public transport
In addition to local
bus services and V/Line services, the Department of Education and Training
school bus program uses this stop
for students from the Daylesford area
travelling to other schools in Ballarat, including: St Patrick’s College;
Ballarat Clarendon
College; Ballarat High School; Ballarat Grammar; Loreto
College; Woodmans Hill Secondary College and Mt Clear
Cr Bray said that
she had been informed that currently 55 students use a single bus, and in
previous years up to 70 students have
There might also be 10
families sending children to what she described as a John Marsden school in
Gisborne (presumably Candlebark
School) and other students going to Castlemaine
Secondary College, for which Cr Bray could not give
She also suggested
that some students going to schools in Bendigo would use V/Line coaches, but
again could not give
Rauber estimated that fewer than 10 primary school children would travel by
local bus to and from school.
She said that she had counted 21 cars in the vicinity of the bus stop in the
morning of the day on which she gave
She understood
there to be a single bus servicing schools in
Furness gave evidence of the Daylesford Dharma School using the bus stop for
student trips to locations in the town, including
the preschool three times each
She had experience of
dropping off and collecting her children who were catching the school bus at
Ferguson said that his three children had attended high school in Ballarat, and
all caught the bus from Bridport
He said that a lot of
children would walk along Central Springs Road to get to town, the swimming
pool, the primary school, the preschool
and the bus
He speculated that they
would cut through the Premises’ car park to hurry to the bus stop, and
that parents would drop their
children off and pick them up from the car park
out the front as well.
Abery did not refer to the bus stop in either of his reports. Under examination
by Counsel Assisting, he said that he was aware
of the bus stop from his site
visit, but had not conducted any research into which services use
Peterson did not refer to the bus stop in her report, which she described under
cross-examination by counsel for the Council as
In her evidence,
she said that she was mindful of the fact that it was there, but that it would
be very common for public transport
stops to be located in close proximity to
licensed premises, including packaged
She did not see it as
presenting a significant risk, recognising that Liquorland is just another 100
metres up the road.
Peterson also gave evidence that there are a handful of bus stops clustered
around a circuit that runs around Albert Street, Vincent
Street, Bridport Street
and Central Springs Road.
had not looked specifically at whether school buses depart and arrive from the
bus stop, but said she would not be surprised
Bray later gave evidence that the bus stop that she had described was the only
bus stop in Daylesford.
Peterson responded to this when recalled, accepting that her own evidence about
other bus stops was
She said that,
having an understanding from the transcript of the way the buses go from the
school up to the other schools, the location
of the bus stop in proximity to the
Premises did not present her with any
difficulties.
She said that
the sale of packaged liquor is seen in close proximity to public transport in
virtually every activity centre in regional
and metropolitan Victoria, and she
did not see them as being
incompatible.
Licensee in its January Submissions submitted that a limited number of school
children may observe the site primarily across to
the adjacent tenancy from the
bus stop in the mornings before the Premises opens and at the end of the
It submitted that they
will not be permitted entry in uniform and no compelling evidence had been
provided to explain how a view
of the side of the building will induce harm
where no person had indicated that harm is arising from other alcohol signage in
– noting that a pylon sign had not been approved (see below at [
Commission holds significant concern over the proximity of the Premises to the
bus stop, which many secondary school students
use. The Commission’s
concern is not one of exposure to signage, which is addressed below, but rather
the prospect that the
congregation of youth at the bus stop is apt to increase
the risk of secondary supply taking place, given that students, some of
will be 18 years old and many of whom will be minors, will be dropped by the
school bus across the road from the Premises on
weekdays after school.
Commission does not consider it fanciful to suppose that, when youth are
congregating in significant numbers near the Premises,
that would be conducive
to secondary supply and, thereby, conducive to harm. That is especially so,
given the relative proximity
of the Premises to “generational”
drinking spots, the relative isolation of the Premises from the town centre, and
relatively limited opportunity for passive observation by community members,
as outlined above.
Lack of 24-hour police presence
the evidence of underage drinking and secondary supply before the Commission,
the Commission also considers it relevant to consider
the existing ability of
the police to take action in respect of these activities. Mr O’Mara
specifically identified the limited
police presence as not helping the problem
of local youth drinking due to the decrease in formal and incidental
surveillance.
there were discrepancies as to the opening hours of the police station in
Daylesford, several witnesses gave evidence that it
is not staffed on a 24-hour
basis. Instead, the community relies on police from Bacchus Marsh out of
Beacham, who did not give evidence at the hearing, said that, as the Daylesford
Police station is only staffed during the daytime,
police have to come from
Bacchus Marsh or Ballarat which takes some time for them to
Mara Ripani, who also
did not give evidence at the hearing, claimed that Daylesford did not have a
staffed police station.
Bowen in her witness statement said that the local police force operates in
office hours only Monday to Friday, with urgent calls
evening and weekends
requiring police to travel from almost 60 kilometres away from Bacchus
Bray submitted a photograph of a sign on the door of the Daylesford Police
Station, which indicated that a communications button
(presumably near the door)
diverts to Bacchus Marsh Police Station, not Daylesford Police
Mr Ferguson
described his experience of this in telling the Commission about an incident
addressed below (at [
Moore referred to police having to come 40 minutes from Bacchus Marsh to attend
a violent altercation outside a
He said that he had
called the police 10 times during his time in the area and they were always
Eliades said that the reason the police were able to attend within 15-20 minutes
on 5 November 2023 (the date of an incident in
which five persons were killed by
a motor vehicle that left the road near a public house) was because it was Cup
Day weekend, and
they were in town specifically for
He said that when he
had called the police in the past, he had issues when needing to get hold of
them; he would either ring and
there would be no answer; he would go to the
police station and there would be no one there; or he would ring and be
transferred
to Bacchus Marsh, resulting in a call back a day or two
Beacham said that there used to be a 24-hour police presence in Daylesford, but
that it has been reduced to 16 hours a day, covered
by three police officers who
have to attend to the surrounding areas; two of whom have to be on a shift at
She said that she
obtained this information from a policeman at the station a few weeks
Licensee’s expert witnesses addressed the lack of a 24-hour police
presence in Daylesford.
Abery asserted that the absence of a 24/7 police presence should not be a
relevant consideration for the Licence given the tenuous
basis on which
increased crime is alleged because of the grant of the
Peterson asserted that the framework of the LCR Act does not allow for
objections based on lack of 24-hour police
Licensee submitted in its January Submissions that it is significant that local
police officers are aware of Victoria Police’s
decision not to object to
the Original Application and that that decision has not been revised since it
was made despite various
discussions with
This was said to
be because the police have a statutory role in the licensing process and they
have, in other instances, participated
vigorously in licensing applications
– from which it is said to follow that the Commission has no basis to
conclude that the
police consider there is any difficulty with their ability to
service Daylesford.
Licensee submitted in final oral submissions that many second-hand numbers as to
police operating hours in Daylesford had been
given over time, and suggested
that the police did not wish to advertise their
The Commission accepts
that the actual operating hours of the police are unclear on the evidence, but
that it is not in dispute that
there is no 24-hour police presence in
Daylesford.
Commission does not agree that the framework of the LCR Act renders the absence
of a 24-hour police presence irrelevant. Nor does
the Commission consider that
the mere fact that the Commissioner of Police has not objected to the Original
Application entails (by
some implication) that there is no concern about the
prospect of harm to minors. The Commission’s function is to make its own
assessment, on the evidence before it, as to whether the Premises would be
conductive to or encourage harm including, specifically,
harm to minors. In
making that decision, the evidence of the lack of a 24-hour police presence in
Daylesford and the Hepburn Shire
is relevant, combined with other matters that
the Commission has considered and outlined above, to the prospect that the
would be conducive to harm to
Licensee’s measures to minimise secondary
Licensee gave evidence of its proposed measures to minimise harm. These were
generally instantiations of policies and procedures
that apply across the
Licensee’s packaged liquor outlets, rather than being specifically focused
on Daylesford. Most of them
were measures relating to the Premises itself.
Scott-Mackenzie submitted a Plan of Management dated February 2022 with his
witness statement, to which were appended a number
of documents including the
Licensee’s “House Policy” and accompanying “Best
Practice Policies and Interventions”
document (to assist staff in
identifying and preventing secondary sales to minors and in turn help to reduce
or eliminate alcohol-related
harm in the community); “School Uniform
Policy”; “Refusal of Service – Intoxication Policy”;
Supply Policy”; “ID25 Policy” and
“Responsible Buying Charter” (this Policy is in relation to the
seeking not to stock drinks that appeal to young people or encourage
Mr Scott-Mackenzie
said that the leadership and executives of the Licensee live and breathe
responsibility.
described sanctions for people on the floors in the Licensee’s stores for
failing to comply with policies like the
ID25 Policy and a process of internal
audits, including mystery
Scott-Mackenzie said that all staff to be employed in the conduct of the Dan
Murphy’s premises will undergo extensive RSA
He indicated that
the Licensee is open to consulting with, and hearing from, Victoria Police
and/or the local community in relation
to any local measures which might be
undertaken consistent with harm minimisation, giving the example of some
licensed premises in
Victoria where the Licensee has voluntarily agreed that
certain liquor items below a certain price will not be stocked and
Scott-Mackenzie told the Commission that the Licensee’s compliance and its
record in various states and territories is of
paramount importance and
demonstrates an understanding that the products it sells are heavily regulated
and, if they are abused,
have the potential to cause
He said that the
Licensee takes that responsibility extremely seriously and that its record, and
previously under the Woolworths
Group Limited banner, in Victoria is
unblemished.
He estimated
that the Licensee operates around 400 licences in
of the stated objectives of the Plan of Management and appended documents
submitted by Mr Scott-Mackenzie with his witness statement
is that alcohol is to
be sold responsibly at all times, and that every possible effort is made to
prevent sales to minors or secondary
sales (as well as sales to other persons
who are intoxicated).
particular relevance in this context are the School Uniform
and the Responsible
Buying Charter.
Scott-Mackenzie was asked by counsel for the Council what are the local measures
that he envisaged to minimise
He identified concerns
Teen Rescue Foundation and
He also described
participation in RSA education in schools through liquor accords, teaching young
people about the real harms of
things like binge-drinking and irresponsible
consumption, and abstaining until at least the age of 18
He said that, if the
Licensee could do something to help change the culture of teen drinking in
Daylesford, it would absolutely love
to be a part of
Mr Scott-Mackenzie
referred to the evidence before the Commission of a youth drinking problem in
Daylesford and said that the Licensee
could have information available in its
store at a higher rate than it would
He specified
educational material on teen drinking and the impact it has, which the Licensee
can obtain from its partnerships with
DrinkWise and the Teen Rescue
Foundation.
Specifically in
relation to Daylesford, Mr Scott-Mackenzie said that there may be opportunities
for the Licensee to do more, and
it would be very live to those
opportunities.
He suggested
that such opportunities might be identified through any active liquor accord and
community consultation, giving the
example of considering at a corporate level
(through the Chief Legal Officer) assisting Mr O’Mara with a specific
that he wanted to
Bray asked Mr Scott-Mackenzie whether, having heard some of the evidence that
was presented at the hearing, he would concede that
there had been a different
picture painted about the Daylesford community and its level of vulnerability,
compared with one based
on the data and statistics
He said that he
had heard clear evidence that there are individuals and groups of individuals,
being young people, who are not consuming
alcohol responsibly, but that is not
unlike any other area in Victoria or
More generally, Mr
Scott-Mackenzie, under cross-examination by Mr Dickenson, said that he had not
seen anything to date that made
him think that the Licensee had made the wrong
decision here.
He said that
he understood, and had heard all of the stories – which were troubling
– but the stories had not led him
to believe that there is any more harm
in Daylesford than in any other community in
of the documents appended to Mr Scott-Mackenzie’s witness statement was
the Licensee’s Secondary Supply
Mr Scott-Mackenzie
also submitted a document entitled “Commitment to Community”, which
refers to a point of sale “Don’t
Buy It For Them” campaign to
raise community awareness and understanding of the Licensee’s staff
enforcing their responsibilities
in the secondary supply of alcohol to
Bray put a number of questions to Mr Scott-Mackenzie about secondary
In particular, she
asked whether he agreed that, while the Licensee can do its best to minimise it
with its policies, secondary supply
is fundamentally out of its
Mr Scott-Mackenzie
referred to the policy, saying it would prevent secondary supply from occurring
within the store and through the
car park area, but the things the Licensee does
beyond those policies and procedures are really where it is going to make a
difference.
He referred to
the Licensee’s in-store materials, its partnerships with DrinkWise, and
its partnership with the Teen Rescue
Foundation about providing education to
young people and parents on the harms associated with alcohol
consumption.
He confirmed
that the secondary supply policy does not deal with anything beyond the actual
site of the store and the Licensee has
no control over what happens once alcohol
has left the Premises, but that is why the Licensee takes part in education
He said that, in
terms of the Licensee being able to control secondary supply, the only influence
that it can have is on educating
people about the harms in relation to supplying
alcohol to minors, which is something that the Licensee does in every
He later said that the
Licensee has traditionally been led by schools on what programs they want to run
in terms of what the Licensee
supports, and clarified that these were high
He confirmed his
understanding that the most common source of alcohol for minors is older family
members (brothers, sisters or parents)
Prezioso gave evidence as to the ID25
She said that, to
ensure compliance with the ID25 Policy, the Licensee will require all staff to
request identification (
) from customers who appear to be under 25
years of age.
details of the training regime and a daily “huddle” of staff in
which the store manager reiterates the ID25
Policy and the requirement to
request ID (the evening staff also receiving a reminder each
Compliance with the
ID25 policy would be monitored by mystery shoppers twice a
Ms Prezioso said
that a failure to comply with, in particular, the ID25 Policy results in an
investigation and may require serious
disciplinary action, up to and including
termination of employment.
her witness statement, Ms Prezioso said that mystery shoppers monitor compliance
with the Secondary Supply Policy, but she clarified
in her oral evidence that
this is not the case.
Prezioso gave evidence as to the Secondary Supply
She referred to the
Licensee’s training regime, which would make employees aware of situations
in which secondary supply may
She gave some
examples of circumstances in which service would be
She was asked by
Counsel Assisting whether staff could do anything to prevent a scenario where an
older person goes into a store
and a young person stays outside out of
Her response was that
if staff can see them, they can refuse service; if staff cannot see them, then
they have no reason to believe
that the older person is not buying it for
themselves, and staff will sell them
final oral submissions, Cr Bray answered a question from the Commission as to
whether she had any suggestions as to what the Licensee
could do to address the
issue of secondary supply.
She submitted that the issue is that the Licensee’s policies are all
in-store-based, such as policing the car park with closed
circuit television
cameras, whereas secondary supply is a harm that happens away from the
She submitted that is
not about a “quick fix” but is a wider community issue on which she
did not have an answer.
Licensee in final oral submissions submitted that the Licensee cannot
necessarily control what happens after alcohol goes out
the door, and that it
should not be criticised, and cannot be held accountable, for people’s
decisions to deal with alcohol
illegally, by giving it to children, or
over-consuming.
The Licensee
should not be held accountable because it simply cannot control
The Licensee later
submitted that it cannot necessarily stop every illegal provision of alcohol to
That is a decision of
an adult to break the law, or facilitate drinking within their home, that cannot
reasonably be expected to
be policed by the Licensee, and which is able to occur
at present.
Licensee’s inability to prevent such behaviour should not weigh against
Commission must consider, not only what happens in and around licensed premises,
but what happens in the community more broadly.
If the opening of the Premises
would be conducive to increasing secondary supply and therefore harm to minors
because of various
considerations regarding its locality – including its
relative proximity to “generational” drinking spots, its
isolation from the shopping precinct, the relatively reduced opportunity for
passive observation by community members, and
its proximity to the pool and the
bus stop where young people congregate – then the Commission considers
that it is no answer
to say that the Licensee cannot control conduct outside of
its premises. The Commission can control whether the Licensee should have
licence for the Premises, and may take into account evidence as to particular
risk associated with a licence at these premises
that the Licensee cannot avoid
or substantially mitigate by its policies.
Commission accepts that the Licensee has an impeccable record in Victoria in
relation to issues such as RSA. However, the Commission
considers that the risk
that it has identified, arising in particular from various characteristics of
the location of the Premises,
is not one that the Licensee’s policies and
procedures will substantially mitigate.
Exposure of minors to
Bray expressed concern that the constant exposure to the presence of the Dan
Murphy liquor store would normalise the presence of
alcohol in young
people’s lives and make them more susceptible to alcohol use at a young
Cr Bray relied on a 2011
paper by Sandra C Jones and Christopher A Magee of the University of Wollongong
entitled “Exposure
to alcohol advertising and alcohol consumption among
adolescents”.
expressed similar concerns, also relying on that
Rauber and Mr Moore also relied on a 2009 article by Andrew W Ellis et al,
entitled “Age of acquisition and the recognition
of brand names: On the
importance of being
Ms Rauber also
relied on a 2018 article by Alexandra Aiken et al, entitled “Youth
perceptions of alcohol advertising: are current
advertising regulations
working?” and a 2017 article by Matthew A Lapierre et al, entitled
“The Effect of Advertising
on Children and
Adolescents”.
Licensee in the Licensee January Submissions submitted that the academic
research relied upon by the Internal Review Applicants
does not assist the
Commission and would require it to draw inferences not supported by that
literature, and without any proper evidence
or basis, in circumstances where the
articles do not address alcohol advertising or appear to relate to studies
primarily of older
generations with different exposure to media to the current
generation.
Rauber also gave evidence of primary school students attending the Country Fire
Authority (
) premises immediately to the north of the site of the
Premises for bushfire safety
Ms Furness did
likewise with respect to children from preparatory to year 2 from the Daylesford
Dharma School, who attend
The Licensee in the
Licensee January Submissions submitted that, in respect of arguments based on
occasional visits to the CFA, this
constitutes no more exposure to the outside
of a licensed premises than already occurs in
De Vecchi, who do not did give evidence at the hearing but submitted a witness
statement, expressed concern that, being in visible
proximity of the school, Dan
Murphy’s signage could potentially encourage young children to normalise
excessive consumption
Hernandez Rodriguez, who likewise did not appear at the hearing, expressed
similar concerns, albeit she referred to exposure
advertising.
As, consistently
with section 115B of the LCR Act, there is no proposal for advertising to be
displayed, the Commission places no
weight on this evidence.
relation to the preschool, Mr Abery noted that it offers 1
year sessions from 9am-2pm, three days a
It therefore operates
for 15 hours a week or about 21% of Dan Murphy’s usual operating hours
during school terms – or
less across the entire
Therefore, for about
80% of the operating hours of the proposed Dan Murphy’s during school
terms, no children are present at
Peterson in her report did not consider that mere proximity will result in an
increased risk to primary school and kindergarten
aged children. She said that
she had seen no research to indicate that children in these age groups will
become more susceptible
to alcohol-related harm due to proximity to packaged
liquor sales.
She said that
it is unproven whether increased exposure of alcohol to young people in itself
has any harm for those young
In response to a
question from the Commission, Ms Peterson said she was not sure if the knowledge
that the Premises sold alcohol
would have much impact on children of primary
school age.
Peterson asserted under cross-examination by counsel for the Council that
Foxxy’s Liquor/Cellarbrations can be seen from
the primary
This was contradicted
by Ms Rauber, with reference to photographs that she had
Ms Peterson when
recalled conceded that it would be very difficult, if not impossible, to see the
Foxxy’s Liquor/Cellarbrations
signage from the primary
Licensee in its January Submissions referred to section 115B of the LCR Act,
which prohibits display of any alcohol advertising
that is static advertising
within 150 metres of the perimeter of a
It submitted that the
Licensee complies and will continue to comply with section 115B of the LCR
Licensee also submitted that liquor signage and actual liquor consumption are
part of the experience of people moving around the
vicinity of the proposed site
and school sites at present, including by reference to Daylesford Brewing on
Vincent Street;
Koukla at Frangos Hotel on the north-eastern corner of Central Springs Road and
Bridport Street; Foxxy’s Liquor/Cellarbrations
on Vincent Street and
Liquorland on Albert
Licensee in its January Submissions submitted that children will not pick up an
understanding that Dan Murphy’s sells alcohol
from brochures or
television, and may more readily do so from advertising by Cellarbrations at the
local sporting ground or in Coles
catalogues.
Licensee submitted that, without a pylon sign there is very little visibility
possible of the Premises from either the primary
school or the
The Commission
accepts that the absence of a pylon sign on the corner of the site (see below at
]) will reduce the visibility of
the Licensee’s branding and thereby ameliorate any impact in terms of the
exposure of minors
to signage.
Commission finds that the academic literature submitted by the Internal Review
Applicants does not support their contentions on
this issue. In the absence of
evidence that children will be affected by exposure to signage, the Commission
places no weight on
this factor.
Commission concludes that granting the Licence would be conducive to or
encourage harm, specifically to minors. In particular,
the Commission concludes
that there is an appreciable risk that granting the Licence would result in an
increase of secondary supply
of alcohol to minors in Daylesford and (therefore)
an increase in alcohol consumption by minors and (therefore) increased harm from
the misuse and abuse of alcohol by minors. This conclusion is driven by the
accumulation of a number of factors outlined above, deriving
“particular local, social, demographic and geographic circumstances”
of Daylesford. To reiterate, these include:
(a) the existing problem of underage drinking in Daylesford;
(b) the relative proximity of the Premises to “generational”
drinking spots such as Lake Daylesford compared with existing
outlets; the
relative isolation of the Premises from the town centre compared with existing
outlets; and (in light of these matters)
the relatively limited opportunity for
passive observation by community members resulting in the Premises being
significantly more
conducive to facilitating secondary supply;
(c) the proximity of the Premises to the town’s swimming pool, and the bus
stop, with the consequence that significant numbers
of young people (some under
and some over 18 years of age) will congregate near the Premises thereby
increasing the opportunities
for secondary supply;
(d) the lack of a 24-hour police presence in Daylesford; and
(e) the Licensee’s policies and procedures not being able substantially to
mitigate the risk that the Commission has identified.
having regard to all of the evidence and submissions, guided by the Court of
Appeal’s decision in
, and noting that “the concept
of harm minimisation is itself anticipatory”, the Commission considers
that this is a case
where “a conservative approach ... should be
adopted”. As noted above, “a conservative approach may mean a
precautionary
approach leading to the conclusion that if an appreciable risk of
harm is identified, harm minimisation favours avoiding such potential
unless it can be positively justified”.
light of the evidence and submissions, and having regard to the
“particular local, social, demographic and geographic
circumstances”,
the Commission does not consider that the risk of harm to
minors that it has identified arising from the proposed Dan Murphy’s
outlet at the Premises is “fanciful” or “trivial”.
Rather, the Commission is satisfied that the risk of harm
to minors is real. And
the Commission considers that “the object of harm minimisation”,
specifically with respect to
minors, “stands out as being poorly
served” by reason of the particular “local, social, demographic and
circumstances” that it has identified above.
Accordingly,
the Commission concludes that granting the Licence would be conducive to or
encourage harm, specifically to minors.
Harm to other persons
or in other ways
(a) the Commission’s conclusion above that granting the application would
be conducive to or encourage “harm”,
specifically to minors;
(b) the balancing exercise that the Commission has engaged in and explained at
it has not been necessary for the Commission to make findings as to whether
granting the application would be conducive to or encourage
to other persons or in other ways (e.g. harm to other vulnerable persons or
communities, family violence or anti-social
behaviour).
the Commission has carefully considered all of the evidence given and
submissions made to it.
particular, the Commission notes that there were competing views expressed by
different witnesses in the proceeding (and competing
submissions made by parties
in the proceeding based on this evidence) as to whether granting the application
would be apt to result
in increased consumption across the Daylesford community
generally, or among particular demographic cohorts (aside from minors addressed
above), and thereby be conducive to or encourage harm.
example (though at the risk of some simplification):
Abery (who was called by the Licensee) gave evidence to the effect that, while
the effect of introducing the new Premises would
be to increase sales of alcohol
in Daylesford by approximately 40%, there would be no significant increase in
consumption
advanced this view based on evidence as to inelasiticity in demand for
He appeared to
suggest that, instead, the increase in total sales would be attributable to
increased purchases of alcohol in Daylesford
from people who might otherwise
have purchased alcohol from outside of
Daylesford.
the other hand, Prof Swerissen (who was called by Ms Poke) said that to argue
that the introduction of the Premises would have
no impact on
consumption would be to “fly in the face of the
Prof Swerissen was reluctant to make a prediction as to how much an increase
there would be to
consumption, noting (amongst other things)
that “elasticities apply differently” for different demographics,
people with less discretionary
Commission doubts that, if the application were to be granted and the Premises
established, there would not be any increase in
consumption of
across the Daylesford community or within particular demographic
groups (setting aside minors). That is particularly so if (as Mr
suggested) sales of alcohol in Daylesford would increase by a significant figure
like 40%. However, it has not been necessary
for the Commission to resolve this
issue, or any broader questions about the impact of the grant of the Licence
(beyond the appreciable
risk that the Commission has identified with respect to
Whether granting the Licence would detract from or be
detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the premises are
Licensee in the License January Submissions submitted that, to the extent that
the material presented by the Internal Review Applicants
is at odds with the
town planning aspects of the Original Application (such as traffic, location and
noise), they are matters that
were considered and settled in the granting of a
planning permit.
The Licensee
will be required to comply with all requirements of the permit including the
conditions and endorsed plans, which contain
noise assessments and other
requirements.
The Licensee
submitted that the Commission should proceed on the basis that the conditions
will be complied with.
Commission accepts this submission, and also finds that the evidence that was
led as to whether granting the Licence would detract
from or be detrimental to
the amenity of the area in which the premises are situated did not amount to a
sufficient basis for the
Commission to refuse the Licence on this ground. This
evidence can be grouped into four categories, addressed in turn below:
signage/location;
traffic/parking/noise; anti-social behaviour and other issues.
On the assessment of this evidence, the Commission does not find that
granting of the Original Application would detract from or be detrimental to the
amenity of the area in which the premises to
which the application relates are
situated under section
44(2)(b)(i).
Signage/location
signage and location of the Premises received close attention during this
matter, although most of that arose in the context of
consideration of harm
minimisation. This issue was addressed above, and the immediately following
paragraphs are concerned with evidence
given and submissions made in the context
of consideration of amenity.
Premises are situated on the north-western corner of Central Springs Road and
Bridport Street. The south-western corner of that
intersection is occupied by
residential premises. Immediately to the west of the Premises are also
residential premises. On the north-eastern
corner of the intersection is the
Daylesford Olympic Swimming Pool. The entrance to the swimming pool faces south
onto Central Springs
Road. Along the western side of the swimming pool site, on
Bridport Street, is the bus stop used by local and V/Line bus services,
buses serving secondary schools in the wider area. On the south-eastern corner
of the intersection is the Daylesford Preschool.
Immediately to the east and
south of the site of the preschool is the Daylesford Primary School. The main
entrance to the school
faces east onto Vincent Street, while there is a
secondary car park entrance facing north onto Central Springs Road, next to the
preschool. The Commission is not satisfied that the mere proximity of the
Premises to these other facilities would detract from or
be detrimental to the
amenity of the area (noting that the Commission has dealt separately with the
question of whether the granting
of the Licence, in light of the location of the
Premises, would be conducive to or encourage harm).
the time of the hearing in this matter, the Victorian Civil and Administrative
) was hearing a matter about a proposed pylon sign to be
located on the south-eastern corner of the site of the Premises. Between
close of evidence and final oral submissions on the Internal Review
Applications, VCAT on 4 January 2024 published its decision
Properties Pty Ltd v Hepburn SC
[2024] VCAT 4.
The effect of this decision
is that no permit has been granted for the proposed
The Licensee indicated
during final oral submissions (instructions having been sought by counsel, as
the Licensee was not a party
to the VCAT matter) that there is no appeal being
pursued from that decision and that, if the Commission were to affirm the
the Licensee would be content with a condition that there be no pylon
sign associated with Dan Murphy’s on the
The Licensee in its
January Submissions submitted that should the Commission have held any concerns
from the swimming pool or the primary school,
that issue need not concern the
Commission.
The Commission
accepts the Licensee’s submission.
Ferguson expressed concern about illuminated
Mr Scott-Mackenzie
clarified in his evidence that the illuminated signs would turn on and off on a
needs basis, that is, they would
not be on during the day, and would also be
programmable so that the lights could, for example, turn off half an hour after
Traffic/parking/noise
De Vecchi, a member of the Daylesford Primary School Council, expressed concerns
the primary
She referred to
traffic congestion in the area and the presence of a truck route passing along
Central Springs Road into Bridport
Street to the
McDiarmid also referred to the proximity of the Premises to the preschool,
primary school, swimming pool, truck route and an existing
packaged liquor
outlet, and said that this was not the spot for more pedestrian or vehicle
Moore referred to the potential impact of increased traffic on the operations of
After the close of
evidence, Mr Moore sought to submit a letter from Paul Anderson,
Secretary/Treasurer of Daylesford Fire Brigade,
which referred to parking and
traffic problems that he said the proposed outlet would
The Licensee in the
Licensee January Submissions submitted that the late provision by Mr Moore of
material from the CFA did not assist,
as there was no basis to assess what the
concerns were and if there was any basis for
It submitted that this
is not a matter on which the Commission should put weight given that it has not
been actively pursued in any
forum by the
Ferguson said that the increased traffic that would result if the proposed
outlet were to open would be a major inconvenience to
children walking on the
Premises’ side of the road on their way to school, and worsen road
He also expressed
concern about noise.
Scott-Mackenzie said that the Licensee would take a range of steps to ensure
that it monitors the car park area as best as it can,
including by team members
collecting trolleys and looking for rubbish and
He said that the
Licensee has stores in other areas where it has engaged contractors to collect
trolleys around the streets, where
people have left them on the
Mr Scott-Mackenzie
described the closed circuit television that would be deployed at the
He said that staff
patrolling down the street was something that occurred at stores in some
circumstances, but also was not going
to advocate to put staff into unsafe
situations, such as approaching people who are minded to do the wrong
Peterson considered the proposed arrangements for a loading bay and parking at
She was satisfied
that noise would not create unreasonable impacts, relying on an acoustic report
prepared by Renzo Tonin &
Associates.
Ms Peterson also
found that the expected increase in traffic associated with the proposal is also
appropriate and can be accommodated
on the local road
Licensee in its January Submissions submitted that, while there have been some
concerns expressed about traffic movements, these
have been assessed as part of
the planning application and plans have been endorsed under that
It submitted that,
the previous reference in the LCR Act to traffic being considered as part of
amenity having been removed, and
in this case planning permission having been
granted, it would be inappropriate to reconsider this
Commission accepts the Licensee’s evidence and submissions on this
Anti-social behaviour
Ferguson told the Commission of an incident that had occurred about seven weeks
before he gave evidence in which, at 9.30pm, two
drunk youths wandered into the
well-lit driveway of his property and proceeded to urinate and spit on his
family’s car, amongst
other things, vandalising the
He reported the
incident to the police, the Constable saying he knew the youths, who were
underage, and he would take care of the
Mr Ferguson said that
the town has its fair share of bored children looking for something to do on a
Sunday night, and that the two
youths were very
Stephenson related a conservation she had had with the police officer who had
approved the Original Application, including reference
to the decriminalisation
of public drunkenness in November
She said this meant the
police would not be able to pick up someone who is drunk in the streets and take
them back to the police
station where they are
She suggested that this
increased the potential for antisocial
Peterson reviewed the licensed hours of the existing packaged liquor outlets in
Daylesford and concluded that they had later trading
hours than the proposed Dan
Murphy’s outlet.
noted that Liquorland and Foxxy’s Liquor/Cellarbrations are licensed until
11pm and in closer proximity to late night venues,
most of which hold general
She said in
evidence that those outlets may not necessarily trade that late, but they are
licensed to that time.
Peterson did not expect there to be an increase in littering over and above any
other proposed use or that it would increase the
likelihood of noise or
anti-social behaviour, as patrons will not be able to consume liquor
Ms Peterson referred
to the operations management plan for the Premises, which sets out operational
arrangements to address common
Peterson considered the rate of drunk and disorderly in public offences in the
Hepburn LGA as reported by the Crime Statistics
Agency, which sits well below
the Victorian average over the period between 2013 and
She also reviewed the
total number of drunk and disorderly in public offences in each of the major
population centres within the
Hepburn LGA, to which Daylesford is the highest
contributor to the overall number, albeit this number is very
The highest number of
drunk and disorderly in public offences recorded in Daylesford is four in a
single year.
examination by Counsel Assisting, Ms Peterson accepted that the lack of a police
presence after hours might impact on the reporting
of such offences, given that
they are more likely to occur between 8pm and
She was not able to
estimate this effect by reference to a percentage or
Licensee submitted that it is only the statistical information which gives any
indication of “disorderly behaviour”
referred to by Ms Peterson
– which indicates very minimal disruptive
It submitted that
this should give the Commission comfort that there is little impact on amenity
arising from the current provision
of packaged liquor, and no basis to conclude
that this would change if the Licensee commenced
Commission broadly agrees with the Licensee’s submission on this
the Commission has explained its conclusion above that granting the Licence
would be conducive to or encourage harm, specifically
to minors, on the basis
that there is an appreciable risk it would result in an increase of secondary
Commission finds that there is some consequential risk, therefore, that granting
the application would also be detrimental to
the amenity of the area in which
the premises to which the application relates are situated insofar as there is
an increase in drinking
by minors in the area with consequent anti-social
behaviour. However, the Commission is not persuaded that any increase in such
anti-social
behaviour that is consequent to minors drinking in the area, of
itself, justifies refusal.
Other issues
Eliades expressed concerns about the effect the proposed outlet would have on
the amenity of the area.
These ranged beyond the scope of the concept of amenity in the LCR Act, and the
Commission places no weight on them.
O’Keefe also expressed the concern that the introduction of a corporate
conglomerate like Dan Murphy’s would impact
the amenity of the area, based
on an understanding that the word amenity relates to the whole community, and
not just those directly
impacted by a Dan Murphy’s outlet at the
The Licensee in the
Licensee January Submissions submitted that there is nothing in the LCR Act
which seeks to differentiate between
licensees; “chain stores”
already exist in Daylesford such as Coles and Liquorland, and the very prominent
hardware chain
store on the major roundabout on the main
The Commission agrees
with the Licensee on this point.
Whether granting the Licence
would facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations
Commission must exercise its discretion whether or not to grant a licence with
regard to the object of the LCR Act of facilitating
the development of a
diversity of licensed facilities reflecting community
expectations.
Poke described the roots of the Victorian wine industry in the early Swiss
Italian settlers who came to Hepburn Springs since the
Many of the local
wineries, breweries and distilleries have been inspired by these original
Ms Poke submitted
that these businesses add to the diversity of the licensed businesses reflecting
community values and
expectations.
Peterson inspected various licensed premises in Daylesford on 4 May
From this inspection,
she noted that the Liquorland and Foxxy’s Liquor/Cellarbrations packaged
liquor outlets are small retail
Liquorland is
associated with the Coles supermarket, whilst Foxxy’s
Liquor/Cellarbrations is a standalone outlet on the main
Daylesford.
She described
Blake Family Grocers as a gourmet mini supermarket with just a few shelves of
alcohol for sale located near the cash
register, which she considered to be
tailored toward the tourism market with more expensive and gourmet
Abery identified various features of the proposed Premises as differentiating it
from other liquor stores in Daylesford.
Scott-Mackenzie in his evidence identified an opportunity for the people of
Daylesford to enjoy a much wider range of products
and services than is
currently available.
Commission concludes that, subject to the findings that it has made that the
granting of the Licence would be conducive to or
encourage harm to minors, the
granting of the Licence would facilitate the development of a diversity of
licensed facilities reflecting
community expectations.
granting the Licence would contribute to the responsible development of the
liquor, licensed hospitality and live music industries
Commission concludes that, subject to the findings that it has made that the
granting of the Licence would be conducive to or
encourage harm to minors, the
granting of the Licence would contribute to the responsible development of the
all the circumstances, having regard to all the materials before it, the
Commission is satisfied that it is appropriate to exercise
its discretion to
refuse to grant the Licence on the basis that granting the Licence would be
conducive to or encourage harm (to
the reasons set out above, the Commission concludes that granting the Licence
would be conducive to or encourage harm, specifically
to minors. Subject to this
finding, the Commission:
(a) concludes that, generally speaking, the granting of the application would
not detract from or be detrimental to the amenity of
the area in which the
premises to which the application relates are situated, albeit that the
Commission accepts that there is some
risk that granting the application would
be conducive to an increase in anti-social behaviour in the area;
(b) accepts that the Premises would facilitate the development of a diversity of
licensed facilities reflecting community expectations;
(c) accepts that the Premises would contribute to the responsible development of
the liquor, licensed hospitality and live music
industries.
explained by the majority in
, the Commission must balance each
of the objects of the LCR Act and arrive at an appropriate synthesis in the
particular circumstances
of the case by the way of a discretionary
Commission in this instance places significant weight on the primary regulatory
object of harm minimisation in relying on the
ground of refusal under section
44(2)(b)(ii) of the LCR Act that the granting of the application would be
conducive to or encourage
noted above, the Commission does not find that (generally speaking) the granting
of the application would detract from or be detrimental
to the amenity of the
area in which the premises to which the application relates are situated. And
the Commission accepts that,
to some extent, the granting of the Licence would
contribute to community life, by providing another venue at which consumers
purchase liquor in Daylesford. The Commission has given these matters some
Commission has also given some weight to the remaining objects of the LCR Act,
concerning the development of a diversity of licensed
facilities reflecting
community expectations, and contributing to the responsible development of the
liquor, licensed hospitality
and live music industries, under section 4(1)(b)
and (c) respectively.
majority in
also held that the notion of harm minimisation is
not simply one of limiting the supply of alcohol, but is concerned with
supply of alcohol so as to ensure, as far as practicable, net
community benefit. However, in the Commission’s view,
does not stand for the proposition that the Commission is considering net
community benefit in some wholly general way. Rather, the
question of regulating
the supply of alcohol to ensure net community benefit is “balanc[ing] each
of the objects” of
the LCR Act.
Licensee in its January Submissions alleged that a number of positive benefits
would flow from the granting of the Licence, and
referred to Ms Peterson’s
identification of these in her report and oral evidence.
of these alleged benefits are not, however, in the Commission’s view,
relevant. That is because they are not connected
to the objects of the LCR
These alleged benefits
include increased short-term (construction) and long-term employment
opportunities; increased provision of
landscaping opportunities along street
frontages; provision of a vibrant commercial use on vacant land; and development
land at a cost of approximately $7.5 million. The Commission places no
weight on these claimed benefits.
claimed benefits that do relate to the objects of the LCR Act are increased
consumer choice and product diversification, and
increased market competition in
the form of potential for the provision of a new bottle shop to result in lower
consumer prices for
goods and services provided as retailers vie for customers.
These fall within the scope of objects under section 4(1)(b) and (c).
extent that Ms Peterson’s evidence was within the scope of the objects of
the LCR Act (including under section 4(1)(a)
as well as (b) and (c)), the
Commission regards it as helpful and relevant. Ms Peterson, when recalled,
responded to a question from
the Commission by saying that if she were to write
her report again, she would not change the table of benefits and disbenefits in
her report, but that she would be more explicit in discussing harm minimisation
as a concept.
Ultimately,
the Commission considers in light of all of the evidence in this case that the
appropriate decision involves giving greater
weight to the primary regulatory
object of minimising harm (sections 4(1)(a) and (2)), and that this outweighs
the positive benefits
of granting the Licence (sections 4(1)(b) and (c)).
conditions have been identified by the Licensee or any of the Internal Review
Applicants that would mitigate the appreciable risk
that granting the Licence
would be conducive to or encourage harm to minors, and the Commission has also
not identified any.
Decision on review
on the reasons set out above, the Commission is not satisfied that granting the
Original Application the subject of the Internal
Review Applications is
appropriate in the circumstances.
Commission has therefore determined to grant the Internal Review Applications
and to set aside the Original Decision, and to refuse
the Original
Application.
The preceding
paragraphs are a true copy of
the Reasons for Decision of Mr John Larkins (Acting Chair), Mr James
O’Halloran (Deputy Chair)
and Ms Susan Timbs (Commissioner).
Appendix: Material before the Commission
(a) Statement of Reasons for the Decision dated 9 December 2022;
(b) Internal Review Application of Ms Krystyna Szokolai received on 5 January
(c) Internal Review Application of Ms Gina Butera received on 6 January 2023;
(d) Internal Review Application of Mr Mark Dickenson received on 6 January
(e) Internal Review Application of Cr Jen Bray received on 6 January 2023;
(f) Internal Review Application of Hepburn Shire Council received on 6 January
(g) Internal Review Application of Ms Lynda Poke received on 6 January 2023;
(h) Internal Review Application of Ms Irene Holub received on 9 January 2023 and
2013 report entitled “The social harms associated with the sale and supply
of packaged liquor in Victoria”;
Institute 2016 report entitled “Community impact of liquor
(i) Submissions of the Licensee opposing stay application dated 11 January
(j) Community Impact and Community Interest Assessment dated May 2023, submitted
by Ms Poke;
(k) Witness statement of Ms Poke dated 21 May 2023;
(l) Witness statement of Prof Hal Swerissen dated 21 May 2023, submitted by Ms
(m) Witness statement of Ms Michelle Stephenson dated 21 May 2023;
(n) Witness statement of Ms Philippa June Burne dated 21 May 2023;
(o) Witness statement of Ms Andrea Maree Furness dated 22 May 2023, submitted by
(p) Letter from Mr Daniel J McDiarmid dated 22 May 2023;
(q) Witness statement of Prof Rob Moodie and Dr Shelley Bowen dated 23 May 2023,
submitted by Ms Poke;
(r) Witness statement of Mr Basil Eliades dated 23 May 2023 (excluding page 4)
and annexures:
February 2022 newspaper article entitled “Endeavour Group and Dan
Murphy’s win from drinking at home”;
Association submission in respect of a development application for a McDonalds
fast food outlet in Guildford, Western Australia
dated 4 May 2017;
of the Metro East Joint Development Assessment Panel dated 7 August 2017;
report by the New Economics Foundation entitled “Re-imagining the high
street: Escape from Clone Town Britain”;
(s) Witness statement of Mr David Ferguson dated 23 May 2023;
(t) Witness statement of Mr David Moore dated 24 May 2023 and annexure entitled
“Kathleen McCrae’s and David Moore’s
Lived experience with a
local Alcohol compromised person”;
(u) Witness statement of Cr Bray dated 24 May 2023 and annexures:
Census All persons QuickStats: Daylesford;
Shire Council’s “A Home in Hepburn Shire: Draft Strategy and Action
Census All persons QuickStats: Hepburn LGA;
Shire’s “ACE Youth Census Summary Report, Hepburn Shire
Shire Youth Census Survey conducted in December 2020;
Bureau of Statistics General Community Profile: Daylesford (SAL20721);
Presentation
slides including photographs;
from Steve MacPhail, Principal, Daylesford College dated 22 May 2023;
paper by Sandra C Jones and Christopher A Magee of the University of Wollongong
entitled “Exposure to alcohol advertising
and alcohol consumption among
Australian adolescents”;
release on the “Ten to Men: The Australian Longitudinal Study on Male
Health” report dated 8 October 2020;
by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare entitled “Alcohol,
tobacco & other drugs in Australia” dated
26 April 2023;
of the Independent Panel Review into the proposed Dan Murphy’s development
in Darwin dated 28 April 2021;
(v) Witness statement of Mr Dickenson dated 24 May 2023;
(w) Witness statement of Ms Bridie De Vecchi dated 24 May 2023;
(x) Witness statement of Ms Debra Rauber dated 24 May 2023;
(y) Witness statement of Dr Jennifer Beacham dated 24 May 2023;
(z) Witness statement of Cr Lesley Hewitt dated 24 May 2023;
(aa) Witness statement of Mr Peter Joseph O’Mara dated 24 May 2023;
(bb) Letter from Mr Edwin Beacham dated 24 May 2023;
(cc) Letter from Mr Simon O’Keefe dated 24 May 2023;
(dd) Letter from Ms Vanesa Hernandez Rodriguez received on 24 May 2023;
(ee) Letter from Springs Medical dated 25 May 2023, submitted by Ms Poke;
(ff) Letter from Ms Mara Ripani received on 25 May 2023;
(gg) Letter from Ms Karri Flood received on 25 May 2023 from Ms Ripani;
(hh) Submissions of Hepburn Shire Council dated 31 May 2023 and
Permit dated 4 December 2018;
Property Report dated 29 May 2023;
Planning Permit dated 5 July 2022;
Permit Assessment Report dated 14 June 2022;
Daylesford:
Sensitive Uses map;
Daylesford:
Liquor licence by category Map;
of Liquor Licences;
article by Jennie L Connor et al entitled “Alcohol outlet density, levels
of drinking and alcohol-related harm in New Zealand:
article by B Rowland et al entitled “The density of alcohol outlets and
adolescent alcohol consumption: An Australian longitudinal
(ii) Social Impact Assessment report prepared by Colleen Peterson dated 8 June
(jj) Witness statement of Mr Chris Abery dated 15 June 2023;
(kk) Submissions of the Licensee dated 21 June 2023 and annexures:
Government Gazette – No. S 384 Tuesday 2 August 2022;
entitled “Information Required When Lodging Objection”;
Shire Council General Local Law No. 2 of 2019;
and Cooke v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2000] VCAT 459
Limited at Dan Murphy’s Cranbourne East premises (Liquor-internal
[2016] VCGLR 7;
Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
(ll) Witness statement of Dr Gregory Stewart dated 10 August 2023;
(mm) Response of Ms Poke to Commission’s request for information and
submissions dated 25 September 2023;
(nn) Response of Mr Eliades to Commission’s request for information and
submissions dated 25 September 2023;
(oo) Response of Mr Eliades to Commission’s request for information and
submissions dated 25 September 2023;
(pp) Response of Cr Bray to Commission’s request for information and
submissions dated 25 September 2023;
(qq) Response of Ms Furness to Commission’s request for information and
submissions received on 26 September 2023;
(rr) Response of Mr Dickenson to Commission’s request for information and
submissions received on 26 September 2023;
(ss) Submissions of Hepburn Shire Council dated 26 September 2023 and
Shire Youth Census Survey conducted in December 2020;
(tt) Presentation slides of Ms Rauber received on 26 September 2023;
(uu) Articles submitted by Ms Rauber on 26 September 2023:
article by Andrew W Ellis et al, entitled “Age of acquisition and the
recognition of brand names: On the importance of
being early”;
article by Matthew A Lapierre et al, entitled “The effect of advertising
on children and adolescents”;
article by Alexandra Aiken et al, entitled “Youth perceptions of alcohol
advertising: are current advertising regulations
(vv) Presentation slides of Mr Moore received on 26 September 2023;
(ww) Email communication from Mr Murray Kellock (King & Wood Mallesons) to
Commission dated 26 September and attachments:
entitled “Hepburn LGA Statistics – Rates of Family
Statement of James Alexander Scott-Mackenzie dated 25 September 2023 and
Curriculum Vitae;
Plan of Management: Dan Murphy’s Daylesford;
Commitment to Community;
Crime Prevention through Environmental Design;
Statement of Rosie Antonietta Prezioso dated 26 September 2023 and
ID25 Policy;
Secondary Supply Policy;
Submissions
of Licensee and annexure dated 26 September 2023:
reading speech for
Liquor Control Reform Amendment Bill
(xx) Newspaper article dated 5 August 2022 received from Licensee on 2 October
(yy) Photographs received from Mr Moore on 2 October 2023;
(zz) Presentation slides of Cr Bray received on 3 October 2023;
(aaa) Presentation
slides of Mr Dickenson received on 3 October 2023;
(bbb) Photographs
received from Mr Moore on 3 October 2023;
(ccc) Dan Murphy’s website pages received from Hepburn Shire Council on 3
October 2023;
(ddd) Document
received from the Licensee entitled “Proposed Elevations” received
on 3 October 2023;
(eee) Document
received from Ms Poke on 4 October 2023 entitled “Overview of density of
packaged liquor outlets for Daylesford”;
(fff) Document
extract received from Cr Bray entitled “Who are our ratepayers?”
received on 4 October 2023;
(ggg) Extracts
received from Cr Bray from 2016 article by B Rowland et al entitled “The
density of alcohol outlets and adolescent
alcohol consumption: An Australian
longitudinal analysis” received on 4 October 2023;
(hhh) Untitled
documents recording statistical information received from Ms Peterson on 4
October 2023;
(iii) Photograph received from Cr Bray on 5 October 2023;
(jjj) Photographs
received from Ms Rauber on 5 October 2023;
(kkk) Letter
from Emma Johns, Manager, Springs Medical dated 5 October 2023, submitted by Ms
(lll) Email communication from Cr Bray received on 6 October 2023 containing
internet links to Hepburn Shire Township Structure Plan
Review and news article;
article by Andrew W Ellis et al, entitled “Age of acquisition and the
recognition of brand names: On the importance
of being early” received
from Mr Moore on 6 October 2023;
(nnn) Documents
received from the Licensee on 6 October 2023:
Primary School Facebook post;
copy of 2011 paper by Sandra C Jones and Christopher A Magee of the University
of Wollongong entitled “Exposure to
alcohol advertising and alcohol
consumption among Australian adolescents”;
from Cancer Council Victoria, Australian Secondary School Students’ Use of
Tobacco, Alcohol, Over-the-Counter Drugs,
and Illicit Substances: Second Edition
[ASSAD 2017 Statistics and Trends];
Shire Youth Census Survey conducted in December 2020;
from report entitled “Interventions for reducing alcohol supply, alcohol
demand and alcohol-related harm”;
(ooo) Presentation
slides of Cr Bray received on 8 October 2023;
(ppp) Presentation
slide of Cr Bray received on 9 October 2023;
(qqq) Document
received from Ms Poke on 9 October 2023 entitled “Responsible Investment
Benchmark Report”;
article by Denise Azar et al, entitled “The association between alcohol
outlet density and alcohol use among urban
and regional Australian
adolescents” received from Licensee on 9 October 2023;
(sss) Documents
received from the Licensee on 9 October 2023:
Cellarbrations
at Foxxy’s Daylesford Facebook post;
Shire Council ACE [Advocate Celebrate Elevate] Youth Development
(ttt) Articles
submitted by Prof Swerissen on 9 October 2023:
article by Michael Livingston et al, entitled “Individual and community
correlates of young people’s high-risk drinking
in Victoria,
Australia”;
article by B Rowland et al, entitled “The density of alcohol outlets and
adolescent alcohol consumption: An Australian
longitudinal analysis”;
article by Adam Sherk et al, entitled “Alcohol consumption and the
physical availability of take-away alcohol: Systematic
reviews and meta-analyses
of the days and hours of sale and outlet density”;
article submitted by Prof Swerissen on 10 October 2023 by Alexander C Wagenaar
et al, entitled “Effects of beverage
alcohol price and tax levels on
drinking: a meta-analysis of 1003 estimates from 112 studies”;
(vvv) Document entitled “Alcohol, tobacco & other drugs in
Australia” received from Licensee on 10 October 2023;
(www) Document
entitled “Risk factors (estimates)” received from Licensee on 10
October 2023;
(xxx) 3D Model images received from Mr Moore on 10 October 2023;
(yyy) Documents
received from Mr Moore on 10 October 2023:
of Reasons for an Application for a Packaged Liquor Licence ALDI Byron Bay dated
31 May 2016;
Health and Medical Research Council Australian guidelines to reduce health risks
from drinking alcohol;
entitled “David Moore Architect”;
Street View images;
for Alcohol Research and Education Submission to proposed Queensland regulatory
framework for online liquor sale and delivery;
Health Organization news release dated 4 January 2023;
article by Benjamin O Anderson et al entitled “Health and cancer risks
associated with low levels of alcohol consumption”;
business.gov.au
Packaged Liquor Licence – Victoria: Description;
Stats Liquor licences;
for Alcohol Research and Education 2014 paper entitled “Stemming the tide
of alcohol: Liquor licensing and the public
Guardian news article dated 29 April 2021;
Architecture document entitled “What is this amenity of which you
Byron Shire Echo news article dated 9 October 2012;
(zzz) Email
communication from Dr Bowen received on 15 October 2023 containing Australian
Bureau of Statistics figures and extract
from submission by M Livingston to the
Liquor and Gambling Commissioner of South Australia regarding packaged liquor
applications
dated 5 July 2021;
(aaaa) Presentation
slides of Cr Bray received on 8 November 2023;
(bbbb) Presentation
slides of Dr Beacham received on 20 November 2023;
(cccc) Documents received from Cr Hewitt on 20 November 2023:
Institute of Family Studies paper entitled “Alcohol-related harm in
families and alcohol consumption during COVID-19”;
Institute of Health and Welfare news release dated 15 March 2019;
Institute of Family Studies website;
of Education and Early Childhood Development Early Childhood Community Profile:
Grampians Region 2010;
paper by M Livingston entitled “Packaged liquor in Victoria: 2001 to
Shire Council: Baseline data report;
(dddd) Email
communication from Licensee received on 24 November 2023 containing information
from Ms Peterson and attaching:
of schools and proximity to licensed premises;
Alcohol and Drug Association 2011 position paper entitled “Preventing
alcohol related violence”;
(eeee) Documents
received from Ms Stephenson on 27 November 2023:
Health Atlas Victoria: Hepburn, Grampians Region: Violence Against Woman Fact
Sheet dated 27 February 2023;
Shire Council Community Reference Group Welcome pack dated February
(ffff) Documents
received from Mr Moore on 27 November 2023:
communication from Paul Anderson, Secretary/Treasurer, Daylesford Fire Brigade
dated 31 August 2023;
communication from Gary McIntosh, Musk Country Fire Authority Brigade Member
dated 27 November 2023;
entitled “Attendance at Littles Supper Club aka The Spa Bar ex
(gggg) Documents
submitted by Counsel Assisting the Commission on 27 November 2023:
from Review of the South Australian
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
dated 29 June 2016
(an additional page was relied on by the Licensee on 30 January 2024);
BWS Cumberland Park
[2022] SALC 70
Dan Murphy’s South Fremantle
(Liquor Commission of Western
Australia, 13 October 2011);
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
(hhhh) Socio-Economic
Indexes for Areas maps prepared by Ms Peterson and received from Licensee on 28
November 2023;
(iiii) Documents submitted by Counsel Assisting the Commission on 28 November
from Preventative Health Taskforce 2009 report entitled “Preventing
alcohol-related harm in Australia: a window of opportunity”;
from Department of Human Services and Health 1995 report entitled “The
quantification of drug caused morbidity and mortality
Australia”;
(jjjj) Email
communication from Licensee received on 5 December 2023 containing information
from Mr Scott-Mackenzie and attaching:
entitled “PCM ESG Analysis - DM Daylesford (Vic)” dated 7 October
Post, Delivery of parcels containing alcohol;
Analysis Australia report entitled “Review of a Study of the Effects of
Liquor Outlet Density and Other Factors in Western
Australia” dated
November 2010;
Analysis Australia report entitled “A Study of the Balga, Albany and
Mandurah Dan Murphy’s Outlets in Western Australia”
dated November
entitled “Our Sustainability Strategy and the IPR”;
entitled “Price Override - EG”;
(kkkk) Letter
from Ms Emma Johns, General Manager, Springs Medical dated 11 December 2023,
submitted by Ms Poke;
(llll) Submissions of Counsel Assisting the Commission dated 13 December 2023;
(mmmm) Submissions
of Mr Moore dated 28 December 2023;
(nnnn) Submissions
of Hepburn Shire Council dated 15 January 2024;
(oooo) Submissions
of Ms Stephenson dated 15 January 2024;
(pppp) Submissions
of Mr Dickenson received on 15 January 2024;
(qqqq) Submissions
of Cr Bray received on 15 January 2024;
(rrrr) Submissions
of Ms Poke dated 15 January 2024;
(ssss) Submissions
of Licensee dated 15 January 2024;
(tttt) Email
communication from Cr Bray received on 30 January 2024 containing transcript
references;
(uuuu) Email
communication from Mr Moore received on 30 January 2024 attaching 2009 article
by Andrew W Ellis et al, entitled “Age
of acquisition and the recognition
of brand names: On the importance of being early”.
of Submissions on Behalf of the Licensee dated 15 January 2024 (
January Submissions
All references
to legislation are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
Section 157(2) to (5) contains
further provisions as to the manner in which the Commission must or may
undertake a review.
LCR Act, sections 44, 49 and
LCR Act, sections 44 and
LCR Act, section 3(1)
(definition of “contested application”).
section 44(2)(b)(i).
section 44(2)(b)(ii).
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
(2012) 39 VR 92
confirms that harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act
and therefore the primary consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although
not to the exclusion of the other objects).
Limited at Dan Murphy’s Cranbourne East premises (Liquor-internal
[2016] VCGLR 7 at [64] (footnotes omitted).
Act, Schedule 8, clause 5.
Act was renamed the
Victorian Gambling and Casino Control Commission Act
(Vic) by the
Casino and Gambling Legislation Amendment Act 2021
(Vic) with effect from 1 January 2022.
guideline states that “
Cumulative Impact
refers to the impacts
arising from a concentration of licensed premises in a defined area. Evidence
has identified that cumulative
impact is associated with a range of positive and
negative effects, depending on the physical and environmental setting, the mix
of premises, and their operating conditions.”
[2012] VSCA 325
(2012) 39 VR 92
Director of Liquor
Licensing v Kordister Pty Ltd
[2011] VSC 207
(2011) 34 VAR 293
turning citing
Re Avery & Director of Liquor Licensing
[2001] VCAT
(2001) 17 VAR 405
. See also at [110] (Tate JA).
[2012] VSCA 325
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2012] VSCA 325
(2012) 39 VR 92
, referring to
Executive Director
of Health v Lily Creek International Pty Ltd
[2000] WASCA 258
(2000) 22 WAR
[2012] VSCA 325
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2012] VSCA 325
(2012) 39 VR 92
Director of Liquor
Licensing v Kordister Pty Ltd
[2011] VSC 207
(2011) 34 VAR 293
[2012] VSCA 325
(2012) 39 VR 92
Director of Liquor
Licensing v Kordister Pty Ltd
[2011] VSC 207
(2011) 34 VAR 293
Lodhi v The Queen
[2007] NSWCCA 360
(2007) 179 A Crim R 470
[2012] VSCA 325
(2012) 39 VR 92
, endorsing
[2005] VCAT
[2005] VCAT 323
v Director of Liquor Licensing (Occupational and Business Regulation)
, [53-[54] (emphasis in original).
(2000) 17 VAR 17
[2005] VCAT 323
[2005] VCAT 323
[2012] VSCA 325
(2012) 39 VR 92
Director of Liquor
Licensing v Kordister Pty Ltd
[2011] VSC 207
(2011) 34 VAR 293
[2000] VCAT 459
(2000) 17 VAR 17
[2005] VCAT
Kordister Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing (Occupational and
Business Regulation)
[2010] VCAT 277
[2012] VSCA 325
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2000] VCAT
(2000) 17 VAR 17
[2005] VCAT 323
Submissions on Behalf of the Permit Applicant dated 21 June 2023 (
June Submissions
) at [20]-[23]; Outline of Further Submissions on Behalf of
the Licensee dated 26 September 2023 (
Licensee September Submissions
Section 27AA defines a
large packaged liquor outlet as a packaged liquor outlet with a floor space
greater than 750 square metres.
Submissions
of Counsel Assisting the Commission dated 13 December 2023 at [13]-[19].
of Submissions on Behalf of the Licensee dated 15 January 2024 (
January Submissions
) at [6]-[8].
Commission here is referring to Foxxy’s Liquor/Cellarbrations at 55
Vincent Street, and Liquorland at 32 Albert Street.
A third packaged liquor
outlet, Blake Family Grocers at 1 Howe Street, may be described as a
gourmet mini supermarket with only a
limited supply of alcohol for sale.
transcript, page 486, lines 1 to 3.
transcript, page 486, lines 5 to 8.
transcript, page 486, lines 13 to 15.
transcript, page 486, lines 15 to 16.
transcript, page 486, line 18.
transcript, page 486, lines 18 to 22.
statement of Prof Hal Swerissen dated 21 May 2023, p. 1; Hearing transcript,
page 618, line 7.
transcript, page 618, lines 7 to 9.
transcript, page 618, lines 9 to 10.
transcript, page 618, lines 10 to 12.
transcript, page 618, lines 38 to 39.
transcript, page 618, line 39.
transcript, page 618, lines 39 to 41.
transcript, page 684, line 17; page 685, line 7.
transcript, page 684, lines 16 to 17; page 685, lines 7 to 15; page 700, lines
transcript, page 685, lines 15 to 17.
transcript, page 685, lines 21 to 22.
transcript, page 724, lines 18 to 19; page 725, lines 41 to 42.
transcript, page 730, lines 22 to 23.
transcript, page 753, lines 36 to 37; page 755, lines 18 to 19.
transcript, page 756, lines 2 to 5.
transcript, page 754, lines 28 to 44.
transcript, page 791, line 44; page 792, lines 20 to 21.
transcript, page 792, lines 21 to 23.
transcript, page 792, lines 36 to 37.
transcript, page 792, lines 39 to 43.
transcript, page 874, line 27; page 875, lines 28 to 29.
transcript, page 876, lines 17 to 21.
transcript, page 876, lines 21 to 43.
transcript, page 967, lines 19 to 20.
transcript, page 967, lines 22 to 23.
transcript, page 967, lines 29 to 30.
statement of Ms Michelle Stephenson dated 21 May 2023, p. 1; Hearing transcript,
page 1109, lines 18 to 19.
transcript, page 1111, lines 12 to 16.
transcript, page 363, line 5, lines 14 to 15; page 379, lines 43 to 44.
statement of Ms Debra Rauber dated 24 May 2023 (
Rauber Witness
transcript, page 429, lines 32 to 33.
transcript, page 429, line 33; page 431, lines 14 to 15; page 449, lines 38 to
transcript, page 430, line 16, lines 21 to 24, line 40.
transcript, page 430, lines 26 to 29.
transcript, page 994, line 30; page 995, lines 42 to 43.
transcript, page 995, line 26.
transcript, page 995, lines 34 to 36.
transcript, page 995, lines 36 to 38.
transcript, page 1028, line 7.
transcript, page 1027, lines 18 to 19; page 1028, line 14.
transcript, page 1028, lines 8 to 10.
transcript, page 1070, line 6, line 29.
transcript, page 1071, lin es 24 to 25.
transcript, page 1071, lines 26 to 28.
transcript, page 1073, lines 41 to 44.
transcript, page 1074, lines 1 to 8.
statement of Dr Jennifer Beacham dated 24 May 2023, p. 1; Hearing
transcript, page 1140, line 45.
transcript, page 1141, lines 5 to 7.
transcript, page 1141, lines 7 to 16.
2022 Report, p. 51.
2022 Report, p. 51; Hearing transcript, page 23, line 25.
Report at [7].
Report at [6].
Statement of James Alexander Scott-Mackenzie dated 25 September 2023
Scott-Mackenzie Witness Statement
) at [1.2].
Scott-Mackenzie
Witness Statement at [1.3].
Statement of Rosie Antonietta Prezioso dated 26 September 2023 (
Witness Statement
) at [1.1]; Hearing transcript, page 1401, lines 27 to
May Submissions at [7.1]-[7.12].
May Submissions at [9.1]-[11.2].
May Submissions at [12.12], [12.17].
September Submissions at [43]-[44]. See also Council January Submissions at
[37]; Hearing transcript, page 1582, lines 29
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 23 June 2021, 2310 (Melissa
Horne, Minister for Gaming and Liquor Regulation); Victoria,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 14 September 2021, 3105-06 (Jaala Pulford).
See Council September Submissions at [48]. See also Council January
Submissions
September Submissions at [49]-[54]. See also Council January Submissions at
[49], [72]-[73].
September Submissions at [52].
September Submissions at [53].
September Submissions at [54].
September Submissions at [55]. See also Council January Submissions at
September Submissions at [57]-[58]. See also Council January Submissions at
September Submissions at [63]. See also Council January Submissions at
September Submissions at [63]. See also Council January Submissions at
September Submissions at [65]-[68].
January Submissions at [1].
January Submissions at [7], [63]-[79].
January Submissions at [8] (emphasis in original).
January Submissions at [10]-[12]. The passage identified by the Council as
emanating from Tate JA’s reasons at [152]
was in fact a quotation by her
Honour from the reasons of the judge below in that case: see
Director of
Liquor Licensing v Kordister Pty Ltd
[2011] VSC 207
(2011) 34 VAR 293
January Submissions at [23].
January Submissions at [23].
January Submissions at [23].
January Submissions at [38]-[40].
January Submissions at [41]-[42].
Independent
Panel Review into the Proposed Dan Murphy’s Development in Darwin
April 2021), p.132.
PCM ESG Analysis - DM Daylesford (Vic
) (7 October 2021).
January Submissions at [44].
January Submissions at [44], [54]. See Peterson Report at [59]-[61].
January Submissions, p.9. See also Hearing transcript, page 1598, lines 3 to
transcript, page 1597, lines 9 to 13.
transcript, page 1597, lines 13 to 15.
January Submissions, p.9. See also Hearing transcript, page 1597, lines 30 to
January Submissions at [1.2].
January Submissions at [2.1].
January Submissions at [3.2].
January Submissions at [4.1]-[4.2].
January Submissions at [5.1]-[5.4].
January Submissions at [1.2].
January Submissions at [1.8]-[1.9]. See also Hearing transcript, page 1602, line
11 to page 1603, line 19.
January Submissions at [1.11].
January Submissions at [7] (emphasis in original). See also Hearing transcript,
page 1608, lines 23 to 30.
January Submissions, p.4. See also Hearing transcript, page 1610, line 43 to
page 1611, line 11.
December Submissions, p.6. See also Hearing transcript, page 1613, line 28 to
page 1614, line 3.
October Submissions at [6]-[8].
October Submissions at [11]-[12].
October Submissions at [29].
October Submissions at [29].
October Submissions at [33]-[40].
October Submissions at [41]-[60].
the Licensee June Submissions, the Licensee said it also relied on its earlier
submissions, including those made in response to
applications for a stay of the
Original Decision. These appear to have little relevance to the issues for
June Submissions at [25]-[30].
June Submissions at [31]-[41].
June Submissions at [42]-[50].
June Submissions at [52]-[56]; Licensee January Submissions at [117]; Hearing
transcript, page 1628, lines 30 to 35.
June Submissions at [64]-[107].
September Submissions at [12], citing
New Theme Pty Ltd v Victorian Casino
and Gaming Authority
[2002] VSCA 80
Mount Alexander SC v
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation
[2013] VCAT 101
January Submissions at [11(a)]. See also Hearing transcript, page 1634, lines 1
January Submissions at [11(c)], [97], [100]. See also Hearing transcript, page
1634, lines 11 to 18.
January Submissions at [11(c)], [101].
January Submissions at [23].
January Submissions at [24], [51], [60], [61], [67], [78].
January Submissions at [46].
January Submissions at [49]. See also at [55].
January Submissions at [77].
January Submissions at [107].
January Submissions at [112]-[116].
January Submissions at [132].
Statistical
Area Level 2, as defined in the Australian Bureau of Statistics’
Australian Statistical Geography Standard (ASGS) Edition 3
January Submissions at [126].
January Submissions at [127].
January Submissions at [163]. See also Hearing transcript, page 1653, lines 18
January Submissions at [284].
January Submissions at [284].
transcript, page 1645, lines 8 to 10.
Act, section 44(2)(b)(ii). The Commission notes that, in determining this
matter, it has also considered each of the applicable
grounds set out in
section 44(2).
LCR Act, sections 4(1)(a) and 172D(3).
Act, section
44(2)(b)(i).
LCR Act, sections 4(1)(b) and 172D(3).
sections 4(1)(c) and 172D(3). The object relating to sexually explicit
entertainment in section 4(1)(d) is not relevant
to these Internal Review
Applications.
section 44(2)(b)(ii).
LCR Act, sections 4
and 172D(3).
Census Survey, p.1. See Response of Cr Bray to Commission’s request for
information and submissions dated 25 September
Bray Response
[25]; Hearing transcript, page 185, lines 36 to 38.
Census Survey, p.1.
Census Survey, p.1.
Census Survey, p.1; Hearing transcript, page 528, line 39 to page 531, line
Council Victoria,
Australian Secondary School Students’ Use of Tobacco,
Alcohol, Over-the-Counter Drugs, and Illicit Substances: Second Edition
[ASSAD 2017 Statistics and Trends] (July 2020), p.48. See Bray Response at
Council Victoria,
Australian Secondary School Students’ Use of Tobacco,
Alcohol, Over-the-Counter Drugs, and Illicit Substances: Second Edition
[ASSAD 2017 Statistics and Trends] (July 2020), p.48.
Census Survey, p.2. See Bray Response at [28]; Hearing transcript, page 501,
lines 30 to 34.
transcript, page 432, lines 35 to 39.
transcript, page 599, line 14.
Response at [33]; Hearing transcript, page 503, line 27.
Response at [11]; Hearing transcript, page 503, lines 22 to 23, lines 26 to
Response at [32]-[42]; Hearing transcript, page 503, line 14 to page 504, line
21; page 593, lines 15 to 45; page 597, lines
Response at [36]; Hearing transcript, page 503, lines 39 to 42.
Response at [38]; Hearing transcript, page 504, lines 3 to 7.
Response at [41]; Hearing transcript, page 504, lines 13 to 15.
Response at [57].
Response at [57].
Response at [56].
transcript, page 973, lines 26 to 28; page 988, lines 30 to 43. See also
Response of Mr Dickenson to Commission’s request
for information and
submissions received on 26 September 2023 (
Dickenson Response
January Submissions at [237].
January Submissions at [237].
from Steve MacPhail, Principal, Daylesford College dated 22 May 2023. See
Hearing transcript, page 502, line 12 to page 503,
Response at [12]; Hearing transcript, page 510, lines 9 to 24.
transcript, page 512, lines 27 to 28.
Report at [111]-[112]. See Hepburn Shire Council ACE [Advocate Celebrate
Elevate] Youth Development Strategy (undated) (
Youth Development
communication from Mr Murray Kellock (King & Wood Mallesons) to Commission
dated 26 September (
Kellock Email
Report at [113]. See Youth Development Strategy, p.11.
transcript, page 499, lines 20 to 25.
transcript, page 1147, lines 18 to 23.
transcript, page 173, line 1.
Health and Medical Research Council,
Australian Guidelines to Reduce Health
Risks from Drinking Alcohol
(2020), p.41.
Health and Medical Research Council,
Australian Guidelines to Reduce Health
Risks from Drinking Alcohol
(2020), p.42.
transcript, page 173, lines 3 to 4.
transcript, page 254, lines 6 to 9.
transcript, page 311, lines 15 to 17.
Peterson Report at [72], Fig. 5.1.
Ripani, who submitted a letter on 25 May 2023 but did not appear as a witness,
described her prime objection as location on
the basis that the Premises is a
one-minute walk from the swimming pool; five-minute walk to Lake Daylesford; and
10-minute walk
to Daylesford Skate Park. She described these as prominent areas
where young adults “hang out”, most especially in summer:
from Ms Mara Ripani received on 25 May 2023, p.1. She did not refer to underage
drinking at these sites, but her identification
of them as gathering places for
young adults is relevant to the question of secondary supply in light of other
witnesses’ evidence.
Response at [36]; Hearing transcript, page 503, lines 43 to 44.
transcript, page 599, lines 36 to 39.
transcript, page 599, lines 39 to 40, line 44.
transcript, page 433, lines 41 to 43.
transcript, page 433, line 43 to page 434, line 1.
transcript, page 434, line 1. See also Hearing transcript, page 442, line 45 to
page 445, line 18.
June Submissions at [102(b)].
transcript, page 434, lines 2 to 4.
transcript, page 454, lines 20 to 24.
transcript, page 471, lines 9 to 15.
transcript, page 471, line 44 to page 472, line 1.
January Submissions at [50], fn 31. See also Hearing transcript, page 1662, line
25 to page 1663, line 17.
January Submissions at [241].
transcript, page 678, line 45 to page 679, line 2.
transcript, page 679, lines 4 to 10.
transcript, page 744, lines 28 to 32.
transcript, page 744, lines 32 to 40.
transcript, page 1020, lines 1 to 6.
transcript, page 1020, lines 6 to 10, lines 33 to 36.
transcript, page 1025, lines 35 to 36; page 1026, lines 7 to 9.
transcript, page 1025, lines 37 to 39.
transcript, page 1030, lines 27 to 30.
transcript, page 1030, line 41 to page 1031, line 11.
transcript, page 1031, lines 18 to 23.
transcript, page 1031, lines 25 to 42.
Report at [114]-[117]; Hearing transcript, page 185, line 42 to page 186, line
transcript, page 548, lines 25 to 36. See also page 589, lines 22 to 45; page
598, lines 5 to 17.
Report at [234].
Report at [202], Fig. 9.8; Hearing transcript, page 199, line 39 to page 200,
transcript, page 291, lines 36 to 37.
Report at [202], Fig. 9.8.
transcript, page 330, lines 32 to 34.
transcript, page 1462, lines 10 to 17.
transcript, page 1462, lines 20 to 22.
transcript, page 1462, lines 28 to 31.
transcript, page 1462, line 33 to page 1463, line 11.
transcript, page 1463, lines 11 to 13.
in particular, the condition imposed by section 18C of the LCR Act on every
licence that authorises a licensee to supply liquor
to a person who makes an
off-premises request.
Response at [2].
Response at [3].
Response at [3].
Response at [4].
Response at [5].
Response at [6].
Response at [7].
Report at [32].
transcript, page 510, lines 13 to 14.
transcript, page 422, line 9 to page 423, line 9.
transcript, page 727, lines 37 to 39; page 740, lines 9 to 15.
transcript, page 727, lines 39 to 42; page 740, line 17 to page 741, line
2022 Report, p.31.
2022 Report, pp.31-32.
2022 Report, p.32.
Report at [202]; Hearing transcript, page 203, lines 20 to 22.
Report at [202].
transcript, page 199, lines 30 to 34.
January Submissions at [240].
Response at [21].
Response at [22]-[23]; Hearing transcript, page 510, lines 24 to 36.
transcript, page 510, lines 36 to 39; page 591, lines 6 to 15.
transcript, page 512, lines 10 to 13.
transcript, page 512, lines 13 to 15.
transcript, page 388, lines 28 to 29.
transcript, page 372, lines 37 to 42; page 423, lines 39 to 40.
transcript, page 424, lines 6 to 10.
transcript, page 727, lines 28 to 34; page 740, lines 5 to 6.
transcript, page 728, lines 4 to 6.
transcript, page 996, lines 1 to 3.
transcript, page 996, lines 34 to 36.
transcript, page 996, lines 38 to 40.
transcript, page 102, lines 28 to 36. See also Hearing transcript, page 162,
lines 25 to 44.
transcript, page 213, line 15.
transcript, page 211, lines 19 to 23.
transcript, page 211, lines 23 to 24.
transcript, page 213, lines 33 to 36.
transcript, page 214, lines 3 to 7.
transcript, page 511, lines 39 to 40.
transcript, page 1461, lines 8 to 9.
transcript, page 1461, lines 18 to 28.
transcript, page 1461, lines 28 to 30.
January Submissions at [216].
January Submissions at [216]. See also at [240].
transcript, page 434, lines 7 to 9. See also Hearing transcript, page 464, line
25 to page 465, line 19; page 466, lines
from Mr Edwin Beacham dated 24 May 2023, p.1.
from Ms Mara Ripani received on 25 May 2023, p.2.
statement of Prof Rob Moodie and Dr Shelley Bowen dated 23 May 2023, p. 4.
Presentation
slides of Cr Bray received on 8 November 2023, “Photo 28 Sign on
Daylesford Police Station Door”.
transcript, page 1001, lines 39 to 40.
statement of Mr David Moore dated 24 May 2023, p.3.
transcript, page 891, lines 18 to 19, line 23.
transcript, page 1029, lines 2 to 4.
transcript, page 1029, lines 4 to 8.
transcript, page 1145, lines 14 to 17; page 1163, lines 27 to 28.
transcript, page 1161, lines 32 to 35.
2022 Report, p.44.
Report at [235]-[236].
January Submissions at [133]-[134].
January Submissions at [134]-[135].
transcript, page 1667, lines 4 to 8.
of Management: Dan Murphy’s Daylesford, Annexure JSM-2 to Witness
Statement of James Alexander Scott-Mackenzie dated 25
September 2023 (
). See Hearing transcript, page 1185, line 15 to page 1187, line
transcript, page 1187, lines 15 to 16.
transcript, page 1187, lines 23 to 35. See also Hearing transcript, page 1363,
line 8 to page 1364, line 9.
Scott-Mackenzie
Witness Statement at [3.2].
Scott-Mackenzie
Witness Statement at [3.3].
transcript, page 1184, lines 15 to 18.
transcript, page 1184, lines 18 to 26.
transcript, page 1184, lines 28 to 41.
of Management at [2(a)].
of Management, Appendix 3: School Uniform Policy.
of Management, Appendix 6: ID25 Policy.
of Management, Appendix 9: Responsible Buying Charter.
transcript, page 1218, lines 15 to 16.
transcript, page 1218, lines 24 to 30.
transcript, page 1218, line 39 to page 1219, line 9.
transcript, page 1219, lines 13 to 15.
transcript, page 1222, lines 20 to 23.
transcript, page 1222, lines 23 to 25.
transcript, page 1353, lines 34 to 35.
transcript, page 1353, line 37 to page 1354, line 6.
transcript, page 1270, lines 18 to 26.
transcript, page 1270, lines 28 to 30.
transcript, page 1296, lines 30 to 31.
transcript, page 1296, lines 31 to 34.
of Management, Appendix 5: Secondary Supply Policy.
to Community, Annexure JSM-3 to Witness Statement of James Alexander
Scott-Mackenzie dated 25 September 2023, p.10. See
Scott-Mackenzie Witness
Statement at [3.1.3].
transcript, page 1255, line 15 to page 1258, line 37.
transcript, page 1257, line 45 to page 1258, line 2.
transcript, page 1258, lines 4 to 7.
transcript, page 1258, lines 7 to 10.
transcript, page 1258, lines 33 to 37.
transcript, page 1329, lines 10 to 12.
transcript, page 1291, lines 9 to 10, lines 31 to 34.
transcript, page 1329, lines 9 to 10; page 1330, lines 8 to 9.
Policy, Annexure RAP-1 to Witness Statement of Rosie Antonietta Prezioso dated
26 September 2023.
Witness Statement at [3.3].
Witness Statement at [3.4]-[3.7].
Witness Statement at [3.8]. At the request of the Commission, the Licensee later
identified the national contractor for
the mystery shopping service as Creative
Activation: Kellock Email.
Witness Statement at [3.8]; Hearing transcript, page 1403, line 16 to page 1404,
Witness Statement at [3.8]; Hearing transcript, page 1411, line 41 to page 1412,
Supply Policy, Annexure RAP-2 to Witness Statement of Rosie Antonietta Prezioso
dated 26 September 2023.
Witness Statement at [3.7].
Witness Statement at [3.7].
transcript, page 1408, lines 20 to 21.
transcript, page 1408, lines 23 to 25.
transcript, page 1599, lines 9 to 18.
transcript, page 1599, lines 20 to 23.
transcript, page 1599, lines 23 to 24.
transcript, page 1627, lines 9 to 14.
transcript, page 1627, lines 14 to 15.
transcript, page 1665, lines 13 to 14.
transcript, page 1665, lines 14 to 16.
transcript, page 1665, line 18.
statement of Ms Jennifer Ann Bray dated 24 May 2023 at [23].
transcript, page 515, line 33 to page 516, line 7. See also Hearing transcript,
page 569, line 35 to page 571, line 19.
Witness Statement, pp.5-10.
transcript, page 389, lines 27 to 40; Hearing transcript, page 1612, lines 13 to
transcript, page 389, lines 27 to 40.
January Submissions at [217], including fn 97.
Witness Statement, p.7; Hearing transcript, page 420, line 23 to page 421, line
transcript, page 741, line 21 to page 742, line 24.
January Submissions at [240].
statement of Ms Bridie De Vecchi dated 24 May 2023 (
De Vecchi Witness
from Ms Vanesa Hernandez Rodriguez received on 24 May 2023.
2022 Report, p.32. See also Kellock Email.
2022 Report, p.32.
2022 Report, p.32.
Report at [197]; Hearing transcript, page 201, lines 3 to 6.
transcript, page 203, lines 31 to 33.
transcript, page 279, lines 18 to 29.
transcript, page 230, lines 33 to 37.
transcript, page 365, lines 22 to 23. See Photographs received from Ms Rauber on
5 October 2023, “1e) View From Cellarbrations,
looking South towards
Daylesford Primary School”.
transcript, page 1461, lines 43 to 44.
January Submissions at [209].
January Submissions at [209].
Licensee incorrectly identified this premises as on Bridport Street.
January Submissions at [211]-[212].
January Submissions at [215].
January Submissions at [242].
transcript, page 80, lines 40 to 41; page 109, lines 24 to 37; page 136, line 24
to page 137, line 20.
transcript, page 137, lines 22 to 25; page 141, lines 6 to 27. See also Abery
2023 Report: Mr Abery stated at p.3 that “the
presence of Dan
Murphy’s and its price position in Daylesford will not induce
significantly higher levels of alcohol consumption
leading to higher levels of
harm or abuse of alcohol”. He explained at p.9 that “[t]he price
elasticity of demand is
a microeconomic theory which measures how sensitive the
quantity demanded (or purchased) of a product or service is to its price”.
He referred at p.10 to recent economic modelling concluding that “new
evidence on demand elasticities of beer, wine and spririts
in Australia found
consumption to be quite inelastic, a result that is consistent with most
previous work in the area”.
transcript, page 109, line 39 to page 110, line 7.
transcript, page 680, lines 11 to 12. See generally page 679, line 34 to page
680, line 15.
transcript, page 680, lines 1 to 5.
January Submissions at [274].
January Submissions at [274].
January Submissions at [275].
January Submissions at [276].
transcript, page 1589, lines 29 to 39. See also page 1624, line 36 to page 1625,
January Submissions at [277].
transcript, page 998, lines 3 to 7.
transcript, page 1195, lines 3 to 9.
Vecchi Witness Statement, p.1.
Vecchi Witness Statement, p.2.
from Mr Daniel J McDiarmid dated 22 May 2023, p.2.
transcript, page 890, lines 19 to 38.
communication from Paul Anderson, Secretary/Treasurer, Daylesford Fire Brigade
dated 31 August 2023.
January Submissions at [267].
January Submissions at [267].
transcript, page 997, lines 40 to 43; page 998, lines 12 to 15.
transcript, page 998, lines 7 to 9.
transcript, page 1195, lines 29 to 33.
transcript, page 1293, lines 7 to 10.
transcript, page 1195, line 38 to page 1196, line 8.
transcript, page 1390, line 40 to page 1391, line 14.
Report at [54].
Report at [167]. See also Hearing transcript, page 190, lines 20 to 34.
Report at [171]. See also Hearing transcript, page 190, line 34 to page 191,
January Submissions at [265].
January Submissions at [266].
transcript, page 997, lines 22 to 24.
transcript, page 997, lines 27 to 30; page 1022, lines 8 to 19.
transcript, page 997, lines 31 to 32.
transcript, page 1115, line 40 to page 1116, line 35.
transcript, page 1116, lines 26 to 27.
transcript, page 1116, lines 33 to 35.
Report at [146]. See also Hearing transcript, page 188, lines 31 to 33.
Report at [147].
transcript, page 188, lines 33 to 34. See also Hearing transcript, page 287,
line 26 to page 289, line 4.
Report at [173]-[175]; Hearing transcript, page 191, lines 6 to 14.
Report at [177]; Hearing transcript, page 191, lines 14 to 24.
Report at [179], Fig. 9.5; Hearing transcript, page 195, lines 39 to 40.
Report at [179], Fig. 9.6.
transcript, page 196, lines 1 to 2.
transcript, page 293, lines 39 to 43.
transcript, page 293, line 45 to page 294, line 12.
January Submissions at [260].
January Submissions at [260].
statement of Mr Basil Eliades dated 23 May 2023.
from Mr Simon O’Keefe dated 24 May 2023.
January Submissions at
sections 4(1)(b) and 172D(3).
transcript, page 793, lines 15 to 17.
transcript, page 793, lines 19 to 20.
transcript, page 793, lines 20 to 21.
Report at [17], [207].
Report at [207].
Report at [207]; Hearing transcript, page 187, lines 30 to 34.
Report at [208]; Hearing transcript, page 187, line 36 to page 188, line 1.
transcript, page 1206, lines 39 to
sections 4(1)(c) and 172D(3).
Commission also notes that, as the Licensee submitted, this is not an
application for a licence for a large packaged liquor outlet,
where the LCR Act
provides an additional ground of refusal under section 44(2)(d) (that the
“net economic and social impact
of granting the application would be
detrimental to the wellbeing of the local community”). The Commission does
not consider
that, expressed in general terms, any asserted economic and social
impact benefit (e.g. increased employment opportunities, or attractive
landscaping proposed for a venue) is necessarily relevant to its
decision-making. The Commission has focused on the objects of the
making its decision.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (35.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter