URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/999.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:26:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Martinez v The Good Guys Discount Warehouses Pty Ltd & Anor (Civil Claims) [2025] VCAT 999 (10 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
CIVIL DIVISION
CIVIL CLAIMS LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO.
Civil Claims List – small claim under
Consumer Law and Fair Trading Act 2012
(Vic); consumer reliance on
Competition and Consumer Law Act 2010
(Cth); claim for a
replacement fridge, including loss of personal time; no proper basis;
misconceived; estoppel by deed.
Costs of a small claim – clause 4I, sch 1 of the
Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Cachia v Haines
179 CLR 403.
Confidentiality – suppression order under
Courts Act 2013
Juan David Martinez
FIRST RESPONDENT
The Good Guys Discount Warehouses Pty Ltd ACN:004 880 657
SECOND RESPONDENT
Lg Electronics Australia Pty Limited ACN:064 531 264
R Curie, Member
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
12 August 2025
DATE OF ORDER
10 November 2025
Martinez v The Good Guys Discount Warehouses Pty Ltd & Anor (Civil
Claims) [2025] VCAT 999
s 18(1)(f)(i) of the
Open Courts Act 2013
(Vic), the principal
registrar is directed to supress the certain particulars of the deed of release
to which the parties are privies
parties must not publish any information contained in or in connection with the
Deed, save for the extracted text contained in
this order.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
the principal registrar is not to permit persons, other than the parties in this
proceeding to inspect the file without further
order of the Tribunal
proceeding is dismissed.
order as to costs.
APPEARANCES:
For Applicant
For First Respondent
No appearance
For Second Respondent
Mr Gandolfo, service supervisor
INTRODUCTION
proceeding is a further attempt by the applicant, Mr Martinez, to claim loss and
damage that was settled by deed more than two
years ago. It concerns the
purchase of a refrigerator in 2017 (‘Refrigerator’), which the
second respondent (‘Manufacturer’)
contends was defective.
Request for written reasons by Mr Martinez following reasons
given ex tempore
reasons were given at the hearing dismissing the proceeding. Mr Martinez has now
requested written reasons.
following reasons reflect those I gave orally at the hearing, with some editing
for clarification and context. In some instances,
I have expanded upon my
description of relevant legislation, the content of documents and/or evidence
given which formed the basis
of my decision, for context and
background.
The Application
Martinez appeared self-represented, assisted by his support person, Ms Marr. The
first respondent, Good Guys (‘Supplier’),
did not attend the
hearing. The Manufacturer was represented by Mr Vince Gandolfo, service
supervisor. Neither party called any witnesses
to give evidence.
of the hearing, Mr Martinez filed various iterations of his claim, including an
affidavit, dated 22 May 2023, consisting of
nine pages that deposes to the
relief sought (‘Affidavit’). However, because the claim was not
clear from any of the
documents filed, Mr Martinez was invited to explain the
causes of action he has against each respondent, including the remedy or
Martinez articulated himself clearly during the hearing and appeared to be
familiar with the provisions contained in sch 2 of the
Competition and
Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) (‘ACL’), albeit, with the assistance of
his support person. He confirmed that he relies on s 54 of sch 2 to the
against both respondents and seeks the following remedy and or relief:
(a) a replacement fridge;
(b) compensation for spoiled food of $550 (from 5 June 2023 until today); and
(c) personal time of $1,499.44; and
(d) personal time to appear at the hearing.
claims brought under
of the ACL are set out in the Affidavit at paragraphs
[29] and [43] and were not pressed, nor were other claims that referred to
various provisions in the ACL.
27 July 2022, Mr Martinez purchased the Refrigerator from the Supplier. Shortly
after taking delivery of the Refrigerator, Mr Martinez
became aware of one or
more defects. The defects caused goods to become frozen when placed in the
bottom drawer and or bottom shelf
of the Refrigerator. Further, a button begun
to delaminate above the ice dispenser.
Subsequently,
in about September 2023, Mr Martinez reported the issues to the Manufacturer,
whereby its representatives arranged a
technician to attend the home of Mr
Martinez to assess the alleged defects. A technician replaced a plastic panel on
the rear of
the Refrigerator; however, the problem persists to this day. During
one or more attendances by a technician, the rear panel of the
Refrigerator
became damaged while a button was being replaced.
to the ongoing call outs by Mr Martinez, on 23 December 2023, Mr Martinez and
the Manufacturer entered a deed of release in respect
of the Refrigerator, that
provided for a ‘drop in value’ payment to Mr Martinez for the period
of use of 5 years (‘Deed’).
This meant Mr Martinez was reimbursed
for half of the cost of the Refrigerator for the time he had used the
Refrigerator since he
purchased it and allowed him to retain it, while the
Manufacturer was released from any further claims or actions.
Notwithstanding
Mr Martinez settled his dispute with the Manufacturer, on 12 November 2023, Mr
Martinez commenced proceedings against
both respondents to seek damages or other
relief in respect of the Refrigerator (‘Application’).
response to the Application, the Manufacturer denies the claim in its Points of
Defence and contends that Mr Martinez is out of
time in accordance with ss 272
and 273 of the ACL, which has a statutory limitation of three years after the
day on which Mr Martinez
first became aware, or ought reasonably became aware,
that the Manufacturer had not complied with s 54 of the
circumstances where the Deed contains confidential information and, moreover, a
confidentiality clause, I will order the suppression
of the particulars of the
Deed, in part, under
Open Courts Act 2013
avoid the publication of confidential information contained in the
operative terms contained in the Deed as set out below:
DEFINITIONS
Claim: Means
the Drop-In Value Compensation in relation to the Product
Product: [suppressed] model [supressed] with Serial number [supressed].
Settlement Sum: $[supressed].
EFT details:
Payee David Martinez
Bank: [supressed].
BSB: [supressed].
Account number: [supressed].
AND PAYMENT OF SETTLEMENT SUM:
not admitted any liability to the Customer in relation to the claim and
continues to deny any liability despite Acknowledgement
and Release.
consideration of the settlement sum by the LG, the Customer agrees to release
the LG from all actions, suits claims demands, costs
and other liabilities of
any nature to which the Customer may now or in the future have against LG, its
officers and/or employees
in connection with the claim.
of Deed 23 December 2022.
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
Mr Martinez is estopped by deed?
Mr Martinez is out of time to commence proceedings against the Manufacturer?
Mr Martinez is out of time to commence proceedings against the Supplier?
Mr Martinez is not estopped and/or not out of time against either or both
respondents, whether Mr Martinez is entitled to the remedy
and or relief sought?
Applicant’s evidence
Martinez was sworn in and gave the following oral testimony.
purchased the Refrigerator from the Supplier, but not as a ‘scratch and
dent’ sale item.
settling the dispute by Deed, he repaired the Refrigerator, but it was his
understanding that the release in the Deed specifically
related to a fault that
occurred at the time, being a defective button, that it did not relinquish any
future claims. Further, this
is the reason why he brought the Application,
because there was a major defect following the signing of the Deed.
were freezing issues with the Refrigerator that sporadically got worse and he,
therefore, seeks compensation for spoiled food,
his personal time to take three
days off work, in addition to a scratch on the back of the fridge. He maintains
that because the
Deed relates only to the button, the Deed did not relate to any
future issues that may arise, and other claims under the ACL would
part of his oral evidence, Mr Martinez made the following statements:
(a) ‘I understood the Deed to be in terms of the defect, the button ...
that my interpretation was specifically to the button
(b) ‘I specifically point out that the Deed is between LG and myself, and
does not include in any way, as far as I can see
in the Deed, release the Good
Guys, who are the party I am predominantly seeking a remedy from.’
(c) ‘I have included a remedy from LG because they were involved, but I am
not sure what remedy I should be seeking from them
in comparison to the Good
(d) ‘I rejected the fridge between the date of purchase and the time of
executing the deed, ‘using language that I was
rejecting it though.’
Martinez was invited to explain whether he had expressly rejected the
Refrigerator in writing at any time up to and including the
hearing. The
applicant stated: ‘I have ... in paragraph [31] in the Affidavit, umm, I
don’t know that I explicitly used
the words, “I reject”, but I
do seek a remedy.’
become aware that his Affidavit did not align with the oral evidence he was
giving, Mr Martinez sought to amend his Affidavit
by withdrawing paragraph [31],
to remove any reference of him purporting to have rejected the Refrigerator.
to the limited oral evidence given by the applicant to advance the Application
of the ACL, I set out below the facts deposed to by Mr Martinez in
his Affidavit:
(a) [6] The Refrigerator sporadically caused produce in the bottom drawers and
on the bottom shelf to freeze since it was delivered.
(b) [7] He contacted the Manufacturer regarding the defect as it became more
regular in 2020 and began to cause significant spoilage
(c) [9] When the technician attended, he replaced the large plastic panel on the
rear of the fridge and advised both him and his
partner, Yasmin Lorenz, that it
was likely that they would experience freezing as the issue was likely a
manufacturing defect.
(d) [11] In or about September 2022, the Refrigerator developed another defect.
The metallic coating on the button above the water
and ice dispenser began to
flake off ....
(e) [21] On 23 December 2022, the Manufacturer offered a settlement sum which
was referred to as a drop in value compensation.
(f) [22] He signed the release ....
(g) [25] On or about 5 June 2023, the Refrigerator developed a major defect.
(h) [26] The entire instrument panel on the left refrigerator door stopped
working (including ice dispensing, water dispensing, the
entire display,
temperature control and all buttons and features). He noted that the
Refrigerator has been freezing produce since
it was purchased and delivered but
the issue became much worse as a result of this new defect as he was unable to
adjust the temperature.
(i) [28] On 23 June 2023, he spoke with a case manager at the Manufacturer ...
and was told that the Manufacturer had met their obligations
and would not offer
(j) [29] The Manufacturer and its representative ... breached
of the ACL by
misrepresenting his rights under the ACL.
(k) [31] ... He rejected the Refrigerator and demanded a remedy under ss 259,
260, 261 and 262 of the ACL (noting this paragraph
was previously withdrawn at
(l) [33] On 18 July 2023, he sent a letter of demand via email to the Supplier
stating that there had been no response to his initial
letter of complaint dated
23 June 2023 and that he would pursue a remedy under the ACL through the
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) if the matter remained
unresolved.
(m) [40] In a phone call on 20 September 2023, the Manufacturer advised that it
would not be offering a remedy on the basis that
a drop in value was offered for
an unrelated matter. The Manufacturer acted in misleading and deceptive manner
[sic] by representing
that they had no further obligation for any faults with
the Refrigerator ....
(n) [43] On 3 November 2023, he received a call from Mr Boyd where he breached
of the ACL be misrepresenting my rights under the ACL.
(o) [44] In the phone call, Mr Boyd advised him that he is not entitled to a
remedy for the defects as the Manufacturer previously
provided him with a drop
in value payment as a remedy for a different and unrelated defect. Mr Boyd went
on to explain that had this
not occurred, he would have offered a remedy for the
(p) [48] On 12 November 2023, he lodged an application (C6667/2023) with VCAT
pursuant to the ACL.
The Manufacturer’s evidence
Gandolfo was sworn in and gave the below oral testimony.
Martinez was compensated following the execution of the Deed and he cannot
understand why the Manufacturer is now joined in this
proceeding.
value of the Refrigerator at the time of the Deed compensated Mr Martinez for
five years of use of the Refrigerator, including
any drop in value.
further compensation being claimed by Mr Martinez is ‘double
Manufacturer gave a substantial amount of the purchase price to the applicant,
being half of the value of the Refrigerator purchase
price after five years of
is use, noting the Refrigerator has a two year warranty.
Mr Martinez’s evidence in reply
reply to the oral evidence given Mr Gandolfo on behalf of the Manufacturer, Mr
Martinez explained, the conversations that lead
to compensation being paid under
the Deed were predominantly around time being wasted and he appreciates this is
not something he
can now claim. Further, the technicians continued to attend
without the correct parts and the advertisements in his possession, which
otherwise available on the Manufacturer’s website, suggest a fridge should
last about 10 to 15 years.
Martinez conceded that he has had use of the Refrigerator for more than five
years at half the purchase price and was permitted
to retain it.
Evidence excluded
Martinez did not file and serve a copy of the advertisement that he read from
his mobile phone while giving evidence in reply.
Although that evidence is
available to be downloaded via the Manufacturer’s website, I find the
evidence given was in respect
of refrigerators available for purchase in 2025
and not in or around 2017 when Mr Martinez purchased his Refrigerator.
Additionally,
this is the first time Mr Martinez sought to raise the issue or
otherwise, refer to advertising material in support of the Application.
was not open to Mr Martinez, when giving evidence in reply, to raise new issues
that ought to have been raised when giving his
evidence in chief. In any event,
it would be unfair to the respondents for me to consider that evidence, which
was not before me,
nor was it raised when Mr Martinez gave his evidence. I will,
therefore, exclude Mr Martinez’s oral evidence about current
advertisements by the Manufacturer as it is not relevant to the issues in
Submissions on the Deed
party was invited to address me on the nature of the Deed and whether Mr
Martinez was entitled to commence this proceeding, or
otherwise, entitled to
relief in respect of the Refrigerator. Mr Martinez explained the Deed only
related to an alleged defect that
existed between the time of purchase and the
date of signing the Deed on 23 December 2022. Although he accepted that he
settled with the Manufacturer on the terms set out in the Deed, it is
his view that he could continue to claim compensation and/or
a replacement
Refrigerator beyond that time, notwithstanding, he had been compensated for half
of the purchase price in respect of
a defective button.
Gandolfo for the Manufacturer explained that the Deed compensated Mr Martinez
for all matters arising in relation to the Refrigerator
up to the date of the
Deed and beyond. That is, Mr Martinez had use of the fridge for five years and
received the Settlement Sum
of $[supressed] as a reduction in value. It,
therefore, remained open to Mr Martinez, at his sole discretion, to treat the
Refrigerator
as he chose once he had received the Settlement Sum.
Martinez admitted, following receipt of compensation paid in accordance with the
terms of the Deed, that he caused repairs to the
Refrigerator, which has allowed
its continued use, albeit, in a defective state.
prefer the evidence of Mr Gandolfo because, although Mr Martinez said he had
suffered greater loss and damage than he was willing
to explain when giving oral
evidence, the defects Mr Martinez experienced existed at the beginning of his
ownership of the Refrigerator.
For example, at [6] of the Affidavit Mr Martinez
deposed that the Refrigerator sporadically caused produce in the bottom drawers
and on the bottom shelf to freeze since it was delivered. Further, at [7], he
said he contacted the Manufacturer regarding this defect
as it became more
regular in 2020 and began to cause significant spoilage in
the time Mr Martinez and the Manufacturer entered the Deed, Mr Martinez was
aware of the defects in the refrigerator which are
the subject of this
Application. I now turn to whether the applicant is estopped.
Whether the Mr Martinez is estopped by Deed?
is a common law doctrine in equity that established when a document contains one
or more statements of sufficient certainty,
without any
and has been signed,
sealed and delivered to the other party a deed is
The effect of a deed
provides ‘a bar that prevents one from asserting a claim or right that
contradicts what one has said or
done or what has been legally established as
as between those
privies to the deed.
facie, the Deed in this case is devoid of recitals. However, the absence of
recitals is not a bar to enforcement as the specific
facts may be found in the
operative provisions.
‘the general words of a release should be restrained by the particular
Aside from the
defined terms contained in the Deed, paragraph 2 of the Deed makes it clear that
the Settlement Sum, being half the
value of the Refrigerator, released the
Manufacturer, including its officers and/or employees from all future claims
that may arise
in respect of the Refrigerator. Mr Martinez was entitled to
retain the Refrigerator for his use.
Martinez explained that he believed the Deed only concerned a faulty button and
not future defects, that he did not intend to release
the Manufacturer to the
extent disclosed, and that he seeks to enforce the guarantees under the ACL.
find that the particulars of the Deed are sufficiently certain and capable of
being understood by a reasonable person in the position
of Mr Martinez at the
time the Deed was executed, as to what has been agreed between the parties.
find that, at all material times, Mr Martinez was aware of the purchase price of
the Refrigerator, the definition of the Drop-In-Value
compensation as recorded
in the Deed, and moreover, the defects that existed at the time he executed the
Deed. It, therefore, does
not stand to reason that Mr Martinez could reasonably
expect to use the Refrigerator for five years, be compensated for a faulty
button by the manufacture for the Settlement Sum, then assert that the Deed was
only executed for this sole purpose.
find at the time the parties executed the Deed, approximately five years post
purchase, the Refrigerator was worth the Settlement
Sum paid to the applicant,
and that it remained open to Mr Martinez to do as he pleased with the
Refrigerator once he agreed to release
the Manufacturer.
by reason of the Deed, Mr Martinez is estopped from asserting any further right
to compensation from the Manufacturer,
which includes his personal time taken
from work to provide access to technicians and especially, his time to appear in
this proceeding.
Whether the Mr Martinez is out of time to commence against
the Manufacturer?
the event I am incorrect about the estoppel finding above, I consider whether Mr
Martinez is out of time to bring a claim against
the Manufacturer, being the
manufacturer of the Refrigerator.
to documents filed by the applicant on 21 May 2025, Mr Martinez contacted the
Manufacturer on several occasions, one of
which expressly included the following
question on 25 May 2020:
Whether there ‘[i]s a way to recycle
the used water filters?
representative of the Manufacturer responded the following day to advise that
filters can be placed in household recycling.
5 August 2020, Mr Martinez wrote to the Manufacturer again, however, this time
in respect of the first defect:
To whom it may concern,
For the past 6 months ice has been building up constantly behind both crisper
drawers. I remove the ice and it’s back within
in 4 – 6 weeks. Is
this a defect or is there something that I can do to correct this?
response to the above, the Manufacturer’s representative sought details
and year of purchase. Mr
Martinez confirmed the date of purchase as ‘Early 2018.’ In later
correspondence Mr Martinez
provided the actual date of purchase in July 2017.
Notwithstanding
the Manufacturer agreed the Refrigerator was defective at this time, it was
clear that the defect being identified
was more than a button as was put by Mr
Martinez during the hearing. The Refrigerator experienced defects that led to
the Manufacturer
agreeing to compensate Mr Martinez and thus, execute the Deed.
Further, the issues that Mr Martinez was aware of were known, according
own email, in or around February 2020 (before he settled with the Manufacturer),
as noted in paragraphs [6] and [7] of the
Martinez deposed to having issues with the refrigerator ‘since it was
delivered’, however, does not depose to any attempt
to contact the
respondents when he first became aware, instead, refers to dates that exist
within three years before the date of
commencing proceedings.
review of other correspondence filed in the Tribunal, for example, on 7 May
2024, Mr Martinez stated in email to the respondent:
Consequential
have not had a refrigerator that was fit for purpose or of an acceptable quality
as the defective appliance has been consistently
spoiling food to the value of
$550 since it’s purchase due to its defective cooling.
Manufacturer contends that Mr Martinez is out of time, having regard to ss 272
and 273 of the ACL. Section 273 of the ACL relevantly
Time limit for actions against manufactures of goods
An affected person may commence an action for damages under this Division at
any time within 3 years after the day on which the affected
person first became
aware, or ought reasonably to have become aware, or ought reasonably to have
become aware, that the guarantee
to which the action relates has not been
complied with.
regard to the email correspondence between the parties, I find Mr Martinez was
well aware of the defects almost immediately
after the Refrigerator was
delivered. He states at [6] of his Affidavit, that ‘the Refrigerator was
sporadically causing produce
in the bottom drawer and on the bottom shelf to
freeze since it was delivered.’ Furthermore, in his Points of Claim he
‘I note that the refrigerator has been freezing produce since
it’s purchase due to its defective cooling.’ The
same or similar
commentary is found in email correspondence by Mr Martinez in February 2020.
the event Mr Martinez understated the period of time when he first became aware
or ought to have reasonably become aware of the
defects in the Refrigerator, I
am satisfied that by about February 2020 he was certainly aware and did not
bring proceedings against
the Manufacturer until 12 November 2023.
find that the proceeding was commenced more than three years after Mr Martinez
became aware of the defects and is, therefore, statute
barred under s 273
of the ACL.
Whether Mr Martinez is out of time to commence against the
Martinez did not articulate a separate cause of action against the Supplier,
instead, maintained the same claim that related to
acceptable quality as was
brought against the Manufacturer; ACL
guarantee. Mr Martinez was very
careful when articulating his claim under
of the ACL.
Martinez entered into a contract to purchase the Refrigerator from the Supplier,
which attracts a limitation of action of six years
from the date a cause of
action arising.
Having regard to
the evidence of Mr Martinez and my earlier findings, the cause of action Mr
Martinez relies on crystalised once
he identified freezing issues in the bottom
draw and bottom part of the Refrigerator that caused his food to become spoiled.
occurred shortly after the time of purchase in late July 2017.
time between when Mr Martinez’s cause of action crystalised and the date
he commenced this proceeding is beyond the six-year
limitation period and is,
therefore, statue barred.
any event, had Mr Martinez commenced this proceeding in time, I find he had
already been duly compensated, having received the
Settlement Sum provided for
in the Deed. The payment by the Manufacturer to Mr Martinez provided for a
reduction in the value of
the Refrigerator by half over a period of five years
of use. I find that Mr Martinez is ‘double dipping’ and not entitled
to be compensated beyond the date of the Deed.
circumstances where I have found the Deed released the Manufacturer, Mr
Martinez’s claim against the Manufacturer must be
dismissed. Mr
Martinez’s is no longer permitted to bring a cause of action against the
Supplier on the facts and issue before
me because he is out of time. Although
the Supplier was not a party to the Deed, Mr Martinez cannot ignore the
compensation received
and maintain his claim against the first respondent under
of the ACL because he has been duly compensated for the loss and damage
that he claims.
Notwithstanding
the applicant sought written reasons as ‘the legal reasons for the
decision was unclear and did not seem consistent
Schedule 2 of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2012
(Vic)’, because the applicant is
estopped, I need not descend any further at the request of the applicant.
will order the proceeding be dismissed and no order as to costs.
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
; Applicant’s
request by email: ‘In the hearing, the legal reasons for the decision was
[sic] unclear and did not seem
consistent with
Schedule 2 of the Competition
and Consumer Act 2012
(Cth). As such, I request that VCAT provide me with
written reasons for the decision pursuant to
Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) [(‘VCAT Act’)]. I ask
that VCAT kindly includes in those reasons its findings of material questions of
273 of the ACL.
See also: the
applicant’s email to the Manufacturer, dated, 5 August 2020, [t]o whom it
may concern, [f]or the past 6 month[s]
ice has been building up constantly
behind both crisper drawers. I remove the ice and it’s back within in 4
Is this a defect or is there something that I can do to correct
P. Keane AC KC,
Estoppel by Conduct and Election
Sweet & Maxwell.
Manton v Parabolic Pty Ltd
(1985) 2 NSWLR 361
at [368], citing
(1873) LR 2 CCR 22 by
Bovill CJ at [127]: ‘... any instrument delivered as a deed, and which
either itself passes an interest
or property, or is in affirmation or
confirmation of something whereby an interest or property passes is a deed
Black’s Law Dictionary
Grant v John Grant &
Sons Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 23
(1954) 91 CLR 112
; P. Keane (n 4), 7-002.
Cachia v Haines
179 CLR 403
, self-represented litigants, whether lawyers or not, generally
cannot recover costs for their own time spent litigating matters.
Limitation of Actions
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (228 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter