URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1978/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hughes v National Trustees Executors and Agency Co of Australasia Ltd [1978] VicRp 27; [1978] VR 257 (17 October 1977)
HUGHES v NATIONAL TRUSTEES EXECUTORS and AGENCY CO OF AUSTRALASIA LTD
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA
MCINERNEY, J
1-3 June, 17 October 1977
McInerney, J.:
This is an application by summons dated 24 May 1977 for extension of time for appealing from a judgment of Dunn, J., pronounced 8
November 1976, dismissing an application by the plaintiff Thomas William Hughes made under PtIV of the
Administration and Probate Act 1958
that provision be made for him out of the estate of his mother the testatrix, Hannah Mary Hughes, who died on 5 May 1975, aged 80
years. Her will, dated 14 November 1973, made no provision at all for the plaintiff. Her estate was valued for probate purposes at
$49,196. The principal asset was a farm property of some 75 acres at Whittlesea valued at $45,600. Under the will the farm property
falls into residue bequeathed to the Bethlehem Home for the Aged. The plaintiff-applicant is the only child of the testatrix's marriage,
her husband having died in May 1961 leaving a will whereby all his estate, including the farm, was left to the testatrix.
At the date of the judgment herein the applicant was and had from March 1945 been living on the farm free of charge, the rates being
paid during his father's lifetime by his father and thereafter by his mother. The applicant's interest in the farm immediately prior
to the testatrix's death can at best be described as that of a tenant at will terminable at any stage by reasonable notice, and upon
the death of the testatrix the respondent-defendant became entitled to demand possession of the farm from the applicant. It is common
ground that in the ordinary course of administration of the testatrix's estate it will be necessary to sell the farm or at least
part of it.
The applicant's application was heard before Dunn, J., on 27 and 28 October 1976, when his Honour reserved judgment. On 8 November
1976 his Honour delivered reasons for judgment dismissing the application, with costs to be taxed. The applicant says he was not
present in Court on that day and that he received no notice that judgment was to be delivered on that day. His then solicitors, who
had been assigned to him by the Legal Aid Committee, were Messrs. Rush and Grant. A Mr. Failla of that firm was handling the matter
on behalf of the applicant.
On 15 November 1976 the respondent's solicitors (Messrs. Cornwall Stodart and Co.) wrote a letter to Messrs. Grant and Rush enclosing
a certified copy of the order of Dunn, J., dismissing the applicant's claim. The letter proceeds:
"Please let us know by the end of the week when your client intends to leave the Whittlesea property. Our client will, of course,
give Mr. Hughes a reasonable time to pack up and depart. If we do not hear from you within the week we shall have no alternative
but to ask our clients for instructions to take ejectment proceedings."
On 17 November 1976 Messrs. Rush and Grant wrote in the following terms to the applicant:--
"Dear Sirs, Re Estate H.M. Hughes "We refer to the above matter and should be pleased if you could contact our Mr. Failla to discuss
the question of your vacating the premises. We have spoken to the solicitors acting on behalf of the National Trustees and they have
assured us that they are prepared to give you a reasonable time to vacate."
The terms of the letter suggest that the applicant had already been apprised of the result of the case but he asserts that prior
to receiving this letter he had no knowledge that his application had been dismissed.
The applicant says that he himself did not communicate with his solicitors after receiving this letter but that his wife telephoned
them on his behalf. His explanation of this was that there was no telephone at his home and that he would have to travel about three
miles to the nearest telephone public box to make a telephone call, whereas his wife could make a telephone call from her place of
employment. He says that he did not know that he had lost the case until his wife reported to him the substance of her telephone
call to Messrs. Rush and Grant.
The applicant says that at the time when he was advised (as he says by his wife), of the result of the decision, he knew there was
a right of appeal against the decision, but believed that there were time limits on that right of appeal. He says that he believed
that he could appeal within 12 months. He gives no explanation as to how he came to form that belief or whence he derived that belief,
and he took no steps to ascertain whether that belief was well founded.
On 17 November 1976, Messrs. Rush and Grant wrote to the respondent's solicitors as follows: "We refer to the above matter and to
your letter to us of 15 November 1976. We have written to our client and as soon as instructions are to hand, we will contact you.
Our client apparently only collects his mail once or twice a week from the local post office so that it may be that we will not have
instructions for at least seven days. In relation to the question of costs, as you are no doubt aware, our client has very little,
if any, assets. Could you please advise us whether you will be enforcing payment of costs."
Messrs. Rush and Grant wrote a further letter dated 23 November 1976, to the respondent's solicitors as follows: "We refer to the
above matter and to your letter to us of 15 November 1976. We have now spoken to our client who advises that he has had some difficulty
obtaining employment as apparently most places are not taking on further employees until after the Christmas break. As such, our
client probably will not be able to commence employment until some time in late January or early February. He has therefore asked
that he be allowed to stay on the premises until the end of January."
Before Dunn, J., and again before me the applicant denied that he had ever spoken to Messrs. Rush and Grant after the hearing but
this seems completely inconsistent with the terms of their letter of 23 November just quoted.
On 6 December 1976, the applicant wrote a letter to the Legal Aid Committee. The letter is a long letter and it is unnecessary to
set it all out. The letter commences as follows:--
"Dear Sir, "I am completely dissatisfied with the court's decision, I can't say there was any justice, the Judge even said he shouldn't
have to make a decision. I didn't have a chance, it was rigged all along the line....We understand that we have to vacate the property
by February, plus the complete cost of the case against me, being turned out like unwanted dogs, nowhere to live, destitute and no
job. It is not easy to get a job and start a fresh [sic], when you are over 55 years....If I had been a bad person you would understand,
but no one that knows me can't understand for why such cruelty should be placed upon me. Even my solicitor Mr. Failla said that the
claims weren't touched and the cases should be reopened. Hope you will consider further help to me in such an appalling situation."
The last passage quoted from this letter strongly suggest that there had been a conversation between the applicant and Mr. Failla.
Nevertheless, the applicant denied that there had been any such conversation and suggested that the penultimate paragraph of his
letter was explicable on the basis that his wife had told him of Failla's comment.
On 9 December 1976 the Secretary to the Legal Aid Committee wrote to Messrs. Rush and Grant referring to a letter from them dated
29 October 1976, (not produced before me) and enclosing a copy of a letter received from Mr. Hughes- - which I take to refer to this
letter of 6 December 1976. The Secretary requested the comments of Messrs. Rush and Grant, together with their full report.
Apparently Messrs. Rush and Grant furnished the report requested. Mr. Gillard, for the applicant, sought to tender a paragraph from
that letter but after objection was taken he desisted from that tender. At all events, on 20 January 1977, the Secretary of the Legal
Aid Committee wrote to the applicant as follows:
"Dear Sir, "Since receiving your letter of 6 December 1976, extensive enquiries have been made by the committee and it has been confirmed
that no further action be authorised and your solicitors have been asked to close your file. You will be informed in due course of
your total liability."
Pursuant to the order of Dunn, J., the respondent's costs were taxed on 15 December 1976 and allowed at the sum of $3,046.20.
On 21 December 1976 the respondent's solicitors wrote to Messrs. Rush and Grant as follows: "Our client is prepared to permit Mr.
Hughes to remain in occupation of the Whittlesea property until the end of February. We are awaiting our client's instructions on
the question of costs."
I take this letter to have been written in reply to the letter dated 23 November 1976 from Messrs. Rush and Grant.
On 14 January 1977 the respondent's solicitors wrote to Messrs. Rush and Grant as follows: "Our client is not prepared to forego
the costs awarded against your client but is prepared to allow him a reasonable time in which to pay. Unless an acceptable proposal
for the payment of the costs by instalments is made in the near future, the Sheriff will be instructed to make a levy on your client's
On 25 February 1977 a writ of fi fa for the costs was issued by the respondent's solicitors.
The applicant in his affidavit in support of his present application, deposed that when his wife rang his solicitors in November
1976, the solicitors told her that his application had been dismissed but did not tell her that he could appeal. In view of the applicant's
evidence before me that he was aware of his right of appeal, the omission of the solicitors to tell him of that right can hardly
have any materiality. Since I have heard no evidence from his then solicitors, there is no evidence before me that they told him
of his right to appeal or of the time within which he had to appeal. In fact, the time for serving notice of appeal expired on or
The applicant deposed that in mid-February 1977, he and his wife told friends that they were very dissatisfied with the result of
the case and that, on the suggestion of these friends he saw a journalist who referred him to Truth newspaper. He deposes that he
was told that Truth would write up the story. He does not say who told him that. The applicant says that in or about March 1977,
he was served with a notice to quit, that he then contacted Mr. Dougall, a journalist to whom he had previously spoken, and that
on Mr. Dougall's advice he consulted his present solicitors on or about 22 April 1977. On that day he spoke to one Leslie, a man
in the employ of those solicitors, concerning a notice to quit which he said had been served on him.
Late in April or early in May 1977 the applicant was served with a writ No. 280 of 1977 issued at the instance of the respondent
claiming possession of the farm property at Whittlesea. Mr. Tuppen, of the applicant's present solicitors, then endeavoured to consult
counsel who had appeared for the applicant before Dunn, J., but was unable to do so until 3 May 1977. On 6 May Mr. Tuppen saw the
applicant and received instructions to appeal against the order of Dunn, J., Legal aid was obtained and a case for opinion was laid
before Mr. Sher, QC, and Mr. EW Gillard of counsel. Presumably on their advice, the present application for an extension of time
for appealing was instituted by summons issued on 24 May 1977.
The application for an extension of the time for appealing invokes the power of a judge under O. 64, r6 to enlarge the time appointed
by O.58, r1A(b), (namely seven days after the pronouncing of the decision in Chambers, for giving notice of appeal.) Under O.64,
r6, the power is exercisable, even after the expiration of the time appointed, on such terms "as the justice of the case may require".
(Ratnam v Cumarasamy, [1965] 1 WLR 8; [1964] 3 All ER 933).
The object of the rule is to give the Court a discretion to extend the time with the view to the avoidance of an injustice--cp. Schafer
v Blyth, [1920] 3 KB 140 at p.143 per Lush , J.,--an observation directed, however, to the terms of O.64, r7 of the rules there under
consideration on the hearing of an application to set aside a judgment entered in default of appearance.
One object of fixing times under the rules is to achieve a time table for the conduct of litigation in order to achieve finality
of judicial determinations. A successful litigant has an interest in knowing that a claim against him has been determined and that
he is no longer "at risk", to use the language of Lush, J., of this Court in Bourke v Kecskes,
[1967] VicRp 117
[1967] VR 894
at p. 898. I repeat, however, what I said in Goldie v Johnston,
[1968] VicRp 85
[1968] VR 651
at p. 654 that "the significance of the fact the defendant has been kept at risk will often depend on the extent to which that risk
is a personal one". Here the risk to the defendant is not a personal one but is a risk only of having to meet a claim only out of
the testatrix's estate.
Higinbotham, J., referred to the interest of litigants in achieving finality of determination when he said, in Youngman v Melbourne
Storage Co. Ltd.
(1885) 7 ALT 53
at p. 54: "When the time has been allowed to elapse that gives the defendant a vested interest in the judgment, and this vested interest
ought not to be disturbed unless there is some good reason for disturbing it."
The phrase "good reason" imports, I think, a consideration of whether justice as between the parties is best served by granting or
refusing the extension sought. The conduct of the applicant may here be relevant. Obviously an applicant is less likely to be granted
an extension of time where he has indicated that he proposes not to appeal and that indication has been acted on--see Esdaile v Payne
(1889) 40 Ch D 520--than where, although he has allowed time to elapse, he has throughout the relevant period plainly indicated that
he intends to appeal.
There may, in appropriate cases, be other factors which would establish that injustice would be caused to the respondent if the extension
of time were granted, as for instance, if the respondent has, on the footing that no appeal has been instituted, dealt (to the knowledge
of the applicant) with assets the subject of or liable to be affected by the result of the litigation or by action taken on the faith
of that decision. This was the aspect which concerned the Full Court in Wyburn v The Corp. of Canterbury (1893) 19 VLR 302 where
the Full Court imposed on the applicant special conditions to guard against this possibility.
There is not, in the case of O.58, r1A(b), or in O.64, r6 any reference to "special leave" such as occurs in O.58, r16. I would myself
regard the latter phrase as imposing more stringent requirements on an applicant, namely, that there must be something special in
the circumstances e.g. that the case involves an important question of law, or that the question involved in the appeal is one of
recurring significance and not one peculiar to the applicant and the respondent. As the High Court said in Boyd v MacPherson
[1919] HCA 52
(1919) 27 CLR 245
[1919] HCA 52
(1919) 25 ALR 341:
"the term 'special leave' connotes the necessity for making a prima facie case showing special circumstances".
It is clear, however, that whether the applicant seeks "special leave" or merely "leave", consideration alike of the question of
possible injustice to the applicant if the application be refused and the judgment left undisturbed, and of possible injustice to
the respondent resulting from the disturbance of his seemingly vested interest in themaintenance of the judgment involves a consideration
of the prospects of success of the appeal if the extension be granted. For it would be unjust to the respondent to put him to the
trouble and expense of an appeal if the judgment sought to be attached is plainly right--compare the observations on a similar point
by Sholl, J., in Bayview Quarries Pty. Ltd. v Castley Development Pty. Ltd.,
[1963] VicRp 64
[1963] VR 445
at p. 446 citing Evans v Bartlam,
[1937] AC 473
; [1937] 2 ALL ER 646 and Collins Book Depot Pty. Ltd. v Bretherton,
[1938] VicLawRp 11
[1938] VLR 40.
From this point of view the inquiry seems generally to have been expressed in terms whether the judgment attacked is attended with
sufficient doubt to justify the granting of leave--see Norton v Taylor
[1905] HCA 8
(1905) 2 CLR 291
; Johansen v City Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd.
[1904] HCA 43
(1904) 2 CLR 186.
Looking at the matter from the standpoint of the respondent, I have not discovered that anything was said or done on behalf of the
applicant which would have conveyed to the respondent that the applicant was intending to appeal against the decision. The request
for an extension of time for vacating the farm, and the request for consideration in the matter of costs are alike consistent with
the applicant having accepted the decision against him. On the other hand, such requests might be made even by an applicant intending
to appeal. Especially in such a case, it would have been reasonable for the applicant's then solicitors to have requested a deferment
of possession pending the determination of the appeal. One would, however, have expected a request in such circumstances to have
been presented in terms of preserving the status quo pending the determination of the appeal. Such a basis was not suggested in this
The respondent was willing to allow the applicant to remain in possession of the subject property until the end of February on the
footing that the applicant was not appealing against the judgment. The writ of fi fa for the recovery of the costs was issued on
28 February 1977, the writ for recovery of possession of the land was not issued until about mid April 1977. There is, however, no
evidence that the respondent executor has made or attempted to make any sale or other disposition of the farm on the faith of the
applicant not intending to appeal.
Had an appeal been instituted within the presented time, that appeal might and, having regard to the state of the Full Court list,
very probably would have been determined by now. If the extension of time is granted, and the appeal proves to be unsuccessful, the
receipt by the beneficiary of the residuary bequest will thereby have been delayed for something of the order of two or three months
more than would have been the case had there been no appeal.
I am far from satisfied with the truth of, -- indeed I am not prepared to act on -- the applicants's evidence that he personally
had no communication with his then solicitors in November 1976 or his evidence that he believed that he had 12 months in which to
I think that he was unhappy about the judgment and wanted to challenge it. But he did nothing to convey either to his then solicitors
or to the defendants that he desired to appeal. He did, however, seek theassistanceof the Legal Aid Committee in relation to his
desire to appeal, albeit after the time for appealing had expired. But neither he nor his then solicitors ever did anything which
would have conveyed to the respondent's solicitors that the applicant had any desire to appeal or intention of appealing. There is
no evidence however, that the respondent was thereby induced to alter its position to its own detriment in any way. Although the
respondent has now a vested right in preserving that judgment from being affected by an appeal, I would not consider the prejudice
which the respondent would suffer if an extension were granted would be great enough to outweigh the injustice caused to the applicant
by denying him the extension sought if the judgment is obviously wrong or if the judgment appears to be attended with such doubts
as to warrant an appeal.
Dunn, J., was unfavourably impressed (as was I) by the applicant as a witness. I have already referred to instances in which letters
from the applicant's solicitor appear to belie the applicant's story that his then solicitors never told him personally of the dismissal
of his application and that he never at any time spoke to his then solicitor regarding or following the decision of Dunn, J., dismissing
his claim. I find the applicant's explanations on the matter unconvincing, to say the least. I find equally unconvincing the applicant's
statement that he went through the ceremony of marriage at the old Methodist Church at Edlington in England on 24 February 1959.
I could perhaps understand an inability to produce a marriage certificate due to loss or destruction but I find it very difficult
to understand how, if such a marriage occurred, there should be no record relating thereto now discoverable in England, and in the
result I am not satisfied that the applicant did go through the ceremony of marriage alleged by him. This, however goes only to credibility,
as Dunn, J., observed. Dunn, J., was, moreover, unimpressed by the suggestion that the applicant had worked hard on the property
and had improved it. The learned judge was not satisfied that any improvements effected on the property had been done by the applicant
without any assistance from his father. Dunn, J., found that the farm was in a derelict and neglected condition. The evidence appears
to support that finding. It is difficult to resist the conclusion that the applicant, in 30 years of occupancy, living rent and rate
free on the farm, had failed to take advantage of the generosity of his parents and that he had been an improvident or inefficient
farmer. Certainly I am not disposed to the view that an appellate Court must, or even that it might, take the view that this is a
case in which the testatrix's estate was enhanced significantly or to any appreciable extent by the work done by the applicant on
the farm or that the applicant had by virtue of that work any special claim on her bounty.
The judgment of Dunn, J., was subjected to a searching and critical review by counsel for the applicant. Mr. Gillard accepted that
the learned judge was correct in saying the onus lay on the plaintiff to satisfy him on the balance of probabilities of the necessary
facts to justify an order in his favour, but contended that the findings of fact made in paras. 1-5 of the reasons for judgment did
not justify the conclusions that the applicant had forced the testatrix from the farm and had failed thereafter to attempt any reconciliation.
The first of those conclusions may perhaps be more open to question, for rejection of the applicant's account does not necessarily
justify the conclusion that it was the testatrix who was forced out, or that, if she was, it was the applicant who had forced her
out. It may equally probably have been the conduct of the applicant's wife (assuming, for the sake of convenience, that she is the
lawfully wedded wife of the applicant.)
I do not, however, see any reason for quarrelling with the learned judge's conclusion that the application had, after his mother's
departure, failed to attempt any reconciliation. I am not at all sure that such failure might not on its own, have been sufficient
to justify the testatrix in excluding the applicant from her bounty.
It was strongly argued by Mr. Gillard that the learned judge had in relation to the testatrix's statements of her relationship with
the applicant reversed the onus of proof in that he had erroneously accepted the testatrix's various statements as evidence of the
facts and circumstances which led her to leave the farm.
The admissibility of statements by a testator as to his relationship with an applicant, or as to the reasons for excluding an applicant
from his will has been a matter on which some divergence of judicial approach has been apparent in Australian Courts--cp. the observations
of Harvey, CJ, in Eq. in Re Jones
[1921] NSWStRp 66
(1921) 21 SR (NSW) 693
and in Re Hall
[1930] NSWStRp 5
(1930) 30 SR (NSW) 165
, of Sholl, J., in Re Paulin,
[1950] VicLawRp 74
[1950] VLR 462
at pp. 470-4;
[1950] VicLawRp 74
[1950] ALR 503
at pp. 509-12 of Gillard, J., in Re Buckland,
[1967] VicRp 1
[1967] VR 3
at pp. 5-6 and the most helpful analysis of the problem by Mr. HT Gibbs (as he then was) in 1956, vol. 2 University of Queensland
law Journal 150.
It would appear probable that Dunn, J., accepted the views expressed by Sholl, J., in Re Paulin, supra,
[1950] VicLawRp 74
[1950] VLR 462
at pp. 472-4;
[1950] VicLawRp 74
[1950] ALR 503
at pp. 511-2 that evidence of testatrix's statements as to her relationship with the applicant cast on the applicant the evidential
burden rebutting any inferences adverse to the applicant which could otherwise be drawn from those statements. In my view, it is
not permissible to use the testatrix's statements as evidence of the truth of the facts stated, for that would clearly be hearsay
evidence. On the other hand, it is generally accepted that if or in so far as evidence of a testator's statements is admitted to
show the testator's belief in the facts so stated, proof that his belief in that state of facts was unfounded may justify the inference
that he did not, at the time he made the will, understand the existence or strength of the applicant's claim on his bounty. As Sir
Harry Gibbs has pointed out (at p. 152 of the article to which I have referred ) "the question for the Court is not whether he held
a mistaken belief as to what his duty was, but whether he has in fact done his duty".
Equally, I think, there is great cogency in the criticism advanced by Gibbs, J., of the unduly inflexible "admission by inference"
theory advanced by Sholl, J., in Re Paulin, supra. It may be that if, in answer to such statements, the applicant gives an explanation
which the trial judge finds to have been consciously false, the giving of that false explanation may found an admission by conduct
of the truth of the testator's statements, on the principle discussed in Woon v R
[1964] HCA 23
(1964) 109 CLR 529
at pp. 536-7;
[1964] HCA 23
[1964] ALR 868
at pp. 870-1; and the American Law Institute's Model Code of Evidence
(1942) Ch 6
r 507 pp. 247-8.
Examining the evidence offered as to the testatrix's statements concerning her relationship with the applicant in the light of the
principles stated above, there can be no doubt that the statements of the testatrix deposed to in para. 4 of the affidavit of the
deponent Valerie Olive Read are hearsay if offered for the purpose of proving that the events narrated by the testatrix in the penultimate
sentence of that paragraph had in fact occurred. The evidence receivable as evidence of the testatrix's then state of mind towards
the applicant but not to prove the factual basis assigned by the testatrix.
The statements contained in para. 5 of that affidavit are statements of the testatrix's reasons for excluding her son from her will.
If the statements in para. 4 of that affidavit were accepted as proof of the facts asserted, they would tend to establish that the
testatrix had left the farm because the applicant's wife had ordered her to leave and that the applicant had "stood by" whilst his
wife ordered the testatrix to go. In so far as testatrix said that she had told her son to leave the farm but that he had refused
to go, that matter is sufficiently proved aliunde by the correspondence between her solicitors and the plaintiff.
As to the affidavit of the deponent Blythman the evidence as to the testatrix's statements contained in para. 2 of that affidavit
is obviously hearsay save in so far as that paragraph constitutes evidence of instructions by the testatrix to him to take steps
to recover possession of the farm property from the plaintiff.
As to the affidavit of the deponent the late William Leo Bryan, the first part of para. 2 would be hearsay evidence if tendered to
prove the truth of the facts asserted by testatrix to him on 8 October 1973. In so far as the statements are offered to prove testatrix's
instructions for her will, the evidence is admissible for that purpose.
In so far as the evidence is offered to show the state of testatrix's beliefs concerning the applicant at the time she gave the instructions
for that will, the state of those beliefs may illuminate the extent to which those beliefs correspond with what the Court finds to
be the true facts of the relationship between the testatrix and the applicant at the time of those statements. Want of accord between
the beliefs and the facts may evidence--not necessarily conclusively--that the will was not that of a just and wise testatrix, while
correspondence between the belief and the facts may assist towards the conclusion that the will was one of a just and wise testatrix.
The letters from the deponent Bryan set forth in paras. 4 and 5 of that affidavit are in my opinion conciliatory and reasonable in
tone and are not fairly to be characterized as aggressive or inflammatory. I do not accept the view, put forward by Mr. Gillard,
that Bryan's letters dated 14 May 1974 and 28 November 1970 are to be regarded as setting a trap for the applicant. On the contrary,
they represent (in my view) a prudent endeavour to obtain particulars of or information as to the "most satisfactory agreement" which
the applicant claimed that he had with his father.
The applicant failed to acknowledge or reply to most of these letters but when he did (by letters dated 25 November 1973 and 3 June
1974 and one received 28 January 1975) his tone was, to say the least, non-conciliatory and even truculent. Moreover, as the learned
judge observed, "there was no suggestion in any of those letters that the testatrix should consider returning or that her return
was desired. Indeed, there was no enquiry as to the well being of the testatrix at all".
Mr. Gillard submitted that, at the most, admission of the evidence of the various statements by the testatrix threw on the applicant
the evidential burden of adducing evidence to answer the conclusions open on those statements.
In fact, the applicant did adduce evidence to answer the evidence adduced by the respondent and it became then a matter for Dunn,
J., to determine whether or not he was prepared to act on the evidence thus adduced by the applicant, and what view he formed on
the whole of the evidence. Dunn, J., appears to have formed an unfavourable view of the applicant as a witness. It was open to him
to form that view. He said, in his reasons for judgment, that having seen and heard the plaintiff and Mrs. Hughes in the box he was
not impressed with their evidence. It is, therefore, to put it at its lowest, doubtful whether Dunn, J., was prepared to act on the
evidence of the plaintiff and his wife. If, in the end, Dunn, J., was left in doubt as to the circumstances under which the testatrix
finally left the farm, there can, in my view, be little doubt that on the correspondence it was open to the learned judge to find
that the plaintiff had thereafter made no attempt to effect a reconciliation with his mother, nor to look after her in her declining
years. As I read his reasons for judgment, Dunn, J., was prepared to found his ultimate conclusion on those findings alone. For my
part, I consider each of the last mentioned findings was open to him.
What has troubled me more is whether Dunn, J., failed to weigh properly the various matters relevant to the exercise of his discretion--cp.
[1975] VicRp 75
[1975] VR 754
at pp. 761 and 763 per Gowans, J., and at p. 773 per Nelson, J.
Mr. Gillard listed some 12 matters in relation to the plaintiff which he says the testatrix should have considered in making her
will. These matters were:--
(1) The age of the applicant.
(2) The fact that the applicant was testatrix's only child.
(3) The fact that the applicant had not worked for any employer since 1945 and would have difficulty in obtaining employment at his
(4) The fact that the applicant has helped to develop the farm.
(5) That the applicant had lived on the farm since 1945.
(6) That the testatrix's husband had promised the applicant the farm.
(7) That the testatrix had permitted a situation to develop whereby the applicant was to some extent, dependent on her in that she
paid the rates and did not require payment of rent.
(8) That the applicant had a daughter who was retarded and required constant attention.
(9) That the attitude and conduct of the applicant towards the testatrix was attributable to some extent, to the attitude and conduct
of his wife towards the testatrix.
(10) That no other person had any claim on testatrix's bounty.
(11) That the applicant had no other assets at all.
(12) That the applicant's conduct towards the testatrix when she attempted to evict him was explicable because of her conduct towards
his wife and because of the aggressive and insulting letter which had been written by the testatrix's solicitor to his wife using
her maiden name.
In fact, however, the learned trial judge, in his reasons for judgment--either expressly or by necessary inference--referred to nearly
all these matters, save perhaps the ninth and twelfth points. I am bound to say that these two points are not advanced in the affidavits
sworn in support of the summons before Dunn, J., and in particular are not put forward in the affidavit of Jacqueline Hughes. I do
not see why the learned trial judge should be regarded as having fallen into error through having failed to take into account matters
which so far as I can see were not part of the case made by the applicant before him; which are not expressly deposed to by the applicant
or the deponent Jacqueline Hughes and which seem to have emerged for the first time in the argument of counsel before me.
Paragraph 5 of the affidavit of the deponent Tuppen sets out what I conceive to be the grounds--17 in all--which would be relied
on in support of the appeal if the extension of time for appealing is granted. Some of these grounds assign a failure to weigh all
relevant factors--e.g. ground (c) that the learned trial judge failed to consider the respective claims of the plaintiff and the
beneficiary under the will, or ground (o) that the learned trial judge failed to give any or any adequate consideration to the plaintiff's
financial position. Some of them assign errors of fact--e.g. ground (m) that the attitude of the applicant had driven the testatrix
out of the home, or ground (i) error in concluding that the plaintiff had done nothing for either of his parents--others assign a
failure to take a relevant fact into account.
The learned trial judge was not impressed with the credibility of the applicant and Mrs. Hughes. It must be taken that he was not
prepared to accept their denials that they had wanted the testatrix to leave the farm or their denials that they had in any way forced
the testatrix to leave. He accepted the evidence as to the nature of the complaints made by the testatrix contained in the affidavits
of the late William Leo Bryan, the solicitor for the testatrix, and of Roger Maxwell Blythman, a senior legal officer with the Australian
Legal Aid Office, and of Valerie Olive Read, the manageress of the guest house in which the testatrix was living prior to her death.
That means that the learned trial judge accepted the evidence of Mrs. Read, Mr. Bryan, and of Blythman as to the statements made
to them by the testatrix concerning the circumstances in which she came to leave the farm. The statements made by the testatrix on
this matter were by no means consistent. To Mrs. Read, testatrix's account was that she had been ordered off the farm by the woman
living with her son. To Mr. Bryan she said that she had in effect been told to leave by her son and the lady he said was his wife,
while to Mr. Blythman she said that her son had threatened her with physical violence if she took steps to evict him and that her
position at the farm had become so difficult that she had come to Melbourne to live. In so far as the learned trial judge found that
certain circumstances appeared to support the truth of those complaints, it is difficult to know which particular complaint or complaints
he had in mind. Furthermore that reference to the applicant's conduct in forcing the testatrix from the farm is not sustainable unless
the learned trial judge rejected Mrs. Read's account of what the testatrix told her or that he rejected the truth of what the testatrix
had told Mrs. Read, and that he preferred Mr. Bryan's evidence of what the testatrix told him.
The importance of the matter just referred to is that the learned trial judge found that the applicant had forfeited all moral claim
to any benefit from the estate by his conduct in forcing the testatrix from the farm and thereafter by his failure to attempt any
reconciliation. Rejection of the applicant's denials that he and Mrs. Hughes had forced the testatrix to leave does not in itself
support the conclusion that the applicant had forced testatrix to leave the farm. It is equally possible that it was the applicant's
wife who had forced the testatrix to leave. Nor, as a matter of law, does rejection of the plaintiff's credibility require the acceptance
of the truth of the complaints made by the testatrix to the various deponents.
I am not impressed with the argument that the learned judge was wrong in holding that after the testatrix had left the farm, the
applicant had made no attempt to effect a reconciliation with her and had he asserted a right to remain in possession of the farm
or to be paid compensation. It may indeed be --I need not decide it--that it was open to the learned judge to regard and that he
did in fact regard these matters alone as conduct disentitling the applicant to relief.
Nevertheless the reasons for judgment contain possible errors of logic and of law to which reference has just been made and these
errors are arguably of such a character as to vitiate the conclusion of the learned trial judge that he should make no provision
for the applicant, and may require an appellate Court--if leave to appeal is granted--to consider for itself whether the case is
one in which provision should be made for the applicant.
I am disposed to the view that arguable grounds of appeal exist in respect of the matters set out in sub-paras. (a), (b), (l), (m)
and (p) of para. 5 of the affidavit of the deponent Tuppen. I say nothing as to whether there is an arguable ground of appeal in
relation to the matters raised in the remaining sub-paragraphs of that paragraph, and I am not to be taken as expressing any view
as to whether any appeal is likely to succeed. Whether or not the judgment refusing any order that provision be made for the applicant
will ultimately be regarded as wrong is not a matter on which I should say anything more than this, that by reason of the matters
raised in the sub-paras. (a), (b), (i), (m) and (p) specifically mentioned above the judgment may be attended with sufficient doubt
to make it proper to give the applicant at least the opportunity of presenting argument to an appellate tribunal. What an appellate
tribunal is likely to do on the hearing of any such appeal is not a matter on which I think I should express any opinion. I propose
therefore to grant the applicant an extension of time for appealing and I will therefore order pursuant to O.64, r6 and O.58, r1A(b)
that the time for the applicant to serve notice of appeal from the order of Dunn, J. made 5 November 1976 be extended until a date
being 14 days from the date of delivery of these reasons for judgment, that is, until 31 October 1977.
As to costs: the applicant has had to come here to obtain the indulgence of an extension of time for appealing and I see no reason
why the costs of this application should be thrown on the estate. I therefore order that the respondent's costs of this application
be taxed and when taxed paid by the applicant.
At a late stage of the argument, the respondent submitted that in the event of my granting the extension of time sought I should
order the applicant to give security for the costs of the appeal. In this connection I was told that the respondent's costs of the
application before Dunn, J., taxed and allowed at the sum of $3046, have not been paid by the applicant.
I am of the view that the question whether security for the costs of any appeal should be determined by the Full Court on appropriate
application made to it, rather than by me. At the moment there is no appeal in being at all and there may never be. All I have done
is to extend the time for serving notice of appeal. Until notice of appeal is served there will be no appeal: once the appeal is
instituted the Full Court has power to make an order for security for costs.
I will certify for counsel.
Order accordingly.
Solicitors for the applicant: Cohen, Thompson, Bolger and Co.
Solicitors for the respondent: Cornwall, Stoddart and Co.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter