URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2004/235.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kantor & Anor v Vosahlo [2004] VSCA 235 (16 December 2004)
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA
COURT OF APPEAL
MILAN KANTOR & ANOR
VLADIMIR VOSAHLO
ORMISTON, BUCHANAN and PHILLIPS, JJ.A.
DATE OF HEARING
21 October 2004
DATE OF JUDGMENT
16 December 2004
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
WILLS - Probate - Proceeding for revocation - Testamentary capacity - Testatrix
suffering dementia - Whether will made in lucid
interval - Evidence of
solicitor - Need for "careful scrutiny" - Onus of proof - Standard of proof.
APPEARANCES:
For the Appellants
Mr A.C. Archibald, Q.C.
Mr S.P. Newton
For the Respondent
Ms C. McMillan, S.C.
Chessell Williams
ORMISTON, J.A.:
Having had the benefit of reading the judgment to be given by
Buchanan and Phillips, JJ.A., I agree with the conclusions they have
and substantially with the reasons they have given for them. I would, however,
wish to say something about one of the principal
issues argued before us. The
learned trial judge, having concluded that the deceased, Mrs Vosahlo, was
suffering from an incapacity
by reason of "significant dementia which was
probably due to vascular degeneration" both before and after the giving of
instructions
for (and the execution of) what has been propounded as the
deceased's last will, stated that "the executors bear a heavy onus of
that the deceased acted at the relevant time in a period of temporary
lucidity". Before examining in detail what one should
construe as the meaning
of "heavy onus" and the extent to which such a test can be said to be
appropriate, I ought immediately to
say that, however generously one ought
to read the words of trial judges in expressing the relevant standard of proof,
be inferred in the present case that the standard was placed too high
by his Honour, if only for the reason that his conclusions,
as examined by the
other members of this Court, can lead fairly only to the conclusion that too
high a standard was imposed by the
trial judge.
Arguments as to standards of proof, and as to how they should
be expressed both by way of directions to juries and in the course
for judgment in trials without juries, have bedevilled the courts for
centuries. In part that has had a beneficial result
in that the primary
standards to be applied in criminal trials and in civil proceedings have now
been settled for many years and
difficulties arise only in some jurisdictions
as to how they should be expressed. The greater difficulty has been in
assigning certain
kinds of proceedings into the appropriate category, whether
they should require proof beyond reasonable doubt, as upon a criminal
proof on the balance of probabilities, as in conventional civil proceedings.
The particular difficulty has been to decide
whether and to what extent those
primary standards should be applied, or applied in qualified terms, by reason
of circumstances arising
in specific kinds of proceedings. Thus in recent
years it has been held that civil contempt proceedings must be resolved by the
application of the criminal standard of proof: see
Witham v. Holloway
, as must actions for the recovery of penalties
for certain breaches of the
Customs Act
C.E.O. of Customs
v. Labrador Liquor Wholesale Pty. Ltd.
Equally clearly it has been held over the last sixty years or so that certain
allegations of criminal behaviour or the like in conventional
civil proceedings
between ordinary litigants do not require that such allegations be tested by
the criminal standard of proof, for
example, in the case of an allegation of
homicide, see
Helton v. Allen
case of an allegation of fraud, see
Rejfek v. McElroy
; and in the case of an allegation of adultery (when it was
treated seriously by the law), see the detailed discussion in
Briginshaw v.
On whom burden of proof rests
There has never been the slightest doubt that those who seek to
propound a will for probate
bear the burden
of establishing to the court that probate should be granted to them and that
this ultimate burden remains upon them
throughout the trial, although
particular circumstances may in practice make that burden harder or easier to
satisfy: see generally
Bailey v. Bailey
Landers v. Landers
Timbury v. Coffee
. From time to time it may be sufficient to show by the
calling of appropriate evidence that the will was duly executed and that
rational on its face: see
as cited by
Dixon, J. in
the other hand, if circumstances are shown to have existed which throw doubt on
the capacity of a testator or testatrix validly
to have executed a will,
whether raised by evidence of old age, mental infirmity, suspicion of undue
influence or of fraud, or the
like, then that prima facie case of the
propounder will be held not to be sufficient to justify a grant to the
propounder. As the
High Court said in
Worth v. Clasohm
"A doubt being raised as to the existence of testamentary capacity
at the relevant time, there undoubtedly rested upon the plaintiff
the burden of
satisfying the conscience of the court that the testatrix retained her mental
powers to the requisite extent."
The present case arises out of an application to revoke the
grant of probate to the appellants but, whatever might have been the position
in other circumstances, it was accepted here that the burden of establishing
that the will had been validly executed remained on
the appellants, as having
propounded the will and having received a grant of probate of it in the first
place, so as to show that
they remained entitled to that grant, with the
consequence that, if they failed to do so, the respondent would have made good
right to have that probate revoked.
Nature of burden: standard of proof
The more difficult aspect of this issue is the question as to
what was the nature of the burden which rested on the appellants,
words, as to what was the standard
proof expected of them. The reference by the learned judge to the executors
bearing "a heavy onus of proof" raises the question
whether there can be any
"onus" of proof in a dispute such as this other than the civil standard on the
balance of probabilities
and whether his Honour intended to raise the barrier
against the propounders to an impermissible extent or whether he intended
less significant. For the proposition the judge cited a passage in
an unreported judgment of Eames, J. in a case decided 14 February
In the Will of Alice May Ivory
. The passage cited (at p.14)
may have been seen by the judge in the present case to be particularly
apposite, for Eames, J. there
"Where there is evidence that the testatrix was defective in mind,
memory and understanding at times both before and after the making
of the will,
by virtue of senile dementia, then the burden of proving that she operated at a
time of lucidity when making the will
falls upon those who propound it, and
their burden of proof is not a light one ...".
It should be immediately noted that the description of the
burden (or standard) as "not a light one" may well be thought to have a
somewhat different connotation from the trial judge's shorter but more emphatic
designation of a "heavy onus". Eames, J. cited as
authority for his
proposition two cases, the first being
, and the second
, although no reference was
there made to any specific passages in the latter decision. As will be seen,
however, neither
provide support for the
proposition that the relevant standard of proof is "heavy".
had described the "burden" in the same terms as Eames, J., i.e. "not a
light one", though Mayo, J. referred for his proposition
to the earlier High
Court decision of
Bull v. Fulton
and in particular to a passage in the judgment of Williams, J.
and to "the cases he cites", but not to the slightly
earlier decision in
J. also referred to two earlier decisions in the ecclesiastical courts, namely,
White v. Driver
v. Cartwright
, the first of which, in
particular, used very emphatic language.
However the passage Mayo, J. cited from
, was rather differently expressed in that
Williams, J. did not explicitly refer to the standard of proof. There
Williams, J. had
referred to the circumstances where the "evidence as a whole"
was sufficient to throw doubt upon the testator's competence and said
that in those circumstances "the court must
decide against the validity of the will unless it
is satisfied
affirmatively
that he was of sound mind, memory and understanding when he
executed it ..." (emphasis added). Nevertheless I would not treat Williams,
as describing only the shift in evidentiary onus for earlier his Honour had
"Advancing age generally takes toll of some physical or mental
attribute, however tough a person's constitution may be, and it has
recognised so often that it affects the faculty of memory that a will made by a
person of advanced age is
always carefully scrutinised
by the court
Kinleside v. Harrison
)." (Emphasis added.)
Moreover the cases cited by Williams, J. in
suggest that he was expressing the relevant test any differently or any higher
than the civil standard. For example, he cited
a passage from
which used the same expression. It is
interesting, however, that Williams, J. chose to cite that passage from
in the judgment of Rich, J. which, on its face, sought to
dissent from or qualify what had already been said about the onus of proof
In addition, no member of
the Court in
, as I read the judgments, considered that it was a
case where sufficient doubt had been thrown generally on the testator's
as to shift the evidential burden again firmly on to the shoulders of
the propounders. Rather Isaacs, J. had considered
the propounders had effectively discharged the burden
resting on them "subject to a counter case of an affirmative nature as
introducing
a specific element of disqualification to destroy the prima facie
unclouded case established". It was this approach which had drawn
from Rich, J.
, expressing dislike of tests based on
shifting burdens and then making the observation which has been so frequently
cited as to the
need for the court to "be able, affirmatively, on a review of
the whole evidence, to declare itself satisfied of the testator's competence".
It may be that Williams, J. cited that statement in
because Rich, J. had there cited two cases in which the
testator had clearly been suffering from some form of infirmity before making
the will and where the burden was stated to rest on those who wished to
establish testamentary capacity by proof of a lucid interval
or otherwise: see
Smith v. Tebbitt
Sutton v. Sadler
. In other words, what Isaacs, J. had said related to
, whereas what Rich, J. relevantly described was how the
of proof was to be satisfied.
Williams, J. in
, but that reference
seems, with respect, curious in that the majority, of whom Isaacs, J. was a
member, did not view it as a case
where the evidence had sufficiently thrown a
doubt on the testator's competence, but rather one where, a prima facie case
been made by the propounders, the burden lay "upon the party impeaching
the will to show that it ought not to be admitted to proof".
Neither Isaacs, J., nor the minority judges (Knox, C.J.
and Starke, J.) (who likewise did not see the burden of proof shifting),
directly referred to the standard of proof, nor the mode of satisfaction of
that standard, in circumstances such as Williams, J.
was describing in
, except that Isaacs, J. stated
in his proposition 6 that: "The quantum of evidence sufficient to establish a
testamentary claim must always depend upon the circumstances
of each case,
the degree of vigilance to be exercised
by the court varies with
the circumstances ...". (Emphasis added.) On the other hand Williams, J. also
for his proposition
and one must assume that he was referring to the judgment of
, where the passage requiring affirmative
satisfaction in Rich, J.'s judgment in
was directly cited.
Finally Williams, J. in
Derrett v. Hall
, an unreported decision of
the High Court given on 4 February 1942,
Both Rich, J.
and Williams, J.
(who formed the majority) in that case again
expressed the necessity to establish "affirmatively" in circumstances such as
the present
that the testator was of sound mind, memory and understanding at
the time of the will's execution.
Thus, whatever might be said as to the origins of the passages
referred to above from
, the requirement as to
affirmative satisfaction in the circumstances seems to have been adopted by the
High Court, though there seems
no reason to doubt that this also connotes
careful scrutiny. For example, in
, as to "affirmative satisfaction", had also quoted with approval
a passage from the judgment of Cresswell, J. in
where his Lordship said:
"But if there are circumstances in evidence which counterbalance
that presumption [viz. of due execution], the decree of the court
against its validity, unless the evidence on the whole is sufficient to
establish affirmatively that the testator was of
sound mind when he executed it."
Sir Owen Dixon, as Chief Justice, returned to the requirement
of careful scrutiny in
Worth v. Clasohm
. There the High Court, having
expressed the view, already quoted
, that where a doubt has been raised, the burden "of satisfying
the conscience of the court" rests on the propounder, continued as
"But that is not to say that he was required to answer the doubt by
proof to the point of complete demonstration, or by proof beyond
a reasonable
doubt. The criminal standard of proof has no place in the trial of an issue as
to testamentary capacity in a probate
action. The effect of a doubt initially
is to require
a vigilant examination of the whole of the evidence
the parties place before the court; but, that examination having been made, a
residual doubt is not enough to defeat the plaintiff's
claim for probate unless
it is felt by the court to be substantial enough to preclude a belief that the
document propounded is the
will of a testatrix who possessed sound mind, memory
and understanding at the time of its execution." (Emphasis added.)
No authorities were cited directly for the stating of the rule
in those terms, but it is entirely consistent with the many authorities
prescribing "careful scrutiny", and I would not see it as essentially
inconsistent with what had been said as to "affirmative satisfaction"
preceding three decisions in the High Court, especially having regard to what
Sir Owen Dixon had earlier said in
and to what Kitto, J. was to
say (as part of the Court) in the next case to be cited. It was merely
describing the process whereby
affirmative satisfaction may be obtained, but
making clear the careful scrutiny that is required for that
Finally, the two concepts were drawn together in a decision of
the High Court frequently overlooked,
Boreham v. Prince Henry Hospital
, by a court consisting of Williams, Fullagar
and Kitto, JJ., who first
repeated the general proposition that a will made in "advanced
always carefully scrutinised
by the court". (Emphasis added.)
The Court then expressed this conclusion
"The proper approach of the Court to the question whether a
testator has testamentary capacity is clear. Although proof that a will
properly executed is
prima facie
evidence of testamentary capacity,
where the evidence as a whole is sufficient to throw a doubt upon the
testator's competency, the
Court must decide against the validity of the will
unless it is satisfied affirmatively
that he was of sound mind, memory
and understanding when he executed it or, if instructions for the will preceded
its execution,
when the instructions were given." (Emphasis added.)
The matter has not been examined by the High Court thereafter,
but the decisions to which I have just referred have been cited by
Courts both at trial and appellate level, over the succeeding 49 years without,
to my knowledge, any serious dispute as to
the test propounded in them.
The test thus laid down, requiring the court in circumstances
of doubt, after vigilant and careful scrutiny, to be satisfied affirmatively
of the deceased's capacity to make a will,
has been stated so frequently by members of the High Court that one should be
in accepting that either Mayo, J.
or Eames, J. was intending by their qualified language to lay down any
different test, especially as each judge relied on and examined
a number of the
authorities which had stated that test. Mayo, J. directly relied on the
relevant passage in
. Eames, J. not only referred to Mayo, J.'s
judgment and to
, but he earlier
cited the same passage in
requiring the court
to be "satisfied affirmatively", and later quoted
the passage cited above from
, noting that Dixon, J. had approved it in
For these reasons I would not treat either Mayo, J. or Eames,
J. as intending to lay down any stricter standard of proof than the
conventional civil standard, unless, for reasons not so far apparent it should
be taken that the High Court intended to alter the
relevant standard. It is
this latter question which must now be examined, for to use a cursory reference
to "not a light" burden
as a basis for changing the standard to a "heavy
burden" in the present case by the trial judge (if it were so intended),
any further examination of authority, suggests an impermissible
alteration to the standard of proof in this kind of civil action.
What Eames,
J. correctly indicated in
was a need for caution before being
affirmatively satisfied: on the other hand the trial judge here seemingly used
a term prescribing
a different standard of proof. If he did so, he was, in my
opinion, wrong.
Standard of proof in probate
One must first examine what is the standard of proof which
rests on a propounder in proceedings in which the validity of a will
issue. Leaving aside for the present what has been intended by the cautionary
test laid down in the High Court in decisions
up to and including
, there can be no doubt that the civil standard of proof on the
balance of probabilities has been accepted and that the burden rests
propounder. It would seem, indeed, that the proposition is so obvious that it
has rarely been adverted to by the High Court.
It is sufficient to repeat what
Dixon, C.J., Webb and Kitto, JJ. said
Worth v. Clasohm
. There, after making the observation set out above
stating that, in cases of doubt, the "burden of satisfying the
conscience of the Court" rested on the propounder, they continued
in the terms already set out in full in
para.[11] so as to make clear that the "criminal standard of proof has no place
in the trial
of an issue as to testamentary capacity".
The difficulty, however, lies in the significance, if any, in
terms of the standard of proof, to be given to expressions such as
"affirmatively satisfied", "careful scrutiny", "vigilant examination" or the
like. One must accept, in the first place, that under
the common law as it is
presently understood, there are only two standards of proof, the criminal and
the civil: see
Helton v. Allen
. It should follow that,
whatever qualifications, requirements or cautions have been stated by the
courts about the acceptance of
one kind of proof or another, none of them
change the standard ultimately to be established by the party which bears the
proving a case or issue.
What then is the significance of requirements laid down by the
courts seemingly imposing a greater burden on those who seek to prove
particular kinds of matters. Whether the matter be a criminal act, adultery
or testamentary capacity in circumstances such as the
present, there has
invariably been a invocation by courts of highest authority to judges (and
juries) requiring them to hesitate,
be cautious or to require affirmative or
cogent evidence as to a particular issue. Nevertheless, in a case involving an
of fraud, the majority of the High Court in
Neat Holdings Pty.
Ltd. v. Karajan Holdings
"Statements to that effect should not, however, be understood as
directed to the standard of proof. Rather, they should be understood
reflecting a conventional perception that members of our society do not
ordinarily engage in fraudulent or criminal conduct
Motchall v.
[1926] VicLawRp 43
[1926] V.L.R. 273
at 276] and a judicial approach that a court
should not lightly make a finding that, on the balance of probabilities, a
civil litigation has been guilty of such conduct."
The majority then
to a passage in the judgment of Dixon, J. in
. It is preferable to set that out at slightly greater
length, the passage directly quoted by the majority in
Neat Holdings
being here emphasised:
"Except upon criminal issues to be proved by the prosecution, it is
enough that the affirmative of an allegation is made out to the
satisfaction of the tribunal. But reasonable satisfaction is not a state of
mind that is attained or established independently
of the nature and
consequence of the act or facts to be proved.
The seriousness of an
allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given
description, or the gravity of the consequences
flowing from a particular
finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the question whether
the issue has been proved
to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal.
In such matters `reasonable satisfaction'
should not be produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect
inferences."
Now as to "reasonable satisfaction", Dixon, J. had already,
indeed immediately before this last quotation, stated
what he understood to be the requirement in a civil
proceeding:
"The truth is that, when the law requires the proof of any fact,
the tribunal must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or
before it can be found. It cannot be found as a result of a mere mechanical
comparison of probabilities independently
of any belief in its
The problem, however, to be considered here is the nature of
the degree of satisfaction to be reached where particular issues arise
the courts have said require special consideration by judge or jury. So Dixon,
J. continued
"It is often said that such an issue as fraud must be proved
`clearly', `unequivocally', `strictly' or `with certainty' ... This does
mean that some standard of persuasion is fixed intermediate between the
satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt required upon a
criminal inquest and the
reasonable satisfaction which in a civil issue may, not must, be based on a
preponderance of probability.
It means that the nature of the issue
necessarily affects the process by which reasonable satisfaction is
." (Emphasis added.)
The latter passage was cited only last year by Hayne, J. in a
judgment with whom Gleeson, C.J. and McHugh, J. concurred: see
Customs v. Labrador Liquor
Dixon, J. immediately considered in
the question of proof of
criminal conduct, stating
: "When, in a
civil proceeding, a question arises whether a crime has been committed the
standard of persuasion is, according to
the better opinion, the same as upon
other civil issues ... ". His Honour therefore was making abundantly clear
that the civil standard
nevertheless prevails but, in accordance with what he
had already said, he stated this qualification
: "But, consistently with this opinion, weight is given
to the presumption of innocence and
exactness of proof is expected
(Emphasis added.)
Dixon, J. then turned in
to the question of
proof of adultery upon which inconsistent opinions had been expressed by State
appellate courts, as well as in
the English courts. The answer ultimately
given by all members of the High Court in
was that an
allegation of adultery did not have to be proved to the criminal standard but
was one which might be proved according
to the civil standard but subject to
the caution required by the seriousness of the allegation. What Dixon, J. (and
seemingly Starke,
J.) perceived was that, although in the common law there were
but two standards of proof, in the ecclesiastical courts not accustomed
applying the common law there had been a difference of approach which might be
said to evidence a third, or different, standard
What had occurred in the 1850's was that the
had, over the succeeding eighty years been little clarification of
precisely what standard of proof was required to establish adultery
matrimonial causes. This might seem to be at the fringes of relevance to the
present case, but, of course, the jurisdiction with
respect to probate had also
been (largely) vested in the ecclesiastical courts until about the same time,
when it was likewise transferred
to the common law courts. So, as noted by
Dixon, J. at 365, Cresswell, J., when transferred from the Court of Common
Pleas to the
new Court of Divorce and Matrimonial Causes had defined the
standard of proof on a party who alleges misconduct against another as
where that party was "bound to establish such misconduct by affirmative
, on its face an identical test
to that needed to prove lucid intervals and the like in probate suits.
Moreover, in concluding that
adultery need not be proved to the criminal
standard, Dixon, J. said
, as to that
issue, and using language not dissimilar to that used later by him in
that "the importance and gravity of the question make it
impossible to be reasonably satisfied of the truth of the allegation without
the exercise of caution and unless the proofs survive a careful scrutiny and
appear precise and not loose and inexact."
What then should be said as to the standard imposed for proof
of an issue such as testamentary capacity, where there is evidence
mental disability of one kind or another before and after the making of a will.
Clearly proof of that issue is not precisely
analogous to proof of adultery, at
least as it was perceived when cases such as
were decided. No criminal conduct or other misbehaviour is in
strictness alleged. What the High Court nevertheless considered in
earlier discussed and leading up to the decision in
which they sought to prescribe rules, was how the courts should approach proof
of another issue on the civil standard, subject
to necessary cautions as to how
satisfaction should be reached. The relevant passage in
which is in fact the very passage cited by the majority of the High Court in
Neat Holdings
, refers to the
circumstances in which "reasonable satisfaction" of an issue was not to be
produced by "inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences".
The three broad circumstances (which, as I
have said, ought not to be taken as exclusive) giving rise to the need for
qualification
were stated there by Dixon, J. to be: (1) "the seriousness
of an allegation made", (2) "the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence
given description" and (3) "the gravity of the consequences flowing from a
particular finding". Category (1) was relevant to
adultery and remains
relevant to cases of fraud and other criminal behaviour. The third category
might cover cases where the right
to carry on a profession or business is in
issue. But it would seem that the second category
, namely "the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a
given description", is the one which might fairly be applied to the present
circumstances, namely the potential unlikelihood of a person temporarily
recovering from a serious mental illness so as to have a
lucid interval of a
kind which would result in a finding of testamentary capacity at the time that
the will is made.
Thus, in a case such as the present, the essential basis for
holding that it is one which requires a closer scrutiny of the evidence
usual in the course of reaching a decision on the balance of probabilities, is
that an occurrence of a lucid interval after
the onset of senile dementia and
during its course is inherently unlikely or unlikely to the extent that it
calls for "vigilant examination"
of the propounder's case before being
"affirmatively satisfied" of the deceased's testamentary competence.
Consequently the Court
is not imposing a higher standard of proof - that
remains satisfaction on the balance of probabilities - but is requiring a
of caution which is appropriate to the case. It is, of course,
inappropriate to look to factors such as the presumption of innocence
to criminal conduct and, at one time, adultery, but otherwise the seriousness
of the issue and the unlikelihood of the event
sought to be established by the
propounders must "affect the process by which reasonable satisfaction is
obtained": see
It is a "process" or method of approach which requires the tribunal of fact to
direct particular and cautious attention to a specific
issue, but, having done
so, to resolve the case on the conventional civil standard.
For purposes such as the present, where the Court has to be
satisfied affirmatively on the capacity of the testatrix to make a valid
the burden of proof or, more precisely, the standard of proof therefore remains
the same, that is, upon the balance of probabilities,
but the Court is not to
reach such a conclusion unless it has exercised the caution appropriate to the
issue in the particular circumstances
by a vigilant examination of the whole of
the relevant evidence. If that process results in the Court being
affirmatively satisfied
that the testatrix had the necessary testamentary
capacity at the appropriate time to make the propounded will, then a grant of
should be made.
Lest it be thought that the "process" or method of approach,
which has been laid down for consideration of testamentary capacity
and which I
have endeavoured to explain, is in reality another way of expressing that a
heavier burden of proof rests on the propounder
in a case such as the present,
it may be useful to make a comparison with a "process" of deliberation, which,
although of necessity
not entirely analogous, has applied in another
has required juries to be warned as to the way in which
they should address proof of particular issues or in reliance on the evidence
of particular kinds of witnesses. Thus in a variety of circumstances judges
have warned juries of the dangers of convicting the
accused on the unconfirmed
evidence of accomplices or certain complainants unless, having scrutinised the
evidence with great care,
having considered the relevant circumstances and
having paid heed to the judge's warning, they are satisfied of the truth and
of the evidence: see, e.g.,
Jenkins v. The Queen
Longman v. The Queen
. Now, strict though that warning is, it has never been
suggested that the standard of proof, as such, in criminal trials has thereby
been altered. A criminal jury in those circumstances is never told that they
can convict only if they are satisfied beyond any doubt,
reasonable or
otherwise. And this is for the very good reason that the warning is directed
(again) only to the "process" or method
of approach whereby the jury should
decide whether the prosecution case is made out to the criminal standard. It
is a warning to
stop and stand back, to exercise caution in particular and out
of the ordinary circumstances, which require a judge to issue a warning
danger, but it does not result in any increased or heavier standard of proof.
A not dissimilar approach applies to a case such as the
present, in a civil trial, on an issue which not infrequently in the past
left to the practical common sense of juries. Warnings were given, even if not
in precisely the same terms as would now be appropriate:
see, for example, the
warning given to the jury by Hannen, J. in the oft-cited case of
Boughton v.
Likewise a judge must
apply to the relevant issue the same caution as would be appropriate for a jury
direction in this kind of case.
The caution now (and for many years past) to
be applied by judges has already been stated. It should affect the manner in
they reach their conclusions but it has not been intended to change the
standard of proof. To say that the burden in these cases
is a "heavy" one is
to misunderstand that process, whereas I would not read any error in the
observations by Mayo, J. and Eames,
J. in the cases cited having regard to the
way in which they examined the relevant authorities. I would therefore
conclude that
the learned trial judge misdirected himself in the present case.
(iv) Factual conclusions
Even if I have misunderstood the manner in which his Honour
approached determining the critical issues in this case, I would still,
reasons stated by Buchanan and Phillips, JJ.A., consider that the trial judge
misapplied the accepted tests as to testamentary
capacity to the circumstances
of the present case. As frequently stated, circumstances vary from case to
case and it has never been
said that old people are disqualified from making a
will if they can otherwise satisfy those tests. The circumstances raised for
consideration here were not complicated, neither were the decisions which the
testatrix had to make complicated. She had a simple
estate and relatively few
(if any) people who might have expected to have their claims taken into
account. Much of the medical evidence
was directed to other issues which,
though of general significance, could not be decisive as to testamentary
capacity at the relevant
time, the time when instructions were taken and
confirmed for the making of the propounded will. Because the preponderance of
favoured the view that the testatrix's condition varied to an extent
making it possible that she had lucid intervals, the question
to be resolved
and the issue to be raised with the expert medical witnesses had to take into
account what the testatrix did at the
relevant time. There was in practical
terms only one person who was able to apply his mind to that question, even
though it was
not based on medical expertise, namely Dr Kantor who spoke to the
testatrix and took her instructions before seeing to the execution
of the will.
I am not satisfied that the medical witnesses relied on by the respondent fully
and appropriately took account of the
observations of Dr Kantor (and the
others) who saw the testatrix at that time. Doubtless it would have been a
difficult exercise,
as those medical witnesses could not have been sure how far
the judge was prepared to accept the testimony of Dr Kantor (and the
Moreover the judge himself had to relate the findings that he was prepared to
make about the way in which the testatrix
gave instructions and the medical
opinions put before him. It seems to me, with respect, that he insufficiently
related those two
strands of evidence.
Even Dr Price's evidence, which was clearly very relevant and
formed an undoubted basis for requiring the propounders to establish
affirmatively, was not fully appreciated in his reasons. She had expressed the
opinion that two months before the making
of the will the testatrix would have
been "aware of the nature extent and value of her estate". It is not
surprising that the doctor
expressed those views for, whatever may have been
the basis for her knowledge, in substance the testatrix owned only the house
lived in and a sum of about $50,000 in a bank account. Although his Honour
made no finding on that issue directly, it must be assumed
that he accepted
that that remained the case for he also accepted Dr Price's further opinion as
continuing to apply, namely that
the testatrix would have been "aware of those
who might reasonably have a claim on her bounty". Moreover, not only did the
express the view that the will was not inofficious, explaining why the
beneficiaries under her earlier will had little call on her
bounty as they were
variously either dead or "remote in time, distance and in her affections", but
the judge also, towards the end
of his judgment, expressed the view that the
testatrix had given "coherent reasons" for excluding those particular
relatives. Furthermore
his Honour appeared to accept that Mr Kruntorad was a
friend who had done much for the testatrix and may fairly have taken the place
in her mind of those earlier beneficiaries. To that extent the judge went
further than Dr Price was prepared to go, in that she
had thought as at March
1999 the testatrix would not have had the ability to evaluate and discriminate
between the respective strengths
of the claims on her bounty. The judge's
fact-finding would, in my opinion, seem to deny that the testatrix lacked the
capacity to discriminate, because he considered that she had given
"coherent reasons" for excluding the earlier beneficiaries, as
It might be argued that no finding was made by the judge as to
her knowledge of others who might otherwise have a claim to be considered
her will. Again this was a simple case, dissimilar from many others where like
issues have arisen. If her obscure relatives
had been fairly omitted, then who
might reasonably have been taken into consideration as the object of her
benefaction? It was not
suggested that anybody other than Mr Kruntorad was
suitable, except that Dr Kantor very properly mentioned to her the possibility
of leaving a gift to the Czech charity known as Sokol. The judge made a
curious criticism of this gift or these gifts in paragraph
[41] of his judgment
(as set out in the judgment of the other members of the Court), which, with
great respect, I have the greatest
difficulty in understanding. Apart from its
infelicity, the paragraph connotes that Dr Kantor had made suggestions as to
testatrix might dispose of her property in a way which seemingly meant
that she had no ability to evaluate and discriminate between
those who had a
claim on her bounty. The truth was that nobody really had such a claim except
arguably Mr Kruntorad, whose generosity
in her failing years might be
recognised. The judge had already found that he was a suitable object for her
bounty and, as to the
charity, I have difficulty in understanding any criticism
of its suggestion or choice. Solicitors frequently make suggestions as
inclusion of charities in wills in circumstances where there are relatives who
have a much more obvious claim than the obscure
relatives of the testatrix in
this case. Sokol was a charity with which she and particularly her husband had
had a close connection
because it had been set up for those with Czech origins.
Moreover the proposed bequest was only $20,000 and was expressed to be "in
memory of my beloved husband
BOHUMIL VOSAHLO
", who had been the first
president of the organisation. Such a gift could hardly be said to have been
inapposite in circumstances
where the only other potential beneficiary was a
relatively recent acquaintance, however kind his endeavours on her behalf may
It may be that one cannot conclude that the judge considered
that the gift in favour of this charity, or possibly in favour of Mr
were in fact appropriate or did demonstrate an ability to evaluate and
discriminate between those who might have a claim
on her estate. Nevertheless,
the other findings seem to me to be more than sufficient to justify the view,
however strictly the
already stated test should be applied, that this was not
merely not an inofficious will but one which was entirely appropriate having
regard to the circumstances in which the testatrix found herself. The
exclusion of the former beneficiaries was clearly found to
coherent and, if his Honour was suggesting that the substituted
beneficiaries, including the charity, were inappropriate, then, with
simply cannot agree with him. The inference to the contrary was so strong that
it could not reasonably have been rejected.
In other words, having regard to
all of the events, as described in the evidence, particularly those parts of
the evidence of Dr
Kantor which were not rejected and taking full account of
the factual findings otherwise made by the judge, the relevant tests for
testamentary capacity at the time had been affirmatively satisfied. Although I
was at one stage inclined to the view that the matter
should be remitted for
reconsideration by a judge in the Trial Division, I have now been affirmatively
convinced, in particular by
the reasons of Buchanan and Phillips, JJ.A., that
that is an unnecessary course which can be avoided having regard to the facts
established
in the present case. I would therefore be prepared to make those
findings, notwithstanding the need for the vigilant and careful
scrutiny of the
whole of the evidence, as required by the authorities and notwithstanding the
conclusion of the trial judge.
I would therefore allow the appeal and dismiss the application
of the respondent for revocation of probate.
BUCHANAN, J.A.:
PHILLIPS, J.A.:
Emily Marie Vosahlo ("the deceased") was born in what is now
the Czech Republic in 1913. She married Bohumil Vosahlo in 1945.
In or about
1952 husband and wife emigrated to Australia from the Belgian Congo, where they
had been living. Thereafter they lived
and worked in Melbourne. They had no
children. Bohumil Vosahlo
died in 1990 and after his death the deceased
lived in the family home in Moffatt Street Brighton until she was hospitalised
2001. She died on 2 December 2001 at the age of 88.
At her death the deceased left a will dated 26 May 1999 ("the
1999 will") in which she appointed the present appellants, Milan Kantor
Walter Alois
Grossman, to be her executors. Dr. Kantor is a solicitor who
had acted for the deceased since 1990 and Mr. Grossman, an accountant
been her friend and her accountant for about 50 years. The executors applied
for probate of the will and this was granted
in ordinary form on 7 February
Under the 1999 will, which was prepared by Dr. Kantor, the
deceased left $20,000 to Sokol Funds Management Pty. Ltd. ("Sokol"),
concerned with the support of elderly persons of Czech origin in Melbourne, and
the residue to Miloslav (Milos) Kruntorad,
a friend of the deceased and her
late husband.
After the grant of probate, an application was made for
further provision under
Administration and Probate Act
: proceeding no. 6666 of 2002. The applicants were two nieces of the
deceased, Blanca Marie Vidler and her sister Jana Trankels.
daughters of the present respondent, Vladimir Vosahlo, the brother of the late
Bohumil Vosahlo. In 1955 Vladimir Vosahlo
and his family had come to Australia
and for a time lived in Melbourne. In 1955 they moved to Sydney where they
still reside. Although
in this proceeding the respondent gave evidence that
after the move to Sydney he continued to have some contact with the deceased,
that contact was fairly desultory.
In the course of the
proceeding (in which evidence
from Mr. Kruntorad was given by affidavit and taken on commission because
he was ill) it emerged that
the deceased had made an earlier will on 12 March
1996 ("the 1996 will") under which she had left one third of her estate to her
brother-in-law Vladimir. That, the respondent says, prompted him to bring the
present proceeding which he instituted on 6 December
2002, only two days after
application was abandoned and in consequence struck out.
The present proceeding was commenced by summons naming as
defendants the present appellants, the executors of the 1999 will.
respondent, as plaintiff, sought an order that the probate granted on 7
February 2002 be revoked and that probate be granted
instead of the will dated
12 March 1996. The matter was tried in the Trial Division over five days in
February 2003, by which time
Mr. Kruntorad, too, had died. On 21 March 2003
the trial judge delivered reasons for judgment, granting the application
, and on 4 April judgment was formally given,
revoking the earlier grant of probate and granting probate instead of the 1996
The costs of all parties were ordered out of the estate.
Dr. Kantor and Mr. Grossman now appeal against the judgment
given on 4 April 2003
. They allege
error in the trial judge's conclusion, as expressed in his Honour's reasons for
, that he was "unable to be
satisfied that the deceased had the requisite testamentary capacity at the
relevant time". The question
whether that betokens error is now the issue for
determination.
The issue is the testamentary capacity of the deceased at the
time of making the 1999 will. The legal requirements for such capacity
not in issue. As his Honour put it
propounder must show that at the relevant time a testatrix knows what she is
doing and the effect of her dispositions; she must
know what estate she has to
dispose of and what persons might have a claim upon her bounty:
. The question of capacity has
been agitated on this occasion because, according to medical evidence
marshalled largely by the respondent
(as plaintiff below), it seems that the
deceased suffered from some degree of dementia - and according to a consultant
neurologist
who saw the deceased in October 1997, "significant dementia". In
those circumstances the judge thought it clear enough that the
executors bore
the risk of non-persuasion on the ultimate issue "as they would bear that
burden in the event of an application for
probate in solemn form" and that he
had to "be satisfied that this will [i.e., the 1999 will] is indeed a valid
one". It was in
that context that his Honour expressed himself, in conclusion,
as "unable to be satisfied that the deceased had the requisite testamentary
capacity at the relevant time" and accordingly revoked probate of the 1999
It is convenient to follow the course adopted by the trial
judge and dispatch at the outset an argument based upon the significant
to the beneficiaries effected in the 1999 will. In the 1996 will the deceased
had left one third of the estate to the present
respondent (the brother-in-law
in Sydney) and for the rest one third each to two persons (perhaps cousins) who
were still resident
in the Czech Republic. None of these three was a
beneficiary under the later will, of May 1999. In contrast, Sokol, a charity
with the elderly in Melbourne, is a charity of which Bohumil
had been foundation president, in Australia. According to an
affidavit of Dr. Kantor's, "the Czech Sokol movement in Victoria ...
to the nineteenth century and was considered to be one of the most important
patriotic associations linking the Czech
nation during the period prior to
independence in 1918". In the 1999 will, the deceased described the bequest as
"in memory of my
beloved husband Bohumil Vasahlo".
As for Kruntorad, the only other beneficiary in the 1999 will,
he was one who had been doing much to assist the deceased in her
later years.
Although he died before the trial began, his affidavit in the
proceeding and the video record of his examination on commission were exhibits
in this proceeding.
His Honour described
the evidence thus
"Mr. Kruntorad said he had been a close friend of the deceased
since the 1960s. She was about the same age as his mother with whom
with his daughter in Wordsworth Street, St. Kilda. The deceased and her
husband used to visit his mother frequently and
he would see them there and
take them for drives in the country. Some time after 1975, Mr. Kruntorad took
Bohumil to hospital when
he became sick and generally helped him in his
difficulties.
He said that shortly before Bohumil died, he asked his friend to
his wife and Mr. Krontorad agreed that he would do so. Accordingly, Mr.
Kruntorad visited the deceased regularly over
the succeeding decade. He used
to cook for her, do her shopping and carry out errands for her and, generally,
provide her with Czech
speaking companionship. He said that from April 1999,
when he stopped work, until February 2001 he used to go to her place daily
make her breakfast and lunch. Sometimes he slept there. For this she paid him
$250 per month. He spoke of occasions when,
on his arrival, he found that she
had soiled herself. He would then clean her up, bathe her and generally look
after her. He also
held her power of attorney but did not use it."
It cannot be surprising, then, that the Sokol organisation and
Mr. Kruntorad were named as beneficiaries. Apparently it was argued
that the will should be regarded as one which ignored those who had claims upon
the bounty of the deceased. It was an argument
that the judge rejected, and,
with respect, properly so. His Honour said
"I mention at the outset the argument that I should look upon the
will as an unofficious document. I do not agree. It is true that
the deceased
omitted in it a gift to her brother-in-law and his family living in Sydney. I
accept that there was nothing extraordinary
in this for the reasons she herself
gave. She omitted, too, her Czech cousins who had previously been
beneficiaries. One of them
had died since her last will in 1996; the other
was apparently remote in time, distance and in her affections. Furthermore,
place as these beneficiaries may have had in her mind in 1996 was taken by
Mr. Kruntorad who was a friend and who did much for her".
The reference in this to "the reasons she herself gave" for
omitting the brother-in-law and his family is a reference to the evidence
Dr. Kantor that, shortly before executing the later will, the deceased had
explained to him why she wanted to depart from her
earlier will.
We have mentioned already that the 1999 will was prepared for
the deceased by Dr. Kantor. Again it is convenient to quote from
judge's reasons for judgment.
"The evidence showed that Dr Kantor, a solicitor of some 45 years'
standing, had made four prior wills for the deceased - on 29 April
October 1990, 9 April 1992 and 12 March 1996, respectively. In each case, he
and Mr Grossman were named as executors.
As Consul for Czechoslovakia and
later the Czech Republic, from 1990, he knew Bohumil who was, for some time,
president of the Czech
Sokol movement in Victoria and active in affairs of this
charitable movement. Dr Kantor had made Bohumil's will also dated 29 April
1990 which was in similar terms to that of the deceased's will of the same
date. Dr Kantor told me that he, too, is of Czech origin
and was able to speak
with the deceased and her husband in their native tongue. He said, and
maintained this despite a challenging
cross-examination, that when he took
instructions and when she executed the will the deceased appeared rational and
appeared to him
to understand what she was doing. He was firmly of the view
that she met the legal requirements for testamentary capacity.
also knew the beneficiary under the 1999 will, Mr Kruntorad. Mr
Kruntorad was also born in Czechoslovakia and was a member of the
Czech Sokol
Club in North Melbourne where he had been a cook. Dr Kantor knew that Mr
Kruntorad was looking after the deceased."
The main thrust of the respondent's attack on the testamentary
capacity of the deceased in May 1999 lay in the medical and para-medical
evidence that, at the time she made a will in May 1999, the deceased was
suffering from "significant dementia". Before us, both
sides put the relevant
evidence before the trial judge into three categories: that of medical
practitioners and the like who spoke
of the deceased at the time when they saw
her; the evidence of medical practitioners who, after the event, were invited
by the parties
to comment on material put before them about the deceased, but
who did not see her; and thirdly, what was called "the lay evidence".
as presently relevant the lay evidence was that of Mr. Kruntorad (as already
described), Kamila Nekvapil, a Czech speaking
friend of the deceased for many
years, Patricia Anne James, a law clerk in Dr. Kantor's office who witnessed
the execution of the
1999 will, and Dr. Kantor himself. (The other witness to
the execution of the 1999 will filed an affidavit, as also did Dr Grossman,
nothing was made of their evidence in argument.)
In his reasons for judgment, the trial judge canvassed in some
detail the evidence in the first of these three categories, and more
particularly the evidence given by a consultant neurologist, Dr. Hilary Hunt,
who saw the deceased in October 1997, and by Dr. William
Waddell, the
deceased's general practitioner up to September 1998; the evidence of two
nurses who each separately made an assessment
of the deceased (for one purpose
or another) in May 1998; the evidence of Dr. Price, the deceased's general
practitioner from October
1998; and the evidence of Louise Irene Fagan, an
occupational therapist who assessed the deceased for aged-care assistance on 5
1999, some six weeks
the execution of the will. In respect
of this body of evidence his Honour said
"I pause to remark that I have no hesitation accepting the evidence
of these medical [sic] witnesses. They were professional and
disinterested and
although their opinions and assessments were directed to matters other than
testamentary capacity, I found their
observations and opinions of great value."
His Honour proceeded next to consider the report of Dr. Price
in which she expressed her opinion on the three matters relevant to
definition of testamentary capacity. In doing so, the doctor based her opinion
on her consultation with the deceased of
17 March 1999, and we shall return to
this expression of opinion later. His Honour dealt, then, with the reports of
the witnesses
who were brought in by the parties at a later stage, the three
medical consultants who were asked to comment upon the earlier reports
express their opinions on the mental capacity of the deceased as at the end of
May 1999, although, as already mentioned, none
of these three had the advantage
of seeing the deceased.
The two consultants retained by the applicant, Dr. Sutcliffe,
a consultant psychiatrist and psycho-geriatrician, and Dr. Gillies,
consultant neurologist, both concluded "with greater or less confidence", said
the judge, "that the deceased lacked testamentary
capacity at the relevant
time". Neither was cross-examined. For the executors, the papers were
submitted to Dr. Mark Cunningham,
consultant psychiatrist, who gave his
evidence orally
and was cross-examined.
He thought that the papers indicated "some degree of fairly established
dementia", saying later "almost severe
dementia, I suppose would be more
correct". But in his opinion the deceased was probably suffering from vascular
dementia rather
than Alzheimer's-type dementia (although he did say that the
two were often present together in elderly patients) and when asked
his opinion
the symptoms of dementia, particularly
vascular dementia, were known to vary
from time to time, at least before it became severe and long term - though even
then (he said)
a person could have lucid intervals. Despite the opinions of
both Dr. Sutcliffe and Dr. Gillies that the dementia was not vascular
nature, he maintained his opinion that it was and therefore likely to vary from
time to time in its impact. As the judge noted,
his opinion on this point was
"confirmed by the observations of Dr. Price".
The detail of all that medical and para-medical evidence no
longer matters. What is important to this appeal is the judge's conclusion
the evidence so far mentioned, expressed as it was before his Honour turned to
"the lay evidence". That conclusion was as follows
"I conclude from this that the burden of the medical evidence,
which I accept, is that, at the time of making her will, the deceased
from significant dementia which was probably due to vascular degeneration,
perhaps accompanied by Alzheimer's dementia.
I conclude that she was unable in
March and July of 1999 to make a rational decision affecting her property, and
for that reason
she lacked testamentary capacity. I accept the medical
evidence that her condition was deteriorating generally but also that she
have had periods when her disability was less apparent. The medical evidence
that her mental condition might fluctuate was
consistent with the evidence of
Mrs Nekvapil that it did and I accept this to be the case.
Thus, and no doubt by reference particularly to the opinions
of Dr. Price (who based her report on a consultation in March) and
(who assessed the deceased in July), the judge was prepared to conclude that
the deceased was unable in March 1999 and
in July 1999 "to make a rational
decision affecting her property and for that reason ... lacked testamentary
capacity". There was
debate before us about whether this conclusion was
justified, not only because it was expressed before consideration of the lay
but also because much of the evidence mentioned thus far had not been
directed to the issue of testamentary capacity at all. But
we pass that by,
for we are prepared to accept, for the sake of the argument, that there may
well have been (as the judge said) a
want of testamentary capacity in March
1999 and July 1999. But the will was made in May 1999 and the critical
question is whether
it can fairly be said from the totality of the evidence
in May 1999
the deceased lacked testamentary capacity.
It is especially important, as can be seen from the foregoing
conclusion, that the judge accepted the opinion of Dr. Cunningham
time to time, despite the dementia, the deceased could have had lucid
intervals. The question then becomes whether the
1999 will was made during one
such lucid interval. Indeed, that is how the judge saw the problem for he
"The case, then, resolved itself into issue whether,
notwithstanding her incapacity before and after the relevant date, the deceased
had the necessary capacity on that date. I bear in mind that in such a case
the executors bear a heavy onus of proof that the deceased
acted at the
relevant time in a period of temporary lucidity:
In the will of Mary Alice
While this was accepted as identifying what became the central
issue and as properly casting the burden of proof on the executors
regard, the first ground of appeal was error in the judge's characterising that
burden as "heavy". Otherwise, however, the
general principles were not in
dispute. One starts with the proposition that, for a deceased to have acted
with testamentary capacity,
he or she must have acted with sound mind, memory
and understanding with reference to the particular will. In
Williams, J. put it
succinctly when he said:-
"Usually the evidence is such that the question upon whom the
onus of proof lies is immaterial, but it is clear to my mind that, although
proof that the will was properly executed is prima facie evidence of
testamentary capacity, where the evidence as a whole is sufficient
doubt upon the testator's competency, then the court must decide against the
validity of the will unless it is satisfied
affirmatively that he was of sound
mind, memory and understanding when he executed it:
Mortimer's Probate Law
and Practice
, Sutton v.
, Landers v. Landers
, Bailey v. Bailey
, Timbury v. Coffee
Derrett v. Hall
As indicated, there is ample authority of long standing to justify this
statement of the law. One may add to the cases just cited,
in which Cresswell, J.
said (in line with what he had said two years earlier in
"If a will, rational on the face of [it is] shewn to have been executed and
attested in the manner prescribed by law, it is presumed,
in the absence of any
evidence to the contrary, to have been made by a person of competent
understanding. But if there are circumstances
in evidence which counterbalance
that presumption, the decree of the Court must be against its validity, unless
the evidence on the
whole is sufficient to establish affirmatively that the
testator was of sound mind when he executed it."
Smith v. Tebbitt
Smee v. Smee
. While it is
possible that in
Sivewright v. Sivewright
Viscount Haldane reversed the onus, to Lord Atkinson
the evidence was clearly in favour of capacity so that onus did not matter
; and while the headnotes in both
might suggest that the onus was on the
objectors to prove incapacity, the judgments are to the contrary
. In those two cases Isaacs, J. alone may
have seen the matter somewhat differently, but in
Rich, J. went
out of his way to state his view unequivocally
- and that is the view that has since
Thus, proof of due execution is ordinarily enough and
testamentary capacity will not be separately raised for decision. But if
evidence as a whole is sufficient to throw a doubt upon the testator's
competency", then the will cannot be admitted to probate
unless at the end of
day, on all of the evidence, the Court is "satisfied affirmatively" of the
deceased's testamentary capacity.
As we read it, the passages just quoted from
the judgments of Williams, J. and Cresswell, J. do little more than this: they
out an issue that ordinarily needs no separate attention (testamentary
capacity), they identify the circumstances in which that issue
will call for
separate decision (where a doubt about capacity is raised by the evidence as a
whole); and they identify, too, the
party upon whom the risk of non-persuasion
then lies. In particular we do not read what was said by Williams, J. in
Bull v. Fulton,
or indeed by Cresswell, J. in
Symes v. Green
addressing the standard of proof (which remains the civil standard) or the
strength - or cogency and the like - of the evidence
needed to persuade the
decision-maker that the deceased had the requisite capacity. The latter will
of course vary with the facts
of the case and depend upon the circumstances,
but that does not alter either the onus or the standard of proof.
Importantly for present purposes, the issue of testamentary
capacity falls to be addressed whenever the evidence as whole raises
a real doubt, as in the present case - about the capacity of the deceased. As
Eames, J. put it in
"Once the proponent has established a prima facie case then the
onus shifts to the person seeking to impeach the will so as to demonstrate
the deceased lacked capacity. Where, however, the whole of the evidence casts
a doubt upon the deceased's capacity, then the
Court must be satisfied
affirmatively that she was of sound mind, memory and understanding when she
executed the will:
Bull v. Fulton
Eames, J. then quoted the words of Hood, J. in
In the Will
to describe the legal
test of testamentary capacity, and continued:-
"Where there is evidence that the testatrix was defective in mind,
memory and understanding at times both before and after the making
of the will,
by virtue of senile dementia, then the burden of proving that she operated at a
time of lucidity when making the will
falls upon those who propound it
The parties before us were agreed that what has just been
quoted properly served to cast the onus upon the appellants at trial, but
were not agreed about what followed the quotation, for Eames, J. had added that
the burden of proof, so cast upon the propounders
of the will, was "not a light
one" (echoing the like expression used by Mayo, J. in
). No doubt that accounted for the
description of the onus by the trial judge on this occasion as "heavy".
, Mayo J. was not persuaded that the onus had
been discharged. In
, the change to the will had been stark, in
that a son, hitherto favoured by the testatrix for good reason, was displaced
stage by a daughter to whom nothing had previously been left,
deliberately. Perhaps, then, it was because of the particular circumstances
the case that in
his Honour had described the burden of proof as
"not a light one": for the very fact of displacement, which on its face was
to explain, pointed against the conclusion that, in making the later
will, the testatrix had been operating at a time of lucidity.
But to say that
is merely to recognise that it is the circumstances of the case that give rise
to the doubt about capacity in the
first place and which serve to shift the
onus on to the propounders of the will: the circumstances do not alter the
standard of proof.
Kinleside v. Harrison
, Sir John Nicholl said of a will prepared by the
solicitor, Mr. Boodle
" Now certainly in this account there does occur a circumstance
in the preparation of this instrument, that always excites the
jealousy and
vigilance of the Court,
and it has been much pressed in argument; the
codicil is prepared through the agency of the party benefited, and without the
professional
person who prepares it having had access to the deceased for the
purpose of taking his instructions: but the Court must take care
convert a circumstance, which is only
a reason for vigilance and
, into an actual defeazance of the right of testamentary
disposition, and of the clear testamentary dispositions of a capable testator.
degree of alarm excited by such a circumstance
depends upon the
other circumstances which accompany it; the thing frequently happens, and
without exciting much, though upon all
a certain portion of
." [Emphasis added]
In that case there was a great mass of evidence bearing on capacity and the
will was ultimately upheld. In
Smith v. Tebbitt
the Court pronounced itself not "satisfied that
the testator was of sound mind, memory and understanding at the time of
and so pronounced against validity; but added that, had the
testatrix had "been esteemed capable of making a will at all", then "grave
question would have arisen whether that capacity would have supported a will so
made and with such dispositions as the will here
in question". The Court
explained as follows:-
"The law has ever been
watchful and jealous of wills made under
religious influences
, and especially so when those influences connect
themselves with any individual who is the object of the testator's bounty.
this will, therefore, could have been established, the relations of Dr.
Smith with the testatrix must have been
further scrutinized and
, and the Court satisfied that, in making him and his brother
residuary legatees to the amount, as it is computed, of 180,000,
testatrix was
acting freely, under the pressure of no imaginary duty or
paramount obligation
- the influence of no delusion as to Dr. Smith's
spiritual being, and the guidance of
no baseless religious dream
{Emphasis added]
Isaacs, J. spoke in
in not dissimilar terms when
The quantum of evidence sufficient to establish a
testamentary paper must always depend upon the circumstances of each case,
the degree of vigilance to be exercised by the Court varies with the
circumstances...
His Honour gave as examples the nature of the will, as simple or complex, the
rationality of its provisions, its inclusion or exclusion
of particular
beneficiaries, and the extreme age or sickness of the testator. In
Williams, J. spoke of
advancing age as affecting memory so often "that a will made by a person of
advanced age is always carefully
scrutinized by the court" (a proposition for
which his Honour cited
In re White,
, a case where the testatrix sometimes
suffered from delusions, O'Leary, C.J., in the Court of Appeal, put it more
broadly when he
"Applying the law to the facts and circumstances here, the will is shown to be
properly executed and attested, but
there are circumstances which must
excite the suspicion of the Court
and those suspicions must be removed
before it can be said to be affirmatively established that the testatrix was of
sound mind when
she executed the will." [Emphasis added]
Those suspicions were not removed and so his Honour ruled against validity.
Finlay, J. and Gresson, J. also considered that the
propounders had failed to
establish testamentary capacity, Finlay, J. expressly approving
what was said in
Mortimer's Probate Law and
circumstances of grave suspicion arise at the outset
the burden of proving,
and very satisfactorily proving
, the testator's
sanity rests upon the propounding party".
We mention two later High Court cases. In
, after describing how the
onus lay on the propounders once a doubt was raised as to the existence of
testamentary capacity at the
relevant time, Dixon, C.J., Webb and
Kitto, JJ. said (when rejecting the criminal standard of proof as
altogether irrelevant in such
"The effect of a doubt initially is to require
examination of the whole of the evidence
which the parties placed before
the court ...". [Emphasis added]
Boreham v. Prince Henry Hospital
after quoting what Williams, J. had said in
Bull v. Fulton
simply stated the test in classic terms:
"Although proof that a will was properly executed is
prima facie
evidence of testamentary capacity, where the evidence as a whole is sufficient
to throw a doubt upon the testator's competency, the
Court must decide against
the validity of the will unless it is satisfied affirmatively that he was of
sound mind, memory and understanding
when he executed it or, if instructions
for the will preceded its execution, when the instructions were given. Memory
is the faculty
which is peculiarly in question in the present case."
No mention was made here of any difference in the standard of proof, which
throughout all the foregoing cases was surely taken to
be the civil standard, a
view that was reinforced in
Worth v. Clasohm
when the criminal standard
was expressly and firmly rejected as irrelevant.
was the only the
only case we have seen in which the standard was discussed.
As a general principle, then, it will be sufficient to say,
once a doubt has been raised about the testator's testamentary capacity,
the Court must be satisfied affirmatively that the testator was of sound mind,
memory and understanding, when executing the
will; for that was how the High
Court described the onus in
Bull v. Fulton
expression "satisfied affirmatively" says all that need be said and any further
description of the onus can only distract
and may mislead: compare
Holdings Pty Ltd v. Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
On this aspect the New Zealand case of
is again helpful, because of the argument
that was put there by counsel. Mr. Gresson, who argued the appeal successfully
objectors, accepted that "the onus resting on the appellants before
this Court [of Appeal] is a heavy one, in the face of the learned
trial judge's
positive finding as to sound disposing mind"
; but he added:-
"... just as, in the Supreme Court, the onus on the respondents
[to prove capacity] was strict and heavy: "
For this proposition counsel cited
Robins v. National Trust
a Canadian appeal before the
Privy Council, but, so far we can see, nothing in the opinion of Lord Dunedin
suggests the description
of the onus accorded to it by counsel in
. Nor was that description adopted by any of the judges in the
Court of Appeal; rather to the contrary. In the course of his judgment,
Gresson, J. said
that, when validity is
impeached, the onus lying on the propounder "becomes very much heavier", but
that was said only by way of
contrast to the onus which is ordinarily
discharged by proof of due execution. It was no more than that. More
importantly, Gresson,
J. said in conclusion, about the onus on the
propounders:-
"I am of opinion that
refinements in regard to the onus of proof are neither
. The burden of proof is, at the outset, on those who
propound the will. Though it may shift from time to time to and fro, as
tendered leads to inferences which in time are rebutted by other
evidence, there is ever present the governing or master principle
Court has to be satisfied it is the will of a testator who had testamentary
capacity to make, not a will in general, or
any kind of will, but the
particular will in dispute,
when it is shown that he was
subject to delusions which may not be wholly unconnected with the dispositions
he has made. Whether
or not this onus probandi has been discharged can be
finally determined only when all the evidence has been heard and the last word
said." [Emphasis added]
There is no warrant, then, for describing the onus on the
propounders in this case as "heavy" or the standard as other than the
one applicable in a civil suit. Of course the cogency of the evidence
necessary to discharge the onus will depend upon
the circumstances of the case,
as it always does; the source of the doubt as to capacity will say much about
what must be proved
to dispel the doubt. But the onus was fixed below on the
appellants (as was acknowledged) and the standard of proof was on the balance
of probabilities. Perhaps the judge, in describing the onus as heavy, meant no
more than did Gresson, J., when he described it as
"heavier" than before the
doubt was raised as to capacity; or perhaps he meant, as did Eames, J., that
the circumstances called for
pretty clear proof, given what had raised the
doubt - in this case, that the testatrix was suffering from some form of
Or perhaps in describing the onus as "heavy" his Honour simply fell
into error. As will be seen, it is unnecessary to express
a concluded view on
that aspect and so we refrain from doing so.
We turn next, as did the trial judge, to the evidence of the
four "lay witnesses" earlier identified: Kruntorad, Nekvapil, James
appellant Kantor. Mr. Kruntorad was familiar with the day to day
activities of the deceased, as already mentioned. It was
he who made initial
he who accompanied her into the
city on 26 May for the signing of the will,
although she made her own way up to Dr Kantor's office on the 11
floor (a fact emphasised by Mr. Archibald on appeal) and Kruntorad was
present when the deceased signed her new will. His evidence was not
altogether consistent with the facts established at the trial,
which led the
judge to say that he did not have "much confidence in the accuracy of his
recollection". Of course, Mr. Kruntorad's
evidence did not deal directly
with the testamentary capacity of the deceased, for it was not in issue at the
time the evidence was
given, it being directed to the
application.
On the one matter which was directly relevant, that Mr.
Kruntorad had told Dr. Price (on a visit of hers to the deceased) about
appointment on the following day with Dr. Kantor for the making of the 1999
will and that the doctor had asked questions of the
deceased apparently
directed to her cognitive state, the judge considered his evidence unreliable.
His Honour regarded Dr. Price
as a reliable witness and her records showed that
the last occasion before the making of the will on which she saw the deceased
in March 1999. Although, said the judge, it now emerged that she saw the
deceased also on 21 May (the Thursday before the Tuesday
on which the 1999 will
was made), the judge was prepared to assume that that visit was merely routine
and he rejected the evidence
of Mr. Kruntorad that Dr. Price actually spoke
with the deceased on the day before she went to Dr. Kantor's office to make the
Mrs. Nekvapil was one who fairly regularly visited the
deceased in her later years. They had known each other since the early 1950s
and they did not live far apart. Mrs. Nekvapil was present when the deceased
was assessed by the nurses in 1998 and 1999 and she,
who was herself a widow,
had had some business experience. She held a power of attorney from the
deceased. She kept the deceased's
bank statements, signed her cheques for
household bills and withdrew cash for her living expenses, including monthly
payments that
the deceased made to Kruntorad. As the judge put it, "by 1999
her day to day business expenses were not being handled by the deceased"
. None the less, Mrs. Nekvapil was
adamant the deceased knew her own mind in 1999: she was capable of and did
make decisions, such
as dealing with requests for charitable donations. In her
affidavit she said:
"In May of 1999 Emily was slow and lazy. It was an effort for her
to do things but I coaxed her to make the effort to maintain her
standard of
living. She appeared to understand what I and Mr. Kruntorad (when in my
presence) said to her and she responded normally,
albeit slowly. She was alert
and lucid although her short term memory was unreliable from time to
In cross examination Mrs. Nekvapil, somewhat incautiously it
transpired, said that she saw the deceased "twice or three times a
week" in May
1999. She was promptly made to confront the fact that from 25 April to 25 May
she herself was in hospital as a result
of a car accident. The respondent
submitted to us that Mrs. Nekvapil did not see the deceased while in
hospital, but that, too,
is an overstatement. Certainly she did not visit the
deceased while she herself (Mrs. Nekvapil) was in hospital, but the
"came to see me in hospital", she said. Moreover, Mrs. Nekvapil
visited the deceased again "before the end of the month", that is,
end of May.
Ms. James, the law clerk employed by Dr. Kantor, already knew
the deceased before she attended at Dr. Kantor's office in May 1999.
evidence the judge said
"Ms James, a law clerk employed by Dr Kantor, knew the deceased
from her previous attendances at the office. She had, indeed, witnessed
four last wills from October 1990. She described her on 26 May 1999 as being a
lot more frail than when she had last seen her
in 1996. She told me that she
had a short conversation with the deceased in which they exchanged
pleasantries. She then took the
deceased into Dr Kantor's office and left her
there for about half an hour to three-quarters of an hour. During this time
she overheard
them speaking in Czech and in English. Later, she and the other
witness to the will were called into Dr Kantor's office to be present
execution of the document. She said Dr Kantor said to the witnesses in the
presence of the deceased that he had read the
will to her and that she
understood what she was signing. The deceased acknowledged this to be the
case. I accept her evidence."
Thus far, none of "the lay evidence" might have been
compelling in itself, though all of it tended to support the view that the
deceased's dementia was such that she did have periods of lucidity from time to
time. But the last witness and "by far the most
important" was Dr. Kantor. He
gave evidence "in strong terms" that the deceased had testamentary capacity at
the relevant time but,
as the judge saw it, the reliability of his evidence was
"affected by a number of matters". The respondent relied heavily upon these
matters as affecting Dr. Kantor's evidence: for their part, the appellants
invited us, for reasons to be explained, to consider
the criticisms as
ultimately of no consequence.
In paragraphs 34 to 38 of the reasons for judgment, his Honour
dealt with the matters affecting the reliability of the evidence
of Dr. Kantor.
First, he said, it did not appear that "he took any particular care to assure
himself of [the deceased's] capacity
notwithstanding her age and the evidence
.... that she suffered from dementia....". This was said apparently because he
medical opinion or independent assessment. Indeed, said the judge,
"his approach to his task appears to have proceeded on the assumption
was unaffected by any mental disability at all". Secondly, Dr. Kantor took
his instructions in two or perhaps several
telephone conversations where,
according to his Honour, "his ability .... to form a view about her mental
state was limited". Dr.
Kantor saw the deceased only once in May, and that was
on 26 May when the will had already been engrossed. Thirdly, Dr. Kantor
and relied upon the diary notes dictated by him on 26 May after the
execution of the will, or perhaps on the day after that, from
hand written
notes which no longer existed. Apparently there were some inconsistencies
between the written notes and what he said
in oral evidence, which led Dr.
Kantor to say "that the note consisted only of points to refresh his memory and
was not a full and
accurate record of events". Fourthly, Dr. Kantor "appeared
to have viewed the attack on his client's capacity as an attack upon
professional competence and even his integrity" which, though understandable,
led his Honour to consider his evidence as "possibly
partisan in the sense that
he appeared concerned to defend himself from these attacks". Finally, said the
judge, Dr. Kantor's account
of the circumstances of taking instructions "was
vague and exhibited a degree of confusion to such an extent that I approach it
considerable caution".
These were the criticisms of which the respondent made much in
argument, inviting the Court in consequence to disregard Dr. Kantor's
as to the testamentary capacity of the deceased. His, however, was the only
direct testimony about whether the deceased
on 26 May 1999, appeared or did not
appear, to have testamentary capacity. Dr. Kantor swore a number of affidavits
and we mention
only that of 10 February 2003. In paragraph 14 he described the
telephone call on 19 May 1999 from Mr. Kruntorad, telling him that
the deceased
wanted to make a new will; his consequent telephone conversations with the
deceased to discuss the new will "and about
her private life"; and the
deceased's telling him that she wished particularly to benefit Mr. Kruntorad
and why, and that she knew
Mrs. Nekvapil, who was also looking after her, to be
reasonably well off so that "she did not believe any need existed to provide
for Mrs. Nekvapil in her will". In paragraph 15, Dr. Kantor described the
deceased's telling him of her assets: namely, the house
in which she lived
"which is fully paid" and "a small amount of savings in her bank account" and,
further, "a small income arranged
by Mr. Grossman as well as her pension
". Dr. Kantor then described the
deceased's giving him instructions to make the bequest of $20,000 to Sokol "in
recognition of her
late husband" who had been its president and that subject
thereto "Mr. Kruntorad should be her sole heir". Dr. Kantor added that
out to her the names of the previous beneficiaries "who she decided to
exclude". Paragraph 16 describes what happened on
26 May when the deceased
attended at his office and the contents of the will and her reasons for
changing the beneficiaries were
again discussed,
the will was
executed; and by way of corroboration Dr. Kantor produced his diary notes which
he had dictated (he said) "following
execution of the will on 26
May 1999". In paragraph 17, the deponent confirmed his independent
recollection of the deceased's reasons for changing the beneficiaries,
emphasised that he had spoken with her in the Czech language and made
translation "wherever I thought that [the deceased] may have
difficulties in
understanding the English" and concluded in emphatic terms: -
"Throughout the conversations I had with Emily [the deceased] and
prior to the execution of her last Will on 26
May 1999, I found
her to be clear in thought and speech. I have no doubt that on 26 May 1999
Emily had testamentary capacity to
make her last Will."
In outline, that was the scope of Dr. Kantor's account on
affidavit of events relevant to the execution of the will. Of course
it was but part of his evidence, for he was cross examined and inter alia the
diary notes were examined. For the reasons
identified above
, the judge approached Dr. Kantor's evidence as a whole "with
considerable caution" and during the argument on appeal counsel for
respondent made much of those reasons and that caution. Yet we are prepared
simply to assume that there was force in the trial
judge's criticisms of Dr.
Kantor's evidence; for it seems to me that such cannot be determinative. That
is because immediately after
expressing his grounds for caution in approaching
Dr. Kantor's evidence his Honour carefully set out, in detail, the findings he
made in consequence. His Honour said, in paragraphs 39 and 40 of his
"This leads me to make the following findings with respect to the
events concerning Dr. Kantor. There were only two telephone conversations.
the first, on Tuesday 19 May 1999, the deceased told him of her wish to give
all her property to Mr. Kruntorad. In one or other
of the conversations, Dr.
Kantor took his client through the 1996 will, asking her the reason why she
wished to exclude her brother-in-law
and her Czech relatives. She gave
coherent reasons. Dr. Kantor suggested that she make a bequest in favour of
the Sokol charity
in memory of her late husband and she agreed to think about
it. Prior to Monday 25 May, the will was prepared, presumably including
bequest to Sokol. Dr. Kantor telephoned her on that day, perhaps to make an
appointment for her to attend for the execution
of the will. In the course of
this conversation he may have gone through the terms of the draft will, again
by reference to her
previous beneficiaries. Dr. Kantor at this time made some
disclosure as to the nature of his involvement with the Sokol charity.
On 26 May at his office, Dr. Kantor took his client through the will. He read
it to her in English with explanations in Czech.
She appeared to understand
the document and duly executed it.
The respondent submitted that what was set out in paragraphs
39 and 40 had to be read as subject to both the criticisms expressed
paragraphs 34 to 37 and the caution expressed by way of conclusion in paragraph
38. We reject that submission. Paragraph 39
makes it quite plain that in
stating his findings, his Honour was doing so after considering the criticisms
he had just made of Dr.
Kantor's account of the relevant circumstances, and in
the light thereof, as the opening words of paragraph 39 plainly attest. There
can be no reason, then, for supposing that paragraphs 39 and 40 of the judgment
were in some way qualified. These were indeed the
concluding findings and, in
our opinion, they point inexorably to the conclusion that the deceased was
shown, positively, to have
had testamentary capacity when she executed the
Although the 1999 will served to change altogether the
beneficiaries mentioned in the earlier will, the judge accepted that the
deceased "gave coherent reasons" for doing so and he had earlier concluded
that, contrary to the submission made by the respondent
at trial, there was no
reason to regard the will as disregarding those who had some claim upon her.
Her recognition of Mr. Kruntorad
as deserving of her benefaction was "rational
and just" (as Mr. Archibald put it), as was her making of the bequest to the
charity in memory of her husband. As to the extent of her property, Dr.
Kantor's evidence was that he was told by the deceased herself
what property
she had and, whether or not she apprehended the size of the estate given that
the house was probably worth more than
she thought
, there is nothing to suggest that she was not able to
understand the extent and character of the property with which she was dealing;
nor was it suggested otherwise at trial. The focus at trial was whether or not
the deceased was in a lucid interval, and thus able
to comprehend the nature
and effect of what she was doing, when she made her will and, with respect,
what his Honour set out in paragraphs
39 and 40 of his reasons for judgment
establish that she was.
Because in argument on appeal the respondent placed much
reliance upon it (as, we assume, was also the case at trial), the formal
of Dr. Price should perhaps be mentioned. Dr. Price was asked, after the
event, to express her opinion on testamentary capacity,
according to the legal
definition, and she did so by a report dated 19 November 2002. The report was
"made without the benefit of
her clinical notes but she recalled that, in
general terms, the mental capacity of the deceased fluctuated"
. In the formal report, the doctor expressed the
that, as at 17 March 1999 (the
last date on which she had noted seeing her before the making of the will), -
"... she [the deceased] would have been aware of the nature extent
and value of her estate; she would have been aware of those who
reasonably have a claim on her bounty; but she would not have had the ability
to evaluate and discriminate between the respective
strengths of the claims of
those persons".
Apart from the fact that this opinion was expressly qualified,
at the outset, by the doctor's saying that she was "not confident this
extrapolated to May in view of my previous comments that her mental state
fluctuated", the last comment about the ability
to discriminate, although the
subject of cross examination, does not seem to us to bear upon the issues in
this case. There is nothing
to suggest that she had to discriminate between
the respective claims on her beyond the extent to which she changed
beneficiaries
altogether, giving "coherent reasons" for doing so. This was a
far cry from resolving the competing claims of a son and a daughter,
More significant, we think, is what Dr. Price said in her
report by way of conclusion:-
"As you know opinion is different from fact and I think that [the
deceased's] testamentary capacity would have to be demonstrated
in the very
narrow legal definition, on the day in question, and by the solicitor involved
in the process of drawing up the legal
In other words, Dr. Price, whose evidence the judge accepted,
saw observation of the deceased on the critical day as by far the more
important consideration. Her expression of opinion as to testamentary capacity
must then be taken to relate to the position of the
deceased generally,
allowing for the interposition of lucid intervals. Dr. Kantor was firm in his
evidence that it was in a lucid
interval that the deceased gave instructions
for her will and a few days later executed it and, with respect, we think that
in paragraphs
39 and 40 of the reasons for judgment his Honour accepted so much
of that evidence as was sufficient to establish that
affirmatively.
The respondent then relied upon what followed in the reasons
for judgment, in paragraph 41. This was the last paragraph before
the judge's
final conclusion (that he was unable to be satisfied that the deceased did have
the requisite testamentary capacity at
the relevant time) and it read
"Given the way in which Dr. Kantor's evidence was given, I am not
satisfied that these conversations were conducted in the manner
which was not
suggested to this elderly woman as to how she might dispose of her property.
In this respect, I am mindful of the powerful
medical evidence as to her
medical infirmity".
The respondent made much of this, reading it (as is obviously
correct) as if the word "suggested" was a mistyping of "suggestive".
Kantor's diary notes make it plain that it was he who had made the suggestion
that the deceased make a bequest in favour of
Sokol in memory of her late
husband, and the judge accepted that.
There was no evidence that Dr. Kantor had suggested Mr. Kruntorad as the
principal beneficiary; nor was it said at trial that he
had - or even that he
had had a reason for suggesting that the deceased exclude those who were
earlier named as beneficiaries of
her estate. It is difficult, then, to see
what the judge meant in paragraph 41, save perhaps that the deceased was so
to fall in with any suggestion made to her "as to how she might
dispose of her property". Importantly, it was not put at trial that
put undue pressure on the deceased to make her will in one form or another;
this was not a case of undue influence. It
was not submitted at trial that the
deceased's will had been overborne in some fashion, by Dr. Kantor, or by
Mr. Kruntorad, or by
anyone else. The immediate relevance of paragraph 41
is therefore not readily apparent and in view of the conclusions so firmly
expressed in paragraphs 39 and 40 we regard paragraph 41 as but a passing
comment and not germane to the final conclusion.
For these reasons, we would allow the appeal, set aside the
judgment given below and dismiss the application for revocation. In
opinion, one may safely conclude that the appellants did discharge the onus on
them, of proving capacity. That can be said by
reference to the findings of
the trial judge, especially as those findings were made in the light of the
careful scrutiny which obviously
the judge thought was appropriate, if only
because he described the onus on the propounders as "heavy" - and perhaps that
that his Honour meant by using the word anyway. Because the
conclusion we have expressed flows, as we see it, from the judge's
own findings
of fact, no difficulty arises from any inhibition on the appellate function
after a trial depending in part upon credibility
of witnesses.
(1995) 183 C.L.R. 525.
[2003] H.C.A. 49
77 A.L.J.R. 1629.
[1940] HCA 20
(1940) 63 C.L.R. 691.
[1965] HCA 46
(1965) 112 C.L.R. 517.
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 C.L.R. 336.
Or for letters of administration c.t.a.
[1924] HCA 21
(1924) 34 C.L.R. 558
esp. at 570 per
Isaacs, J., with whom Gavan Duffy, J. and Rich, J. concurred at 579.
[1914] HCA 74
(1914) 19 C.L.R. 222
at 235-236 per Rich,
[1941] HCA 22
(1941) 66 C.L.R. 277
at 283 per Dixon,
(1859) 1 Sw. & Tr. 401 at 402;
[1952] HCA 67
(1952) 86 C.L.R. 439
at 453, per Dixon,
C.J., Webb and Kitto, JJ..
The preferred view is that "onus" or
"burden" should be confined to the question on whom the burden lies and that
"standard" of
proof should be used in describing the degree to which a party
must make out its case, i.e. on the balance of probabilities or beyond
reasonable doubt. Usage is, however, not consistent.
[1943] S.A.S.R. 304
at 307 per Mayo,
[1942] HCA 13
(1942) 66 C.L.R. 295.
It was decided nearly a year earlier
but is the immediately preceding case in the Commonwealth Law
Reports. Mayo, J. was clearly aware of
for he cited it for
another proposition later on p.307 of his judgment.
(1809) 1 Ph. 84
(161 E.R. 922)
John Nicholl at 86 (923), who said that it was "scarcely possible indeed to be
too strongly impressed with the great degree
of caution necessary to be
observed in examining the proof of a lucid interval".
(1793) 1 Ph. 90
(161 E.R. 923)
William Wynne at 100 (927), who described the requirement "completely to
establish" the propounder's case and that "There
must be a complete and
absolute proof" that there was no assistance. Cited with approval (on this
issue) by Cockburn, C.J. in
Banks v. Goodfellow
(1870) L.R. 5 Q.B. 549
At 343 per Williams, J. The other
member of the majority, Latham, C.J. said at 298 that he agreed with the view
of the law expressed
by Williams, J. See also at 299 where the Chief Justice
said that the "standard of proof" was nevertheless that "required in civil
(1818) 2 Phill. Ecc. 449 at 462
at 1200], referring to a circumstance "which always excites the
jealousy and vigilance of the court ...".
At 235-236.
At 233-234.
See at 235-236, citing Lord Brougham in
Waring v. Waring
[1848] EngR 693
(1848) 6 Moo. PC 341
(1867) L.R. 1 P. & D. 398 at 436:
"the Court or the jury must be able, affirmatively, on a review of the whole
evidence, to
declare itself satisfied". The passage in the judgment of
Sir J.P. Wilde referring to the shifting onus appears at 434.
[1857] EngR 738
(1857) 3 C.B. (N.S.) 87
671 at 675]: "unless [the jury] are convinced of the affirmative".
is in fact also cited by Williams, J. in
At 571, proposition 8, per Isaacs, J.,
with whom Gavan Duffy, J. and Rich, J. (on this occasion) concurred.
At 570. The "circumstances" are listed
in some detail in proposition 7 at 571.
At 283. As with his reference to
, Williams, J. does not cite any specific passage from
At 235-236, as set out (in part) in
I am indebted to the librarian of the
High Court for supplying me with a copy of the reasons for judgment which seem
to have been
read in open court and later revised.
At p.2 of his judgment: "The court ...
must be able, affirmatively, on a review of the whole evidence, to declare that
the testator
was of sound mind" etc., citing
Smith v. Tebbitt
At p. 9 of his judgment: "unless the
evidence as a whole is sufficient to establish affirmatively that the testator
was of sound
Williams, J. in
also cited Mortimer's
Probate Law and Practice
(1927) at pp.53-55. It would seem the most relevant passage appears at p.53
where, citing
among other cases, the learned
author says that where there is evidence as to the incompetence of the testator
the decree must be
against validity "unless the evidence on the whole is
to establish affirmatively
that the testator was of sound
mind when he executed it." (Emphasis added.) See also at p.54 ("the burden of
proving, and very
satisfactorily proving ...") and p.62 ("rouse the vigilance
of the court"). Lest it be forgotten, the author, whose knowledge of
law was unequalled, was the father around whom his unhappy but better-known son
"voyaged" before turning to the creation
of his fictional character
At 283. The passage
immediately precedes the passage Dixon, J. cited and quoted from
: see para.[
[] fn. and para.[] fn.
(1859) 1 Sw. & Tr. at 402.
At 343, per Dixon, C.J., Webb and Kitto,
(1955) 29 A.L.J. 179.
At 180. They quoted the passage in the
judgment of Williams, J. in
at 66 C.L.R. at 338, set out earlier in
McKinnon v. Voigt
[1998] 3 V.R. 543
, although the issues were somewhat different.
I would not treat the word
"affirmatively" as merely emphatic, for an adverb of that kind would not be
used gratuitously so often
by members of the High Court.
It should be noted that Mayo, J. gave
his judgment before either
was decided.
At 235-236. See at para.[
At 452-453.
At 363 per Dixon, J.
[1940] HCA 20
(1940) 63 C.L.R. 691
at 712 per Dixon,
Evatt and McTiernan, JJ.
(1960) 33 A.L.J.R. 521
at 524 per Dixon,
C.J. See also, in the context of criminal trials,
Sodeman v. The King
[1936] HCA 75
(1936) 55 C.L.R. 192
at 216 per Dixon, J.
[1992] HCA 66
(1992) 67 A.L.J.R. 170
at 171. Cited
with approval by the majority in
Krakowski v. Eurolynx Properties Ltd.
(1995) 183 C.L.R. 563
at 573 per Brennan, Deane, Gaudron and McHugh, JJ.
At 362. The passage here quoted begins
I would not assume that Dixon, J.
intended those broad categories to be exclusive, and it would appear that in
Neat Holdings
the High Court made no such assumption.
At 362-363.
[2003] H.C.A. 49
77 A.L.J.R. 1629
1653 para.[135].
Ibid, the latter phrase also quoted by
Hayne, J. in
CEO Customs v. Labrador
at 1653 para.[135].
At 363 and over the subsequent pages to
Alexander v. Alexander
Sw. & Tr. 95 at 101;
164 E.R. 928
It may be noted that category (2) does
not appear to have been reproduced in s.140(2) of the Commonwealth
and the New South Wales
Evidence Act
, for reasons
which are not apparent. Although the section contains some broad categories,
the relevant factors must be such as to
affect the answer as to what amounts to
reasonable satisfaction and, as expressed in the section, they seem (to an
outsider) too
general to comprehend the strict mode of examination required by
Fortunately the meaning of the section is
irrelevant to the decision of the case in this jurisdiction, in which common
law principles
as applied and adapted by the courts still operate.
A not dissimilar approach was taken by
Smith, J. to proof of a lost will or codicil, relating the caution there
required to
Re Plunkett
[1965] VicRp 16
[1965] V.R. 118.
The first example was probably in
v. Atwood and Robbins
[1788] EngR 39
(1787) 1 Leach 464
168 E.R. 334.
[2004] HCA 57.
[1989] HCA 60
(1989) 168 C.L.R. 79
at 91 per Brennan,
Dawson and Toohey, JJ.
(1873) L.R. 3 P. & M. 64 at 76.
[2003] VSC 81.
The present appellants are also the
executors to whom probate was granted of the 1996 will. While they might be
thought to have
an equal interest in supporting the one will or the other, no
point has been made about their standing to appeal.
Paragraph 42.
Reasons for judgment, paragraph 8.
[1924] HCA 21
(1924) 34 C.L.R. 558
at 566-7 per Knox,
C.J. and Starke, J. (dissenting, but not in respect of the principles).
Reasons for judgment, paragraph 12.
Paragraphs 25 and 26.
Paragraph 9.
Paragraphs 10 and 11.
Paragraph 19.
Objection was taken to Dr. Cunningham's
report, Exhibit MLC1 to his affidavit of 1 February 2003, and the report
was not admitted
into evidence.
Reasons for judgment, paragraph 22.
Paragraph 23.
Unreported, 14 February 1995, SC Vic,
Eames, J. at p.14.
[1942] HCA 13
(1942) 66 C.L.R. 295
2nd ed., 1927, at 53-55.
[1857] EngR 738
(1857) 3 C.B. (N.S.) 87
especially 3 C.B. (N.S.) at 98-99, 140 E.R. at 676.)
[1914] HCA 74
(1914) 19 C.L.R. 222.
[1924] HCA 21
(1924) 34 C.L.R. 558.
[1941] HCA 22
(1941) 66 C.L.R. 277.
Unreported, High Court,
February 1942.
(1859) 1 Sw. & Tr.
401 at 402,
164 E.R. 785
(1867) L.R. 1 P. & D. 398 at
(1879) 5 P.D. 84.
[1920] S.C. (H.L.) 63.
at 341-2, Williams, J. discussed
and was prepared,
if necessary, to distinguish it as a case on Scottish law. Alternative
justification was suggested by Gresson,
In re White, deceased
[1951] N.Z.L.R. 393
at 424. Anyway, if Lord Haldane did reverse the onus,
that view has since been clearly rejected.
In both appeals, all the evidence at
trial was weighed and a positive (or "affirmative") conclusion reached that
testamentary capacity
had been established.
(1914) 19 C.L.R. at 235-6.
[1942] HCA 13
(1942) 66 C.L.R. 295
(1897) 23 V.L.R. 197
[1943] S.A.S.R. 304
(1818) 2 Phill Ecc. 449,
John Nicholl, Prerogative Court).
161 E.R. at 1231.
(1867) L.R. 1 P. & D. 398 at
[1924] HCA 21
(1924) 34 C.L.R. 558
577, his Honour returned to the need for vigilance.
[1942] HCA 13
(1942) 66 C.L.R. 295
At 462, 161 E.R. at 1200.
[1951] N.Z.L.R. 393.
At 410-411.
ed., 1927) at 54.
[1952] HCA 67
(1952) 86 C.L.R. 439
(1955) 29 A.L.J.R. 179
[1992] HCA 66
(1992) 67 A.L.J.R. 170
[1992] HCA 66
A.L.R. 449.
[1951] N.Z.L.R. 393.
Arguendo, at 398, 399.
[1927] A.C. 515
at 520, 521.
[1951] N.Z.L.R. at 423.
Reasons for judgment, paragraph
Paragraph 32.
Both of which would end at her
In paragraph [
The deceased thought that the house was worth "at least $200,00"
according to Dr. Kantor in evidence. Some years later, however,
and after the
deceased had gone into care, the house was sold for $775,000 and, even more
shortly before her death, the deceased
inherited a share in a cousin's estate,
estimated to be worth in the order of $850,000, according to Dr. Kantor on
Reasons for judgment, paragraph
As described by the trial judge, in
paragraph 20.
Paragraph 39.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (291 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter