URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2024/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
JYN [2024] VMHT 22 (30 September 2024)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2024] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan mental health service
Mode of hearing:
Videoconference
Tribunal members:
Sue Tait (Legal Member)
Philip Price (Psychiatrist Member)
Leslie Cannold (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from the health service
With online video
Case manager
With online video
Hari Sridhar
Legal representative, Victoria Legal Aid
With online video
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal revoked your
treatment order.
This statement of reasons:
hearing your treating team requested a written explanation of the Tribunal's
decision. A copy of this statement of reasons
will be given to your treating
team as well as to you and your legal representative. While the statement of
reasons was requested
by your treating team, because it concerns you it is
addressed to you.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because your treating team
applied for another treatment order. The Tribunal had to have a hearing to
whether or not to make a treatment order.
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental
health and wellbeing principles (‘principles’).
Based on the
information provided in your hearing and our understanding of your
circumstances, the Tribunal identified the following
principles were
particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
autonomy – the Tribunal understood your right to be treated with dignity
and respect.
Diversity of
care – the Tribunal acknowledged your belief that you have experienced
symptoms associated with post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) and your wish to
continue to work with a psychologist.
restriction – the Tribunal took into account what you said were your
future goals and made its decision with the aim of
promoting your recovery and
full participation in community life.
decision making – the Tribunal took into account your views and
preferences to focus on having a healthy and nutritious
diet and to have the
energy to look for work and possibly learn new skills.
Dignity of risk
– the Tribunal had to balance your right to take reasonable risks
(including choosing not to have treatment
or contact with mental health
services) with the risk to your mental health and wellbeing and associated harms
if you did not receive
The Tribunal must also give
proper consideration to your rights under the
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’). Compulsory
treatment engages and limits a number of human rights protected under the
Charter including
consent, and where a person is being treated in hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your rights protected under the Charter, and
whether limits on them are reasonable, the Tribunal
must thoroughly examine
three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your file. Both you and your treating team spoke
to and answered questions from the Tribunal in the hearing.
representative also made submissions on your behalf. This statement of reasons
does not summarise all that information,
but the next section refers to the
information the Tribunal relied on to make its decision and explains
The Tribunal must have regard to your views and preferences. From
what you told the Tribunal and the materials we read you were very
happy to have
secured stable accommodation after being homeless and living in your car for 10
months prior to your admission to hospital
in April. You told the Tribunal you
were a strong, resilient, and independent person. You said you wanted to focus
on your physical
health and nutrition. Hari told the Tribunal you were ambitious
and motivated. You said you wanted to focus your energy on getting
that you were considering further study. You told the Tribunal you did not
believe you had experienced symptoms of mental
illness but that you had
experienced significant stressors associated with being homeless and
experiencing a breakdown in your family
relationships. You said the medication
you had been prescribed was the same as the medication you had overdosed on in
your twenties.
You said it made you feel sluggish, and it dampened your bubbly
4. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following
summarises what the Tribunal decided in relation to the four questions that need
to be answered under the compulsory
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
The treating team’s report set out your
mental health history which included a traumatic event at work resulting in PTSD
associated anxiety and depression. It also referred to your experience, in
your twenties, of an intentional overdose with an anti-depressant.
that prior to your hospital admission in April 2024 you had little contact with
mental health services other than working
with a psychologist over the years to
manage your PTSD.
The report set out the circumstances surrounding your
admission in April 2024. It stated on admission, you exhibited significant
disturbance
of your thoughts, both the things you were thinking about (bizarre
beliefs relating to persons of a particular nationality) and the
way you were
thinking about things (obsessive thoughts about cleanliness). It also stated
there were changes to your mood including
anxiety, depression and your responses
to trauma. The report suggests you may also have experienced perceptual
disturbances as you
were observed talking at night when there was no one else
Hari told the Tribunal there was no current evidence you were
experiencing significant disturbances in thought, mood, perception or
Hari said you accepted you had experienced PTSD. She said you denied having
thoughts about secret societies or foreign nationals.
She said your admission in
April had occurred in the context of significant stressors including
that triggered your PTSD. Hari said
consultant reviews in June and August of this year state your presentation was
diagnostically
You told the Tribunal you did not think you
needed to be admitted to hospital in April. You said your resilience had been
demonstrated
by your ability to survive homelessness. You said your hospital
admission had occurred because of a misunderstanding. You did not
reflect on the
assessment by the specialist forensic staff that you were exhibiting psychotic
symptoms, behaving abnormally, and
needed to be taken to hospital.
referred the Tribunal to a previous hearing reported in
In that case a person had been admitted in the context of extreme
stressors. On admission the person had exhibited psychotic symptoms
dissipated following three weeks of treatment. The person had no previous mental
health issues. In that case the Tribunal
found there was no evidence of a
persisting mental illness, and that this criterion was not met.
case there was consensus that you have experienced PTSD. Although there was lack
of diagnostic clarity, TD said the treating
team was of the view that your
functional decline over the previous months, including stopping work, the
breakdown in your family
relationships and being homeless, was indicative of an
underlying mental illness. In the report the treating team also expressed
concerned about your persistent thoughts regarding cleanliness.
all the information before it the Tribunal was satisfied on balance that you
have experienced significant disturbance of
your thoughts, for example your
characterisation of your admission as a misunderstanding and your persistent
thoughts regarding cleanliness.
As the Tribunal was satisfied that you
have experienced significant disturbance of your thoughts this criterion was
(b) Does your mental illness mean you need to be treated now,
to try and prevent your mental health or physical health seriously
deteriorating;
or to prevent serious harm to you or someone else?
The treating team’s report stated that
without immediate treatment there were several risks to you. They included risk
of deterioration
in your mental health, homelessness, further trouble with
police, risk of re-traumatisation and risk of suicide. The report also
there were a number of risks to others. These included threats to family members
resulting in intervention orders and verbal
aggression to police and others when
you were found to be trespassing.
Hari told the Tribunal none of the
risks identified by the treating team were imminent. She said your suicide
attempt occurred when
you were in your earlier twenties. Hari said you had
stable accommodation negating any risk of homelessness. She said your lived
experience had given you strategies to manage your mental health issues
successfully without treatment or medication for years.
You told the
Tribunal your work with a psychologist had given you strategies to deal with
your PTSD over the years and you could manage
any stressors without medication.
You told the Tribunal you wanted to stop your anti-psychotic medication because
it made you feel
sluggish and because you wanted to have energy to look for
work. You also said the treating team were currently prescribing the drug
you had attempted to overdose on in your twenties.
Hari referred the
Tribunal to a previous Tribunal hearing reported in
In that case a person who had experienced chronic delusions had been subject to
a compulsory treatment order for years. Despite treatment,
the delusions
remained. The person had a strong and consistent wish to stop treatment. The
Tribunal found that although the person’s
delusions might intensify
without treatment there was no evidence this posed a
risk of harm
to the person or anyone else. The Tribunal in that case found that this
criterion was not met and revoked the person’s
This criterion has two aspects to it. The first is the
of the treatment. This is time critical. The second aspect is the
seriousness
of the harm intended to be addressed or ameliorated by the
treatment. Risk of harm does not need to be imminent, but the harm needs
seriously detrimental.
In your case, the Tribunal was not satisfied that
without immediate treatment your mental health was more likely than not to
deteriorate. You had successfully implemented strategies to manage
your PTSD over the years. Stressors that had precipitated your
admission had
largely resolved. The Tribunal was also not satisfied that without immediate
treatment that you would pose a risk to
yourself or others to the level of
seriousness envisaged by the Act. The Tribunal considered the fact that you had
found stable accommodation
you were happy with, was an important protective
factor in stabilising your mental health and promoting your mental
This criterion was not met.
5. Decision
Given the Tribunal was not satisfied all the
compulsory treatment criteria applied to you the Tribunal revoked your treatment
Date of determination: 02-09-2024
[Signed by the legal member]
Presiding member, on behalf of the Tribunal
Date: 30 September 2024.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143
Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (540 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter