URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2025/692.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DPP v Fleming [2025] VSC 692 (13 November 2025)
THE SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
AT MELBOURNE
CRIMINAL DIVISION
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
STEPHEN FLEMING
DATE OF HEARING
29 September 2025
DATE OF SENTENCE
13 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
DPP v Fleming
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VSC 692
CRIMINAL LAW - Sentence – Manslaughter by unlawful and dangerous
act – 67 year old lead tenant killed in her home by 46
year old male
subtenant – Offender disposed of body in green waste bin – Body
recovered from tip several days later -
Mechanism of death not able to be
determined as injuries to body could have occurred post mortem in garbage truck
guilty – Mental impairments -
5 applicable
– Limited priors – Protection prisoner - Sentenced to 10
years’ imprisonment with non-parole period
of 7 years -
[2023] VSC 218
DPP v Ivankovic
[2025] VSC 50
[2023] VSC 538
[2007] VSCA 302
[2019] VSCA 287
DPP v Tiumalu
[2024] VSCA 192
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269
[2024] VSC 533.
APPEARANCES
For the Crown
Ms E Ramsay with
Office of Public Prosecutions
For the Accused
Mr M McGrath with
Mr P Bloemen
Chester Metcalfe & Co
HIS HONOUR:
Fleming, you are to be sentenced today for the manslaughter of Annette Brennan
on 1 July 2024. The maximum penalty for manslaughter
is 25 years’
imprisonment.
were originally charged with murder.
April 2025, witnesses were cross-examined by your counsel at
hearings spread over
several days.
trial was listed to commence on 10 November 2025. Your defence was identity. In
other words, you denied having killed Ms Brennan.
14 August 2025, the prosecution filed over a new indictment, substituting a
charge of manslaughter for murder. You were immediately
arraigned on the new
indictment and pleaded guilty, thereby admitting that you had in fact unlawfully
killed Ms Brennan.
CIRCUMSTANCES OF
turn to the known circumstances of your offending.
late April 2024, Ms Brennan moved into a 3 bedroom home at 5 Hilgay Street,
Coolaroo. She had leased the premises from a friend
with plans to sublet the two
spare bedrooms. She advertised for tenants online.
sublet one of the rooms, moving in on 6 June 2024. As at 1 July 2024, you were
the only other person residing at the premises.
your subtenancy, tensions arose between you and Ms Brennan. Ms Brennan conveyed
a number of concerns about you to various friends
and acquaintances, including
the following:
That you had not
paid your bond and were behind with your rent;
That you were
not going to work, even though you said you had a job;
That you were
possibly smoking in the house;
That you had
taken things from the fridge;
re-arranged things in the house without asking;
That you had put
a lock on your bedroom door;
That you had
yelled at her;
didn’t like you and wanted you out of the house;
That you had
stolen her phone.
your part, you were communicating with the owner’s husband behind
Ms Brennan’s back, endeavouring to take over the
head lease of 5
Hilgay St. In one communication to the owner’s husband, you
I want to sign a lease with you if you agree Annette doesn’t do any
cleaning [or] do any repairs, and isn’t even looking
for a job. What is
the rent per week as I’m willing to pay full amount that she is paying
1 July 2024, between 12.11am and 12.53am, Ms Brennan paid a number of bills
online. Sometime later on 1 July 2024 you killed her.
The available evidence
does not enable me to say exactly when or how or why you killed her.
this point, it should be emphasised that in withdrawing the charge of murder and
accepting your plea of guilty to manslaughter,
the prosecution no longer alleges
that you killed Ms Brennan with murderous intent – that is, with an
intention to kill or
to cause really serious injury. Rather it is alleged, and
by your plea of guilty you accept, that you killed Ms Brennan by an unlawful
dangerous act. The word “dangerous” in this context has a technical,
legal meaning, namely, that a reasonable person
in your position, performing
the act or acts which caused Ms Brennan’s death, would have realised that
they were exposing Ms
Brennan to an appreciable risk of serious injury.
to the chronology of known events, at approximately 12.12pm on 1 July 2024, a
woman who was going to move into the spare
bedroom at 5 Hilgay St attended for
a pre-arranged meeting with Ms Brennan. But no one answered the door and
Ms Brennan did not
respond to her text messages. The woman left, returning
around 4pm but with the same result.
bins, including his green waste bin, which were
to be emptied the following
some time after this, you swapped the waste bin from No 5 with the waste bin
outside No 22 Hilgay St, having placed Ms Brennan’s
clothed body in the No
5 waste bin.
approximately 8.36am on 2 July 2024, the contents of the waste bin outside No 22
were collected by a garbage truck which took them
to a waste facility where they
were added to a large mound of organic waste.
was not until 3 July 2024, that Ms Brennan’s body was detected amongst the
mound of waste and the appropriate authorities
were alerted. The pathologist who
conducted the autopsy was not able to determine the cause of death because she
could not determine
whether the injuries to the body had been caused before or
after Ms Brennan’s death. Those injuries included the
extensive fragmentation of the head and neck with disruption of the scalp to
such an extent that the cranial contents were lost;
right parietal skull
fracture; fractures to bones in the neck (hyoid); fractured clavicles, fractured
ribs, fracture dislocations
of the vertebra; extensive fragmentation of the
pelvis, degloving injuries to the lower legs, fractures and amputation of the
right fibia/tibia.
relation to these injuries, the prosecution summary states the
The prosecution cannot prove that any of these injuries were inflicted by the
offender ante mortem. The extent of the injuries is
relevant only in considering
the significance to sentence of the manner in which the offender disposed of Ms
Brennan’s body.
were arrested on 9 July 2024. In your recorded police interview, you told many
lies, including that you had nothing to do with
Ms Brennan’s death,
initially claiming you had moved out of the premises on 20 June 2024.
Victim Impact
victim impact statements were tendered by the prosecution.
Brennan’s sister comments that “I feel a lot of anger about the way
she was treated as though she was rubbish, being
put in a bin.” She refers
also to her sadness at her sister’s untimely death, and her loneliness
without her.
Sally Jamieson states that Ms Brennan’s death has left a big hole in her
life. She concludes: “Annette enriched
my life and those of many others. I
hope that Stephen Fleming comes to understand this and the impact her death has
had on those
who loved her”.
Robert Strickland speaks of how he misses Ms Brennan who was “outgoing and
involved with people” and “very
Austin, a friend of Ms Brennan’s since school days, also expresses outrage
over your actions: “No one should
die like that and be stuffed in a
wheelie bin as trash”.
Summary of Aggravating
Circumstances
me summarise the aggravating circumstances of your offending.
victim was a vulnerable female, aged 67.
killed her in her own home.
disposed of her body in a green waste bin.
is likely that Ms Brennan’s body was seriously damaged when the contents
of that waste bin were collected and processed.
offence was committed whilst on a community corrections order (CCO).
Objective Seriousness of
manslaughters are serious offences because they involve the taking of a human
life, but there is spectrum of seriousness for manslaughter,
as with every other
offence. Having regard to the aggravating circumstances which I have just
summarised, I assess your offending
as an upper mid-range example of the offence
of manslaughter.
CIRCUMSTANCES OF
were born on 16 August 1978, making you 46 at the time of your offending and 47
and your brother and sister, were raised by your natural parents.
father was a naval officer.
family moved fairly regularly, living in New South Wales, then Queensland, then
1989, your brother committed suicide. You found him unresponsive in a vehicle in
the driveway of your home. You had 6 months off
school, receiving counselling.
left school mid-way through Year 11 at MacLeod Technical School. You then worked
at KFC for 5 years. Over the years you have held
many jobs including working in
hospitality and as a factory hand, labourer, apprentice chef and laser
2009, you began a long term intimate relationship that produced 3 children, born
in 2012, 2014 and 2016.
2019, you and your de facto partner separated. She did not permit you to see the
children after the separation.
2022, your mother died from cancer.
now have no contact with your father or your sister or your children.
relation to your drug history, you began using cannabis when you were about 18
years old and progressed to MDMA, amphetamines
and ketamine in your early
twenties. In 2023 and 2024, you also used LSD. According to what you told
psychologist Gina Cidoni, whose
reports I will refer to in some detail shortly,
your longest period of abstinence from illicit drugs occurred when you were
your first prison sentence of 6 months, imposed in April
Antecedents
to your criminal record in more detail, it began in 1996 with the theft of a
motor vehicle for which you were fined and had
your license suspended. Many of
your subsequent convictions involved motor vehicles in one way or another. In
June 2007, you were
convicted of dangerous driving and failing to stop your
vehicle after an accident and placed on a community based order (CBO) for
months with conditions which included assessment and treatment for drug and
alcohol addiction. You breached that CBO and in June
2018, the CBO was varied to
an 18 month order. In January 2009, for driving whilst disqualified, you
received a sentence of 1 month
imprisonment, suspended for 12 months. In August
2017, for driving dangerously, you were fined, your licence was cancelled and
were disqualified from driving for 6 months. In January 2020, for possessing
methylamphetamine, cannabis and a controlled weapon
and for driving whilst
suspended and committing an indictable offence whilst on bail, you were fined.
April 2020 you received your first sentence of immediate imprisonment – 6
months – for trafficking and possessing methylamphetamine
and cannabis,
theft, criminal damage and entering a private place without excuse.
August 2021, you were sentenced by Judge Leighfield of the County
to a combined sentence of 66
days’ imprisonment and a 2 year CCO for several charges, including 2
counts of recklessly exposing
emergency workers to risk by driving, one count of
reckless conduct endangering serious injury, driving whilst suspended and
an indictable offence whilst on bail. You had driven your vehicle at
a police car containing two police officers after they had pulled
you over for
driving whilst suspended. The police officers had to take evasive action. About
20 minutes later, you also drove through
a red light placing another motorist in
27 June 2023, you were fined for offences including possessing housebreaking
implements, criminal damage, unlawful entry, possessing
a controlled weapon and
possessing methylamphetamine.
13 December 2023, for breaching the CCO imposed by Judge Leighfield in 2021,
that CCO was cancelled and you were placed on a further
CCO for 1 year. You were
on that CCO when you committed manslaughter.
you have no prior convictions for assaults, you have a number of prior
convictions regarding endangering others, which is relevant,
given that you are
to be sentenced today for unlawful and dangerous act manslaughter.
regard to your mental health, your counsel tendered a number of psychological
reports about you.
was a report from Charles Huson dated 17 August 2017 who had seen you 3 times in
2017 for stress. Mr Huson made the following
Generalised
Anxiety Disorder;
Depression;
Probable Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder.
were 3 reports from Gina Cidoni dated 20 April 2021, 13 July 2021 and 18
September 2025.
main things I take from Ms Cidoni’s 2021 reports, which were prepared in
relation to your County Court hearing in 2021 before
Judge Leighfield, are the
Your general
cognitive ability falls in the low average range (full scale IQ of 82);
In 2021, you had
a number of mental disorders, namely, Borderline Personality Disorder
(contributing to “unexpected impulsive
) , Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder and Cannabis Use Disorder.
Cidoni’s 2025 report states that, after formal testing, she diagnosed you
Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder, chronic;
Major Depressive
Disorder, recurrent episode, without psychotic features;
Generalised
Anxiety Disorder;
Personality Traits;
Ketamine Use
Disorder, severe, in remission in a controlled environment;
Disorder, in remission in a controlled environment;
Hallucinogen
(LSD) Use Disorder, in remission in a controlled environment.
[94]–[95] of her 2025 report, Ms Cidoni writes:
Mr Fleming’s longstanding drug dependence is central to understanding his
mental functioning at the relevant times. His substance
use disorders,
particularly ketamine and MDMA dependence with intermittent hallucinogen and
stimulant use, were severe and entrenched
before his arrest. They reflect
maladaptive coping mechanisms that developed in response to trauma, depression,
and anxiety. The
reliance on drugs as a primary means of emotional regulation
was itself disabling, impairing his ability to think clearly, manage
stress, and
sustain pro-social functioning. His mental health conditions — including
post-traumatic stress disorder, major
depressive disorder, generalised anxiety
disorder, and borderline personality disorder — appear secondary, both as
vulnerabilities
that contributed to his initiation of drug use and as conditions
that were worsened by the effects of prolonged substance misuse.
His personality
dysfunction, together with recurrent depression and severe anxiety, further
impairs his ability to regulate affect,
tolerate distress, and maintain stable
relationships, leaving him reliant on external substances or supports to achieve
His combined psychiatric and substance use conditions render imprisonment
substantially more burdensome than for an individual without
such impairments.
Progress on
to your counsel, you have been held in protection units whilst on remand.
Although you have been able to work whilst in
protective custody, I was told
that you are subject to more limitations than are placed on mainstream
prisoners. But no evidence
was led as to the nature and extent of those
limitations and so, having regard to what the Court of Appeal said in
I can only give this
consideration modest weight. I was also told that once sentenced, you expect to
be able to take up education
opportunities within the prison system. Two
certificates were tendered in relation to courses you have completed whilst on
namely, courses dealing with alcohol and drug abuse.
Prospect of
rehabilitation
do not accept your counsel’s submission that your prospects of
rehabilitation are reasonable or good. Given your chronic
mental disorders,
long history of illicit drug use, criminal antecedents and the gravity of the
offence for which I must sentence
you today, I am guarded about your prospects
of rehabilitation.
Summary of Mitigating
Circumstances
this point, I will summarise the circumstances that I consider should mitigate
your sentence.
plea of guilty was of significant utilitarian benefit. It avoided the need for a
trial, sparing witnesses from having to give
evidence and brings a degree of
finality to this matter.
reason of your mental impairment, prison will be harder for you than for
prisoners not so impaired.
criminal history is a limited one. You have no priors for assault and the
longest prison sentence you have previously undergone
is a sentence of 6
months’ imprisonment.
are a protection prisoner.
was referred to a number of other alleged comparable cases where the offender
had been sentenced for
manslaughter.
Head sentences ranged
from 8 to 13 years’ imprisonment and the non-parole periods ranged from 5
to 10 years’ imprisonment.
These cases were of some assistance in
determining an appropriate sentence for you but each case has to be decided
according to its
own unique features.
of Sentencing
Manslaughter
is obviously a serious offence because it involves the taking of a human life.
Having particular regard to the sentencing
purposes of just punishment,
denunciation, deterrence and protection of the community, you must receive a
substantial sentence of
imprisonment. Please stand.
the charge of manslaughter, I sentence you to 10 years’ imprisonment.
are to serve a minimum term of 7 years’ imprisonment before being eligible
for parole.
declare that you have served 492 days by way of presentence detention.
for your plea of guilty, I would have sentenced you to 12 years’
imprisonment with a minimum term of 9
Criminal Procedure
Whether or not you had stolen
her phone is not the issue. I mention the allegation as evidence of the strains
in your relationship
with Ms Brennan.
Prosecution summary, [53].
You allege that your father
was a violent and emotionally abusive man.
[2021] VCC 1264.
Report of Gina Cidoni, 20
April 2021, [64].
[2007] VSCA
: “It should now be clearly understood by defence counsel that,
if they wish to rely on the factor of protection as a mitigating
sentence, in the absence of a Crown concession the mere assertion that a client
is in protection will hereafter be treated
as insufficient. Counsel will need to
make clear to the sentencing court how the particular protection regime is said
to make the
offender’s experience of imprisonment harsher than it would be
if those conditions had not been imposed”.
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
, 276, [32].
DPP v Giffith
DPP v Ivankovic
[2025] VSC 50
[2023] VSC 538
DPP v Ristevski
[2019] VSCA 287
DPP v Tiumalu
[2024] VSCA 192
(9y 6m/7y);
[2024] VSC 533
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (208 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter