URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/271.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Suliman v The King [2025] VSCA 271 (11 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCR 2025 0042
TAYLOR and ORR JJA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
24 June 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
11 November 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 271
JUDGMENT APPEALED FROM:
[2025] VCC 38 (Judge
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal – Sentence
– Plea of guilty to charges of recklessly causing serious injury, affray,
law assault – Random street violence – Applicant and
co-offender assaulted three victims in public place – Applicant
influence of alcohol and cocaine – Applicant struck one victim to the head
when victim was in vulnerable and defenceless
state, causing him to sustain a
severe traumatic brain injury – Several mitigating factors, including
applicant’s deprived
background and impaired mental functioning –
Whether judge erred in application of
– Whether unjustifiable disparity with co-offender’s sentence
– Whether sentence manifestly excessive
– Total effective sentence
of 6 years and 6 months’ imprisonment with non-parole period of 4 years
and 6 months within
range – Leave to appeal refused.
Bugmy v The
(2013) 249 CLR 571;
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269
[2011] VSCA 45
(2011) 32 VR 486
Kellway (a pseudonym) v The King
Hafner v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 190
Green v The Queen
[2011] HCA 49
(2011) 244 CLR 462
Clarkson v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 157
(2011) 32 VR 361
Young v The
[2016] VSCA 149
Armstrong v The King
[2024] VSCA 316
Buddle v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 232.
Ms CA Boston SC with Mr T Acutt
Respondent:
MC Lawyers and Associates
Respondent:
Ms A Hogan, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
applicant pleaded guilty to one charge of recklessly causing serious
one charge of
and two charges of common
law assault. The charges arose from an altercation outside a restaurant and bar
at Southbank in the early
hours of 30 October 2022. The applicant had been at
the restaurant and bar with his friend, Mr Khaled Haddara. The three victims,
Kevin Vidovic, Mr Michael Rahmani and Mr Semih Senvardar, had also been at the
restaurant and bar. During the altercation, which
was captured on CCTV, the
applicant struck Mr Vidovic twice, causing Mr Vidovic to sustain a severe
traumatic brain injury with catastrophic
effects. Mr Rahmani and
Mr Senvardar also sustained injuries.
a plea hearing conducted in the County Court on 26 November 2024 and
9 December 2024, the applicant was sentenced on 30 January
causing serious
years and 3 months
Effective Sentence:
6 years and 6
4 years and 6
Pre-sentence
Detention Declared:
Section 6AAA
Total Effective
Sentence 9 years
Parole-Period 7 years
applicant seeks leave to appeal his sentence on four proposed grounds:
Ground 1: The learned sentencing judge erred in his application of the
principles.
Ground 2: The learned sentencing judge erred in failing to apply
principles 3 and 4.
Ground 3: The sentences imposed on charges 2 and 3 give rise to a justifiable
sense of grievance, when compared with the sentence
imposed on the
applicant’s co-accused Mr Haddara.
Ground 4: The individual sentences on charges 1–4, orders for cumulation
and non-parole are manifestly excessive having regard
to all relevant matters,
including the applicant’s guilty pleas and disadvantaged background.
the reasons that follow, we would refuse leave to appeal.
Circumstances of
around 10 pm on 29 October 2022, the applicant drove to a restaurant and bar at
Southbank with Mr Haddara. They met up with another
male at the restaurant,
whose identity is unknown. Mr Vidovic, Mr Rahmani and Mr Senvardar, who had been
friends for many years,
were also at the restaurant that evening. The applicant
was 26 years old. The victims were each 25 years old.
approximately 12:30 am on 30 October 2022, the restaurant closed and the patrons
exited the venue to Southbank Promenade. Much
of what happened next is captured
on CCTV and mobile phone footage. As Mr Rahmani walked out of the restaurant, he
brushed shoulders
with the unidentified male who was with the applicant and
Mr Haddara. Mr Rahmani apologised and continued to walk outside. The
unidentified
male shouted at him, and Mr Rahmani asked him to calm down and
offered to shake his hand. A verbal argument ensued between Mr Rahmani,
applicant, Mr Haddara and the unidentified male. Mr Senvardar attempted to
diffuse the situation, while Mr Vidovic and a female
tried to separate the
applicant and Mr Rahmani then tussled, while the others followed closely behind.
The applicant struck Mr Rahmani and a physical
fight broke out. The recorded
footage depicts Mr Rahmani being set upon by the applicant and Mr Haddara. Mr
Rahmani can be seen covering
his head in an attempt to protect himself. Mr
Haddara pulled Mr Rahmani’s denim jacket, causing Mr Rahmani to lean
The applicant then threw an uppercut punch to Mr Rahmani’s head
with a significant degree of force. The applicant aimed another
uppercut punch
at Mr Rahmani but missed. Mr Haddara then pulled Mr Rahmani’s jacket over
his head and kicked in Mr Rahmani’s
direction, but missed him. At this
time, the applicant can be seen in the recorded footage pulling his hoodie over
his head. Mr Senvardar
can be seen trying to pull Mr Rahmani away from the
attack. Another male can also be seen attempting to pull Mr Haddara away from
Mr Rahmani, but Mr Haddara would not let go.
female patron tried to diffuse the situation and separate Mr Haddara and Mr
Rahmani. She tried to dodge punches and kicks but was
hit to the mouth and
knocked to the ground. She said that this was when Mr Vidovic intervened. Mr
Vidovic rushed towards Mr Rahmani.
He grabbed Mr Haddara around the waist from
behind and successfully swung him away from Mr Rahmani. As this was happening,
the applicant
punched Mr Senvardar.
separated Mr Haddara from Mr Rahmani, Mr Vidovic then kicked Mr Haddara,
striking his right thigh and causing him to stumble
backwards into an outdoor
restaurant umbrella. As Mr Haddara regained his balance, Mr Vidovic kicked at
him again. Mr Haddara attempted
to punch Mr Vidovic but missed. Mr Haddara
continued to move towards Mr Vidovic, who was walking backwards with both arms
and pushed Mr Haddara. While Mr Vidovic was moving backwards, the
applicant positioned himself behind Mr Vidovic. The applicant then
Vidovic, striking him with force to the back of his head, which caused Mr
Vidovic to stumble. Mr Haddara then advanced
from the front to swing another
punch at Mr Vidovic, but missed. As Mr Vidovic continued to back away, the
applicant, who was by
then to the side of Mr Vidovic, leant forward and
punched Mr Vidovic’s face. The punch had such force that it caused Mr
to fall backwards with his arms in mid-air. Mr Vidovic was unable to
brace his fall, and the back of his head hit the concrete pavement
so hard that
it bounced and hit the pavement again. Witnesses described hearing the loud
sound of Mr Vidovic’s head hitting
the concrete. One witness said that Mr
Vidovic was probably unconscious from the punch before he hit the ground.
Following the punch,
Mr Vidovic was motionless on the pavement. He was
unresponsive and bleeding from his ear and mouth.
applicant left Mr Vidovic and moved towards Mr Senvardar, who raised his arms to
create some distance between them. On the recorded
footage, the applicant can be
seen squaring off against Mr Rahmani, before fleeing the scene with Mr Haddara
and the unidentified
male. The three men drove away in the applicant’s
made multiple calls to 000. Police and paramedics arrived a short time later. Mr
Vidovic was taken to the Alfred Hospital
with life threatening injuries. He
underwent emergency neurosurgery on the same day, following which he was in a
critical condition,
and assessed as having a questionable prognosis. Mr Vidovic
sustained an extremely severe traumatic brain injury. In November 2022,
Vidovic’s treating physician assessed him as having ‘a significant
chance of non-survival’. In January 2023,
Alfred Health provided an update
from Mr Vidovic’s acquired brain injury consultant as to his
He is gradually progressing to consciousness. He is currently severely impaired
requiring full nursing care to fulfil his basic
needs. He is currently unable to
communicate in any meaningful fashion. It is likely he will remain severely
impaired and be unable
to live without a high level of physical and cognitive
support however his condition continues to change. He will require prolonged
rehabilitation.
a report provided in March 2023, the Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine
stated that Mr Vidovic’s ‘injuries were
so severe that [he] required
long-term total care due to being unable to perform the most trivial body
movements as late as January
2023’. He was assessed as ‘likely to
have a short life expectancy or a slow, incomplete recovery taking many years
ever being fully functional again’.
Rahmani was also treated at the Alfred Hospital. He suffered multiple jaw
fractures, a severely displaced left lower jawbone, and
fractures on both sides
of his nose that required specialist surgery. He also lost a tooth from the
Senvardar sustained a broken nose and was also treated at the Alfred
identifying the applicant and Mr Haddara from information provided by
Mr Senvardar and witnesses to the altercation, police
arrested the
applicant on 4 November 2022 and Mr Haddara on 10 November 2022
respectively. Both gave ‘no comment’ interviews
Sentencing reasons
dealing with the circumstances of the offending, the sentencing judge addressed
the impact of the offending on the victims.
The judge referred to a victim
impact statement written by Mr Vidovic’s brother, who spoke of the
irreversible effects of the
offending not only on Mr Vidovic, but also on his
family, whose existence had been redefined by Mr Vidovic’s profound
disabilities.
Mr Vidovic’s brother said that his family were completely
drained, financially, emotionally and physically. They found it increasingly
difficult to connect with each other or with others, with their main goal being
to remain sane amidst the immense emotional and physical
strain involved in
Mr Vidovic’s daily care. The judge referred to photographs and a
video of Mr Vidovic, which showed his ‘parlous’
state. He described
Mr Vidovic’s injuries as catastrophic, observing that he requires full
time nursing care and has lost the
ability to speak and feed himself. The judge
characterised the impact on Mr Vidovic’s family as ongoing and
judge also referred to victim impact statements from Mr Senvardar and
Mr Rahmani, in which they each referred to the significant
consequences of
the applicant’s actions, and to their grief at the condition of Mr
judge then turned to matters that were relevant to the nature and gravity of the
offending. He referred to the degree of factual
overlap between the charges and
observed that in order to avoid doubly punishing the applicant, he would
moderate the sentence imposed
on the charge of
judge described the affray as encompassing all the fighting that the applicant
engaged in during the incident. He said that the
sentence he would impose on
this charge was directed towards the applicant’s contribution to the
seriousness of the attack
on the three victims and the terror caused to those in
the vicinity. As to the assaults on Mr Rahmani and Mr Senvardar, the judge
observed that these charges encompassed the applicant’s application of
force to each of them. He said that the applicant had
been aggressive and was
heavily involved in the fighting concerning Mr Rahmani, initially striking him
and then delivering a forceful
uppercut while Mr Rahmani was being held by Mr
Haddara. The judge described the offending as conduct that had evolved, rather
being premeditated and planned. It had not involved a weapon and the
offences did not involve any intent to cause serious injury
to Mr Vidovic or
injury to Mr Rahmani or Mr Senvardar. Nonetheless, the offending was
self-evidently serious.
to the charge of recklessly causing serious injury to Mr Vidovic, the judge
described the offending as involving the delivery of
two blows to Mr Vidovic
with a clenched fist. The first blow was delivered to the back of Mr
Vidovic’s head and the second
was delivered to his face as he was walking
backwards, and brought Mr Vidovic to the ground. The judge referred to the CCTV
which depicted Mr Vidovic backing away when the applicant was to the
side of him. He inferred to the requisite standard that Mr Vidovic
did not see
the punch coming, given where the applicant was positioned and the manner in
which the applicant delivered the blow,
together with the fact that
Mr Vidovic did not take any defensive steps. The judge described Mr Vidovic
as essentially defenceless.
Mr Vidovic had not braced his fall in any manner and
had simply hit the concrete footpath. At the time the applicant struck the
Mr Vidovic did not present a threat to the applicant. At the time of the
first blow, Mr Vidovic was interacting with another person
who was engaged in
unlawful fighting. At the time of the second blow, he was backing away from the
judge observed that the applicant’s guilty plea to the charge of
recklessly causing serious injury involved an admission
that he was aware of the
probability that serious injury would result and notwithstanding this, engaged
in the relevant conduct.
The offence did not require foresight of the serious
injury sustained by Mr Vidovic, nor any intent to cause serious injury. However,
the harm caused to Mr Vidovic, which included serious physical injuries, was a
matter that the judge said he was required to take
While the applicant had
not used a weapon, a clenched fist could be a lethal weapon when used to deliver
a hard punch to a person’s
The applicant had struck
Mr Vidovic while he was vulnerable on two occasions, once from behind and once
while he was backing away.
The second blow was a forceful blow to Mr
Vidovic’s face.
judge went on:
[41] ... Notwithstanding the application of the principles in
’ case which I
will shortly deal with, [the applicant’s] moral culpability is nonetheless
high. Such an attack must carry
with it a high degree of probability that a
serious injury will result. The serious injury in this case is catastrophic.
[42] It follows that general deterrence and the court’s denunciation of
[the applicant’s] conduct must be appropriately
emphasised in my
sentencing of [him].
judge then turned to the applicant’s ‘personal mitigatory
matters’. He observed that the applicant was 28 years
old, and had been 26
at the time of the offending. His prior criminal history included a charge of
reckless conduct endangering serious
injury, concerning driving a motor vehicle,
and a charge of driving whilst
judge observed that the applicant was born in Sudan and was the third of five
siblings. His parents came from two tribes who were
at war with one another. The
extended family did not approve of his parents’ relationship and the
applicant experienced severe
mistreatment and violence at their hands, including
being hit, spat on and burnt with a cigarette lighter, being partially drowned
and being the victim of an attempted
kidnapping.
the applicant was about 7 years old, his family moved to Egypt to escape the
conflict in Sudan, during which the applicant had
been exposed to distressing
scenes and the deaths of multiple relatives and friends. In Egypt, the applicant
lived in rudimentary
conditions. Although his family were safer from the abuse
from their extended family, they were poorer and were subjected to racism,
leading the applicant’s mother to describe their treatment as being
‘worse than
judge observed that when the applicant was about 10 years old, his family moved
to Australia. They lived briefly in Brisbane before
moving into public housing
in Melbourne. The applicant found the move to Australia difficult. He initially
spoke no English and struggled
to fit in. He attended a number of primary
schools as his family moved around, causing disruption to his academic
development. The
applicant’s parents separated when the applicant was
during Year 10. He reported being bullied and socially isolated, and he was
involved in a number of fights. He reported that
the bullying, as well as his
desire to provide for his family, were the primary drivers for his decision to
leave school. Upon leaving
school, the applicant commenced an apprenticeship,
which he did not complete. He completed certificates in real estate, civil
construction,
mechanical and automotive engineering and plastering. He worked in
a cleaning business and in the construction
judge recorded that prior to his arrest, the applicant lived with his parents.
He was in a relationship and was close to his siblings.
His father worked at a
wrecking yard and his mother performed home duties. The applicant was running
his own business as a subcontractor
in the construction industry, operating
excavation equipment.
judge referred to the applicant’s history of significant drug and alcohol
abuse, which had commenced in his teenage years.
The applicant’s use of
alcohol increased in social contexts from about the age of 18. The applicant
reported that up until
the time of the offending, he was drinking about half a
bottle of spirits every second day. The applicant also commenced using cannabis
around the age of 16, as well as various other substances in his late teens. He
had not received any professional help in relation
to his substance use. On the
night of the offending, he had consumed ‘a fair bit’ of alcohol and
After being released on bail following his initial
period of remand, the applicant ceased drinking alcohol. He had relapsed in
to his drug use on a number of occasions, which he attributed to his
elevated stress. His relationship had ended due to the stress
prosecution, but the applicant was now in the early stages of a new
relationship.
judge indicated that he had considered a number of personal references filed on
the applicant’s behalf, many of which were
from family members. He had
also taken into account a report from Mr Patrick Newton, a psychologist, dated
26 April 2024. The judge
observed that the applicant had given Mr Newton an
account of the offending, based on his ‘unclear’ memory of the
which bore little resemblance to what had actually happened. Mr Newton
described the applicant’s early experiences with conflict
and instability
as leaving him wary and insecure with others and reactive in the face of
conflict. The applicant had a limited level
of insight into his emotions in
general and his anger in particular. He had ongoing difficulty identifying when
he was becoming angry,
with his anger coming upon him without warning only after
it had reached extreme levels. This meant it was difficult for him to exercise
appropriate control of his
judge referred to Mr Newton’s diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder
in partial remission. Mr Newton said that the
applicant’s post-traumatic
stress disorder was connected to the offending because it increased the
applicant’s social
anxiety and the reactivity the applicant experienced in
unfamiliar social situations. His heightened anxiety left him prone to
stronger than typical reactions and his issues with emotional
self-awareness limited his capacity to recognise his anger before it
escalated to a significant extent. Mr Newton said that each of these factors had
contributed to the applicant’s reaction
on the evening of the offending.
The applicant’s post-traumatic stress disorder and substance use disorder
combined to make
it more likely that he would engage in impulsive, aggressive
acting out towards others he perceived as threatening. Each condition
contributed to the breakdown in behavioural controls, with the specific
proportion contributed by each being impossible
to delineate at this distance in
judge stated that in light of Mr Newton’s observations, the
applicant’s insight into the factors lying behind his
offending conduct
appeared somewhat limited. He referred to the applicant’s account of being
under the influence of alcohol
and cocaine at the time of the offending. The
judge regarded this as a matter that contextualised the offending, but said that
did little to mitigate it, with its primary relevance lying in the assessment
of the applicant’s prospects of
rehabilitation.
judge went on:
[68] Both parties, prosecution and defence agree that [the applicant’s]
PTSD ought operate to modestly reduce [his] moral culpability,
and the operation
of punitive sentencing measures on [him], independently of their joint position,
in accord with
’ case. I agree.
[69] In addition, I agree with both parties that as a result of this condition
[the applicant’s] imprisonment will be more
burdensome than for another
and I allow for some modest reduction of sentence as a result of this.
judge then dealt with a number of other matters in mitigation. The applicant had
entered a guilty plea at a relatively early time
and had exhibited a degree of
remorse for his conduct. It was now more than two years since the offending and
the applicant had experienced
the anxiety and uncertainty of having the prospect
of a sentence throughout this period, as well as being subject to bail
conditions.
The applicant had also commenced a process of rehabilitation. He had
remained employed, had not re-offended and had attended a Men’s
although Mr Newton had observed that the applicant was unable to articulate the
content or benefit of the program. The applicant
had vowed to leave drug abuse
behind him, although he had only had mixed success and had not undertaken any
treatment for drug abuse.
The judge assessed the applicant’s prospects of
rehabilitation as reasonable, but stated that further work on the
applicant’s
judge indicated that he had considered various authorities placed before the
Court regarding current sentencing practices and
sentencing principles for this
emotional, psychological
and financial support of his parents and other family
members, the judge stated that he was not satisfied that there were exceptional
circumstances of family
noting that the
applicant’s counsel had not suggested that to be the
However, the judge
accepted that the applicant’s time in custody would be more burdensome
given the applicant’s concerns
including the wellbeing of his parents, given their health and related
conditions.
judge observed that the applicant’s co-offender, Mr Haddara, had pleaded
guilty in the Magistrates’ Court to one charge
of affray and one charge of
common law assault concerning Mr Rahmani. Mr Haddara had received a community
corrections order of 18
months’ duration. He had a prior history that
included appearances in 2017 for robbery and conduct endangering serious injury.
The judge said that he had had regard to the important sentencing principle of
parity, and noted that there were a variety of matters
that could justify
disparity in sentence. He said that in sentencing the applicant, he had had
regard to: the roles of each of Mr
Haddara and the applicant in the altercation;
the different charges they faced; and the personal matters that had been made
to him. The applicant’s charges were more serious, his role was more
aggressive and his culpability was significantly greater.
The applicant had
commenced the fighting by striking Mr Rahmani, he had caused serious injury to
Mr Vidovic, including by striking
him while he was backing away, and he had also
engaged with Mr Senvardar. The applicant’s contribution to the affray
was greater
than Mr Haddara’s given his more active and violent role in
the fighting. In these circumstances, the applicant fell to be
sentenced in a
very different factual context to Mr
judge described his role in sentencing as requiring him to address the
fundamental sentencing aims of punishment, general and
specific deterrence,
rehabilitation, denunciation and protection of the community. He observed that
he must balance matters such
as the seriousness of the relevant offence, the
applicant’s culpability, his personal circumstances, the community’s
interest in deterring and denouncing the applicant’s conduct, and the
community’s interest in ensuring so far as possible
that the applicant is
rehabilitated. He said that in all the circumstances, nothing other than a
substantial term of imprisonment
was appropriate, particularly given the gravity
of the applicant’s conduct as an example of recklessly causing serious
to Mr Vidovic.
Proposed grounds one and two:
Application of
is convenient to deal with proposed grounds one and two together, given the
overlap between the matters and submissions relevant
to these grounds.
Submissions
applicant commenced by emphasising the following aspects of the evidence
concerning his childhood. He was born in Wad Madani,
the capital of Al Jazirah
state in war-torn east-central Sudan. As a young child, he was exposed to the
deaths of multiple relatives
and friends. The applicant saw corpses with
multiple bullet wounds and bullets hitting his house. He also recalls being
his extended family, including by being beaten, tortured, partially
drowned in a large water barrel and burnt with cigarettes. At
a young age, he
was kidnapped by relatives, but his family managed to get him back before he was
taken too far away. After the applicant’s
family fled Sudan when he was 6
or 7 years old, seeking refuge in Egypt, they lived with a relative in a single
room and were provided
with insufficient food for two to three years. The
applicant did not attend school, was unwelcome because of his race, and
his family’s time in Egypt as the worst time in his life. When
he was 10 years old, the applicant’s family sought asylum
in Australia. On
arrival, the applicant and his family spoke no English. The applicant changed
school countless times. The applicant
recalls his parents bickering frequently
as they attempted to navigate their new life in Australia. He started using
alcohol and
cannabis in his mid-teens, which progressed to the use of other
drugs, including cocaine. He did not receive any mental health treatment
drug or alcohol treatment prior to the offending.
applicant submitted that the judge’s treatment of the unchallenged
evidence concerning his childhood involved two specific
the judge failed to significantly moderate the applicant’s moral
culpability as a result of his childhood deprivation
and the effects of that
deprivation. The applicant submitted that while a causal link is not required
for childhood deprivation to
be a mitigatory consideration, it is an important
consideration in reducing moral
culpability.
the applicant submitted, his traumatic background had a clear causal connection
to his offending, warranting a significant reduction
in his moral culpability.
The applicant referred to Mr Newton’s unchallenged opinion that:
(a) the applicant’s early experiences of conflict and instability had left
him wary and insecure in his interactions with others
and reactive in the face
of conflict;
(b) the applicant has ongoing difficulty identifying the physical cues that
signal he is becoming angry, and experiences anger as
coming upon him without
warning only after it has reached extreme levels, making it difficult for him to
exercise appropriate control
of his anger;
(c) the applicant continues to be affected by the impacts of traumatisation,
isolation and other adverse early experiences that dominated
his childhood and
have left him feeling insecure and unsafe;
(d) the applicant’s anxiety is particularly intense in social settings and
especially so in contexts where he is with others
whom he does not know —
in such situations, he is prone to being particularly on edge and sensitive to
indications of danger
or threat; and
(e) at the time of the offending, the applicant was experiencing particular
emotional stress because his father had disappeared while
visiting Sudan six
weeks prior, and his brother had recently been killed in Sudan.
applicant submitted that on the plea, his senior counsel had relied generally on
the principles in
Bugmy v The
Although his counsel
had not explicitly submitted that there should be a significant moderation of
moral culpability on account of
his childhood deprivation and its consequences,
this was said to be implicit in counsel’s submissions. Counsel had
to the paragraph of the High Court’s decision in
which the Court speaks of the potential for an offender’s childhood
experiences to explain their conduct, such that their
moral culpability may be
substantially reduced.
applicant submitted that the judge had wrongly allowed only for ‘some
sensible reduction’ of the applicant’s
moral culpability, which
remained ‘high’. He submitted that his moral culpability could not
logically remain ‘high’
principles were properly
taken into account, particularly in circumstances where his moral culpability
was also to be reduced on account
of the first limb in
The applicant
sought to reinforce this submission by pointing to the fact that, in the part of
his reasons dealing with the gravity
of the offending, the judge did not
acknowledge that as a result of his significant childhood deprivation, the
applicant’s
perception of risk had been altered, particularly in social
situations involving people he does not know.
to whether the effects of his childhood deprivation gave rise to a need to
prioritise protection of the community in the sentencing
exercise, the applicant
referred to Mr Newton’s evidence that his conditions were treatable.
He had commenced mental health
treatment by the time he was sentenced, and he
had ceased drinking and drug taking, albeit that there had been some relapses
his drug taking. Further, the applicant submitted that the prosecution had
not contended on the plea that protecting the community
from the applicant was a
matter of particular importance, and the judge had made no such finding.
the judge failed to moderate general deterrence on account of the
applicant’s childhood deprivation and resulting post-traumatic
disorder, as required by both
principles. In
relation to
principles, the applicant submitted that where violence
lacking premeditation has resulted in serious injury or death, childhood
deprivation
can reduce the need for general
deterrence.
, the applicant had submitted to the judge that
limbs 1 to 5 applied, and the prosecution agreed that limbs 1 to 4 applied.
While the judge applied
limb 1 (reduction of moral culpability)
and limb 5 (burden of sentence),
he had failed to acknowledge, let alone give effect to,
(moderation of general deterrence) or limb 4 (moderation of specific
deterrence). To the contrary, the judge stated that general
deterrence must be
‘appropriately
emphasised’,
said to suggest that he regarded general deterrence as a factor that was to be
emphasised rather than moderated.
applicant submitted that the judge’s reference to the operation of
‘punitive sentencing measures’, which he
said the parties had agreed
should be ‘modestly’ reduced as a result of the applicant’s
post-traumatic stress disorder,
should not be interpreted to include general or specific deterrence. General and
specific deterrence were not ‘punitive sentencing
measures’. The
judge’s reference to ‘punitive sentencing measures’ should
instead be understood as a reference
to just deserts or proportionate
sentencing.
response, the respondent submitted that the applicant’s senior counsel had
not submitted on the plea that the application
required a significant reduction in moral culpability. The position of both
parties was that there should be ‘some’
reduction in the
applicant’s moral culpability. The respondent pointed to the submission of
the applicant’s counsel at
the plea hearing that if the judge was
satisfied of the evidentiary foundation for the
submission,
recognition would need to be given to it ‘in the sense that there would be
reduction in moral culpability’. It was not, the respondent
submitted, implicit in such a submission that the applicant sought
significant
substantial
reduction in moral culpability. The
applicant is bound by the way his counsel put his case below. The judge had
reduced the applicant’s
moral culpability in accordance with the agreed
position of the parties. Further, there was nothing wrong with the
applicant’s
moral culpability remaining ‘high’, because moral
culpability can be reduced from ‘very high’ to ‘high’.
Here, it was appropriate that the applicant’s moral culpability, even
after a reduction to reflect the effects of his childhood
deprivation, remained
respondent submitted that when looking at
principles, it was
necessary to balance the potential mitigating effect of the effects of childhood
deprivation on the offender’s
moral culpability against a potential need
to protect the community from the offender in light of the effects of their
deprivation.
evidence of Mr Newton was that the applicant’s heightened anxiety left him
prone to experience stronger than typical
reactions and that his issues with
emotional self-awareness limited his capacity to recognise his anger before it
had escalated.
This ‘excessive’ reactivity meant that protection of
the community was very important in the sentencing exercise.
respondent submitted that when speaking of the need to ‘appropriately
emphasise’ general deterrence, the judge was
indicating that the principle
of general deterrence was to be applied in a reasonable and measured fashion and
in accordance with
the law. And when the judge spoke of allowing for a
‘sensible’ reduction in the applicant’s moral
culpability,
the judge was
indicating that he was allowing for an appropriate and reasonable reduction in
the applicant’s moral culpability,
in circumstances where an issue
concerning protection of the community squarely arose from Mr Newton’s
report. The respondent
acknowledged that the judge had not expressly referred to
the need for community protection when dealing with
principles.
However, the respondent submitted that reading the sentencing reasons as a
whole, it was clear that the judge had dealt
carefully and given full weight to the applicant’s deprived background.
This formed part of the overall sentencing
synthesis, in a case where there were
very strong considerations pointing in opposite directions.
in relation to
, the respondent submitted that the judge had
applied and given proper weight to the four enlivened limbs of
Senior counsel
for the applicant at the plea hearing had indicated his agreement with the
prosecution’s position that
limbs 1 to 4 were enlivened to
a ‘moderate degree’. The judge had also appropriately noted the
factors that reduced the
mitigatory effect of the
principles.
judge’s reference to ‘punitive sentencing measures’, the
respondent acknowledged that the purely punitive
sentencing purposes of the
Sentencing Act 1991
were just punishment and denunciation, but submitted
that it was not possible to be certain that this was what the judge was
to when he spoke of modestly reducing the operation of those measures.
The respondent accepted that the judge did not explicitly
state that he had
moderated general deterrence, but emphasised the need to look at the overall
sentencing exercise and view the judge’s
reasons in the context of the
discussions at the plea hearing, which evinced the agreed position of the
parties as to the application
reject the applicant’s submission that the judge erred in his application
principles.
consideration of proposed grounds one and two is informed by the position taken
by the parties below. As this Court said in
Romero v The Queen
sentencing appeal is not the occasion for the revision and reformulation of the
case presented below.
does not lightly entertain arguments that could have been, but which were not,
advanced on the plea.
relation to
principles, the applicant’s senior counsel
referred on the plea to the prosecution’s concession that, in the event
judge was satisfied of the evidentiary foundation for the applicant’s
submission, ‘there would be recognition given to it in the
sense that there would be a reduction in moral culpability’.
applicant’s counsel did not contend for a ‘significant’ or
‘substantial’ reduction in the applicant’s
moral culpability.
This may be thought unsurprising in circumstances where, by his plea of guilty
to the offence of recklessly causing
serious injury to Mr Vidovic, the applicant
had acknowledged that he was aware of the probability that his conduct would
cause serious
injury to Mr Vidovic and that he had engaged in that conduct
regardless.
in conceding the application of
principles in the event of an
evidentiary foundation, the prosecution emphasised that protection of the
community was a relevant matter,
given the serious nature of the offending and
Mr Newton’s assessment that the applicant presented a moderate risk of
violent offending in circumstances where he was yet to address his
substance use issues.
relation to
principles, senior counsel for the applicant referred
on the plea to the prosecution’s acceptance that
4 arose ‘to a moderate degree’. Senior counsel went on:
I can only by way of submission I agree with that, Your Honour. I’m not
saying this is, you know, someone who’s in the
grip of schizophrenia or
something of that nature so we’re not talking about severe curtailments of
moral culpability, specific
deterrence, general deterrence but we would join
with the submission that there should be moderation, moderation, in respects to
findings as to moral culpability. You’ve already got the
consideration but this is additional to that,
in turn then reduced emphasis
on specific deterrence and general deterrence,
not savagely reduced but
moderate reduction
pause to observe that it is clear from the submissions on the plea that the
prosecution’s position that
limbs 1 to 4 warranted only
‘modest’ moderation of general and specific deterrence was driven by
the evidence about the
applicant’s consumption of alcohol and cocaine on
the night of the offending. The prosecution submitted that this had
significantly
contributed to the offending, and was not a matter in mitigation.
The prosecutor referred to the applicant’s acknowledgement
Mr Newton that his substance use had led to problems in his life, including
by disinhibiting him and contributing to a wide range
of behavioural
difficulties. In this Court, the applicant conceded that his senior counsel had
not contested these propositions.
judge’s application of
principles must be
viewed in the light of these submissions.
Consistently
with these submissions, the judge allowed for a ‘sensible’ reduction
in the applicant’s moral culpability
based on his ‘background of
disadvantage and dysfunction’. Contrary to the applicant’s
submission, it was not illogical
for his moral culpability to have remained
‘high’ after the judge allowed for this ‘sensible
reduction’.
In circumstances where the offending involved a vicious attack
on a vulnerable person who posed no threat to the applicant, and where
applicant was aware of the probability that his actions would result in serious
injury, there is nothing illogical about the
judge’s finding that the
applicant’s moral culpability remained ‘high’.
to the judge’s approach to limbs 3 and 4 of
, we reject the
applicant’s submission that, by speaking of the need to
‘appropriately emphasise’ general deterrence,
the judge was
indicating that he regarded general deterrence as something to be emphasised,
not moderated. Just as the applicant’s
senior counsel had done when he
spoke of the need for a ‘reduced’ emphasis on general deterrence,
the judge was qualifying
the emphasis to be given to this sentencing factor, by
indicating that it was only to be emphasised to an extent that was appropriate
in the circumstances of the applicant’s case. While the judge did not
specifically state that he was moderating the role of
specific deterrence, this
may reflect the fact that specific deterrence was a matter that received little
attention in the prosecution’s
submissions on the plea. The prosecution
submitted that in the circumstances of the case, specific deterrence was a
matter of only
‘some’ relevance.
reading the reasons as a whole, the judge’s reference to a modest
reduction in the operation of ‘punitive sentencing
measures ... in accord
’ case’ may well have been intended to capture
general and specific deterrence. We accept that principles of deterrence
commonly be described as ‘punitive sentencing measures’. However, it
is telling that the judge’s reference
to a reduction in the operation of
‘punitive sentencing measures’ was accompanied by a reference to
, as well as a reference to the agreed position of the parties,
which encompassed the operation of limbs 3 and 4 of
Proposed ground three:
proposed ground three, the applicant submitted that there was an unjustified
disparity between his sentence and the sentence imposed
on Mr Haddara, giving
rise to a ‘justifiable sense of
grievance’.
pleaded guilty in the Magistrates’ Court to one charge of affray and one
charge of common law assault of Mr Rahmani.
The applicant submitted that the
charges against Mr Haddara were equivalent to charges 2 and 3 on his indictment.
Although he accepted
that his role was greater, in that he had initiated the
violence and was a more active participant in the violence, the applicant
submitted that he and Mr Haddara were acting in concert and were sentenced on
the same factual basis. While Mr Haddara received an
18 month community
corrections order, the applicant was sentenced to 12 months’ imprisonment
for the affray and 22 months’
imprisonment for the common law assault
of Mr Rahmani.
applicant submitted that the fact that Mr Haddara was sentenced in the
Magistrates’ Court was irrelevant to the application
of the parity
principle. It is the maximum penalty for an offence that indicates the gravity
of the offence as directed by Parliament.
The jurisdictional limit that applies
in the Magistrates’ Court does not alter that legislative indicia of the
gravity of the
offence; it simply puts a ceiling on the penalty that is capable
of being imposed and does not form part of the instinctive synthesis
appropriate sentence is arrived
The applicant submitted
that, because the sentence imposed on Mr Haddara did not reach the
imprisonment, the principle of parity
applied to the sentences imposed on the applicant in the County Court and the
sentence imposed
on Mr Haddara for the equivalent offences in the
Magistrates’ Court.
judge, the applicant submitted, approached the question of parity in a global
way, and thereby failed to engage with the need
to compare the sentence imposed
on Mr Haddara with the sentences imposed on the applicant in respect of
charges 2 and 3. The significant
difference in the sentences imposed on the two
men was not justified. Both men were the same age and both pleaded guilty. Mr
had a more serious and relevant criminal history, which included prior
convictions for: robbery, for which Mr Haddara had received
imprisonment; reckless conduct endangering serious injury; and drug possession.
In contrast, the applicant had never received
a sentencing disposition greater
than a fine. He had been fined without conviction for offences that included the
charge of reckless
conduct endangering serious injury, and fined with conviction
for driving whilst suspended. The delay in the applicant’s case
year longer than the delay experienced by Mr Haddara, which prolonged the
applicant’s experience of the additional
punishment of having the matter
hanging over his head and being the subject of restrictive bail conditions. In
that time, the applicant
had also progressed his rehabilitation by not
reoffending.
principles had no application to Mr
Haddara, and there was no evidence of any burden that his imprisonment would
have on any family
members. Further, in sentencing the applicant, the judge had
indicated that he was moderating the sentence imposed for the affray
the factual overlap with the other offending, a factor that did not apply to
Mr Haddara.
applicant submitted that the fact that he was charged with a more serious charge
of recklessly causing serious injury, which Mr
Haddara did not face, was not
relevant to the question of parity, because parity must be applied between
individual charges and is
not a matter of looking at the total effective
However, he accepted
that it may be appropriate to take the existence of a more serious charge into
account as part of the backdrop
in certain circumstances. For example, the
existence of such a charge may make a community corrections order an
inappropriate disposition,
in which case the question will become whether the
length of the sentence of imprisonment to be imposed is appropriate, given the
application of parity.
the applicant submitted that the demands of the parity principle, and the
principle of totality, may require the imposition
of a particularly lenient
sentence to properly accommodate the imperative of equal
respondent submitted that the judge properly addressed the issue of
The differences in the
roles of the applicant and Mr Haddara, which were acknowledged by the judge,
justified the different sentences
imposed. It was the involvement of the
applicant that had taken the fight from a low level altercation ‘up
several notches’.
Had the applicant not been involved in the altercation,
the outcome would have been very different.
respondent submitted that the disparity in sentence was further justified by the
different context created by the applicant’s
principal charge of
recklessly causing serious injury. Further, the sentence imposed for charge 1
rendered the applicant ineligible
for a combination sentence, and without more,
therefore prevented the imposition of a community corrections order for the
other charged
respondent also pointed to the substantial concurrency ordered by the judge,
resulting in the applicant only needing to serve
11 months’ imprisonment
for charges 2 and 3, a period that might be regarded as further moderated by
eligibility for parole.
In circumstances where a community corrections order is
regarded as a serious
punishment,
carrying the risks
of resentencing and of substitution of imprisonment, the sentence imposed on Mr
Haddara is not so clearly disparate
as to justify or mandate intervention,
particularly as Mr Haddara was a less culpable offender.
an appellate court to intervene with a sentence on the basis of disparity, the
disparity between the sentences imposed on co‑offenders
must be such that
the difference is ‘marked’ or ‘manifest’. In other
words, the disparity must engender an
objectively justifiable sense of grievance
on the part of the offender on whom the heavier sentence is imposed — on
that it gives the appearance that justice has not been
are not persuaded that the sentences imposed on the applicant in respect of the
affray and the common law assault on Mr Rahmani
engender an objectively
justifiable sense of grievance when compared with the sentence imposed on Mr
Haddara for the same offences.
The factual context for the two sentencing
exercises was different.
relation to the common law assault of Mr Rahmani, it was the applicant who
caused Mr Rahmani to sustain his injuries, by striking
him twice to the head.
Although Mr Haddara was involved in the altercation with Mr Rahmani, he had
a much lesser role, which consisted
of: pulling at Mr Rahmani’s denim
jacket, causing him to lean into a position where the applicant could punch him;
Mr Rahmani’s jacket over his head; and kicking in Mr
Rahmani’s direction.
relation to the affray, it was the applicant who commenced the fighting, by
striking Mr Rahmani. It was the applicant who struck
Mr Vidovic and Mr Senvardar
during the course of the fighting. Recognising the need to moderate his sentence
for the affray to reflect
the degree of factual overlap between the affray and
his other offending, the applicant still fell to be sentenced as the more
and culpable contributor to the affray.
the judge recognised, not only did the applicant and Mr Haddara have different
roles in relation to the affray and the common law
assault of Mr Rahmani, but
the applicant fell to be sentenced in circumstances where he had also pleaded
guilty to other charges
arising from the altercation, namely recklessly causing
serious injury to Mr Vidovic, and common law assault of Mr Senvardar. This
context changed the balance of the sentencing purposes with respect to his
offending, elevating the weight to be given to deterrence,
denunciation and
community protection, and reducing the weight to be given to matters in
mitigation.
to the matters in mitigation, we accept that there were some matters in the
applicant’s favour when compared with Mr Haddara.
We accept that Mr
Haddara had more significant and relevant prior convictions, that he experienced
less delay than the applicant
before the resolution of his charges, that neither
considerations were enlivened in sentencing Mr
Haddara, and that there appears to have been no evidence of family hardship in
event Mr Haddara was incarcerated. However, we consider that none of these
matters, considered alone or in combination, render the
difference between the
sentences imposed on the applicant in respect of charges 2 and 3 and the
sentence imposed on Mr Haddara to
be unjustifiable. To the contrary, the
disparity in the sentences was justified.
Proposed ground four: Manifest
proposed ground four, the applicant submitted that, having regard to all
relevant matters, the individual sentences on charges
1 to 4, the orders for
cumulation, and the non-parole period, were each manifestly excessive.
support of this submission, the applicant relied on the following
(a) the offending was spontaneous, no weapons were used and there was no
material age difference between the applicant and the victims;
(b) his deprived background;
(c) his impaired mental functioning;
(d) his early plea of guilty, his genuine remorse and his acceptance of
responsibility for the offending;
(e) his prospects of rehabilitation, which were assessed by the judge as
reasonable;
(f) the delay of two years in his case, during which time he did not reoffend,
progressed his rehabilitation and suffered the additional
punishment of the
matter hanging over his head,
well as being subject to strict bail conditions; and
(g) the fact that the judge found that custody would be more onerous for him due
to his anguish at not being able to care for his
mother and father, both of whom
have serious medical conditions.
applicant accepted that the objective gravity of his offending was high and that
Mr Vidovic’s life-changing injuries were
an important matter to be
taken into account. However, the applicant submitted that the seriousness of the
injuries sustained by
Mr Vidovic could not be permitted to
‘swamp’ all other sentencing
considerations.
Further, the
applicant pointed to the prosecution’s concession on the plea that he was
not to be sentenced on the common law
assault charges on the basis that he
intended to or was reckless as to causing injury to Mr Rahmani or Mr
applicant also emphasised the principles of parity and totality. He submitted
that although the principle of totality was important
in his case, there was no
mention of the principle in the judge’s reasons. The judge’s
reference to the need to avoid
was different from an
application of the principle of totality, which requires the sentencing court to
stand back and consider whether
the overall sentence is just and appropriate,
and for the judge to be mindful that the severity of a term of imprisonment
exponentially with the length of time to be served.
applicant also pointed to the maximum penalties for the offences. He submitted
that despite his significant matters in mitigation,
including his lack of any
relevant criminal history, his sentences comprised a significant portion of the
maximum penalty for each
of the offences, including 37 per cent of the maximum
penalty for the assault on Mr Rahmani.
the applicant submitted that each of the four comparable cases that the
prosecution had relied on at the plea hearing, in
which sentences of multiple
years had been imposed for the offence of recklessly causing serious injury,
could be distinguished on
the basis of different aggravating and mitigating
response, the respondent submitted that the individual sentences, the total
effective sentence and the non-parole period appropriately
balanced the gravity
of the offending, the applicant’s moral culpability, his matters in
mitigation and other relevant sentencing
considerations. While accepting that
the applicant’s sentence might be seen to be ‘slightly at the
sterner end’,
the respondent submitted that it was well within range for
offending of this kind, being random street violence involving catastrophic
injuries to a stranger outside a bar at night.
respondent submitted that the objective gravity of the offending and the
applicant’s moral culpability were appropriately
found to be high, having
regard to the fact that: the applicant initiated the violence; he assaulted
three victims in public; while
he did not use a weapon, he used a clenched fist
to forcefully strike his victims; he punched Mr Vidovic when Mr Vidovic was
and defenceless; he left the scene and provided no assistance to Mr
Vidovic, who was laying gravely injured on the ground, or to
his two other
victims; and each of his victims suffered physical injuries, including the
catastrophic injuries sustained by Mr Vidovic.
The respondent also emphasised
the profound consequences of the offending for Mr Vidovic’s family, as
well its impact on Mr
Rahmani and Mr Senvardar. The respondent relied on the
fact that the applicant was under the influence of alcohol and cocaine at
time of the offending, and that general deterrence and denunciation loom large
in offending that involves alcohol fuelled violence.
respondent acknowledged the judge’s findings and observations as to the
applicant’s guilty plea and remorse; the delay
in the proceedings; the
applicant’s prospects of and efforts at rehabilitation; and the burden on
the applicant of his time
in custody. The respondent submitted that the judge
was careful to avoid double punishment as between charges 1, 3 and 4, and charge
2, and moderated the sentence on charge 2 accordingly.
for cumulation, the respondent submitted that each of the orders for cumulation
on the base sentence imposed for the principal
charge of recklessly causing
injury were necessary. The charge of affray was a different matter to the
principal charge, and the
two assaults involved different victims to the
principal charge. The respondent emphasised that any cumulation must be real and
tokenistic, and must reflect the relevant wrongdoing. While the orders
cumulating 7 months and 4 months of the sentences imposed
for the two assaults
might be thought to be ‘a bit stern’, the amount of cumulation was
certainly not excessive. The
order cumulating 4 months of the sentence imposed
for the affray was ‘quite moderate’.
sentence will only be manifestly excessive if it is ‘wholly outside the
range of sentencing options
available’.
As this Court
has often observed, this is a ‘stringent’ test, which is difficult
to satisfy.
The applicant must
show that something has gone obviously, plainly or badly wrong in the exercise
of the sentencing discretion.
The Court must be ‘driven to conclude that there must have been some
misapplication of
principle’.
considered each of the matters upon which the applicant and the respondent rely,
we are not persuaded that the applicant’s
individual sentences, the orders
for cumulation or the non-parole period are manifestly excessive.
four offences constituted serious instances of each crime, with the charge of
recklessly causing serious injury being a particularly
serious example of that
offence. Mr Vidovic was vulnerable and defenceless when he was attacked by the
applicant. By his plea of
guilty to this charge, the applicant accepted that he
had attacked Mr Vidovic in circumstances where he was aware of the probability
that his actions would cause serious injury to Mr Vidovic. The sentence imposed
on this charge is the largest component of the applicant’s
total effective
sentence, comprising 5 years and 3 months’ imprisonment. The maximum
penalty for this offence is 15 years’
imprisonment.
of the offences was committed in company in a public place, in the presence of a
number of bystanders. Each involved unprovoked
violence that was fuelled by the
applicant’s use of alcohol and drugs. This Court has described such
conduct as a scourge from
which the community requires
protection.
applicant’s moral culpability was high and the consequences of his
offending were grave, particularly for Mr Vidovic and
his family. The
applicant’s brief, spontaneous outburst of violence has had enduring and
devastating consequences for a number
of innocent people.
the applicant could point to a number of matters in mitigation, including his
plea of guilty, his profound childhood deprivation,
his impaired mental
functioning, his expression of remorse, his limited prior convictions, his
prospects of rehabilitation, the delay
in the resolution of his charges and the
burden on him of his time in custody, a significant period of imprisonment was
nonetheless
necessary. The individual sentences of imprisonment were not outside
the available range of sentencing options. Nor was the non-parole
which the applicant did not direct any specific submissions.
for cumulation in respect of the sentences for affray and the common law
assaults were also necessary, given the distinct nature
of the wrongdoing
underpinning each charge. As this Court has stated, the essence of the offence
of affray is unlawful violence that
creates terror in bystanders, which makes it
distinct from offences against individual
Both Mr Rahmani and Mr
Senvardar sustained significant injuries as a result of their assaults. Orders
cumulating a total of 15 months’
imprisonment in respect of the affray and
the two assaults were not outside the available range.
application for leave to appeal will be
Contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
Contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
This charge related to the
victim Mr Vidovic.
This charge related to the
victim Mr Rahmani.
This charge related to the
victim Mr Senvardar.
DPP v Suliman
, [29]–[30], [37] (‘Reasons’).
Reasons, [31].
Reasons, [32].
Reasons, [33]–[35].
Reasons, [36].
Sentencing Act
ss 5(2)(daa)
Eade v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 142
(2012) 35 VR 526
[34] (Maxwell P, Neave JA and Lasry AJA);
[2012] VSCA 142
Best v The Queen
[2015] VSCA 151
(2015) 46 VR 196
210 [70]–[71] (Ashley, Redlich and Priest JJA);
[2015] VSCA 151.
Ashdown v The
[2011] VSCA 408
(2011) 37 VR 341
, 349 [23] (Maxwell P);
[2011] VSCA 408.
Reasons, [43], [45]. The
applicant had also been convicted of possessing a dangerous article, which
appears to have been a tyre
iron. This offence took place in May 2022, prior to
the present offending. The applicant was convicted and fined in August 2023,
after the present offending.
Reasons, [46], [48].
Reasons, [49]–[51],
Reasons, [50], [55],
Reasons, [64], [67].
Reasons, [70]–[71],
Referring to
(2010) 30 VR 589
[2010] VSCA 105
Reasons, [86]–[88],
[91]–[101].
Reasons, [102]–[104],
referring to
[2010] VSCA 105
(2010) 30 VR 589
, 595 [20] (Maxwell P, Nettle,
Neave, Redlich and Weinberg JJA);
[2010] VSCA 105.
[105]–[107].
Reasons, [88], [108].
DPP v Terrick
[2009] VSCA 220
(2009) 24 VR 457
, 468 [46] (Maxwell P, Redlich JA and Robson AJA);
(2013) 249 CLR 571;
Referring to
(2013) 249 CLR 571, 595 [44] (French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and
[2013] HCA 37.
(2007) 16 VR 269
Munda v Western
[2013] HCA 38
(2013) 249 CLR 600
, 620 [54] (French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel,
Gageler and Keane JJ);
[2013] HCA 38
DPP v Atkinson
[2024] VSC 286
(Hollingworth J).
Referring to Reasons, [41],
Reasons, [42].
Reasons, [68].
249 CLR 571, 595 [44]–[45] (French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and
[2013] HCA 37.
Reasons, [53].
Referring to Reasons,
Referring to Reasons,
Romero v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 45
(2011) 32 VR 486
, 489 [11] (Redlich JA, Buchanan JA agreeing at 494 [28], Mandie
JA agreeing at 494 [29]);
[2011] VSCA 45.
Emphasis added.
Lowe v The Queen
[1984] HCA 46
(1984) 154 CLR 606
, 610 (Gibbs CJ, Wilson J agreeing at 616), 613
[1984] HCA 46
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR
, 301 (Dawson and Gummow JJ), 314 (McHugh J), 323 (Gummow J), 327 (Kirby
[1997] HCA 26
Postiglione
Hansford v His
Honour Judge Neesham
[1995] VICSC 58
[1995] 2 VR 233
, 236–7 (Brooking J, Hampel J
agreeing at 241, Smith J agreeing at 241);
[2007] VSCA 137
(2007) 172 A Crim R
, 116‑–17 [17] (Nettle JA, Chernov JA agreeing at 120 [36],
Vincent JA agreeing at 120 [37]);
[2007] VSCA 137.
Greaves v The
[2020] NSWCCA 140
, [66] (Cavanagh J, Hoeben CJ at CL agreeing at [1],
Hamill J agreeing at [2]);
Biba v The King
[2023] VSCA 122
[2020] VSCA 329.
Postiglione
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
, 301–2 (Dawson and Gummow JJ);
[1997] HCA 26.
Citing, eg,
[2011] VSCA 238
, [19]–[24] (Hansen JA, Harper JA agreeing at
Referring to Reasons,
Boulton v The
(2014) 46 VR 308
[2014] VSCA 342.
Kellway (a pseudonym)
[2023] VSCA 109
, [126] (Emerton P, Niall and Kaye JJA);
v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 190
, [17] (Buchanan JA, Bongiorno JA agreeing at
[26], Osborn JA agreeing at [27]);
Green v The Queen
[2011] HCA 49
(2011) 244 CLR 462
474–5 [31] (French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ);
[2011] HCA 49.
[1982] 2 NSWLR 517
, 519 (Street CJ, Moffitt P agreeing at 522, Nagle CJ at
CL agreeing at 522);
Mill v The Queen
[1988] HCA 70
(1988) 166 CLR 59
, 66 (Wilson,
Deane, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ);
[1988] HCA 70.
[2010] VSCA 105
(2010) 30 VR 589
, 595 [20] (Maxwell P, Nettle, Neave, Redlich and Weinberg JJA);
[2010] VSCA 105.
Pang v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 5
, [43] (Priest and Santamaria JJA);
[2012] VSCA 142
(2012) 35 VR
, 532 [30] (Maxwell P, Neave JA and Lasry AJA);
[2012] VSCA 142.
Reasons, [32].
The four cases were:
Wahame v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 4
Mazzonetto v The Queen
[2022] VSCA
Apineru v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 206
DPP v Betrayhani
278 A Crim R 341
[2019] VSCA 150.
Clarkson v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 157
(2011) 32 VR 361
, 384 [89] (Maxwell ACJ, Nettle, Neave, Redlich and
Harper JJA);
[2011] VSCA 157
’). See also
Lowndes v The Queen
[1999] HCA 29
(1999) 195 CLR 665
, 671–2 [15] (Gleeson CJ,
Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne and Callinan JJ);
[1999] HCA 29.
[2011] VSCA 157
(2011) 32 VR
, 384 [89] (Maxwell ACJ, Nettle, Neave, Redlich and Harper JJA);
[2011] VSCA
Young v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 149
, [128] (Ashley, Whelan and Kaye JJA).
[2015] HCA 39
, 559 [28] (French CJ, Keane and Nettle JJ);
[2015] HCA 39.
Armstrong v The King
[2024] VSCA 316
, [59] (McLeish, Boyce and Orr JJA). See also
[2014] VSCA 308
(2014) 44 VR 471
, 472 [1] (Maxwell P, Weinberg and Santamaria JJA);
[2014] VSCA 308.
Buddle v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 232
, [21] (Priest and Neave JJA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (694 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter