URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/41.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:46:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Moore v Ararat Rural City Council [1996] VicRp 41; [1996] 1 VR 572 (4 March 1996)
MOORE v ARARAT RURAL CITY COUNCIL
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA
04 March 1996
The writ in this proceeding was filed on 29 March 1994. The plaintiff sought trial by a judge and jury of six.
S15(1) of the
Juries Act 1967
provides that: The party entering any civil case for trial by a jury of six in the Supreme Court shall pay to the prothonotary the
prescribed fee for a jury of six.
The plaintiff complied with the requirements of that subsection.
S15(3) of the Act provides that: A party who required a civil case to be tried by jury shall pay to the sheriff or any prescribed
officer of the court the prescribed fee for a jury for the second and every subsequent day of the trial. -
Subs(3a), in so far as it is relevant provides as follows: The fees required to be paid under subs(3) shall be paid on the day before
the day in respect of which they are paid ...
It is convenient to refer also to subs(4): If any sum referred to in subs(3) is not so paid then the court shall unless such sum
is paid by any other party discharge the jury and proceed to finish the hearing of the trial and determine it without a jury notwithstanding
that it commenced with a jury.
Today is the second day of the trial. The plaintiff has not paid the jury fees for this day. Subs(3) required them to be paid yesterday.
Plaintiff's counsel informed me this morning that the defendant was not put on notice that the plaintiff did not intend to pay today's
jury fees. Counsel for the defendant told me that he first became aware that jury fees had not been paid was when I raised the matter
with counsel for the plaintiff this morning.
I am bound to say that I regard the course adopted by the plaintiff's side as trickery. But the question is whether it is now open
to the defendant to pay the jury fees, its counsel having informed me not only that his client desires to do so, but that fees were
paid in fact during a short adjournment after the issue first emerged.
Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that it was not open to the defendant to pay the jury fees. That was said to be a consequence
of the operation of subs(3a) upon subs(4); that is, it was submitted that subs(4) should be read as if, after the words "unless such
sum is paid by any other party" there should be inserted the words "on the day before the day in respect of which they are paid".
Neither counsel was able to refer me to any authority precisely in point. Senior counsel for the plaintiff said that he had recollection
of a ruling by Southwell J in a case where a plaintiff who had set a matter down for trial by jury inadvertently failed to pay jury
fees for the second or a subsequent day the other party declining to do so. There his Honour, I was told, held that subs(3a), even
though the failure to pay by the plaintiff had been inadvertent, operated so as to require discharge of the jury.
In the short time that has been available to me I have been able to locate three proceedings in which the party requiring trial by
jury inadvertently failed to pay the jury fees. In two of them the other party did not seek to exercise the opportunity available
by subs(4). In the third case the other party did seek to avail itself of that opportunity.
The earlier of the cases falling into the first category is Pryce v Melbourne and Metropolitan Tramways Board (unreported, 1982)
Pryce v Melbourne and Metropolitan Tramways Board. In May 1982, in an unreported ruling, O'Bryan J held that the inadvertent plaintiff
could not remedy its default, and that (subject to a presently irrelevant consideration) the trial must proceed without a jury where
the defendant did not wish to pay the jury fees. Subs(4) had mandatory operation in such circumstances. On 18 May, delivering reasons,
his Honour contrasted the original verbiage of subs(3) with amendments effected to it by Act 9620 of 1981; and he referred to the
insertion of subs(3a) by that amending Act.
The second of the cases falling into the first category is Goodall v Sefton (unreported, 1990) Goodall v Sefton, an unreported decision
of JH Phillips J (as his Honour then was), heard at Shepparton in April 1990, judgment being delivered on 19 June 1990.
I should refer to what his Honour said at 21-2 about the matter: At the commencement of the second day of the trial I was informed
that the defendant's solicitor (the defendant having sought trial by jury in this matter) had by -
inadvertence neglected to pay the jury fees for that day on the previous day pursuant to s15(3a) of the
Juries Act 1967
and counsel agreed (the plaintiff being unwilling to pay the fees) that I was obliged to discharge the jury pursuant to s15(4) of
. I came to conclude that I had no option but to take this course. The present state of the relevant section is, in my opinion, inherently
unsatisfactory. Although I accept that in this instance the failure to pay the fees was inadvertent, the section, as presently worded,
provides an opportunity for the use of mischievous tactics during a trial which could result in injustice, inconvenience and expense.
A trial judge should be given a discretion to continue an action with a jury and require payment of the relevant fees by the party
which has requested trial by jury. I propose to convey these views to the Chief Justice.
None of Pryce v Melbourne and Metropolitan Tramways Board (unreported, 1982) Pryce, Goodall or the unnamed proceeding to which counsel
for the plaintiff referred me raised the point presently in issue. The unanimity of those decisions is readily understandable. Doubtless
subs(3a) firmly attaches to subs(3) so as to leave no room for avoidance of the consequence specified by subs(4) in the event that
the other party is unwilling to pay the fees. The question here is, I think, a quite different one. It is whether subs(4) must be
read subject to subs(3a) so as to impose the temporal obligation set up by subs(3a) upon a party seeking to avail itself, for the
first time, of subs(4). In my opinion the verbiage of the section does not require it. That is a conclusion which I reach happily.
To conclude otherwise would facilitate, at least in some cases, a mischief.
Subs(3) is concerned to deal with the situation of the party who has required the matter to be tried by jury - to impose upon that
party an obligation to pay fees for the second and subsequent days. "The fees required to be paid" which are the subject matter of
subs(3a) are not simply the "prescribed fees for the second and every subsequent day of the trial". They are those fees as "required
to be paid" by a particular party to the proceeding. The history of the subsection supports that reading. Subs(3), prior to its amendment
by Act 9620 of 1981, contained what is now the subject matter of subs(3) and subs(3a). The intimate connection between those two
provisions is emphasised by the opening portion of the latter. Subs(4), on the other hand, addresses simply the circumstance where
a sum referred to in subs(3) "is not so paid". The opportunity is then given to the other party to pay that sum. In terms no temporal
obligation is cast upon the party who takes up that opportunity.
Further, it is difficult to see how the temporal obligation could operate in respect of subs(4). That subsection is triggered if
a sum referred to in subs(3) "is not so paid". That must be read as a reference to both subs(3) and subs(3a). Subs(4) has remained
unaltered since its original enactment. Then it referred to subs(3), which contained the subject matter of the present subs(3) and
subs(3a). The subsequent division of that subject matter into two subsections does not lead to an altered construction of what is
encompassed by the phrase "is not so paid" in subs(4). It cannot be said that a sum "is not so paid" as required by subs(3a) until
it has not been paid "on the day before the day" to which the sum relates. Once that day - in practical terms the business day of
the sheriff or other prescribed officer of the court - is at an end, subs(4) is triggered. But by then it has become impossible for
a party seeking to exercise the right granted by subs(4) to exercise it so as to comply with subs(3a). Legislation should not be
read to produce such an outcome.
That takes me to the third of the earlier proceedings to which I referred a few moments ago. In Buyukgonenc v Doolan (unreported,
1982) Buyukgonenc v Doolan (unreported, 16 June 1982) Beach J -
was confronted by a situation where, a plaintiff having inadvertently failed to pay jury fees in accordance with subs(3a), the defendant
was willing to do so - that is, to do so on the day to which the fees related. Beach J permitted this course, observing that the
Act was silent as to the time within which a party might act under subs(4).
Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that subs(3a) would not deprive subs(4) of effective operation in the event that the party required
to pay fees under subs(3) failed to disclose to the other party or parties an intention not to pay them in accordance with subs(3)
and subs(3a). He submitted that it was for the other party or parties to make relevant enquiries of the sheriff or other prescribed
officer of the court. In my opinion the section imposes no such burden. What was not done here, and what ought to have been done,
is what was reportedly done in Pezzimenti v Seamer [1995] 2 VR 32 at 33. There, the proceeding being one which had been commenced
in the County Court, counsel for the plaintiff informed the trial judge when the matter was called on for hearing that his client
no longer desired trial by jury and would not pay jury fees after the first day of trial. That having been done, counsel for one
of the defendants informed the judge that his client desired trial by jury and would pay the jury fees, and so the trial continued.
It may be, and I would be prepared to say, that in respect of every day of a trial other than the first day upon which a party takes
up the right conferred by subs(4), such party ought to pay the fees on the day preceding the day in respect of which the fees are
paid. Such an obligation would not arise by reason of legislation, but by a logical de facto extrapolation of legislation.
It follows from what I have said that this trial should continue with a jury, and that in paying the jury fees this morning the defendant
has complied with s15(4) of the
Solicitors for the plaintiff: Slater and Gordon.
Solicitors for the defendant: Clements Hutchins and Co.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter