URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/69.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:46:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ANM Trading Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Business Franchises [1996] VicRp 69; [1996] 2 VR 312 (5 March 1996)
ANM TRADING PTY LTD v COMMISSIONER OF BUSINESS FRANCHISES
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA
21-23, 26 February, 05 March 1996
It is in the interests of the parties that I give judgment as soon as humanly possible, to use the parties' own words, and I accordingly
do so now -
without taking the further time that would be involved in committing my reasons to writing and carefully revising them before handing
them down. I am conscious that the course I am taking will require attendance of the parties' advisers for some time this morning
and also that it will mean that my reasons are not as fluently or fully expressed as they might otherwise be, but I fear that, had
I done otherwise, the reasons would not be available for some further time.
This is an application by originating motion for relief by way of judicial review, under O56 of the rules, of the determinations
of the delegate of the defendant to refuse the plaintiff's applications for a wholesale tobacco merchant's licence for the months
of January and February 1996. S7AH(1) of the
Business Franchise (Tobacco) Act 1974
provides that, subject to subs(2), such a determination is not reviewable in any court or tribunal, but subs(2) provides that subs(1)
does not apply to proceedings in the Supreme Court:
(a) seeking the grant of any relief or remedy in the nature of certiorari, prohibition, mandamus or quo warranto, or the grant of
a declaration of right or an injunction; or
(b) seeking any order under the
Administrative Law Act 1978
The appropriateness of the reference to quo warranto, which excited the curiosity of some Members of Parliament in the course of
debates on the bill which became Business Franchise (Tobacco) Amendment Act 1995, may be questioned. The reference is found also
in s19BC(8) but it is not in the earlier-enacted s9(3)(e).
The originating motion seeks declarations that s7(3) of the Act has not been duly administered in respect of the applications for
the issue of a wholesale tobacco merchant's licence for January and February 1996 lodged on 27 December 1995 and 25 January 1996
respectively, and orders that the defendant issue such licences and, alternatively, orders that the defendant determine the plaintiff's
applications in accordance with law.
For the reasons I gave in my ruling on 21 February 1996, such declarations as mentioned could not, in my view, be made unless I quashed
the determinations. It was agreed between the parties that the originating motion should be treated as implicitly seeking relief
in the nature of certiorari in addition to the relief which it expressly sought, and I proceed on that basis.
The defendant's determinations were notified to the plaintiff in writing as required by s7AF(1), by letters dated 29 December 1995
and 12 February 1996, which, as required by s7AF(3), included the reasons for refusal. The reasons given for the first determination
1. The applicant has contravened the provisions of S7AI(1) of the Business Franchises (Tobacco) Act 1974 ("the Act") by failing to
provide full particulars of a change in material information previously provided, namely that: on or before 2 November 1995, the
business plan of ANM Trading Pty Ltd which had previously been provided to the Commissioner was no longer the business plan being
pursued by it by virtue of an agreement to sell tobacco products to a person or persons outside Victoria.
2. The applicant has contravened the provisions of S13(1) of the Act and Reg10 of the Business Franchise (Tobacco and Petroleum Products)
Regulations 1992 by failing to keep such accounts, records, books and documents as prescribed, namely: orders of tobacco products
placed with ANM Trading by Adbarr Pty Ltd.
3. The applicant has contravened the provisions of S13A(1) of the Act by failing to endorse every invoice statement of account and
receipt issued by him for or -
in relation to the sale of tobacco with the words "Licensed tobacco wholesaler", namely: invoices representing the sale of tobacco
to Adbarr Pty Ltd.
4. The applicant does not have sufficient financial resources to carry on tobacco wholesaling for the whole of the month for which
the licence is sought and for any subsequent period in respect of which the licence holder has stated, in an application under s7AD,
an intention to carry on tobacco wholesaling.
The reasons given for the second determination were:
1. The applicant has contravened the provisions of s7AI(1) of the
Business Franchise (Tobacco) Act 1974
") by failing to provide full particulars of a change in material information previously provided, in that: on or before 2 November
1995, the Business Plan of ANM Trading Pty Ltd which had previously been provided to the Commissioner was no longer the Business
Plan being pursued by it by virtue of an agreement to sell tobacco products to a person or persons outside Victoria.
2. The application included information that is false or misleading in that it indicated the said sales to Adbarr Pty Ltd were made
interstate when they were in fact made in Victoria.
3. The applicant has contravened the provisions of s13(1) of the
and Reg10 of the Business Franchise (Tobacco and Petroleum Products) Regulations 1992 by failing to keep such accounts, records,
books and documents as prescribed, namely: orders of tobacco products placed with ANM Trading Pty Ltd by Adbarr Pty Ltd.
4. The applicant has contravened the provisions of s13A(1) of the
by failing to endorse every invoice statement of account and receipt issued by him for or in relation to the sale of tobacco with
the words "Licensed tobacco wholesaler", namely: invoices representing the sale of tobacco to Adbarr Pty Ltd.
5. The applicant does not have sufficient financial resources to carry on tobacco wholesaling for the whole of the month for which
the licence is sought and for any subsequent period in respect of which the licence holder has stated, in an application under s7AD,
an intention to carry on wholesaling.
6. The applicant has participated in, and facilitated others' participation in, sham sales of tobacco interstate where the transaction
involved the tobacco being resold for consumption in Victoria.
7. The application is governed by s7AA(2) of the
and must be refused by reason of subs7AB(2) and subs7AB(3).
In these reasons when I use the word "Commissioner" or the word "defendant", I should be taken as including a reference to, and indeed,
in the circumstances of this case, meaning, the commissioner's delegate, Mr Lester, pursuant to s4(3) and s(4).
There being no suggestion of jurisdictional error, for relief in the nature of certiorari to be obtained the plaintiff must show
error of law on the face of the record. The defendant did not argue that the reasons were not part of a record: cf R v Industrial
Appeals Court; Ex parte Henry Berry and Co (Australasia) Ltd
[1955] VicLawRp 29
[1955] VLR 156
at 164-5. Indeed, as required by s7AF(3) already mentioned, the reasons were set out as part of the adjudication: Hockey v Yelland
[1984] HCA 72
(1984) 157 CLR 124
at 131 and 143. The point is put beyond doubt by
Administrative Law Act 1978
, which applies even though the current application is not made under that
, s10 being quite general in its expression.
Although in argument on the extent of evidence admissible before me, on which I gave my abovementioned ruling, senior counsel for
the defendant cryptically spoke of "the record whatever that may be", he did not in final submissions contend that I could not look
at the material before the commissioner and indeed he repeatedly referred to that material in support of his -
submission that there was no error of law on any of the bases put forward by the plaintiff. His earlier argument on the question
of the evidence that was admissible to the effect that the plaintiff was confined to leading in this proceeding evidence of the material
that was before the commissioner, necessarily involved that I could consider that material in deciding whether there was error of
law on the face of the record. In the circumstances, I consider that I should proceed on the basis accepted by the parties. If the
record does not include the material that was before the commissioner, the sole relief conceded by s7AF(2) may be illusory, although,
as against that, a plaintiff may be able to argue that error of law can be established because no evidence supporting the reasons
appears in the notifications. I do not, however, need to consider those matters.
The plaintiff must, as I have said, show error of law. There is no error of law in making a wrong finding of fact. A finding of fact
will only be open to challenge as erroneous in law if there is no probative evidence to support it, whilst an inference will only
be open to challenge as erroneous in law if it was not reasonably open on the facts: Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
(1990) 170 CLR 321
at 355-60, my understanding of which is set out in my reasons in Roads Corporation v Dacakis [1995] 2 VR 508, where I also deal with
the view, a minority one as I understand it, expressed by Deane J in Bond at 366-8.
Further, an error of law is not sufficient if it did not contribute to the impugned decision or if the decision would have been the
same regardless of it: Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
(1990) 170 CLR 321
Bond at 384; Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
(1986) 162 CLR 24
at 40. In addition, in such a case prerogative relief might be refused in the court's discretion, as the defendant argued here in
the last resort: R v Knightsbridge Crown Court; Ex parte Marcrest Properties Ltd [1983] 1 WLR 300 at 313.
S7AE confers on the commissioner a discretion to refuse an application by an existing holder of a wholesale tobacco merchant's licence
if satisfied, so far as material:
(a) that the licence holder has failed to provide information (whether in an application for a licence or otherwise) to the Commissioner
that the licence holder was required by this
to provide, or has provided information that is false or misleading in any material particular; or
(b) that the licence holder has otherwise contravened this
(f) that the licence holder does not have sufficient financial resources to carry on tobacco wholesaling for the whole of the month
for which the licence is sought and for any subsequent period in respect of which the licence holder has stated, in an application
under s7AD, an intention to carry on tobacco wholesaling;
Because the plaintiff, which held a licence for December 1995, did not, by reason of the commissioner's refusal of the application
for the January licence, hold a licence for January, s7AB(1) applied to its application (under s7AA(1)) for a licence for February.
That subsection required refusal unless the commissioner was satisfied relevantly:
(c) that the applicant has, or is likely to have, access to sufficient financial resources to carry on tobacco wholesaling; It will
be observed that para(c) is a little different from para(f) of s7AE for reasons referable to the fact that s7AB is dealing with an
application by a person who does not hold a relevant licence. The onus in s7AB(1) in relation to an -
application under s7AA by a person who does not hold a relevant licence is reversed as regards satisfaction as against that in s7AE
in relation to an application under s7AD by an existing licence holder.
There is, in the case of the application for the February licence, only one relevant statutory ground for refusal - that which I
have set out. However, s7AB(2) provides that the commissioner must refuse an application under s7AA if the commissioner is satisfied
that the applicant held a wholesale tobacco merchant's licence under the
at any time in the year preceding the month for which the licence is sought. For this reason it is vital to the plaintiff to obtain
a mandatory order for the issue of the licence for January even though January has long since concluded. By parity of reasoning,
a failure before me on the part of the plaintiff in respect of the January licence will require failure in respect of the February
licence applied for.
There are real problems of a practical nature in connection with applications to the court within s7AH(2) because of the monthly
nature of the licences where, as here, there are complicated challenges which cannot be heard and decided in a matter of a couple
of hours. Although January and February have passed, if the plaintiff is otherwise entitled to relief I should grant it, and I think
the defendant accepted this, to set the record straight because of s7AB(2) which I have already discussed.
S7AB(4) provides that, in determining whether or not he or she is satisfied as required by subs(1), the commissioner may take into
account various considerations, the only possibly material one being that in para(d), namely, whether each associate of the applicant
and, in the case of a corporate applicant, each associate of each director of the applicant is of good fame and character. (S2(1)
of the principal
has a definition of "associate" by reference to the Corporations Law with modifications, and other provisions bring associates of
applicants under the commissioner's scrutiny.) But it seems to me that that consideration cannot be relevant to the grounds on which
the commissioner determined the application for the February licence or to s7AB(1)(c) in particular.
I should also say that s7AA(4)(c)(i) requires that an application under that section, relevantly the application for the February
licence, must contain in relation to the applicant: a full and true disclosure of all the material facts known to the applicant ...
and ... each director of the applicant ... to enable the Commissioner to determine the application and ascertain the licence fee
payable by the applicant; Failure to comply with that requirement is not, however, made a ground for obligatory refusal of the application
in s7AB(1). The provision in s7AA that I have just mentioned has a corresponding provision in s7AD(3)(c)(i), breach of which would
be picked up by the permitted grounds of refusal set out in s7AE(a) and (b), but it must be noted that s7AD(3)(c)(i), unlike the
corresponding provision in s7AA, does not extend the required disclosure to material facts necessary to enable the commissioner to
determine the application.
It is necessary to refer to additional provisions of the
in order to deal with the present proceeding. The
was substantially amended by the
Business Franchise Acts (Amendment) Act 1994
Business Franchise (Tobacco) (Amendment) Act 1995
. The provisions relating to applications, determinations, and proceedings in this court so far mentioned were inserted by the 1995
Before setting out other relevant provisions which that
inserted, I mention that s1 of the 1995 amending
states the main purpose of it to be to amend the principal
(a) to provide for the compulsory licensing of tobacco wholesalers;
(b) to revise the procedure for applying for and granting wholesale tobacco merchant's and group wholesale tobacco merchant's licences;
(c) to increase the fees payable for licences issued under that
I turn now to other provisions inserted by that
. S7AD provides in subs(1) that:
(1) A person who, in a month, holds a wholesale tobacco merchant's licence may apply to the Commissioner, in accordance with this
section, for a wholesale tobacco merchant's licence for the following month.
By subs(3) the application must be made at least seven days before the current licence expires; must be in the prescribed form; and
must contain a full and true disclosure (as I have already mentioned), a statutory declaration made by the applicant verifying the
information in the application; and a statement as to whether the applicant intends or does not intend to carry on tobacco wholesaling
in the two months following the month for which the licence is sought.
S7AA has a similar provision in relation to an application by a person who was not the holder of a wholesale tobacco licence save
that the application has to be made for the month that is the third month after the month in which the application is made.
In addition, s7AI was inserted providing so far as material:
(1) If a material change occurs in the information provided in, or in connection with, an application under s7AA or s7AD (whether
before or after a licence to which that application relates has been issued), the applicant or licence holder, within 14 days of
becoming aware of the change, must give the Commissioner written particulars of the change.
Penalty: 50 penalty units ...
(3) In this section, "application" includes any documents lodged with an application.
S6(1) prohibits after 1 August 1995 the carrying on of tobacco wholesaling by a person unless the holder, relevantly, of a wholesale
tobacco merchant's licence. Further, s7B was inserted relating to sales to and purchases from unlicensed persons. So far as material
subs(1) provides that:
(1) The holder of a wholesale tobacco merchant's licence ... must not, in the course of tobacco wholesaling, sell tobacco to a person
who is not the holder of a licence.
Penalty: 50 penalty units. Subs(2) relates to purchases by licensed retail tobacconists. But subs(3) provides, so far as material,
(3) Subs(1) and subs(2) do not apply to a sale or purchase of tobacco outside Victoria in the course of tobacco wholesaling or tobacco
retailing unless the terms (whether express or implied) of the sale or purchase or of any contract for the sale or purchase -
(a) require either party to deliver, or arrange delivery of, the tobacco into or within Victoria; or
(b) contemplate delivery of the tobacco into or within Victoria. -
Subs(3) echoes provisions in s2(6AB), which I will refer to later. Finally, save for one provision the mention of which it is convenient
to defer, the 1995
inserted s9B and 9D which allow the commissioner to suspend or revoke licences in the circumstances specified.
The amendments made in 1995 which I have set out or referred to cannot be understood without reference to the amendments made by
. The definition in s2(1) of "Tobacco wholesaling" had until 1994 read so far as material:
"Tobacco wholesaling" means the business of selling tobacco whether in or outside Victoria for the purposes of resale ...
The words "whether in or outside Victoria" were omitted the 1994
. At the same time that
inserted subs(6AA) and subs(6AB) in s2. They read:
(6AA) A reference in this
to the sale of tobacco is a reference to the sale of tobacco in Victoria.
(6AB) A sale of tobacco made outside Victoria in the course of tobacco wholesaling or tobacco retailing shall for the purposes of
be regarded as having been made in Victoria if the terms (whether express or implied) of the sale or of any contract for the sale
(a) require either party to deliver, or arrange delivery of, the tobacco into or within Victoria; or
(b) contemplate delivery or the tobacco into or within Victoria.
S11D, inserted in 1994, accords with subs(6AA). By the 1995
, a definition of "sell" was inserted in s2(1) of the principal
reading: "`Sell' includes offer to sell." I interpolate to refer to
Interpretation of Legislation Act 1984
. By the latter section: Where a word or phrase is given a particular meaning in an
or subordinate instrument, other parts of speech and grammatical forms of that word or phrase have, unless the contrary intention
appears, corresponding meanings.
That provision applies to the defined word "sell" and, in my view, it applies also to the interpretation of the word "sale" contained
in s2(6AA) and (6AB). In any event, as a matter of construction, a like conclusion would be reached without s39. By s23, in substance
the meanings of expressions in the
as amended for the time being apply in the regulations under the
unless the contrary intention appears. The regulations in question here are the Business Franchise (Tobacco and Petroleum Products)
Regulations 1992. They were substantially amended in August 1995.
In connection with the new subsections inserted in s2 by the 1994
, it may be noted that by another new section, s2AA, the Business Franchise Acts are not to apply so as to exceed the constitutional
power of the State.
Subpara(i) of s10(1)(a) was substituted in 1994, so that, with the amendment of the percentage fee made by the 1995
as from 1 August 1995, s10(1)(a) now reads:
10. (1) The fees to be paid for licences issued under this
shall be as follows:
(a) For a wholesale tobacco merchant's licence, a fee of $50 together with an amount of 100 per centum of the value of tobacco sold
in the relevant period by the applicant, other than tobacco that -
(i) in the opinion of the Commissioner, is for re-sale or consumption outside Victoria; or ... -
The changed form of subpara(i) is significant in that exclusion from fee, which had previously depended on knowledge or reasonable
belief of the applicant, was made to depend on the opinion of the commissioner. It is observed, however, that no occasion to form
an opinion arises unless tobacco has been "sold", a matter discussed below. I point out that subpara(i) is not an exact reflex of
s2(6AB), though from time to time the defendant's argument suggested otherwise. "The relevant period" is by s2(6a) a reference to
the month two months before that for which the licence is sought. S11B, after amendment in 1994, reads so far as material:
(1) The holder of a wholesale tobacco merchant's licence ... shall -
(a) deliver with every consignment of tobacco which he or his servant or agent delivers to the holder of a licence an invoice in the
prescribed form showing the quantity of and total consideration for the sale of the tobacco; and
(b) retain a true copy of the invoice ... for a period of twelve months ...
S13 and s13A, which were not amended in 1994 or 1995, are also relevant. They provide, so far as material:
13. (1) A person who -
(b) is the holder of a wholesale tobacco merchant's licence ...
- shall keep such accounts, records, books and documents as may be prescribed containing such particulars as may be prescribed and
shall preserve each of those accounts, records, books and documents for a period of five years after the last entry was made in it.
Penalty: 50 penalty units.
13A. (1) A person who is the holder of a wholesale tobacco merchant's licence ... shall endorse on every invoice ... issued by him
for or in relation to the sale of tobacco the words "Licensed tobacco wholesaler".
(2) A person who fails to comply with the provisions of subs(1) shall be guilty of an offence.
Penalty: 10 penalty units.
In relation to s13(1), reg10(1) as amended provides: For the purposes of s13(1) of the
Business Franchise (Tobacco) Act 1974
a person who ... is the holder of a wholesale tobacco merchant's licence ... must keep all accounts, records, books and documents
that come into the person's possession and relate in any way to a sale or purchase of ... tobacco ... including without limiting
the generality of the foregoing all invoices, dockets, letters, orders and correspondence relating to such a sale or purchase.
Reg10(4) prescribes the particulars to be contained in such records.
The provisions inserted in 1994 and 1995 were clearly designed to counter avoidance of Victorian franchise fees. Accordingly, they
are to be read as liberally as is fairly open: Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Lutovi Investments Pty Ltd
[1978] HCA 55
(1978) 140 CLR 434
It is the commissioner's delegate's satisfaction or the reverse, not mine, that is in question here. Here the commissioner was satisfied
in respect of one application, and not satisfied in respect of the other, of relevant matters. But his satisfaction is not unexaminable.
As Dixon J said in Avon Downs Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1949] HCA 26
(1949) 78 CLR 353
at 360: But it is for the commissioner, not for me, to be satisfied of the state of the voting power at the end of the year of income.
His decision, it is true, is not unexaminable. If -
he does not address himself to the question which the subsection formulates, if his conclusion is affected by some mistake of law,
if he takes some extraneous reason into consideration or excludes from consideration some factor which should affect his determination,
on any of these grounds his conclusion is liable to review. Moreover, the fact that he has not made known the reasons why he was
not satisfied will not prevent the review of his decision. The conclusion he has reached may, on a full consideration of the material
that was before him, be found to be capable of explanation only on the ground of some such misconception. If the result appears to
be unreasonable on the supposition that he addressed himself to the right question, correctly applied the rules of law and took into
account all the relevant considerations and no irrelevant considerations, then it may be a proper inference that it is a false supposition.
It is not necessary that you should be sure of the precise particular in which he has gone wrong. It is enough that you can see that
in some way he must have failed in the discharge of his exact function according to law.
Here, to attack the commissioner's satisfaction or non-satisfaction, as the case may be, the plaintiff must, subject to a development
of the argument which I mention later, show either that it was not open to the commissioner to be so satisfied or not satisfied,
or that such satisfaction or non-satisfaction was so unreasonable that no decision maker could come to that conclusion: Minister
for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
(1986) 162 CLR 24
Peko-Wallsend at 41-2. That question is to be determined by reference to the material before the commissioner. In that regard I refer
to my previous ruling and to Ballarat Brewing Co Ltd v Commissioner of Pay-Roll Tax (Vic)
(1979) 10 ATR 228
at 235-6 and Kolotex Hosiery (Australia) Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1975] HCA 5
(1975) 132 CLR 535
at 567-8, 575-7 and 578-9. It is immaterial that those two cases were not certiorari cases. Those cases show that, if a discretion
or satisfaction has miscarried, further evidence may be allowed before the court. Because relief in the nature of mandamus is here
sought, that principle is capable of application in a case such as the present, but neither party suggested that it was applicable
in the circumstances of this particular case.
Here the question is whether the commissioner was not entitled to be satisfied under s7AE or was bound to be satisfied under s7AB.
The plaintiff says that those questions should be answered negatively in the case of the first mentioned and affirmatively in the
second. In addition, or as part of that submission, the plaintiff also says - and this is the development I referred to a little
earlier - that there was an error of law in the commissioner's interpretation of the reach of the
or that he had regard to extraneous considerations, so that, in the words of Mason J at first instance in Kolotex Hosiery (Australia)
Pty Ltd v The Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia
[1973] HCA 28
(1973) 130 CLR 64
at 81, "the Commissioner could not in law be satisfied ...".
As I have also already indicated, in relation to the second refusal, the grounds numbered 1, 3 and 4 are not responsive of s7AB,
and no general discretion was argued for nor did the commissioner rely on any suggestion that the applicant was not fit and proper.
But the ground numbered 5 is covered by s7AB, and para7 would, as I have already mentioned, be sufficient if the plaintiff fails
in its challenge to the earlier determination. If the defendant's contentions in support of the commissioner's decision are made
out, there would have been a breach of s7AA(3)(b)(i) which is covered by para2 of the reasons and thus an offence within s19(1) of
, but para2 and the similar, but by no means identical, para6 can go only to the discretion of the court with regard to the granting
of prerogative relief or to the principle that an error of law will only result in the -
quashing of a decision if the error contributed to that decision and the decision would not necessarily be the same without the error,
matters to which I have referred earlier.
The answer or the principal answer to the various reasons put forward by the commissioner for his decisions that is made by the plaintiff
is essentially that the various reasons seize on ex-Victorian transactions which are outside the reach of the
and are of no concern to the commissioner. If that answer is right, the plaintiff's wholesaling, save for such wholesaling as is
conducted in the Goulburn Valley, may not require a licence at all: s6(1). In my view s7AA(6) and s7AD(5), which I do not trouble
to set out, are not against that conclusion.
I have read or re-read, and considered, all the written submissions of each party and I have read in full and considered the records
of interviews of Mr Bakkar and Mr Nasir as well as all affidavits and exhibits and the transcript of the evidence of Mr Lester, the
decision-maker, and other transcripts relied on in argument; but the answer that I referred to earlier that is made by the plaintiff
to the various reasons advanced by the defendant was the main area of contest in this case and I propose to concentrate upon it without
attempting a summary of the interviews or expressly dealing with every argument of each party.
The defendant here submitted in the course of written submissions, which I amplify a little, that the commissioner was and was entitled
to be satisfied:
(a) for the purposes of s7AE(a), that the licence holder had failed to provide information required to be provided by s7AI(1), that
is, written particulars of the change which occurred in the information which had been provided in the business plan submitted in
connection with the application originally made for a licence;
(b) for the purposes of s7AE(b), that the licence holder had otherwise contravened the
by failing to keep proper accounts and records, contrary to s13(1) as amplified by reg10(1);
(c) for the purposes of s7AE(b), that the licence holder had otherwise contravened the
by failing to endorse invoices for the sale of tobacco to Adbarr Pty Ltd with the words "Licensed tobacco wholesaler", contrary to
s13A(1) of the
(d) for the purposes of s7AB(1)(c) and s7AE(d), that the licence holder did not have sufficient financial resources to carry on tobacco
wholesaling for the whole of the month of January and did not have, and was not likely to have, access to sufficient financial resources
to carry on tobacco wholesaling in the case of the application for a licence for February.
I turn to each of those four matters. They are substantially reflective of the four reasons in the first notification of determination.
On the hypothesis that the activities of the plaintiff in November and the first half of December 1995 and earlier preparations for
those activities, being activities involving large sums of money, are within the reach of the
, it seems to me that it was open to the commissioner to be satisfied of matter (a). PtC of form 2 in the regulations as amended,
which, though not in evidence (unlike Mr Bakkar's own plan, Ex PJL3), was the form applicable to the plaintiff's application for
a licence for September 1995, provides:
2. Please provide a copy of any business or financial plan, and an estimate of monthly tobacco sales in the licence period. Include
names, addresses and telephone numbers of the business' suppliers of and prospective purchasers of tobacco products. [This information
is required under s7AB(1)(c) of the
, or may be required in accordance with s7AC(3).] -
I pass by the question whether the sentence in square brackets is correct, but it seems to me that on the above hypothesis the preparations
for the commencement of an extension of the business in the way in which it was extended in November and early December and also
the making of a contract - I do not say sale, but contract for sale - on 1 November, along with revised estimates, required to be
drawn to the commissioner's attention in writing under s7AI within 14 days. That was not done in the facsimile message of 15 November
1995 (Ex MB5), which eschews the past. In my view that change or those changes, apparent on information before the commissioner,
were "material": Re Cufari; Ex parte Commissioner of Taxation v Huppatz
[1992] FCA 95
(1992) 34 FCR 544
at 549 ("would be relevant to and might be likely to affect the making of a decision"); Sola Optical Aust Pty Ltd v Mills
[1987] HCA 57
(1987) 163 CLR 628
at 636; and Rogers v Whitaker
[1992] HCA 58
(1992) 175 CLR 479
at 490 (showing that, relevantly, information is material if the decision-maker would be likely to attach significance to it). For
they would or might well affect the calculation under s10(1)(a) of the licence fee required to be tendered by virtue of s7AF(4).
Changes after 15 November were not notified in writing, either. They were material also.
However, if the transactions to which I have compendiously referred are outside the reach of the
, then they would not be, in my view, material and the changes that occurred in the plaintiff's operations would not have been notifiable
under s7AI(1). To anticipate, para2 of PtC of form 2 is, in my view, concerned with sales or expected sales within the meaning of
s2(6AA) and (6AB), which I shall endeavour to expound later.
The second matter of which the defendant contended the commissioner was and was entitled to be satisfied is too widely stated having
regard to the terms of the letters of notification which are limited to orders of tobacco products placed with the plaintiff by Adbarr
Pty Ltd. However, if this matter is so confined and if the transactions which I have compendiously described are within the reach
, then the commissioner was, in my view, entitled to be satisfied of matter (b). For he had material before him in the form of the
record of interview of Mr Bakkar clearly showing that he, being the relevant organ of the plaintiff, received written orders (at
least some of which were from Adbarr Pty Ltd) which he did not keep. That was a breach of s13(1) read by reference to reg10(1). But
reg10(1) and thus also s13(1) turn, in my view, upon there being a "sale" within the meaning of the
and in particular of the subsections I have already identified. For reg10(1) speaks of documents relating in any way to a "sale or
purchase" of tobacco and in particular "orders ... relating to such a sale or purchase". "Purchase" is not defined in the
but it is the counterpart or reciprocal of a sale, or perhaps a sale viewed from the point of view of the purchaser, and therefore
it must have a meaning corresponding to or consonant with that of "sale", the meaning of which, in my view, turns on the subsections
I have earlier identified. To anticipate again, if the transactions are outside the reach of the
, they would necessarily not involve "sales".
Similarly, in my view, the commissioner was entitled to be satisfied of matter (c) if the transactions I have compendiously described
are within the reach of the
. For it is clear that the invoices exhibited in fact to the principal affidavit by Mr Bakkar are not endorsed with the requisite
words. But, as appears from s13A(1) itself, s13A(1) turns, like s13(1), upon there being a "sale" within the meaning of the
. I do not repeat the remarks I have just made on that. -
Finally, as regards matter (d), if the commissioner was entitled to have regard to the transactions which I have compendiously described,
he was, in my view, entitled to be satisfied or not bound to be satisfied (as the case may be) of that matter, slightly differently
expressed according as it is the January or the February licence which is under consideration. It is, in my view, clear, and it certainly
was open to the commissioner to find, from Mr Bakkar's record of interview and from what he is recorded by Mr John Macdonald of the
commissioner's office as saying to Mr Macdonald on 15 November 1995 (Ex JM4) that the plaintiff could not, as part of lawfully carrying
on tobacco wholesaling, pay the fee that would be exigible under the Victorian
for the full period of the transactions so described, being the sum of $1.4 million or thereabouts. The same finding was, I consider,
open if regard is had only to the fee in respect of orders placed after 28 November 1995, a date which (as appears later) is important.
If, however, he was not entitled to have regard to those transactions, he may well not have been entitled to be satisfied of an insufficiency
of financial resources or may have been bound to be not satisfied of a lack of access or likely lack of access to sufficient financial
resources. I say that because the material before the commissioner showed that the plaintiff was, from its subpurchasers, as I may
call them to anticipate, able to pay timeously the suppliers to it of the large amounts of tobacco involved in the compendiously
described transactions and that it was able to pay the price of the small amounts of tobacco and the 100%, but small, fee in relation
to those amounts that were involved in its wholesaling business in the Goulburn Valley. There was, said counsel for the plaintiff,
eating to prove the pudding. The plaintiff then submitted that financial resources were not limited to cash or indeed to other assets
but included the ability to raise credit or raise funds in other ways. No case was cited on this point, but, in my opinion, that
submission is borne out by Goddard v Minister of Housing and Local Government [1958] 3 All ER 482 where at 486 Lord Parker CJ said
that the words "the resources" of a local authority clearly meant: ... not merely cash resources, but [the council's] credit in the
world, [its] ability to borrow, and all the rest of it.
Although the word "financial" was not found in the statutory provision there, a record under consideration did use the words "financial
resources". I think that the view of his Lordship, admittedly on different legislation, is apposite here. In any event, it accords
with my own view independent of authority.
Even if the transactions so described are not within the purview of the
directly, it seems to me that activities entirely outside the State of Victoria of a company which was the holder of or an applicant
for a licence under the Victorian
would be relevant on the question of financial resources. If, for instance, an applicant was also conducting mining operations on
the "Golden Mile" in Western Australia and was making serious losses regularly, it might be open to the commissioner to decide that
that strain upon its financial resources meant that the applicant did not have the requisite financial resources for the purposes
of its tobacco wholesaling within the
. I therefore think that the transactions compendiously described above are relevant even if the hypothesis mentioned earlier is incorrect.
But, if no fee is exigible in respect of them, it seems to me that the material before the commissioner clearly showed that they
had been capable of being transacted by the plaintiff and therefore it would -
probably not be open to the commissioner to be satisfied that the applicant did not have sufficient financial resources or access
or likely access to them.
It might be said that a satisfaction in those circumstances that the applicant did not have the necessary financial resources or
the necessary access or likely access would simply be a mistake of fact and therefore not an error of law. But, if the interpretation
of financial resources which I have adopted is correct, then on the assumption now being made, even having regard to all the material
before the commissioner, I am inclined to think that it would not be open to him to reach the necessary satisfaction of insufficiency
or (as the case may be) not to reach satisfaction of access or likely access.
I should mention that Mr Lester said that the plaintiff's inability to pay the licence fee was "not a factor in reaching the decision"
(T79). But it is clear from Mr Dalton's memorandum to Mr Lester (Ex 2) and the notifications themselves, confirmed by Mr Lester in
oral evidence as stating his reasons, that the inability was a factor in each determination. In my view, the decision Mr Lester was
referring to at T79 was the choice from the options for action presented to him by Mr Dalton.
Implicit in what I have said is that the tobacco wholesaling for which there must, loosely speaking, be sufficient financial resources
under s7AB(1)(c) or 7AE(f) to the commissioner's satisfaction is wholesaling within the meaning of the
and thus, by reference to the definition in s2(1) of "tobacco wholesaling" (which uses the word "selling"), within the meaning of
subs2(6AA) and subs2(6AB).
On the meaning of the word "sale" and its cognates in the
I asked each counsel for the meaning that he submitted was to be attributed to it, but, although I was of course given answers, I
was not able, as it seemed to me, to obtain a precise or detailed submission on the very point from either counsel. Be that as it
may, in my view, the word "sale" and its cognates here connotes a transfer of the property in goods, as opposed to an agreement to
sell goods. This is an
dealing with commodities, in particular the commodity tobacco. In my view it is to be read by reference to the sale of goods legislation
or, which comes to the same thing, the general corpus of the law relating to sale of goods. A similar view was taken under, at any
rate, the former sales tax legislation of the Commonwealth: cf Commonwealth Quarries (Footscray) Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
[1938] HCA 13
(1938) 59 CLR 111
at 121. That the foregoing is the meaning of the word "sale" in the context of sale of goods can be seen from the discussion in Halsbury's
Laws of England, 4th ed, vol 41, at para601, para636 and para637. I refer also to each subsection of
Goods Act 1958
and, in case it be the applicable
Sale of Goods Act 1895
(SA). (I do not propose to add to this lengthy judgment a determination of which State's
is applicable by virtue of common law or convention principles of private international law.)
The use in s2(6AB) of the words "any contract for the sale" as an alternative to "the sale" confirms my view based on the text and
context of the legislation that the word "sale" and its cognates denotes or requires the transfer of property in tobacco.
Whilst the word "sell" is defined in s2(1) of the
Business Franchise (Tobacco) Act 1974
as including offer to sell, and there are provisions in the
and regulations where such an extended meaning is applicable, it is in my view clearly inapplicable to s10(1)(a) and to other provisions
on which the various reasons of the commissioner depend or which they invoke. A mere offer or even agreement to sell, which might
never result in a sale in the sense of a transfer of -
property, could scarcely, in my view, entitle the revenue to exact a franchise fee. If, then, that is the meaning of the word "sale"
and its cognates, it is necessary to consider the working out of subs(6AA) and subs(6AB) of s2. In the light of the foregoing, subs(6AA),
in my view, by its express terms refers to a transfer which occurs in Victoria of the property in tobacco. That would in any event
probably be the natural meaning of the word "sale" in a Victorian
That meaning is expanded by subs(6AB). The latter is in effect a deeming provision, but it requires that the terms of the sale or
contract for the sale, whether those terms be express or implied, do one of two things. Not even the principle in Federal Commissioner
of Taxation v Lutovi Investments Pty Ltd
[1978] HCA 55
(1978) 140 CLR 434
Lutovi permits the reference to the terms to be overlooked. The first of the two things is that the terms require either party to
deliver, or arrange delivery of, the tobacco into or within Victoria. There was, in my view, no material (whether or not admissible
in a court of law) before the commissioner suggesting such a term, express or implied. Certainly that is so of express terms. As
regards implied terms, the putative sales were either to Mr Nasir or to Adbarr Pty Ltd. (As will appear, I consider it was the latter.)
But, in either case, there was no material to show a term that Mr Nasir or Adbarr Pty Ltd or the plaintiff was impliedly required
to deliver, or arrange delivery of, the tobacco into Victoria. Indeed, the evidence before the commissioner was quite the contrary.
What occurred according to the material - and there is no suggestion that the actual handling of tobacco at Murray Bridge did not
occur - was inconsistent with there being any implied term of the contracts satisfying para(a). For delivery to the various subpurchasers
was effected at Murray Bridge or, possibly in one case, in suburban Adelaide. Mr Lester in cross-examination (T73) very fairly said
that he had no evidence of any of the tobacco being delivered into Victoria.
I should perhaps digress to say that, despite two brief submissions and a little variation by Mr Bakkar in his record of interview,
the defendant in written submissions, and in argument substantially, treated the sales as being either to Mr Nasir or Adbarr Pty
Ltd as principal, not to either as agent for various purchasers unidentified except by an odd forename or two. The case was really
argued on the basis that the sales were to Mr Nasir or Adbarr Pty Ltd. Even if it were open to the commissioner to conclude that
either was an agent for the sundry unidentified persons, such a view would, in my opinion, lead to no different conclusion than the
conclusions I express.
There was reference in the documents and in argument to shams. It is convenient to note at this point that in that regard there was
not a submission that the plaintiff did not sell tobacco or, in other words, that the whole idea of selling was a sham. In any event,
it could not, in my view, be concluded that the plaintiff did not sell tobacco. It undoubtedly purchased from suppliers, whose bona
fides were not called into question, large amounts of tobacco which it disposed for what was called a fee. It disposed physically
of the tobacco and ceased, in my view, to own it. In other words, it sold. What was concluded by the commissioner and submitted on
his behalf to me was that what I might call the interstate aspect was a sham and that the sales were Victorian. I shall consider
that submission in due course.
I turn then to the second, alternative, thing that the terms must do if they are to satisfy subs(6AB). It is contained in para(b).
It was agreed before me that the delivery there spoken of was delivery by one of the parties. Delivery is, of course, a well-known
term, if not a term of art, in the field of sale of goods legislation. The subsection requires that the terms, admittedly including
implied terms, "contemplate" deliver into or within Victoria. No or virtually no submissions -
were directed to that word. The word "contemplate" denotes more than to expect. In the Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd ed, the relevant
meanings are:
4(a) To have in view, ... take into account as a contingency to be provided for;
(b) To have in view as a purpose.
In Scene Estate Ltd v Amos [1957] 2 QB 205, the Court of Appeal in England was concerned with whether agreements were made "in contemplation
of the use of land only for grazing or mowing during some specified period of the year". Parker LJ was of the view at 213 that "contemplation"
required more than expectation: it required the power and obligation to do the very thing contemplated. Denning LJ at 211 expressed
a not dissimilar view and both of their Lordships stated, interestingly in the light of submissions in the present case, that contemplation
covered the case where the express agreement was a sham.
Applying, as I would, those general views to this case, whilst recognising that the legislation was different, I consider that it
is the terms of the contract or sale that must contemplate, and confer a power and obligation to effect, delivery into or within
Victoria. Those terms may be implied but it is the terms that must contemplate. Therefore it is not enough if the parties to the
contract thought it likely or even intended that someone down the chain of purchasers would deliver the tobacco into or within Victoria.
Because of the requirement that the contemplation must be by the terms, I think that the abovementioned agreement before me of the
parties that the delivery must be by one of the parties to the sale or contract is correct.
If the dictionary meanings are applied, then it seems to me that for the commissioner to be entitled to consider that the facts fall
within para(b) there would have to be some material before him justifying the view that the parties to the contracts or sales had
in view as a term of the contracts or sales delivery into or within Victoria, or had that in view as a purpose of their contracts
or sales. It is, in my view, not enough that it was open to conclude that the tobacco would eventually be delivered by someone into
Victoria or within it. Of course, whatever the superficial terms might show, if it was open to conclude that there were implied terms,
which I take to include tacit terms, whereby the parties agreed or understood that in truth one or other of them was contractually
bound to deliver into or within Victoria, para(b) would be satisfied. But I do not think there was any evidence justifying such an
The interpretation I have placed so far upon para(b) might be said to duplicate para(a). It does seem to me that there is overlap,
but certainly para(b), unlike para(a), is apt to cover sham transactions, by which I mean transactions which on their face appear
to require delivery elsewhere than into or within Victoria, but which do not reflect the real intention of the parties which is hidden
by their form of words.
But para(b) could also possibly apply more widely so as to be satisfied by a term which provided that, in case the goods are delivered
into Victoria or within Victoria, the seller warrants that they satisfy, say, the health regulations, if there be any, relating to
tobacco. I am conscious that that is to give the word "contemplate" a wider meaning than the Court of Appeal gave the word "contemplation"
in the English case, but it is an example of a term which, if within para(b), would make para(b) in its non-sham application not
merely repetitive of para(a). -
The idea of the purchaser delivering, which is present in subs(6AB), is somewhat unusual in the context of sale of goods (cf
Goods Act 1958
and s27 and s29(1) of the South Australian
). But it is no doubt present as an anti-avoidance technique.
On the interpretation I have adopted, it is not necessary to consider any question of extraterritorial validity. In support of the
views which I have expressed I would add, first, that the example of a contract for the sale of tobacco made by a telephone call
between a licensed wholesale merchant present in Victoria and a purchaser in Western Australia in a case where the contract was to
be wholly performed in Western Australia would strongly suggest that the place of making the contract was, contrary to two of the
defendant's submissions, not the appropriate test; for such a sale, albeit by a Victorian licensed wholesaler, would not seem to
be within the presumptive proper reach of a Victorian
. Nor in my view is the reach of the
to be determined by asking whether the proper law of the contract of sale is Victorian. I therefore do not consider that Benaim v
[1924] AC 514
, cited for the plaintiff, is applicable so far as it deals with the question of proper law. So far as it deals with where a particular
contract was made, because it turns on contract as opposed to sale, it is not, in my view, applicable. Furthermore, on that aspect,
it is only an example and lays down no general rule.
I would also support my view that the provisions invoked by the commissioner in his reasons do not apply without limitation of locality,
by suggesting that the
was not intended to apply where the holder of a wholesale tobacco merchant's licence under the Victorian
who was also licensed in Western Australia, by a transaction negotiated and performed completely in Western Australia, say in Kununurra,
sold to a retailer who intended to sell to consumers from his or her shop in Kununurra. Presumably there would be a fee levied by
reference to the amount of that sale under the legislation applicable in Western Australia. Except possibly in regard to financial
resources, such a transaction would seem of no concern to the Victorian Commissioner.
I should add that the parliamentary debates on the 1994
and the 1995
are of no help on the meaning of subs(6AA) and subs(6AB).
I turn then to consider whether the material before the commissioner allowed a conclusion that the transactions I have compendiously
described were sales in Victoria within s2(6AA). (For reasons I have already given, I consider that subs(6AB) could not, on the material,
reasonably be invoked.) In doing so, I point out that any factual view reasonably open can be relied on by the commissioner, but
that it is my opinion that, if, on all of those views of the facts, the true legal position is that the sales were properly ex-Victorian,
there was an error of law even though there might be respectable arguments to the contrary of what the court holds to be the true
legal position. I have found this part of the case very difficult and it is not, I think, as simple as the able arguments of counsel
for opposing views suggested.
It seems to me that it was not open to the commissioner on the material before him, which was uniform on the point, to conclude otherwise
than that the plaintiff, through Mr Bakkar, was not prepared to hand over to the purchaser tobacco until the requirements laid down
by Mr Bakkar had been satisfied, being the registration of the purchaser as an unlicensed wholesaler in South Australia (or the purchaser
obtaining a licence as a consumer, a possibility which may be disregarded), and, at least as a matter of preference, the purchaser
being a body corporate. Mr Bakkar also told persons at Murray Bridge, including Mr Nasir, -
that the purchaser must produce identification and make a statutory declaration. However, I think that it was open to the commissioner
to conclude from p98 of Mr Bakkar's record of interview that that was not a requirement which was in fact insisted on. But the requirement
of registration was insisted on. It may be that Mr Bakkar would have been prepared to waive the requirement of incorporation; but
this need not be pursued, for that requirement was satisfied no later than the requirement of registration.
It was put by the plaintiff that registration was a condition precedent, meaning that until it was satisfied there was no contract,
and that it was not satisfied until 28 November 1995 and, when it was satisfied, the matter was, as it were, in the jurisdiction
of South Australia. But I consider that the correct view is that the requirement which Mr Bakkar laid down was a condition precedent,
not to contract, but to performance of contract: Perri v Coolangatta Investments Pty Ltd
[1982] HCA 29
(1982) 149 CLR 537.
The plaintiff could not have sold to someone else without breach of contract towards Mr Nasir (or his company), who (or which) was
impliedly obliged to use best endeavours to satisfy the condition. The performance in question clearly included delivery, but, in
my view, it also included transfer of property in the tobacco. For the condition might never be satisfied and it would be strange
indeed if one were left with the position that the goods were owned by the purchaser but the purchaser never became entitled to delivery
and thus possession of them. This shows in my view that satisfaction of the requirement was a condition precedent to transfer of
the property as well as delivery, even if by 28 November no further specific conduct on the part of the plaintiff was required to
effect the transfer.
That condition was not satisfied until 28 November 1995. In respect of the orders that had been placed, accepted and paid for up
to that time, when and only when the condition was satisfied the tobacco was physically delivered to the purchaser and immediately
to the subpurchasers, and the property in that tobacco passed at the time of satisfaction in South Australia to the purchaser. Therefore,
in respect of the orders which had been placed before satisfaction of the condition precedent, the sales effected upon satisfaction
were in my view outside the reach of the Victorian
. (The sales made upon satisfaction of the condition were, because by then Adbarr Pty Ltd had been incorporated, sales to that company
and not to Mr Nasir. The requirements of strict juristic analysis are satisfied by an implied novation or a ratification under s183
of the Corporations Law.)
I do not accept the plaintiff's submission that Mr Bakkar's "going guarantee for the goods" was inconsistent with property not having
passed in Victoria. It seems to me that it is consistent with the risk remaining with the seller, or is another way of saying that
the risk remained with the seller, as it did if I am right in the view that the property was not transferred until satisfaction of
the condition (Goods Act 1958, s25 and s20 of the South Australian Act).
The imposition of the requirement might possibly be viewed as a reservation of the right of disposal until it was satisfied within
Goods Act 1958
or s19(1) of the South Australian Act. I think that view less likely to be correct, but in any event it does not affect the conclusion
that, in respect of the contracts made before satisfaction of the condition, the property in the tobacco was transferred in South
But as from 28 November that condition was satisfied in respect of any possible future sales to Adbarr Pty Ltd. Other orders were
placed after 28 November, as appears from the invoices exhibited to Mr Bakkar's principal affidavit, and more particularly from his
record of interview. By that time there -
was no condition precedent or reservation of the right of disposal. One has, on the material before the commissioner, payments by
the purchaser occurring in Melbourne; the payment by the plaintiff to its supplier at the same time; and the loading in or in the
vicinity of Melbourne on vehicles of tobacco from the supplier's warehouse or store, or, in one case, delivery to the plaintiff by
the supplier, in that case Rothmans, to Shepparton. One has on the material, which it was not suggested should in any way be rejected,
those steps in Victoria in the transactions, but also in respect of those transactions the delivery undoubtedly occurred at Murray
Bridge. It was not suggested for the defendant that the commissioner was entitled to take the view that delivery - by which I mean
delivery to the purchaser Adbarr Pty Ltd - occurred elsewhere than at the plaintiff's warehouse in Murray Bridge.
The question then arises whether the principle stated in para718 of Halsbury, op cit, is applicable here to exclude r5(1) mentioned
later. That principle reads: Where, by the terms of the contract for unascertained goods, the seller agrees to deliver the goods
at a particular place, and no intention appears in the contract that the property will pass previously to such delivery, the property
does not pass unless and until delivery is made accordingly.
I refer particularly to what was said by Cockburn CJ in Calcutta and Burmah Steam Navigation Co v De Mattos
(1863) 32 LJQB 322
at 335 and by Lords Herschell and Davey in Badische Anilin und Soda Fabrik v Basle Chemical Works
[1898] AC 200
at 207 and 209 respectively and also to Flynn v Mackin
[1974] IR 101
at 111-12. But here the goods had already been paid for. The question is whether Mr Lester was entitled to find that an intention
impliedly appeared in the contract that the property would pass on payment.
In my view, it was open as a matter of fact to the commissioner to find on the material before him that, notwithstanding the avowed
compliance with South Australian law, the going to South Australia and the handing over there of the tobacco were artificial and,
after 28 November 1995, were a sham to give the appearance that property was not to pass in Victoria when, in truth, the parties
intended it to pass in Victoria. The fact that Mr Lester could not point to any tobacco sold to Adbarr Pty Ltd by the plaintiff coming
back into Victoria does not prevent such a finding.
Whilst the ultimate categorisation is a matter of law, the finding of artificiality and sham, which I think was open on the material
for the reasons I will mention in a moment, was a matter of fact. I will not burden this already lengthy set of reasons unduly by
reference to the material. But, in my view, the commissioner was, to start with, entitled to have regard to the very large, to use
neutral terms, amount in volume and money that was involved in the transactions between the plaintiff and Adbarr Pty Ltd. over a
short period of time, some $1.4 million, and to have regard to the following facts set out in para4 to para5 and para29 of Mr Lester's
affidavit. The plaintiff was not the only wholesaler selling or purporting to sell tobacco products in South Australia. The commissioner
had before him information that the volume of tobacco products known to be consumed in South Australia was approximately $15 million
worth per month and that Victorian licensed wholesalers under investigation by his office had made combined sales of tobacco products
into South Australia in the month of November and early December 1995, in excess of $15 million. He was entitled to conclude that
the disclosed alleged interstate sales of tobacco products into South Australia did not accord with the known natural consumption
figure. Furthermore, he was entitled -
to have regard to the fact, which he had on hearsay from the South Australian State Taxation Office, that no consumers are licensed
in South Australia and no merchant has reported purchases from any of the unlicensed wholesalers claiming to operate in South Australia.
It is true that Mr Lester said (T47) that those general matters were not relied on in the first determination, as opposed to the
second (T51). But he was aware of them and his answer meant no more, in my view, than that the reasons in the first determination
were confined to specific legislative provisions and did not include sham. He was of the view that the tobacco was coming back into
Victoria and being consumed here and that the sales were completed here (T48, 81-82). Those general matters underlay his assumption,
as it were, of jurisdiction.
Leaving those general considerations aside, he was also entitled to find and have regard to the fact that in respect of each order
the purchaser's director and some of the subpurchasers came to Melbourne to pay, and that they paid in cash, being cash emanating
from the subpurchasers; that the plaintiff's warehouse at Murray Bridge was empty except for the enormous amount of tobacco stored
in it between 1 and 27 or 28 November; that Mr Bakkar did not know Mr Nasir's surname; that the plaintiff and the purchaser had no
real connection with South Australia; that the plaintiff only went to South Australia as a result of a request from Mr Nasir, a Victorian;
and that the subpurchasers apparently attended the Murray Bridge warehouse, possibly as a result of word of mouth advertising by
Mr Bakkar, but in such a way that, when he came, Mr Nasir found ready-made customers for his business.
Moreover, in relation to the application for a licence for February, but only in relation to that application, the commissioner was
entitled to take into account matters revealed by the interview of Mr Nasir in January 1996, namely, the one month sublease of a
shop in suburban Newton, South Australia, which had no services connected to it and which Mr Nasir used twice only; and that Mr Nasir,
the director of the purchaser, was aged only 19 and had not previously known his customers. Mr Nasir agreed that "it looks absolutely
bizarre". It was also open to the commissioner to take into account that $2.7 million worth, on contract price, of tobacco was delivered
by a Victorian carrier in four deliveries in early December 1995 to those very same premises.
I should briefly deal with the three characterisations which the defendant submitted it was open to the commissioner to make of the
facts or material before him. The first was that what occurred was that after invitations to treat, whether in Victoria or South
Australia, Mr Bakkar made an offer to sell, capable of acceptance only by conduct constituted by the handing over to the plaintiff
of the price of the product to be sold, and each offer was accepted by the handing over of the money in Melbourne, thus giving rise
to a sale in Victoria.
In my view, the insistence by Mr Bakkar upon satisfaction of at least his requirement of registration, which I do not think it was
open to the commissioner on the material before him to gainsay, requires the rejection of that characterisation in respect of orders
placed before 28 November 1995. In relation to both earlier and later orders and contracts, I do not accept the characterisation
because the goods were unascertained at the time of payment and, until they were ascertained, property did not and could not pass:
Goods Act 1958
and s16 of the South Australian Act. -
The second characterisation was that each of the sales between the plaintiff and Adbarr Pty Ltd took place in Victoria because title
in the goods passed in Victoria as soon as the goods were taken from Composite Buyers or, it may be, delivered by Rothmans.
It seems to me that the second characterisation cannot be accepted in respect of orders placed before satisfaction of the requirement
of Mr Bakkar, but in relation to orders placed and contracts made thereafter, I, in substance, accept the submission. It appears
to me that it was open to the commissioner to conclude that the property in the goods passed upon appropriation by ascertainment
and loading and that the delivery which admittedly occurred in South Australia was not necessary for the property to pass. In other
words, it was open to him to find that the facts fell within r5(1) of the well-known rules set out in s23 of the Victorian Act and
s18 of the South Australian Act. Apposite in that regard is the statement by Dixon J in James v The Commonwealth
[1939] HCA 9
(1939) 62 CLR 339
at 377-8: The seller in shipping a definite parcel of goods in performance of a contract for the sale of unascertained goods by description
ascertains the goods, and prima facie he appropriates them to the contract. The terms of the contract import the prior assent of
the buyer to his doing so, and accordingly, if the appropriation is unconditional, the presumption is that he intended that the property
should pass without more. If he does not reserve the right of disposal of the goods, as it is called, his delivery of the goods to
the shipowner as a carrier for the purpose of transmission to the buyer is deemed an unconditional appropriation of the goods to
the contract. But he may reserve the right of disposal until certain conditions are fulfilled, and then, notwithstanding shipment
for transmission to the buyer, property in the goods will not pass to the buyer until fulfilment of the conditions. The first two
sentences are directly in point. See also Canberra Washed Sand Pty Ltd v Ro-Mix Concrete Pty Ltd
(1976) 11 ACTR 1.
The third characterisation put forward was that, notwithstanding Mr Bakkar's sworn evidence in the course of his interview on 21
December 1995, all communications about the sale of tobacco took place in Melbourne at the banks where the moneys were deposited,
and not in South Australia as alleged. That is to say, it was submitted, it was inherently improbable that Mr Bakkar would have travelled
to South Australia for the purposes of taking orders: it is far more likely that Mr Nasir communicated the orders to Mr Bakkar in
Victoria where both of them were resident.
It may be that that view of the facts was open, but I do not find it necessary to express a concluded view on that point. For, even
if it be right, it still deals only with the place of the making of the contract, not the place of sale, for the goods are unascertained
and ascertainment was, as I have stated, necessary.
It was submitted for the plaintiff that the defendant's determinations were vitiated because he failed to have regard to the plaintiff's
offer to photograph and report about its purchaser and subpurchasers and to the plaintiff's cessation of interstate activity after
a warning. Compare also Ex 1. Mr Lester said (T65) that he did not ignore the offer, but did not think it relevant to his decision.
To my mind he was saying that he considered it but thought it of no weight. But, even if he rejected it and the cessation of the
activity as irrelevant, he made, in my view, no error of law. There was no statutory obligation to consider the matters: they bore
on none of the matters for satisfaction. They may have been relevant to sham and place of sale, but they in no way compelled findings
on those aspects favourable to the plaintiff. The appropriate finding was for Mr Lester and I -
should not intervene: Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
(1986) 162 CLR 24
Peko-Wallsend at 40. The plaintiff also submitted that no reasonable decision-maker could have made the determinations on a proper
construction of the Act. My reasons for judgment as a whole show that I do not accept that submission.
I have in substance accepted the defendant's characterisation as regards post-27 November orders. My line of reasoning is not found
in Mr Lester's notifications. But Mr Lester based his determinations factually on all transactions as being within his purview and
my reasoning furnishes the legal basis for his having regard to some of those transactions, sufficient to support his determinations.
There is in the reasoning only one matter of fact where a finding or choice by the commissioner is required, the material before
him permitting of only one finding on other matters of fact. That one matter of fact is whether delivery in South Australia was artificial
and a sham. Whilst there may not be an explicit statement by Mr Lester to that precise effect, it is clear from his affidavit that
he regarded the relevant activities of the plaintiff as, or as part of, an avoidance scheme and considered steps in those activities
to be shams. Reasons 2 and 6 in his second notification of determination are wide enough to encompass the very finding. But the reasons
for the first determination, in my view, as stated earlier, are based on the same underlying view. In my opinion, there is no point
in remitting the first application to the commissioner for reconsideration in accordance with law as found in my reasons, for, despite
some of Mr Lester's answers in cross-examination, it cannot be doubted what he will conclude, particularly having regard to the submissions
made on his behalf. Therefore, so far, if at all, as a discretion might arise to grant relief, I decline to do so in the exercise
of it: R v Anderson; Ex parte Ipec-Air Pty Ltd
[1965] HCA 27
(1965) 113 CLR 177
It follows, in my view, from the reasons which I have expressed that, in relation to the first determination, even though sales pursuant
to the orders placed before and up to 27 November 1995 were outside the reach of the Act, no error of law is shown by the plaintiff
in respect of any of the grounds in the first determination as notified. This is because there were contracts of sale made after
the date or satisfaction of the conditions, and thus sales made after that date, but before the date of the commissioner's first
determination.
As regards the second determination of the commissioner, reason 7 in the commissioner's decision must be upheld and is fatal to the
plaintiff's challenge to that second determination. Even if all other reasons were shown to be vitiated by error of law, reason 7
would be a sufficient reason and there would be no point in quashing the determination. But in addition the substance of ground 5
is not shown to be vitiated by any error of law, although its expression is inapt as it should refer to an application under s7AA
and its wording should be appropriately changed. If that were the only reason, in my discretion I would not quash the determination
because of the way in which the reason was expressed. For, if the matter had to be sent back to the commissioner, he would be entitled,
for the reasons I have given, to find that the appropriate ground referable to an application by a person who did not hold a current
wholesale merchant's tobacco licence had been made out for refusing the application. In view of Mr Lester's affidavit, he would almost
certainly do so. As to the other reasons, they strictly are not open, for the reasons I have given; but they are discretionary factors
at least so far as the court is concerned. Indeed the case was conducted on the footing that their validity was really raised in
the challenge to the first -
determination; and merely because they were inapposite I would not give the plaintiff any relief in respect of the second determination.
For the reasons which I have given, subject to anything the parties may say, there will be orders as follows:
1. This proceeding be dismissed.
2. The plaintiff pay the defendant's costs, including any reserved costs and the costs of recording and transcription of evidence,
ruling, and reasons.
3. The time for the serving of any notice of appeal be enlarged to 28 March 1996.
Application dismissed.
Solicitors for the plaintiff: Trumble Szanto Braham
Solicitor for the defendant: TD Weerapah, solicitor to the Commissioner of State Revenue.cLEISH
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter