URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VRAT/2009/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Armstrong-Mallia-Caspaney (HAR) - App 03 04 & 05 2009 [2009] VRAT 5 (28 April 2009)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
APPEAL NO'S. 3, 4 & 5 OF 2009
In the matter of an Appeal
MR MICHAEL ARMSTRONG
MR RON MALLIA
AGAINST THE PENALTY OF SIX MONTHS DISQUALIFICATION FOR BREACHING
AUSTRALIAN HARNESS RACING RULE 217 IMPOSED BY THE HARNESS RACING
MR MICHAEL CASPANEY
AGAINST THE PENALTY OF THREE MONTHS DISQUALIFICATION FOR BREACHING
AUSTRALIAN HARNESS RACING RULE 217 IMPOSED BY THE HARNESS RACING
JUDGE WILLIAMS
, His Honour
Mrs E. Clarke,
Mr J. Kellett, Adviser
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT MELBOURNE ON 28 APRIL
2009 AT 10.11 A.M.
MR P. RANDLES appeared on behalf of Mr M. Armstrong.
MR A. MALLIA (with leave) appeared on behalf of Mr. R. Mallia.
MR M. CASPANEY appeared on his own behalf.
MR B. DUNSHEA appeared on behalf of Harness Racing Victoria.
(His Honour Judge Williams)
R U L I N G
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal by Michael Armstrong, Ron Mallia and
Michael Caspaney against penalties imposed by the stewards on
25 March 2009. At
the outset I wish to express my thanks to my colleagues for the assistance which
they have provided to me in this
case, which has been of considerable value to
me. But in accordance with the principles of these matters, the decisions that
made in relation to the appeals are mine.
If I can turn to the circumstances of the offending. The horse Lota
Vision was purchased from New Zealand some time during 2008
and came to
Australia on a date which is not certain but would appear to be two or three
months at least prior to the relevant Ballarat
trial date which was Sunday 7
December 2008. Once in Australia, the horse Lota Vision was stabled at Ron
Mallia's stables, Ron Mallia
being a registered stable hand.
Michael Armstrong being a registered trainer, became involved with the
horse as its trainer, and ultimately for the purposes of
the driving in the
subject trial on 7 December 2008, Michael Caspaney was asked to drive and did in
fact drive the horse on that
occasion. He was a C-Grade Driver and also a
registered trainer who had some horses at those stables belonging to Ron
Another horse by the name of Possum Bourne in fact died in Tasmania
some time in the middle of 2008, a fact which was known at least
Armstrong, if not to Ron Mallia. It seems that approaching the relevant date, 7
December 08, there was either pressure
or perceived pressure from the owners of
the horse, the individuals who had purchased Lota Vision in New Zealand,
perceived pressure
from them upon Armstrong and perhaps also Mallia to get the
horse racing.
However there was a problem because of some issue in New Zealand,
perhaps the non payment by the agent of moneys to the prior owners.
or certificates had accompanied the horse Lota Vision over to Australia, and as
at the time I am speaking, namely early
December 2008, there were still no
papers that were in the possession of the owners or the trainer, Mr
So the predicament arose that there was the pressure to get the horse
running but there were no papers to certify its correct identity.
Nevertheless
in the days prior to 7 December 08, it was determined certainly by
Mr Armstrong, and as I will later indicate, in my view also by Mr Mallia
that the horse be entered to run in an official trial at
Ballarat on 7 December,
and that it be entered under the name of the deceased horse Possum Bourne.
As a result of this decision, Mr Armstrong filled in an application
form on Friday 5 December 08 that the horse run on Sunday the
7th under the name
of Possum Bourne. As I will again indicate later, it is my view that Mr Mallia
was fully aware of this entry
on Friday the 5th. As it turned out, on the
Sunday morning Mr Armstrong,
Mr Mallia, Mr Caspaney and others all travelled to Ballarat in a
vehicle. Mr Caspaney had been asked on the Friday to ride the horse,
agreed to do so, but at that stage he understood the horse would run under the
correct name, Lota Vision. It was not
until the trip, or just before the trip
to Ballarat on the 7th, the Sunday, that he was informed that it was going to
run under the
false name of Possum Bourne.
Notwithstanding the fact that he was informed of those matters on the
Sunday morning, he agreed to carry on and drive the horse
in the trial. In
fact, the horse did run in the trial and it ran seventh. As it turned out,
(this appears from a passage in Mr
Mallia's record of interview at p.38 of the
exhibit book) the papers arrived within a matter of about three days, i.e.
papers certifying
the horse Lota Vision arrived in Australia within a matter of
Subsequently for reasons which I need not inquire into or set out, the
stewards became suspicious of the matters that I have just
explained, and
records of interview of the relevant personnel were carried out by the
investigative steward, Mr Rogers on 24 February
09. He interviewed Mr Armstrong
in an initial interview of 11 pages conducted at about 3.00 p.m. on that day.
Mr Armstrong provided a false account of events, and indeed I am
informed today at this hearing that in another matter occurring
in early January
of 09 and indirectly arising out of this false or this deceptive behaviour, Mr
Armstrong again came before the stewards
and would have had the opportunity to
explain correctly what had taken place on 7 December, but declined to do
As I have just said, at the first interview at three o'clock on the
afternoon of 24 February, he again gave false information.
However inside the
hour, he decided to come clean and rectify the matter with
Mr Rogers, and a second record of interview was carried out prior to
4.00 p.m. that same day, in which a true account of events was
Mr Mallia was also interviewed by Mr Rogers and he made admissions
in other ways.
Mr Caspaney made full admissions to Mr Rogers in his record of interview.
In the event, the relevant charges were laid by the stewards, Mr
Armstrong was charged with contravention of Rule 217 which reads,
whether alone or in association with others shall not conceal or attempt to
conceal the identity of a horse." He was
also charged in relation to his false
record of interview, with breach of Rule 187(2). "A person shall not refuse to
answer questions
or to produce a horse, documents, substance or piece of
equipment, or give false or misleading evidence or information at an inquiry
investigation."
Mr Mallia was charged with contravention of the aforesaid Rule 217, and
Mr Caspaney was also charged with contravention of Rule
217. At the stewards
25 March 2009, Mr Armstrong was disqualified for a period of six months
in relation to the Rule 217 offence, and was fined $2000
in relation to the Rule
187 offence.
Mr Mallia was disqualified for six months for the
Rule 217 offence, and Mr Caspaney was disqualified for three months for
the Rule 217 offence.
Each of those three individuals are here today appealing not against
the finding of guilt and conviction, but solely against the
penalties imposed.
In essence, Mr Armstrong through his counsel, Mr Randles, has put to the
Tribunal that although he went into
this deception with his eyes open and
knowing it was wrong, it was not a case of feigning poor performance by the
horse in order
to gain subsequent financial benefit, for example in the betting
ring. It was not such a case. It was, he puts, merely behaviour
brought about by some degree of pressure to get the horse running, and to give
the horse a hit out to see what it was really
like, and how competitive it would
Accordingly Mr Randles has submitted that the culpability that should
be attributed to his client should be regarded as relatively
low, and when added
to Mr Armstrong's good character which is attested to by several testimonials
that are provided, together with
30 years in the industry without
significant prior offending, all those matters, Mr Randles submits, should lead
to a significant
reduction in the period of disqualification.
Mr Mallia, through his spokesman, his spokesman another Mr Mallia, has
put on penalty that he should not be treated by the Tribunal
as equally culpable
as Armstrong, that he was not an architect, as Armstrong was, of the offending.
He was not involved in any foreknowledge
or conspiracy with Armstrong in
relation to the deception that was carried out, and that indeed Armstrong filled
out the papers to
run the horse in the false name, and that Mallia was only told
he was not nearly as culpable as Armstrong was. In addition, it has been
pointed out that Mr Ron Mallia also has had nearly
30 years in the industry
without offending, and that disqualification will impose a significant loss in a
number of ways upon him.
Mr Caspaney, who appeared for himself, has pointed out that this is his
first offence against the rules of harness racing, that
he was unaware of the
deception until the Sunday morning when the various individuals congregrated
prior to the car trip to Ballarat.
He had been asked to drive at the trials on
the Friday, but as far as he was then aware, he was driving a correctly named
and it was not until the Sunday morning that he became aware of the
deception. There is no real argument about that because they
are the facts. He
says he went along with it. He admits that he went along with it, that he
should not have. Perhaps he is asking
us to infer that there was some degree of
pressure he felt to go along with it, and that therefore the Tribunal should
the penalty that has been imposed. Such are the facts and the
submissions that have been put.
The Tribunal considers that an offence of this nature, namely the
substitution of one horse for another, is potentially of the highest
seriousness in relation to the breaches that the stewards and the appeal
tribunals come to deal with. Everybody involved
in the codes, the horse racing
codes, inherently is aware that the very concept of a ring-in or a substituted
horse for another horse
is at the highest echelon of culpability in the
industry. I consider that the fact that there are so few instances of this
occurring in the codes is testament to the very point that I have just
made, and that is the inherent awareness of all concerned
as to the seriousness
of the particular deception and offence.
Mr Dunshea, who represented the stewards in this matter, in his
submission analysed the offending by classifying three different
culpability within the particular offence before us, namely concealing the
identity of a horse, substituting a wrong horse,
or a horse under a wrong
At the lowest level of culpability, submitted Mr Dunshea, was the
case of an inadvertent mix up of horses, perhaps due to transport
confusion or
some other phenomenon where there was clearly no intention on behalf of the
owner or trainer to deliberately substitute
one horse for another, and Mr
Dunshea conceded that for that sort of circumstance in all probability a fine
would be an adequate
Perhaps if I leave the second category for a moment, and jump to the
third category at the other end of the spectrum, where an owner
deliberately substitutes one horse for another, or runs a horse or trials a
horse under a false name to feign a poor performance
in order to subsequently
cash in on that poor performance by running the better horse under the same name
on an official occasion.
In other words, the "Fine Cotton" sort of situation.
One cannot imagine a more serious offence in the industry, and disqualification
for as much as a life period may be appropriate.
Turning then to the final category put by Mr Dunshea, and that is
the intermediate category of culpability which of course covers
a broad spectrum
of circumstances. Mr Dunshea put it that this category covered the situation
where there was a deliberate substitution
of one horse for another, but where
the gain was not intended to be the direct financial gain that might be wrought
from a deliberate
poor performance at a trial under a wrong name; but rather
some much lesser indirect benefit, such as seeing how good a horse was
administrative purposes or something of that nature. And no doubt this
intermediate category of culpability, as I indicated,
may cover a wide range of
circumstances.
I consider that Mr Dunshea's categorisation of this offence into those
three broad categories is a helpful one. It cannot really
be argued that the
inadvertent situation at the lower end may not warrant a significant penalty.
The Fine Cotton type offending
at the other end warrants the highest level of
penalty, and the in between categorisation will vary considerably depending on
culpable the Tribunal considers the perpetrators to be. Nobody here today
really argued with those sentiments. Nobody here today
argued that this case
fell into the second category. As I have indicated, that still requires the
Tribunal to analyse how great
the wrongdoing has been.
It is the Tribunal's view, as I hinted earlier, that both Mr Armstrong
and Mr Mallia were involved in the planning towards this
false deception.
Particularly bearing in mind what Mr Armstrong has admitted in his second
record of interview, the true record
of interview, and what Mr Mallia has
said at p.38 of the exhibit book, in the Tribunal's view it cannot really be
denied that each
of these individuals has conspired together to enter this horse
under the false name of Possum Bourne, and for the purposes of the
Ballarat on 7 December 08. Undoubtedly they wanted to trial the horse. There
may well have been perceived pressure from
the owners to do so, and to find out
how good the horse was, and how it would cope with the pressure of a trial
In those circumstances it is the view of the Tribunal that there were
two easy and honest options open to Messrs Armstrong and Mallia.
First, a phone
call could easily have been made to the New Zealand racing authority to
ascertain how long the papers would be in
arriving. As I have already
indicated, it turned out that they were over here within a matter of about three
days. That could have
easily been learned by those individuals, had they taken
the trouble to make some inquiry, and a delay of a few days would have meant
absolutely nothing in relation to the progress of the horse.
The second honest option would have been to arrange for the horse to be
involved in an unofficial trial at a trotting track, a convenient
track for the
individuals involved, where it could perform fast work in the company of other
horses. I am assured that, notwithstanding
the matters put to me on behalf of
Mr Mallia, that this is not a difficult matter to arrange, and it is indeed
common practice at
many tracks around this State.
So there were two easy honest options for Messrs Armstrong and
Mallia to avoid doing what they did. But instead of choosing one
options, they chose to involve themselves in a course of action which
constituted this serious offence. They chose to trial
a horse under a wrong
name. Now, it hardly needs be said that nothing brings the integrity of the
industry, the harness racing industry
down as comprehensively as this sort of
action, this offence of substituting a horse for another horse.
Accordingly even though this is not a Category 3 case, the Tribunal is
of the view that it still involves significant culpability,
being a clear and
dishonest deception. In addition as far as Mr Armstrong goes, he also faces the
lack of candour which he displayed
both in relation to the stewards, both
earlier in January and more particularly on the day of the record of interview
when his first
statement was clearly false.
The Tribunal does take into account the good prior record of all three
appellants, as has been put on behalf of each of them, and
the Tribunal also
takes account of the testimonials produced on behalf of Mr Michael Armstrong.
However in view of the significant level of culpability which the
Tribunal is satisfied exists in this case, as I have just explained,
even though
it is a Category 2 and not a Category 3 case, and in view of the significant
degree of deterrence that needs to be seen
to result from the Tribunal's
penalties, the Tribunal considers the penalties imposed by the stewards are
proper and appropriate.
No assistance is gained by reference to the sparse precedents that have
been referred to. Not enough is known about the facts that
led to those cases,
and in any event the Tribunal is mindful of significant penalties that have been
imposed at least in the thoroughbred
code upon trainers who have transgressed in
Accordingly the disqualifications under Rule 217 of six months against
Mr Armstrong, six months against Mr Mallia and three months
Caspaney will continue to exist. The appeals will be dismissed. And the fine
of $2000 will be reimposed in relation
Mr Armstrong's breach of Rule 187(2).
It is true that Mr Caspaney's culpability is clearly less than the
culpability of the other two. But the Tribunal takes the view
that he could
have withdrawn, and chose not to. His lesser period of disqualification is
meant to reflect his lower level of wrongdoing.
Accordingly all appeals are
dismissed, but I will order the return of the respective deposits.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (42 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter