URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICCAT/1998/1315.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kulasingam Family Trust v Whittlesea CC Kulasingam Family Trust v Whittlesea CC [1998] VICCAT 1315 (23 December 1998)
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
Permit Application No 704249
PRELIMINARIES
PLANNING CONTROLS
THE PROPOSAL
REASONS FOR ORDER
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
NO: 1998/47313
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON 23 DECEMBER 1998
A J Quirk, Member
Applicant for Review/Permit Applicant Kulasingam Family Trust
Responsible Authority Whittlesea City Council
NATURE OF APPLICATION
Application under S.77 of the
Planning and Environment Act
review of a decision
to grant a permit.
Permit Application No 704249
3 Unit Development
4 Hayley Court, Mill Park.
Land and Dimensions
Irregular lot with area of 863m
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING
Whittlesea Planning Scheme - Reserved Living Zone.
GROUNDS OF REFUSAL
1. The design of the proposal does not satisfy the following design elements,
objectives and criteria of the Good Design Guide for
Medium Density Housing
i) Car Parking and Vehicular Access
ii) Neighbourhood Character
2. The proposal would have a detrimental impact on the amenity of the area.
GROUNDS OF APPLICATION
1. The proposed development complies with State and Regional planning policy
and is consistent with Urban Consolidation and Housing
2. The proposed development adequately complies with the relevant elements of
the Good Design Guide for Medium Density Housing and
satisfies the intent and
objectives of the Guide.
3. The proposed development is appropriate within the context of the street and
the locality of the site given the existing neighbourhood
4. The proposal will not cause any traffic or parking problems in the vicinity
of the site.
5. The proposed development will not have a detrimental impact on the amenity
of the area.
APPEARANCES
Mr Roger Sucic, town planner, represented the Responsible Authority.
Mr Ross Bardin, planning consultant, appeared for the Applicant.
This is an application for review of a decision of the City of Whittlesea to
refuse to grant a permit for three detached dwellings
and associated garages at
4 Hayley Court, Mill Park.
PRELIMINARIES
Mr Bardin made application under clause 64(1) of Schedule 1 of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
1998 to substitute -
1. the Kulasingam Family Trust as the applicant for purposes of the
application; and
2. amended plans for the plans dealt with in the application.
Mr Sucic did not object to either of these requests and the application was
accordingly amended under the above clause.
PLANNING CONTROLS
The site and the surrounding land are zoned Reserved Living under the
Whittlesea Planning Scheme. A planning permit is required
for detached houses
and multi dwellings under Clause 122-1.2 of the scheme. Clause 21 of the
Regional Section applies and requires
the proposal to be assessed against the
Good Design Guide for Medium Density Housing.
Mr Sucic's description of the appeal site and surrounds was as follows :
"1. The appeal site is located within a relatively new residential
precinct in south west Mill Park, approximately 1 kilometre from
Dalton Village
Shopping Centre (a neighbourhood level shopping centre) and 600 metres from
Lalor North Secondary College.
2. The locality is characterised by a mix of single and double storey
dwellings and medium density housing in contemporary or reproduction
Front setbacks tend to be six metres and gardens are characterised by low scale
and restrained planting.
3. The site is located within 400 metres of Sycamore and Findon
4. The site is located immediately to the west of a Proposed Main Road
(which when constructed will accommodate traffic from Mill
Park and Epping
further north on to the Metropolitan Ring Road).
For the benefit of the Tribunal the location of the objectors in relation to
the appeal site have been outlined. The appeal site
covers an area of
, is located within the bowl of Hayley Court (which has a
length of only approximately 50 metres), is vacant, relatively flat, irregular
in shape and devoid of any vegetation. The frontage has a width of 12.55
metres, the eastern boundary has a length of 63.59 metres
and the western
boundary has a length of 76.01 metres. The site ends in a point at its
northern extremity".
THE PROPOSAL
Mr Bardin's submission described the proposal as follows :
"It is proposed to use the land for the purpose of developing three detached
dwellings. The layout is such that the dwellings are
located one behind the
other along the length of the site. The front dwelling is two storey and three
bedroom with living areas
located at the ground floor level. This dwelling is
set back between four and 5.5 metres from the street frontage. The two rear
dwellings are single storey and each contains two bedrooms.
Vehicle access is via a driveway on the eastern side of the site. A single
garage is provided for each dwelling. These are attached
to the rear dwellings
and in the case of the front dwelling the garage is attached to the garage of
the middle dwelling. These two
garages separate the front and middle
dwellings. Visitor parking is provided in tandem with the garages. Open space
areas for each
dwelling are generally along the western side of the
Landscaping is provided in the frontage setback, along both sides of the
driveway and around the entry areas of the rear dwellings.
The dwellings would
be of brick construction with pitched tiled roofs.
Slightly modified plans have been prepared and these make the following
changes to the layout :
* Greater provision of landscaping around entry areas to rear
* Relocation of fencing between open space areas of two rear
* Designation of turning/access areas to car spaces."
APPLICATION
After receiving the planning application, the Responsible Authority directed
that a notice of application be given which resulted
in three individual
objections including a petition of 29 signatures being received. The
objectors' concerns were summarised by
the Responsible Authority as follows
"1. Obstruction of views.
2. Reduction in property values
3. Increased noise
4. Increased traffic
5. Excessive units in the street
6. Reduced privacy as a result of overlooking".
The Council after having considered the application and the objections on 2
June 1998 resolved to refuse the application on the grounds
as listed with
particular emphasis on car parking, vehicular access and neighbourhood
character as being its major reasons.
REASONS FOR ORDER
Both parties to the appeal made both written and verbal submissions and
provided the Tribunal with extra material such as photographs
to assist in its
determination. All these are retained on the Tribunal's file.
Hayley Court is a very short court off an access street Carroll Crescent.
According to Mr Sucic and the Council report, there are
already quite a number
of units within the immediacy of Hayley Court including within the court
itself. The court contains eight
allotments and 13 dwellings. The subject
site is the only vacant parcel of land within the court. The court pavement
a large bowl at the end of the court which has more than ample room
for turning movements of vehicles.
It was Council's submission that medium density housing should be appropriately
distributed throughout a suburb so that concentrations
and clusters of unit
developments do not occur. It submitted that the appeal site locality has
quite a number of single and double-storey
units of contemporary reproduction
styles. The significant issue was that canopy trees are generally absent with
low scale plantings
in front gardens. The Responsible Authority further
submitted that the area has a relatively intensive built fabric with prevalence
of large double garages at the fronts of sites. Its opinion was that the
approval of this development would lead to a disproportionate
and unreasonable
number of units in comparison to single detached dwellings in the street.
However, as Mr Bardin submitted, the development
basically meets all the
criteria of Element E4 and E3 of the Good Design Guide. He submitted the site
layout meets all the objectives
and criteria of Element E4. He further
submitted that the overall area around Hayley Court could be described as
contemporary suburban
and that these units would be respectful of the
neighbourhood which was acknowledged in the Council officer's report on the
which he quoted :
"The design scale and mass of the dwellings is consistent with the types of
dwellings constructed in the area".
Mr Sucic did not argue strongly at all about the neighbourhood character
issue and I find it difficult to accept his contention that
the proposal would
not be in keeping with the neighbourhood character of the area. The proposal
has a density in excess of the requirements
of the Good Design Guide, it has
the two-storey unit at the front of the site and the single-storey units
towards the rear. It has
a setback in keeping with the setbacks of adjacent
dwellings. The units themselves are well located from boundaries and have a
architectural style to other buildings in the area. I do not consider
that this set of three units will in any way exacerbate any
problems of an
undue number of units in the area because, over the wider precinct, there is a
good mix of both single dwellings and
multi unit dwellings.
I fail to see how the Responsible Authority's second ground of refusal, ie,
that the proposal would have a detrimental impact on
the amenity of the area
can be sustained. I do not accept that the concerns of the objectors in
relation to noise, reduced privacy,
reduction in property values and
obstruction of views can be sustained. I do not believe there will be any
excessive overlooking
from the single window shown in bedroom 3 of the proposal
on the open space of the residents to the west of the subject site.
In relation to the Council's concerns about carparking and vehicular access, I
make the following comment.
Mr Bardin submitted the street presently generates approximately 120 to 130
vehicles per day and these three units would generate
possibly an extra 30
vehicle movements per day into that street. An access place under the
Guidelines of VicCode 1 can accommodate
300 vehicles per day with ease on
pavements of the width of Hayley Court. Therefore, the street will have
approximately 50% of the
traffic generation which could be sustained in an
access place. The road network external to Hayley Court is good. As far as
is concerned, the photographs submitted indicated very few vehicles
parking in the street at the time they were taken and further
there is ample
pavement within the street to accommodate car parking. There is also ample
room inside the site to accommodate parking
in accordance with the Good Design
Guide. The only problem, as submitted by the Council and with which I have
some agreement, is
that if the tandem spaces in front of the garages of units 1
and 2 are taken up by other cars, then it would be impossible for a
from unit 3 to drive forward out of the site without a good deal of shuffling.
It certainly could not complete a simple three
point turn but rather would have
to engage in a four or five point turn. However, this to me would only happen
on an odd occasion
and I am prepared to accept this under the circumstances.
My other comments are as follows.
As I said at the hearing, the secluded private open space for unit 1 is
insufficient for a 3 bedroom unit. The other two units have
open space well in
excess of the Guide and I have no problems with those. Unfortunately, they are
the smaller units. After some
discussion, the applicants agreed that they
would reduce unit 1 to a two bedroom unit which would then make its area of
more acceptable, as it does meet the minimum criteria of the Good
Design Guide. I accepted that at the hearing. My other comments
while the density and site layout are quite acceptable, I generally find the
neo Georgian style of development to be totally
foreign to design requirements
for housing in the climatic conditions experienced in Australia. There are no
eaves or other means
of restraining the sun's entry into habitable rooms on the
northern and western sides of buildings in summer periods. This with
incidence of ultra violet rays caused by the depletion of the ozone layer
causes all sorts of problems including the fading
of furnishings and carpets
and deterioration of furniture generally, in rooms where these are directly
exposed to the sun. The last
two summers should give significant warning to
people of what can occur. Therefore, I am going to require that appropriate
devices such as eaves, pergolas, external blinds or other methods be
incorporated into the design and that these be provided to the
satisfaction of
the Responsible Authority.
The order of the Tribunal is that the application for review is allowed in part
and the Responsible Authority is directed to issue
a permit under Section
85(1)(b) of the Act for three dwellings at 4 Hayley Court, Mill Park, in
accordance with the endorsed plans
and subject to the following conditions :
1. Within one month of this permit and before starting the use or development,
3 copies of a revised plan must be submitted to and
approved by the Responsible
Authority, showing:
(i) Unit 1 redesigned as a 2 bedroom unit.
(ii) Canopy tree(s) within the front setback.
(iii) Eaves, verandahs, pergolas, external blinds or other means of shading
north and west windows.
When approved the plans will be endorsed and will then form part of the permit.
The use and development as shown on the endorsed
plans must not be altered
without the consent of the Responsible Authority.
2. Before the use and/or development starts, areas set aside for parked
vehicles and access lanes as shown on the endorsed plan must
(i) Constructed to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
(ii) Properly formed to such levels that they can be used in accordance with
(iii) Surfaced with a fully sealed material to the satisfaction of the
Responsible Authority.
(iv) Surfaced with materials including bitumen, coloured concrete, coloured
patterned concrete, interlocking paving, bricks or other
materials to the
satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
(v) Drained and maintained to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
Parking areas and access lanes must be kept available for these purposes at all
3. Before the use allowed by this permit starts, landscaping works shown on the
endorsed plan must be completed to the satisfaction
of the Responsible
Authority and then maintained to the satisfaction of the Responsible
4. (i) Prior to commencement of the buildings and works hereby permitted, or
at such later date as the Responsible Authority may approve in
there shall be lodged with the Responsible Authority an amount of
$3,000 as security deposit for the satisfactory completion and maintenance of
the landscaping works hereby permitted
(ii) Upon completion of the landscaping works to the satisfaction of the
Responsible Authority, the Responsible Authority will refund
the security
deposit to the then owner of the subject land.
(iii) In the event that the landscaping works are not completed or maintained
to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority, the
Responsible Authority may
complete and/or maintain the landscaping work and deduct the cost thereof
(including supervision) from
any security deposit lodged pursuant to this
5. Vehicular access to the site shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the Responsible Authority.
6. Sewer, water supply and stormwater discharge shall be provided to the
satisfaction of the Melbourne Water, Yarra Valley Water
and the Responsible
7. All litter generated by building activities shall be collected and stored on
the site and shall be removed from the site at the
completion of the
development.
8. This permit shall expire if the development is not commenced within one (1)
year and completed within two (2) years of the permit
date. Application may be
made to the Responsible Authority within three (3) months of the expiration of
the permit for an extension
AJQ:fh 221098
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter