URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/255.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Portea v The King [2025] VSCA 255 (20 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCR 2024 0143
PRIEST, BOYCE and KAYE JJA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
14 October 2025
DATE OF ORDERS:
14 October 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
20 October 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 255
JUDGMENT APPEALED FROM:
[2024] VCC 716 (Judge
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal – Conviction
– Applicant convicted of one charge of burglary, three charges of theft
related summary charges – Applicant pleaded guilty before jury at
commencement of trial to additional charge of theft (charge
1) – Evidence
relevant only to charge 1 referred to in prosecution opening and adduced in
trial – Prejudicial evidence
with no probative value – Prosecutor
referred to evidence of incriminating conduct in opening address –
Incriminating
conduct evidence not relevant to remaining charges on indictment
– Risk that jury influenced by inadmissible evidence –
jury engaged in impermissible propensity reasoning – Jury directions
– Prosecution case that applicant acted
alone – Judge gave erroneous
directions as to liability of applicant as involved party – Substantial
miscarriage of justice
– Application for leave to appeal granted –
Appeal allowed – Re-trial ordered.
Richardson v The Queen
[1974] HCA 19
(1974) 131 CLR 116
(1986) 21 A Crim R 19
[2002] VSCA 84
(2002) 5 VR 317
Paulino v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 306
v The Queen
[1986] HCA 59
(1986) 161 CLR 423
[1998] 3 VR 862
(1990) 48 A Crim R 464
, referred to.
Ms G F Connelly SC with Ms T Khor
Respondent:
James Dowsley & Associates
Respondent:
Ms A Hogan, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
applicant was charged on indictment with one charge of burglary, and six charges
of theft, which were alleged to have been committed
by him in Shepparton in
October 2021. A trial of the charges was commenced at the County Court at
Shepparton before a jury on 29
May 2023. At the conclusion of evidence, the jury
was discharged without verdict. The applicant was subsequently retried on the
at a trial commencing in Shepparton on 22 April 2024. The applicant
pleaded guilty, before the jury, to one charge of theft (charge
1), and not
guilty to the remaining charges. On 30 April 2024, the jury empanelled on
the trial returned verdicts of guilty on the
burglary charge (charge 2) and
three of the theft charges (charges 4, 5 and 7), and not guilty on two of the
theft charges (charges
a plea made on his behalf, the applicant was sentenced in respect of the charges
for which he was convicted, and three related
summary offences, to a total
effective sentence of 3 years and 8 months’ imprisonment, with a
non-parole period of 2 years
and 6 months. The sentences were comprised as
on Indictment
Theft (van), s
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes Act 1958
years, 6 months
firearm (pump action single barrel shotgun),
firearm (Mossberg air rifle),
Crimes Act 1958
firearm (Winchester .22 calibre rifle),
firearm (Bettinsoli 12 gauge double barrel shotgun),
(jewellery, cash, documents, hard drive),
Fail to stop on
police direction
9, 10, 11 and 12
Drive while
disqualified
sentence of 3 months
report to police
Effective Sentence:
Pre-sentence
6AAA on charge
1 is 12 months’ imprisonment and summary offences is aggregate of 6
months’ imprisonment; licence cancelled
and disqualified 3 months from
date of sentence
applicant sought leave to appeal on two grounds, namely:
Ground 1: The trial miscarried by reason of:
(a) the prosecutor foreshadowing in her opening evidence that was not
subsequently adduced in the trial; and
(b) the admission of evidence with no probative value or scant probative value
that was outweighed by its prejudicial effect; and
(c) the admission of evidence the sole potential relevance of which was to
support incriminating conduct reasoning in circumstances
where the judge had not
determined that that evidence was capable of being viewed by the jury as
evidence of incriminating conduct
in proof of any charge the jury had to
Ground 2: The trial miscarried by reason of the judge:
(a) expanding the prosecution case to encompass liability as an involved rather
than principal offender; and
(b) failing to provide procedural fairness by giving proper notice of the
complicity directions he intended to give; and
(c) giving erroneous and inadequate directions as to liability as an involved
the conclusion of oral submissions, the Court determined that the application
for leave to appeal should be granted, the appeal
allowed, the convictions of
the applicant on charges 2, 4, 5 and 7 be set aside, and that there be a retrial
of those charges. The
following are our reasons for that conclusion.
burglary, that was the subject of charge 2, and the thefts, that were the
subject of charges 3 to 7, were committed at the home
of Frank and Nancy Mammone
at 5 Fox Court, Shepparton in the early hours of 19 October 2021. In 2004, the
applicant married Rita
Mammone, who is the daughter of Frank and Nancy
Mammone. The applicant and Rita Mammone subsequently separated in acrimonious
circumstances
13 October and 14 October 2021, a Mitsubishi Express van registered
SGM‑495, belonging to Grosvenor Engineering Group,
was stolen from outside
that company’s address in Longstaff Street, Shepparton. That vehicle was
the subject of charge 1, to
which the applicant pleaded guilty.
17 October 2021 and 21 October 2021, Frank and Nancy Mammone left their home at
5 Fox Court, Shepparton and travelled to Melbourne
to visit family. During that
period, no other person was residing at their premises.
the early hours of Tuesday 19 October 2021, the applicant was observed on CCTV
at a Petrogas service station at 4 Industrial Road,
Shepparton. He filled the
stolen van with petrol. Use of his debit card showed that the purchase was made
at 3:24 am. At that time,
the applicant was disqualified from driving
(related summary offence 9).
Subsequently,
CCTV at APCO service station at 111-125 Numurkah Road, Shepparton, captured the
applicant withdrawing money from the
ATM using his NAB debit card, and then
purchasing assorted food items with cash. His use of the debit card showed that
the purchase
was made at 3:51 am on 19 October 2021.
3:30 am and 4:00 am on 19 October 2021, the mains power at the
premises of Frank and Nancy Mammone at 5 Fox Court, Shepparton,
was switched
off. The prosecution case was that during that time, and at about 4:00 am,
the applicant attended at the premises, broke
into them and stole the items that
were the subject of charges 3 to 7 on the indictment.
Specifically,
it was alleged that the applicant stood on top of a dog statue and removed the
flywire to the sunroom to the premises,
slid open the window, and climbed over
the fridge that was in front of the window. The applicant’s palmprints
were subsequently
located on the top of the fridge. It was alleged that the
applicant then forced open the laundry door at the rear of the dwelling
smashing a hole in the wooden door. Once inside the premises, the applicant
rummaged through the three bedrooms, and stole two
firearms in the master
bedroom, namely, a pump-action 12-gauge shotgun (charge 3), and a Bettinsoli
12-gauge double barrel shotgun
(charge 6). The applicant also was alleged to
have stolen jewellery belonging to Nancy Mammone, cash totalling about $500,
and a hard drive, which items were the subject of charge 7. Those
items were stolen from the master bedroom and also the study. In
addition, it
was alleged that the applicant stole two further firearms from a shed at the
rear of the premises, namely, a Mossberg
air rifle (charge 4) and a Winchester
.22 calibre rifle (charge 5).
approximately 7:40 am on 19 October 2021, Judith Lang, a resident of Fox
Court, observed an unknown male (who was not the applicant)
wearing a hoodie
exit the driver’s seat of a utility vehicle parked outside 9 Fox Court,
walk up the driveway of 5 Fox Court,
and return to his vehicle a couple of
minutes later.
approximately 2:00 pm on the same date, Peter Gramson, a neighbour of Mr
and Mrs Mammone, brought in their rubbish bin. He observed
that the door to
the power box of the house was open. He closed the door and assumed it had blown
prosecution alleged that, following the burglary, the applicant on the morning
of 19 October 2021 drove to Reedy Swamp in North
Shepparton, where he wrapped
the air rifle (charge 4) and the Winchester firearm (charge 5) in a black
jacket, and the ammunition
in a light coloured rag, and then wrapped all those
items in grey coloured duct tape. The applicant was then alleged to have hidden
the firearms and ammunition under a fallen log in the long grass in Reedy Swamp
near the Goulburn River on Gemmill Swamp Road.
Subsequently,
at approximately 2:20 pm on 19 October 2021, Mr Sid McNeil located the
two firearms at the swamp and contacted police.
the meantime, it is alleged that the applicant drove to Numurkah, where he gave
the pump-action firearm (charge 3) and the 12-gauge
double barrel shotgun
(charge 6) to an associate.
2:50 am on 20 October 2021, CCTV from the Petrogas service station in
Industrial Drive, Shepparton, depicted the applicant putting
petrol into the
stolen Mitsubishi van. At that time, the roof racks had been removed from the
van and its rear windows had been painted.
21 October, at 7:40 am, Peter Gramson observed an unknown male (not the
applicant), who was young, skinny and about 6 feet tall,
walk up the driveway of
5 Fox Court. Mr Gramson spoke to the male, who then drove away in a
dual-cab utility vehicle. Mr Gramson
telephoned police and asked them to
police arrived, they confirmed that the premises had been broken into. Police
obtained palmprints from the top of the freezer
that was adjacent to the window
on the inside of the sunroom. As we have noted, those prints were subsequently
matched to those of
the applicant. It was further noted that the entrance was
marked in a manner consistent with having been opened by a jemmy bar. A
bar, with the DNA of the applicant on it, was located on the bed in the master
bedroom. The lock of a wooden cupboard in the
rear shed had been broken and the
two firearms, that were subsequently recovered at Reedy Swamp, had been removed
from it. The jewellery
and money had been taken from the master bedroom, and the
documents and CCTV hard drive from the study (charge 7, theft).
27 October 2021, members of the Shepparton uniform branch, who were in a marked
divisional van, noticed the applicant driving the
stolen Mitsubishi van south on
Packham Street in Shepparton. The applicant subsequently purchased a can of red
spray paint and used
it to paint the entire van red. He also created a white
Australia Post sign which he affixed to the back left side of it.
Subsequently,
at 12 noon on 28 October 2021, police observed the stolen van parked in a car
park in Shepparton. Investigators waited
near the vehicle for the applicant to
the applicant called
the emergency number 000 using his mobile telephone, and
told the call taker that he had sighted four males undertaking a drug deal
the intersection of River Road and Grant Court in Cobram. The applicant stated
that he had sighted one of the males holding a
shotgun. The prosecution case was
that the applicant had seen the police who were waiting for him, and he made the
000 call as a
deliberate attempt to divert police away from the van.
12:35 pm on 28 October 2021, investigators from the Shepparton and Cobram
Crime Investigation Units located the applicant sitting
on the ground on Main
Street, Cobram near the Cobram cinema. The applicant was arrested and
Subsequently,
police monitored the applicant’s telephone calls that he made from
custody. In the course of that monitoring,
the applicant was heard to admit to
his mother that he had made the hoax call to 000 for the purpose of avoiding
apprehension by
the second trial, the defence case was that the applicant did not commit the
burglary and the thefts, other than he admitted theft
of the Mitsubishi van. It
was contended that there had not been enough time for the applicant to proceed
from the APCO service station
in Numurkah Road, Shepparton to 5 Fox Court,
Shepparton, in order to turn off the electrical power box at those premises
before 4:00
am. The defence contended that the prints on the freezer might
have been placed there before the burglary, and that the biological
material on
the jemmy bar might have been deposited from previous innocent use by him, or
transferred onto the jemmy bar from another
deposit within the house. The
defence contended that it could not be excluded that the other persons cited,
with apparently nefarious
purpose, at 5 Fox Court on 19 October and 21 October
2021, might have been responsible for the burglary.
Summary of evidence
view of the issues raised by the grounds of appeal, it is not necessary to
summarise the evidence in detail. It is sufficient to
set out, in short form,
the structure of the prosecution case, in order to provide appropriate context
for the two grounds relied
Mammone and Nancy Mammone each gave evidence as to the background circumstances,
including the applicant’s marriage to
their daughter, Rita, and their
visit to Melbourne between 17 October and 21 October 2021. Mr Mammone
related how he received a telephone
call on 21 October notifying him of the
burglary at the premises, as a result of which he and his wife then returned to
Shepparton.
Mr Mammone described his observations on their return home. He
described how the intruder had entered through the door into the sunroom,
then managed to unlock the security door. He also noted that the freezer and
fridge had been pushed away from the wall, and that
the lock on the security
door had been jemmied off. Frank Mammone and Nancy Mammone had described the
nature of the items that had
been stolen by the intruder. They confirmed that
before the applicant had separated from their daughter Rita, the applicant had
visited their home. However, he had not done so after their
relationship terminated.
her evidence, Ms Nancy Mammone also described her observations on their
she was always
meticulous about cleaning the premises, and that she had frequently cleaned the
fridge and freezer that was in the
Mammone gave short evidence concerning her relationship with the applicant. She
was aware that after she had returned to live
with her parents when her marriage
with the applicant failed, her parents had installed CCTV at the home.
was then led as to observations made by three neighbours of the events of
19 October. Judith Lang, who was living in Fox
Court, Shepparton in October
2021, gave evidence that at about 7:30 am on 19 October, she had observed a
motor vehicle park in Fox
Court with its headlights on. She observed a man exit
the vehicle and walk up the driveway of the premises at number 5 Fox Court.
couple of minutes later, she saw him return and go back to his vehicle where he
drove off. She said that the man was wearing a
hoodie, and that he was at all
times on his mobile telephone.
Gramson was also living in premises in Fox Court in 2021. He said that on
19 October 2021, after he returned home at 2:00 pm,
he took his own
rubbish bins back into his premises, and then took the rubbish bins of Frank and
Nancy Mammone into their premises,
as he knew that they were then away. When he
did so he observed that the door on the power box was open, and he assumed that
blown open. He closed the door and left. A couple of days later (on 21
October), Mr Gramson saw a young man walking up the driveway
premises at 5 Fox Court. Mr Gramson confronted him and asked him what he
was doing. The man replied that he was ‘going
to pick up a mate’.
Mr Gramson described the man as being skinny, perhaps 6 feet tall, with
brown hair. As he had become suspicious,
Mr Gramson walked around
Mr Mammone’s house. He noticed that the flywire screen on one of the
windows had been removed and
that the back security door was ajar. Accordingly,
he telephoned the emergency number 000.
the first trial, Mr John Dickson gave evidence concerning the theft of the
Mitsubishi van. On the second trial, his evidence was
not adduced before the
jury. However, the content of it was summarised in an agreed statement of facts.
In essence, Mr Dickson stated
that he was a manager of a business in
Longstaff Street, Shepparton. The agreed facts further stated that between 13
and 14 October
2021, one of the work vans belonging to the business, namely, a
2003 white Mitsubishi Express van, which had been parked outside
the business,
was stolen overnight.
balance of the prosecution case comprised police and forensic evidence.
Marko Mitic, of the Shepparton Divisional Tasking Unit, gave evidence that on 19
October 2021, in company with Senior Constable
Steven Burke, he was directed to
attend Reedy Swamp in relation to firearms which had been found there.
Constable Mitic gave evidence
as to how they attended at the swamp,
observed the firearms which were then covered in cloth and contained in a
package, and transported
them to the property office, where he liaised with
Leading Senior Constable Stewart Lowe.
Amy Williams was stationed at Shepparton Police Station. On 21 October 2021, she
received a communication at 7:47 am in
response to a 000 call that had been
made that morning. As a consequence, Constable Williams then attended at
the premises at 5 Fox
Court with Constable Kayla Warwick. On their arrival, the
security door was open. There was a hole in the door that led into the
Constable Williams also described her observations as to the state of the
premises inside it.
Senior Constable Stewart Lowe was attached to the Shepparton Crime Scene
Services. On 19 October 2021, Senior Constable Mitic
conveyed to him the
two firearms that had been located at Reedy Swamp, namely, a Winchester single
shot .22 rifle and a Chinese branded
air rifle. There were also shotgun
shells and .22 bullets in the package in which they were contained.
21 October, Senior Constable Lowe and Leading Senior Constable Deborah
Williams attended the premises at 5 Fox Court. Senior Constable
that a dog statue had been placed under the sunroom window, and that the flywire
screen had been removed from that window.
It appeared that the offender had
climbed through the window. On the other side of it was a fridge. Senior
Constable Lowe conducted
a fingerprint examination of the window and the
flywire screen. He noticed that there were hand marks on top of the fridge, and
used a powder to develop latent prints from the marks. Senior
Constable Lowe also observed that there was a hole in the rear laundry
door, which appeared to have been created by a jemmy bar, as there were jemmy
bar marks evident around the edges of it. Senior Constable
Lowe located a
jemmy bar on the bed in the master bedroom. It was conveyed back to the police
station to undergo further examination.
Senior Constable Deborah Williams gave evidence, which, in effect, corroborated
the evidence given by Leading Senior Constable
next two witnesses gave evidence concerning forensic examination of relevant
Skbor, a fingerprint expert employed by the forensic services department of
Victoria Police, gave evidence that matched the
palmprints on the freezer at the
premises at 5 Fox Court with the sample fingerprint obtained from the
Kate Mosse,
a forensic officer of the Victoria Police Forensic Services Department, gave
evidence that in effect matched the DNA extracted
from the jemmy bar with that
of the applicant. Ms Mosse’s evidence was that a partial mixed DNA
profile of three contributors
was obtained from the swabs taken from the jemmy
bar. The DNA evidence was 100 billion times more likely if the applicant
was a contributor
to that mixture than if he was not. In scientific terms,
Ms Mosse concluded that that ratio provided ‘extremely strong
that the applicant was a contributor to the DNA mixture
extracted from the jemmy bar.
remaining two witnesses were police witnesses. Detective Senior
Constable Charles Ryall described the circumstances in which the
was arrested on 28 October 2021. Senior Constable Ryall, who was patrolling the
Cobram CBD in company with Senior Constable
Armstrong, observed the very
distinctive red Mitsubishi van, with white sign writing of AusPost, in the IGA
car park area. Senior
Constable Ryall then received information that the
applicant was seated outside a cinema nearby. Senior Constable Ryall and Senior
Constable Armstrong proceeded to that location and arrested the applicant, who
was then sitting in the entrance to the cinema.
final prosecution witness was the Informant, Detective Acting Sergeant Luke
Arrowsmith of the Benalla Crime Investigation Unit.
Detective Arrowsmith
gave evidence that when he attended the premises at 5 Fox Court on 21 October
2021, Rita Portea nominated the
applicant as a potential person of interest.
Ms Portea provided to Detective Arrowsmith the bank statements of a
joint bank account
held by herself and the applicant. As a consequence,
Detective Arrowsmith attended the Petrogas service station in Industrial
Shepparton, and the APCO service station in Numurkah Road, Shepparton, and
was able to obtain the evidence that demonstrated that
the applicant had
attended those two service stations at 3:24 am and 3:47 am
respectively on 19 October 2021. Detective Arrowsmith
stated that the APCO
service station was 5.7 km from the house of Mr and Mrs Mammone in Fox
Court, Shepparton, and that the distance
between the Petrogas service station
and those premises was approximately 5 km to 7 km.
Detective Arrowsmith
obtained CCTV footage evidencing the applicant’s attendances at those two
premises on 19 October, and also
footage of his attendance at the Cobram BP
service station on 27 October. He said that each occasion on which the
Mitsubishi van
was depicted on CCTV, its appearance had been changed. In the
first footage, at the Petrogas station, the van was almost in its original
condition. The next occasion on which it was captured — which was on 20
October 2021 at another service station — the
roof racks had been removed
and the windows painted white. Finally, when the van was captured at the Cobram
BP station on 27 October,
it had been painted red and an AusPost logo was on the
passenger door.
Detective Arrowsmith
confirmed the evidence concerning a sighting of a van, matching the description
of the stolen Mitsubishi van,
in Cobram on 27 October 2021. As a consequence,
Detective Arrowsmith contacted the Cobram Criminal Investigation Unit. The
was arrested by Detective Ryall on the following day.
Arrowsmith then gave evidence of a 000 recording of a telephone call made by the
applicant at 12:12 pm on 28 October 2021,
which he readily determined was a
hoax call by the applicant. Accordingly, Detective Arrowsmith instructed
police members not to
leave the Mitsubishi van. Finally,
Detective Arrowsmith stated that apart from the .22 calibre rifle and the
air rifle that were
located at Reedy Swamp, none of the other items that were
stolen from the premises at Fox Court have been recovered.
applicant gave evidence at the first trial, but, on the second trial, he did not
do so. His father, Sam Portea, gave evidence
on his behalf. Mr Portea said
that when the applicant and Rita Mammone separated, the latter took possession
of most of the furniture
and other items, including the refrigerator and
freezer. At the time the freezer was in quite good condition. The applicant and
Portea moved the freezer outside the garage in which it was then housed.
In doing so, the applicant tilted the freezer forward, then
tilted it back in
place, and wheeled it to the front of Mr Portea’s premises.
submissions
for the applicant commenced submissions, in support of ground 1, by noting that,
at the first trial, counsel then appearing
for the applicant sought severance of
charge 1 (theft of the motor vehicle) on the basis that it was not related to
the other charges
on the indictment. The judge refused the application, and
considered that any prejudice occasioned to the applicant could be adequately
addressed by an appropriate direction to the jury. Counsel further noted that at
the first trial the defence had taken issue with
the prosecution notice of
incriminating conduct. The judge observed that he considered that the objection
was appropriate, and his
Honour upheld the submission that the incriminating
conduct could only be used in proof of charge 1 (theft of the motor
the second trial, the applicant pleaded guilty, in the presence of the jury
panel, to the theft of a motor vehicle (charge 1).
Nevertheless, in opening the
case, the prosecutor referred to conduct that had previously been relied on, in
the first trial, as
proof of incriminating conduct in respect of that charge.
That conduct included the following: on 27 October, driving off at a fast
of speed to evade police who were seeking to intercept his vehicle; painting the
van to make it appear to be an Australia Post
vehicle; the hoax call to 000 on
28 October in order to divert a police stakeout of the van; further alterations
to the appearance
of the van (removing the roof racks, and painting the windows
of the vehicle); a monitored call from within custody a month after
applicant’s remand, in which he admitted to making the hoax call for the
purpose of evading police; and text messages by
the applicant concerning the
further noted that on the third day of the trial, the prosecutor abandoned
resort to incriminating conduct reasoning. On the
following day, the prosecutor
stated that she did not intend to adduce evidence of the incident in which the
applicant drove off
at a fast rate of speed to avoid apprehension, or evidence
of the further alterations to the appearance of the van and the text messages
the applicant about the offending.
Nevertheless,
counsel for the applicant noted, the prosecution still adduced evidence in proof
of the theft of the motor vehicle charge
(charge 1), which would only be
relevant in support of incriminating conduct reasoning in respect of that
charge. That evidence included:
the evidence of John Dickson that the van had
been stolen; the evidence of the alterations by the applicant to the appearance
the van; the evidence of the hoax call; and the evidence of the call from
prison admitting the hoax call.
noted that at the trial defence counsel objected to the admissibility of some of
that evidence as being irrelevant, but nevertheless,
the hoax call and the
prison phone call, admitting the hoax call, were played to the jury. In her
closing address, the prosecutor
invited the jury to rely on the hoax call to
reason that the applicant had been endeavouring to divert the attention of
police from
his ‘own activities in the vicinity’. On this
application, counsel submitted that that proposition was capable of being
understood by the jury as an invitation to reason that the applicant was seeking
to divert police, because he knew he had committed
the burglary and thefts.
noted that the trial judge did direct the jury that the fact that the applicant
stole the van, evaded police, changed the
appearance of the van, and made the
hoax call, were not relevant to the charges which the jury was required to
determine. The judge
also directed the jury that it must not take the
applicant’s plea of guilty to charge 1 into account in determining other
However, counsel submitted that, for three reasons, the directions
given by the judge to the jury, to that effect, were insufficient
to ensure that
the jury did not inappropriately take into account the evidence, that was solely
relevant to the charge of the theft
of the van, in determining the question of
the applicant’s guilt on the remaining charges.
it was submitted, the directions by the judge to the jury were not specified by
his Honour to be directions of law with which
the jury must comply; rather, they
might have been understood by the jury as comments by his Honour on the facts.
Counsel submitted
that the statement by the judge, as to the relevance (or
irrelevance) of evidence, was not equivalent to a direction (which it was
submitted should have been given) prohibiting the impermissible incriminating
conduct reasoning.
counsel submitted, the judge did not instruct the jury that it could not, as the
prosecutor had invited, rely on the hoax
call by the applicant to reason that
the applicant had been attempting to divert police because he knew that he had
committed the
offences that were the subject of charges 2 to 7.
and in any event, it was submitted that no direction could have saved the trial
from being a miscarriage of justice. It was
contended that the irrelevant
conduct, adduced in evidence, might have induced the jury to reason that the
applicant was the type
of person who would commit a burglary and thefts on the
property of his estranged parents-in-law. In that respect, counsel noted
the judge did not give to the jury a direction that it must not engage in such
propensity reasoning. Accordingly, it was submitted
that the evidence, and the
reliance on it by the prosecutor, has occasioned a substantial miscarriage of
response, counsel for the respondent, quite properly, accepted that the
evidence, that was the subject of ground 1, should not
have been adduced in the
trial. Counsel for the respondent noted that before the commencement of the
second trial, the prosecution
provided the applicant’s counsel and the
Court with an amended copy of the summary of prosecution opening. Despite the
that the defence counsel knew that the applicant would plead guilty to
charge 1 (theft of the motor vehicle), he did not raise any
issue concerning the
content of the proposed opening. Counsel noted that the prosecutor opened in
conformity with the document that
he provided to defence counsel and no
exception was taken to that opening.
noted that on the third day of the trial the prosecutor observed that the
incriminating conduct notice had ‘fallen by
the wayside’ as a result
of the plea of guilty by the applicant to charge 1. At the commencement of the
trial on the fourth
day, the applicant’s counsel indicated that the
applicant would also plead guilty to the related summary charges. The prosecutor
acknowledged that she had opened on matters that would no longer be the subject
of evidence, and the judge suggested that the matter
should be ‘let go to
the keeper’. The applicant’s counsel did not contend to the
contrary. The prosecution opening
had contained references to the text messages
located on the applicant’s telephone, that ultimately were not the subject
evidence. However, consistent with the judge’s suggestion, the messages
were not referred to again during the trial. During
his charge, the judge
reminded the jury that it must determine the case based only on the
for the respondent submitted that the plea by the applicant of guilty to charge
1, and the circumstances of the theft, were
before the jury as a result of
decisions made by the applicant’s counsel at trial. Evidence of various
changes to the vehicle’s
appearance was adduced as part of the narrative
of the investigation, which explained the circumstances in which the applicant
apprehended in Cobram. While the probative value of that evidence was
slight, it was of little prejudicial effect, and any prejudice
occasioned by it
was sufficiently alleviated by directions given by the judge.
for the respondent further noted that the hoax call made by the applicant, and
the Arunta call on 19 November 2021 in which
the applicant admitted making that
hoax call, was admitted into evidence following argument, on the basis that the
hoax call had
been opened by the prosecutor without objection. The prosecutor
had submitted that the call was not adduced as incriminating conduct,
part of a chronology of the events that occurred. Counsel noted that the
prosecutor did not invite the jury to reason that,
if it was satisfied the
applicant made the hoax call, he did so because he believed himself to be guilty
of the burglary charges.
principal submission by counsel for the respondent, in oral submissions, was to
the effect that while the evidence, that is the
subject of ground 1, ought not
to have been adduced in the trial, nevertheless the direction given by the judge
to the jury, that
it should not take that evidence into account in determining
the remaining charges on the indictment, was sufficient to address any
prejudice occasioned to the applicant by reason of that evidence being
introduced in the trial. In that respect, counsel for
the respondent noted that
defence counsel did not make any objection, or take an exception to the
direction given by the judge to
the jury that it should disregard those items of
evidence. Nor did defence counsel seek any further directions from the judge on
that matter.
Ground 1 — Analysis and
is quite apparent that evidence was adduced, and matters were put to the jury,
which were not relevant to charges 2 to 7 on the
indictment, and which had the
capacity to adversely affect the applicant’s right to a fair trial on
those charges.
is also apparent that the matters, that are the subject of ground 1, arose from,
and were substantially the result of, the decision
of the applicant to plead
guilty to charge 1 on the empanelment of the jury in the trial. The theft of the
Mitsubishi van, and the
evidence in proof of that offence, were not relevant to
the proof of any of the offences that were the subject of charges 2 to 7
indictment. It was for that reason that application was made, before the judge
in the first trial, to sever charge 1 on the
indictment.
was not suggested, in this application, that the applicant derived any
particular tactical or other advantage by pleading guilty
to charge 1 on the
empanelment of the jury. If he had pleaded guilty before empanelment, and in the
absence of the panel, that charge,
and the circumstances of it, would not have
been relevant to the jury’s consideration of the other charges. If, and to
extent that, the applicant’s use of the van in the days that followed
the burglary was relevant, that fact could have been
the subject of an
appropriate admission at trial without any reference to the impugned evidence
that is the subject of ground 1.
it is apparent that, following the applicant’s guilty plea to charge 1,
neither the prosecution nor defence counsel
gave any consideration to the
question whether a number of matters of evidence, that were the subject of the
notice of incriminating
conduct, would be admissible in the trial of the
remaining charges on the indictment. Rather, each of those matters were referred
to by the prosecutor in her opening to the jury.
Specifically,
the prosecutor opened each of the following matters:
(1) On 27 October 2021, after a member of the Shepparton uniform branch took up
a position behind the stolen vehicle, the applicant
drove off at a fast speed
and failed to stop.
(2) Following the theft of the van, the applicant took steps to disguise it. He
purchased a can of red spray paint and sprayed the
entire van red, and made a
white Australia Post sign which he fixed to the back side of it.
(3) On 28 October 2021, when members of the Cobram Crime Investigation Unit
observed the stolen van parked behind the IGA premises,
the applicant made the
hoax call to 000 in order to attempt to draw police away from the van.
Subsequently, police monitored several
of the applicant’s telephone calls
made from custody in which he admitted to placing the hoax telephone call in
order to avoid
apprehension by police.
(4) Police investigators had identified a number of text messages on the
applicant’s telephone relating to the offending. In
those messages the
applicant described how he had sought to evade police on 27 October. In one of
the messages he asked for ‘Nathan’
to destroy some incriminating
of those four matters were expressly foreshadowed in the written opening filed
by the prosecution before the trial. Thus, defence
counsel was plainly on notice
that those matters would be sought to be adduced. Each of the four matters, that
were referred to in
the opening, were only relevant to, and probative of, the
offence that was the subject of charge 1, to which the applicant had pleaded
guilty. Counsel for the applicant did not, either before the opening before the
jury, or after it, make any suggestion, or objection,
concerning the reference
to those matters in the prosecutor’s opening.
Subsequently,
on the third day of the trial, the prosecutor informed the Court (in the absence
of the jury) that the incriminating
conduct, referred to in the notice, had
become irrelevant as a result of the plea of guilty by the applicant to charge
each of the matters in the notice of incriminating conduct was only
relevant to the issue of the theft of the van. The judge observed
that it would
be necessary to fashion a direction to the jury to the effect that because the
applicant conducted himself in the manner
described in the notice, that did not
mean that he was guilty of the offences in question. Relevantly, at that point,
counsel for
the applicant did not suggest that any other steps should be taken,
including discharge of the jury.
Notwithstanding
that concession by the prosecution, evidence was subsequently adduced before the
jury which would only have been relevant
to charge 1. First, by the agreement of
the parties, the evidence of Mr Dickson was reduced to a statement of agreed
facts, which
was read to the jury, concerning the theft of the Mitsubishi van.
Secondly the informant, Detective Sergeant Arrowsmith, gave evidence
changes in appearance in the Mitsubishi van as depicted on CCTV footage.
Thirdly, Detective Arrowsmith gave evidence concerning
the hoax call made
by the applicant to emergency number 000 on 28 October 2021. The recording of
the telephone call to the applicant
made to his mother on 19 November 2021, and
in which he admitted to making the hoax call, was tendered in evidence as an
in the trial. Further, in final address the prosecutor made specific
reference to the hoax call and submitted that that call was
an attempt by the
applicant ‘ ... to divert the attention of police from his own activities
in the vicinity and allow him to
get away ...’.
the course of the evidence being adduced from Detective Arrowsmith, counsel
for the applicant did object at the point at which
Detective Arrowsmith
commenced to describe how, on 27 October 2021, the applicant had evaded members
of the Shepparton uniformed
force when the police attempted to intercept him. As
a result of that objection, Detective Arrowsmith desisted from further
the circumstances and manner in which the applicant sought to evade
police apprehension. However, counsel for the applicant did not,
at that point,
or at any other point, object to the evidence that had been adduced concerning
the changes to the appearance of the
van, and the hoax call by the applicant to
police on 28 October.
was not ultimately adduced concerning the text messages, which the prosecutor
had referred to and read to the jury in the
course of her opening. As counsel
for the applicant has noted, the messages were couched in terms which would have
conveyed the impression
to the jury that the applicant was conversant with a
criminal subculture. In the course of the messages he referred to someone who
had ‘lagged’, he mentioned evading the police, and he suggested that
an acquaintance be asked to destroy relevant evidence.
The texts were expressed
in terms of a person who was familiar with police procedure. The applicant spoke
that police had ‘shit’ on him which
he would not be able to ‘fight’. He said that he did not wish to go
jail until he had first seen his children.
text messages were read to the jury in the course of the prosecutor’s
reasonably brief opening at the commencement of the
trial. The trial itself only
lasted six sitting days, and it might fairly be expected that the jury would
have recalled, at least
in part, the substance of the text messages that had
been read to them by the prosecutor.
judge sought to allay the prejudice occasioned to the applicant by giving
directions to the jury that it must not take those matters
into account in
determining the guilt of the applicant on the charges before it. In the course
of his charge, the judge directed
the jury that the applicant’s guilty
plea to charge 1 was not relevant, and could not be taken into account or used
jury’s consideration of the other charges. The judge further
directed the jury that the evidence that the applicant had evaded
the police and
disguised the van, was not relevant to the charges before the jury. His Honour
He knew he had stolen the van, so running from the police and disguising the
van could only be relevant to him knowing that he’d
stolen the van, that
is to charge 1. It cannot be used by you in determining whether the prosecution
had proven that he was guilty
in relation to charges 2 and 7.
judge also directed the jury that the hoax call, that the applicant made to 000
on 28 October 2021, was only relevant to demonstrate
that the applicant
wanted to distract the police because he had stolen the van, and that the hoax
call was not relevant to whether
the applicant committed the offences that were
the subject of charges 2 to 7.
determining ground 1, the critical question is whether the directions, so given
by the judge to the jury, were sufficient to offset
the unfair prejudice
occasioned to the applicant by reason of the adducing of evidence, and
references in the prosecution opening,
relating to matters that were not
admissible other than on charge 1, to which the applicant pleaded guilty. In
determining that question,
it is, of course, important also to bear in mind the
unnecessary prejudice occasioned to the applicant by reason of the circumstance
that he pleaded guilty to charge 1 on the empanelment of the jury, so that his
admission to the theft of the van, which would otherwise
have been irrelevant,
was before the jury in their consideration of charges 2 to 7 on the
indictment.
considering the question as to the efficacy of the directions given by the judge
to the jury, the starting point is, of course,
that the evidence, that is the
subject of ground 1, was entirely irrelevant to the jury’s
consideration of charges 2 to 7 on
the indictment, and it was impermissible for
the jury to have taken it into account, in its consideration and determination
offences that were the subject of those charges. Plainly, that, and the
matters that are the subject of ground 1, should not have
been before the jury.
The conclusion is inescapable that the reference to those matters, both in the
prosecution opening, and in
evidence, was prejudicial to the fair trial of the
applicant on those charges for a number of reasons.
there was a significant risk that, notwithstanding the direction given to it by
the judge, the jury might have taken into account,
or been influenced by, the
inadmissible evidence, and other matters, in its consideration and determination
of the charges that were
before it. In that respect, the submission made by the
prosecutor in final address — that the hoax call was an attempt by the
applicant to ‘divert the attention of police from his own activities in
the vicinity’ — was capable of inducing
the jury to erroneously take
into account the hoax call as an implied admission by the applicant of the
offending that was the subject
of charges 2 to 7.
the matters, which were inadmissible, reflected unfairly and adversely on the
applicant. They portrayed him as a person
who had a criminal disposition, and as
the kind of person who would commit the offences which were the subject of the
charges before
the jury. As such, there was a material risk that the material
might have induced the jury to engage in impermissible propensity
the quantity of the impermissible material that was placed before the jury might
well have distracted the jury from a dispassionate
and rational assessment of
the evidence adduced in the trial that was relevant and admissible in respect of
the charges that were
before the jury. The inadmissible material, taken in
combination, was not insignificant either in its quantity, or in its effect.
Each item of inadmissible material had the potential to compound the prejudice
occasioned to the applicant by reason of the other
material that ought not have
been adduced before the jury.
a criminal trial, it is expected that juries adhere to directions of law given
to them by the trial judge. The experience of the
law is that that expectation
is ordinarily well‑founded. However, there are necessarily limits to the
capacity of a trial judge
to offset the kind of prejudice that was occasioned to
the applicant by the inadmissible material that was put before the jury in
present case. Further, as counsel for the applicant noted, the judge did not, in
express terms, specify that the directions that
he gave to the jury, to
disregard the inadmissible material, were directions of law with which the jury
must comply. In addition,
while the judge did correctly direct the jury not to
take the inadmissible material into account in considering the charges, his
Honour did not give to the jury a specific direction that it should not use that
material to engage in impermissible propensity reasoning,
namely, that the
applicant was the kind of person who might commit the offences that were the
subject of the charges under consideration.
is a matter of concern that defence counsel at trial (who was not counsel who
appeared for the applicant on this application) did
not take the appropriate
steps to ensure that the inadmissible material not be put before the jury. As we
have discussed, there is
no apparent explanation why the applicant pleaded
guilty to charge 1 (the theft of the Mitsubishi van) in the presence of the
panel. Nor does it seem that counsel took any steps to ensure that, upon
the applicant’s plea of guilty to that charge, the
prosecutor not refer to
in her opening, nor adduce, the matters that were the subject of the notice of
incriminating conduct, and
which were all directed solely to proof of charge 1
on the indictment. Further, as counsel for the respondent has pointed out on
this application, counsel for the applicant at trial did not take exception to
any of the directions given by the judge to the jury
relating to the
inadmissible material. Nor did defence counsel seek any further direction
concerning it.
matters are all relevant for consideration on this application. However, the
point remains that, for the reasons that we have
discussed, the plea made by the
applicant to guilt on charge 1 in the presence of the jury, and the subsequent
reference to, and
adducing of, material before the jury that was only admissible
on that charge, and which was otherwise inadmissible in the trial,
necessarily
occasioned significant prejudice to the right of the applicant to a fair trial
of charges 2 to 7 on the indictment. On
this application, counsel for the
respondent, quite correctly, did not seek to contend that there was any possible
forensic advantage
to the applicant in not objecting to the inadmissible
material, and in failing to seek further directions in respect of that
as was observed by this Court in the course of oral argument, the responsibility
of ensuring that the applicant receive a
fair trial was shared by the
prosecutor. It was a necessary part of the prosecutor’s duty to take steps
to ensure that, on
the plea by the applicant to charge 1 on the indictment, the
material that would have otherwise been adduced on that charge, but
otherwise inadmissible, should not be put before the
circumstances of the trial, and the outcome of ground 1 of this appeal,
demonstrate the importance of the role of counsel, both
for the prosecution and
the defence, at trial. In that respect, it is appropriate to record the
following observations of the Court
of Criminal Appeal in
in which neither the
prosecution, nor defence counsel, had taken exception to erroneous directions
given by the judge to the jury
on the issue of provocation in a murder
We turn to consider the relevance of the fact that no exception was taken at
the trial to the charge on provocation. We do not think
that the learned judge
received the assistance from either end of the Bar table to which he was
entitled. The duties of counsel in
a criminal trial during and after the charge
are responsible and important. Counsel for the defence are under a duty to their
to ensure that by taking exceptions to deficiencies in the charge they
ensure as far as they can that their client’s case is
put to the jury in a
way which is favourable to the client’s interest as the rules of law,
including the common law right to
a fair trial, require. We consider that
counsel for the prosecution has a duty to take exceptions with a view to
correcting errors
in the charge including errors which make a conviction more
likely but depart from the law. It is not in the public interest that
citizen receive other than a fair trial according to law. It is not in the
public interest that a trial be followed by use of
the resources of the judicial
system in the expensive necessity of an appeal and a new
the circumstances, it must be concluded that by reason of the immaterial matters
being referred to in the prosecution opening,
and being adduced in evidence, the
right of the applicant to a fair trial of the charges against him was
substantially compromised.
We do not consider that the directions given by the
judge to the jury were, or could have been, sufficient to offset that prejudice,
or to ensure that the jury not engage in impermissible use of that evidence and
material in its consideration of the charges that
were before it.
follows that as a result of those matters, there was a substantial miscarriage
of justice in the trial of the charges against the
applicant. For that reason,
ground 1 of the application for leave to appeal must succeed.
Ground 2 — submissions
support of ground 2, counsel for the applicant noted that the prosecution case
as opened, and which the applicant was required
to meet, was that the applicant
himself was the person who turned off the power to the house, who trespassed on
the property, who
stole the items that were the subject of charges 3 to 7, and
who then put the two firearms at Reedy Swamp. The prosecution did not
suggest that the applicant’s liability might arise as a result of being a
person involved in the offending of another
person. Further, in a closing
address to the jury, the prosecutor did not invite the jury to convict the
applicant on the basis that
he had been complicit with other persons in the
commission of the offences.
further noted that, in his closing address, defence counsel did not put in issue
the fact that a burglary and theft had occurred.
He put squarely in issue the
question whether it was possible for the applicant to travel from the APCO
service station in Numurkah
Road to the premises in Fox Court in time to turn
off the power to the house by 4:00 am.
was submitted that, in that context, the judge was not permitted to invite the
jury to convict the applicant on the alternative
basis, that he was involved in
a burglary and theft committed by another person or other persons. However, the
judge did make such
a clear invitation to the jury. Specifically, the judge
instructed the jury that it could convict the applicant, if it was satisfied
that he was involved in the burglary or theft as a joint arrangement or
understanding with someone else, or that he acted as part
of a joint criminal
enterprise. It was submitted that that direction by the judge was an erroneous
extension of the prosecution case,
which had the effect of undercutting the
defence case, by providing a pathway for the jury to convict the applicant, even
not satisfied that the applicant was the person who turned off the
power and committed the burglary. Counsel further noted that the
judge did not
give the parties any notice of his intention to invite the jury to convict the
applicant on the basis of complicity.
Neither the closing address of the
prosecutor, nor that of defence counsel, reflected any appreciation that the
judge intended to
leave liability on the basis of complicity available to the
the circumstances, it was submitted, the fact that defence counsel (or the
prosecutor) did not take exception to the charge given
to the jury does not
detract from the conclusion that the erroneous expansion by the judge of the
prosecution case caused the trial
to miscarry.
response, counsel for the respondent accepted that the judge erred in giving to
the jury the direction which is the subject of
ground 2. Counsel properly
accepted that if that direction provided to the jury a new ‘pathway’
to finding the guilt
of the applicant, which was not relied on by the
prosecution in the trial then ground 2 must succeed. Counsel further accepted
if the case had been put to the jury on a complicity basis, the directions,
which the judge gave to the jury, would clearly have
been deficient, as the
judge did not give any explanation or elucidation of the matters which the
prosecution was required to establish
if the applicant were to be found guilty
other than as a principal offender. However, it was submitted, when regard is
manner in which a case was put, and the purpose for which the
directions were provided, any shortcomings in the directions given
by the judge
did not result in a substantial miscarriage of justice.
that respect, counsel for the respondent noted that the prosecution case was
consistently put on the basis that the applicant himself
physically entered the
Fox Court premises and stole the various items within the property. The forensic
evidence on the freezer and
on the jemmy bar supported the prosecution case put
on that basis. Further, counsel noted, there was no evidence positively
that another person was or may have been present at the time of the
further noted that although the direction by the judge did raise the spectre of
someone other than the applicant turning off
the power to the premises at Fox
Court, there was nothing in the direction given by the judge which sought to
resolve the ‘timing’
issue. Further, there was no realistic basis
for the applicant to be convicted on charges 2 to 7, other than on the basis of
own personal commission of each of the offences, in which turning off the
power was a relevant fact, but not an element of the offence.
Accordingly, it
was submitted, the erroneous direction given by the judge to the jury did not
open an impermissible pathway for the
jury to find the applicant guilty of the
charges before it.
Ground 2 — analysis and
considering ground 2, the starting point is that quite clearly the prosecution
case was based on proof by it that the applicant
himself committed the offences
that were the subject of charges 2 to 7. That is, the prosecution case was that
it was the applicant,
alone, who entered the premises of Mr and Mrs Mammone
at 5 Fox Court, Shepparton by trespass, and stole from those premises the items
that were the subject of charges 3 to 7 inclusive.
prosecution opening, that was filed on the matter, specifically alleged that at
4:00 am on Tuesday 19 October 2021, the applicant
attended the premises in
Fox Court, Shepparton, switched off the mains power, and broke into the premises
by removing the flywire
to the sunroom and sliding open the window, and climbing
over the fridge that was in front of the window.
the trial, the prosecutor opened the matter to the jury consistently with the
written opening. The prosecutor put to the jury that
at approximately
4:00 am on 19 October 2021, the applicant attended 5 Fox Court in the
stolen van, switched off the mains power,
and entered the address via the
sunroom at the rear of the address. There was no suggestion by the prosecutor in
her opening that
the applicant committed the offences, that were the subject of
charges 2 to 7, in company with, or with the assistance of, any other
it is quite clear that the defence was based on the proposition that the
prosecution could not prove beyond reasonable doubt
that it was the applicant
who was the person who broke into the premises and stole the items that were the
subject of the theft charges.
In his preliminary opening to the jury, counsel
for the defence stated that the first matter that was in issue in the trial was
it was disputed that the applicant attended the premises and committed the
burglary at the premises. Counsel put to the jury:
He [the applicant] didn’t enter 5 Fox Court. He didn’t take
firearms. He didn’t take money. He didn’t take
property such as
paperwork and the CCTV hard drive. He disputes that.
trial was conducted, and the evidence addressed, consistently with the openings
by both counsel. In final address, the prosecutor
did not depart from the manner
in which she had opened the matter to the jury. A large proportion of the
prosecutor’s final
address comprised a quite detailed summary of the
evidence that had been put before the jury. In doing so, the prosecutor
that the evidence of Judith Lang, as to her observations of a man who
walked up the driveway of the premises at 5 Fox Court on the
evening of 19
October, and that the evidence of Peter Gramson, who saw a different young man
walk up the driveway of the premises
on 21 October, were each ‘a red
herring in terms of who burgled the house’. The prosecutor completed her
final address
by putting to the jury that the prosecution case was a quite
strong circumstantial case that the offences that were the subject of
to 7 had been committed by the applicant.
counsel’s final address was directed to the proposition that it was not
the applicant who had attended at the premises
and broken into them. Counsel
commenced his address by pointing to the evidence that the attendance by the
applicant at the APCO
service station at 3:55 am on 19 October, which was
some 5.7 kms distant from the premises in Fox Court. Counsel noted that the
of Red Energy was that the power had been switched off at 4:00 am,
and counsel thus contended that it had not been possible for the
applicant to be
the person who had attended at the premises, switched off the power and
committed the burglary. Counsel further noted
that the method of entry into the
premises, through the sunroom, would not have been adopted by a person, like the
applicant, who
was familiar with the premises. Counsel also referred to the
sighting by Judith Lang of the ‘strange vehicle’ at 7:30
19 October, and her sighting of a person who did not match the description of
the applicant. Counsel also referred to the evidence
of Mr Gramson
concerning the unknown male who entered the premises at 5 Fox Court on the
morning of 21 October. In that respect,
counsel noted that there was no specific
evidence as to the time or date on which the burglary took place, other than
that it must
have occurred between 4:00 am on 19 October and the morning of
21 October.
the critical issue for the jury was whether it was satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that it was the applicant himself who entered
the premises at 5 Fox Court
as a trespasser, and stole the items that were the subject of charges 3 to 7. At
the conclusion of the
evidence, and at the conclusion of final addresses, there
was no suggestion that the offence had been committed by some other person
company with the applicant, or by some other person who was acting pursuant to a
joint enterprise with the applicant.
the relevant part of his charge, the judge commenced by correctly directing the
jury that to establish the offence of burglary,
the prosecution must establish
beyond reasonable doubt: first, that the applicant entered the building;
secondly, that he did so
as a trespasser; and thirdly, that at the time he
entered he had the specific intent to steal property from the premises.
judge then proceeded to introduce the alternative pathway to the establishing
the offence. Having observed that it was not in
dispute that someone had
committed the burglary, his Honour posed central the question as
The question is, does the circumstantial evidence satisfy you beyond reasonable
doubt that Mr Portea either was the man alone or
he acted in conjunction
with others in a joint enterprise to do what occurred, that is, burglary.
judge then directed the jury as to the elements of the crime of theft. He made
it clear to the jury that it was not in dispute
that that offence had been
committed. Having done so, his Honour stated as follows:
Someone stole the guns and all the items I led through before. The issue is,
can you infer from the circumstantial and on the evidence
as a whole that
Mr Portea was involved in that theft – in those thefts.
Now, as I said to you, he can commit the offence alone or in company with
others, whether it was one, two or more people. The common
example given in
these courtrooms are if my staff and I decide to commit a bank robbery and my
tipstaff goes out and steals a car
and brings them back first to driving and my
associate goes and gets the shotguns, gives it to me and I go into the bank and
it up while my tippy keeps watch and my associate is keeping the car warm,
we are all guilty of armed robbery even if one person
is involved. Now, that is
a clear example of a joint agreement or arrangement or understanding between the
You are guilty of an offence committed by another if you are party to it, that
if you intentionally encourage or assist the person
who commits the burglary or
the theft to do so. So in this case the Crown do not have to prove that
Mr Portea acted alone. In fact,
they could not. There is no idea how many
people went into those premises but they had to prove that Mr Portea was
involved and that
is the issue for you to determine in this case.
Coming back to all – to the circumstantial evidence in this case, does it
prove that Mr Portea took part in the burglary and
theft and the elements
as I outline them to you of both those offences are established.
is quite clear, and not in issue on this application, that the judge thus
directed the jury on a basis on which it might consider
the guilt of the
applicant on charges 2 to 7, which was not opened or relied on by the
prosecution. In doing so, the judge did not
merely instruct the jury on the
basis that the applicant might have committed the offence in company with one or
more other persons.
More significantly, the judge directed the jury that it
might so conclude on a basis that did not require proof by the prosecution
the applicant himself was the person (or one of the persons) who actually
entered the premises at 5 Fox Court and removed from
it the items that were the
subject of charges 3 to 7. That basis is quite apparent, and would have been
apparent to the jury, by
reason of the example which the judge gave to the jury
of the bank robbery in which one of the participants (the
‘tipstaff’)
kept watch outside the premises in which the crime was
committed and provided a means of escape from it.
that way, the judge clearly directed the jury of a pathway, by which it might
conclude the guilt of the applicant on charges 3
to 7, but which had not been
put or relied on by the prosecution, and which, importantly, the defence did not
have the opportunity
to address.
pathway so suggested by the judge to the jury was not entirely fanciful or
without any evidentiary foundation in the trial. Thus,
it could have appealed to
the jury, and been utilised by the jury, in reaching its verdicts.
evidence of Ms Lang as to the sighting of another person who entered the
premises on the morning of 19 October, and the evidence
of Mr Gramson of
the young person who entered the premises on 21 October, was relied on by
the defence, in final address, in suggesting
the possibility that some other
person than the applicant had committed the burglary and stolen the items which
were the subject
of the charges on the indictment. In that respect, defence
counsel had, in addressing the evidence, suggested explanations for the
print of the applicant on the fridge and the finding of the applicant’s
DNA on the jemmy bar. As noted, in final address
counsel for the applicant had
contended to the jury that the person, who had entered the premises in Fox
Court, did not have familiarity
with those premises, as evidenced by the manner
in which that person had gained entry into the house.
the concept of a joint enterprise engaged in by the applicant and another person
in the commission of the offences, that were
the subject of the charges before
the jury, was not entirely fanciful. In those circumstances, it could not be
concluded that the
jury would have disregarded, or not been influenced by, the
directions given to it by the judge concerning the establishment of the
the accused person by that person’s involvement in a joint enterprise. In
that way, and contrary to the submissions
made on behalf of the respondent on
this application, the impugned passage in the judge’s charge did open to
the jury an impermissible
pathway to finding the guilt of the applicant on the
charges before it. As a consequence, it must be concluded that there was a
miscarriage
of justice.
follows that ground 2 of the application for leave to appeal must
Summary of conclusions
the foregoing reasons, the applicant has succeeded on ground 1 and ground 2 of
the application for leave to appeal. Accordingly,
the application for leave to
appeal must be granted, the applicant’s appeal allowed, the conviction of
the applicant on charges
2, 4, 5 and 7 of the indictment be set aside and the
applicant be retried on those charges.
have had the considerable advantage of having read in draft the reasons of
Priest and Kaye JJA. I joined in the orders made at the
conclusion of oral
argument; and I did so for the reasons their Honours give that concern the
appellant’s ground 2.
Richardson v The Queen
[1974] HCA 19
(1974) 131 CLR 116
, 119 (Barwick CJ, McTiernan and Mason JJ);
[1974] HCA 19
(1986) 21 A Crim R 19
, 29 (Young CJ);
Cannon v Tahche
[2002] VSCA 84
(2002) 5 VR 317
, 339‑–341 [56]–[59] (Winneke P, Charles
and Chernov JJA);
[2002] VSCA 84
Paulino v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 306
[141]–[145] (Priest, Beach and Kaye JJA).
(1990) 48 A Crim R 464.
Ibid, 475 (Crockett, McGarvie
and Beach JJ); see also
[1999] VSCA 145
(1999) 3 VR 355
(Phillips CJ, Charles J).
King v The Queen
[1986] HCA 59
161 CLR 423
, 429 (Deane J), 432, 435–436 (Dawson J);
[1986] HCA 59
[1998] 3 VR 862
878–879 (Batt JA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (510 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter