URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/vic/VicSAC/2022/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:23:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Should Media Coverage Affect Sentencing [2022] VicSAC 5; (19 July 2022)
Should Media Coverage Affect Sentencing?
Sentencing Advisory Council
Introduction
sentencing an offender, courts take many factors into account, such as the
seriousness of the offence, the offender’s prior
record, their age,
whether they pleaded guilty and many others. In Australia, courts do this
through an approach known as instinctive
synthesis, meaning they consider all
the factors that can justify a sentence being more or less severe and then
arrive at a final
the factors that courts may take into account is whether the offender has
already been punished in some fashion outside the
criminal justice
extra-curial
extra-judicial
punishment) this can take
various forms such as visa
cancellation,
loss of chosen
injury to the
and hardship to the
offender’s family.
report is concerned with just one form of extra-curial punishment: adverse media
in particular, of
The media and the courts have an important and symbiotic relationship, but
sometimes their interests can diverge. The media have an
interest in reporting
on criminal justice matters because they are often stories of considerable
interest to their audiences. In
reporting on those stories, the media often
concentrate their attentions ‘on the exceptional and unusual among serious
which can lead to ‘intense and often emotive media
reporting’ about
sentencing.
This can run the
risk of undermining, rather than promoting, confidence in the justice
Courts in turn have an
interest in having their decisions reported. Confidence in the judicial arm of
the criminal justice system
relies on a combination of community awareness about
what courts do, the transparency of their work, and the apparent fairness of
their decisions, which can only be scrutinised if there is transparency and
community awareness.
the sentencing purpose of general deterrence – whereby the sentencing of
one offender is thought to deter other people
from engaging in similar behaviour
– is realistically only achievable (if at all) if the media and/or
operate as the
conduit between the courts and the
While some courts
have taken the very laudable step of making most of their sentencing remarks
publicly available,
many people
do not even have time to read media
let alone original
source material like sentencing remarks, especially in the social media
So the community
realistically only becomes aware of sentencing decisions through the media. The
difficulty is balancing the need
for fair coverage (the courts’ priority)
with the need for interesting coverage (the media’s
Justice Harper has
described the relationship as like a ‘Greek tragedy’ because
‘[e]ach is forced by its circumstances
to face the other off, with neither
having the flexibility necessary to reach a satisfactory working
compromise’.
Beyond the educative and deterrent effect of media coverage about a
particular case, it can also result in publicity about, and vilification
offender at a local, national or even international level. The consequences of
media coverage on fair trial rights are well
documented.
However, there has
been relatively little analysis of the appropriate role that such publicity and
vilification should have in the
process. In 2019, Chief Judge
Kidd wrote in
that ‘the manner and extent to which
extra-curial punishment and public opprobrium should be taken into account ...
In 2016, Chong
et al. argued that studies on extra-curial punishment ‘are sorely needed
because of the continuing complexity
and ambiguity surrounding both the
definitional parameters of extra-curial punishment, and the way courts have
applied these rules’.
2014, Freiberg wrote that ‘[t]he question of the relationship between the
degree of adverse publicity and the level of sentence
has received little
attention in the sentencing
The Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecution’s guidance on sentencing federal offenders
describes the issue as one that
‘remains to be authoritatively
The Judicial
College of Victoria’s
Sentencing Manual
states that ‘it is
unclear whether opprobrium as a result of conviction may be considered by the
court in sentencing’.
the National Judicial College also says that ‘[i]t is unclear whether
hardship resulting from public opprobrium may be
taken into account as a
mitigating factor at
It has been
more than 20 years since the High Court expressed conflicting views on this
then, the advent of social media has elevated the potential exposure for public
opprobrium to unforeseen
Yet the issue seems to
remain as unsettled now as it did
The aim of this report is to analyse the last 20 years of judicial and
academic commentary on media coverage as a sentencing factor
in order to assist
courts and practitioners in navigating the current case law on the issue. The
report finds that most courts appear
to take adverse media coverage into account
but also that there is significant inconsistency in terms of whether it is taken
account, on what basis and to what extent.
The Council’s approach
There were three stages
to the Council’s research. First, a literature review was undertaken of
academic work relating to media
coverage as an extra-curial sentencing factor,
especially in Australia. This was conducted by searching for particular terms in
review was undertaken of contemporary Australian case law (primarily
2010–) relating to the role of media coverage
as a sentencing factor. This
was conducted using AustLII, a publicly available legal database, again
Cases where courts accepted that the offender had experienced ‘public
humiliation’ or similar, without reference to whether
it was due to media
coverage, were excluded.
themes were identified in the literature and case law.
Literature and case law review
The literature review
identified only a handful of academic articles and texts discussing the role of
media coverage as a sentencing
factor. A few additional texts were reviewed that
discuss the role of extra-curial punishment generally. There were then 43
identified in which an Australian court considered – in detail
or otherwise – the role of media coverage in its sentencing
This is not intended to be an exhaustive account of such cases but rather a
representative sample.
A number of interrelated issues emerge from the identified literature and
basis is adverse media coverage relevant to sentencing? Does adverse media
coverage achieve a legislated sentencing purpose
somehow, or is there another
basis for its relevance?
inherently punitive for an offender’s case to receive
coverage? Or does some feature of the coverage itself, or its effect on the
offender, render it punitive?
way(s) can media coverage be punitive?
How relevant
should courts assess the weight to be given to adverse media coverage in
sentencing?
A. Why should courts acknowledge adverse media coverage in
sentencing?
Richards argues that
extra-curial punishment, in general, can instil genuine remorse, operate as a
form of punishment in its own right,
have a specific deterrent effect on the
and have a general
deterrent effect on other would-be
Similarly, Chong et
al. argue that extra-curial punishment may, depending on the circumstances, be
relevant to just about all the
purposes of sentencing, because it may have
‘deterred, reformed, rehabilitated, denounced and/or retributively
punished the
These are all legitimate and legislated purposes of sentencing in
(and elsewhere), which
would explain why achieving them extra-curially might reduce the need to achieve
them curially. As the Queensland
Court of Appeal wrote in
R v Hannigan
[T]he theory which underlies the relevance of extra-curial punishment to
sentence is that it deters an offender from re-offending
by providing a reminder
of the unhappy consequence of criminal misconduct ... In such cases one can see
that a purpose of sentencing
by the court, deterrence or retribution, has been
partly achieved.
In contrast, Duffy argues that ‘judges have been too quick to
acknowledge extra-curial punishment as a factor in mitigation
identifying the sentencing goals or purposes that such an acknowledgement
achieves’, and in so doing risk ‘erod[ing]
the important symbolism
involved in a court
He suggests
that allowing extra-curial punishment to influence the state-sanctioned
punishment may have the effect of retrospectively
imbuing extra-curial
punishment with the quasi-approval of the state. This is because doing so
suggests that the extra-curial punishment
somehow legitimately (even if only
partly) achieved some of the purposes of
sentencing.
As one court said,
‘[i]nformal public shaming in the media ... can never be a substitute for
the formal expression by society
through its courts that a member of that
society has committed a
Instead, Duffy
argues that extra-curial punishment should only become relevant on the basis of
, not sentencing purposes such as deterrence and
retribution.
Fellows and Chong
make the same argument, that mercy provides a more appropriate philosophical
foundation than deterrence does for
allowing courts to acknowledge extra-curial
punishment in appropriate
To date, there has been little academic discussion of the role that mercy
plays in sentencing.
though, a well-established principle. In 2010, a five-judge bench of the
Victorian Court of Appeal reiterated that ‘[t]here
must always be a place
in sentencing for the exercise of
More recently, in
2020 the Victorian Court of Appeal expressly adopted the following statement
from Brien, whose 1991 PhD
revolved around mercy:
Through its relationship to discretion and the place of discretion within the
legal system, mercy is essential to the functioning
and workability of the law,
and, more generally, to the culture of the law. No theory of law, therefore, can
be adequate without
an account of mercy, both as a particular action and as a
virtue of the system’s officials. Not only has mercy a place within
justice, but it must be maintained as a possibility and actively promoted, if
the law is to operate in a morally acceptable
manner and carry out the various
functions that it has in our social arrangements. Therefore, rather than being
in tension with the
law as a system, mercy is an essential component of
The Court of Appeal did, however, suggest that mercy is only relevant when
exceptional
circumstances.
In that sense,
mercy may not be the most appropriate platform from which to argue adverse media
coverage as a mitigating factor.
Instead, it may be preferable to argue that
there is less need for the sentence imposed to achieve ‘just
punishment’
reflect ‘the moral sense of the
just punishment is not constrained by the requirement of exceptional
circumstances. It might also be argued that
there is less need to achieve
specific deterrence if the adverse media coverage has reduced the risk of
reoffending. But such a claim
would benefit from some empirical
foundation.
B. When should adverse media coverage become relevant?
In the 2001 case of
each member of
a five-judge High Court bench delivered a separate opinion. The case has since
heralded legislative reforms as to
the role of good character in sentencing when
that good character in some way
facilitated
A less discussed
feature of the case was the division among the court about the appropriate role
of public opprobrium in sentencing.
Two justices thought it could be relevant,
two thought otherwise and Gummow
did not address the issue:
wrote that crimes committed by people of ‘some prominence will often
attract much greater vilification, adverse publicity’
and ‘public
humiliation’, and that sentencing courts should not ignore those
consequences.
agreed, saying that ‘opprobrium, adverse publicity’ and
‘public humiliation’ could be taken into consideration,
‘[i]f properly based on
was not convinced that public opprobrium should entitle a person to a
lesser sentence, because it would be too difficult to measure
and taking it into
account would unfairly benefit ‘powerful’ and
‘well-known’ people more than
He also hinted that
there had not been ‘full argument on the
agreed, saying that society’s reactions to an offender ‘are matters
which a sentencer should not take into account’
because ‘[t]here is
an irreducible tension between the proposition that offending behaviour is
worthy of punishment and condemnation
according to its gravity, and the
proposition that the offender is entitled to leniency on account of that
condemnation’.
Since then, courts have often observed that ‘the broader issue of
public opprobrium or stigma being a mitigating factor at sentence
remains to be
authoritatively resolved’.
(Despite this, some have made clear that their preference lies with the
McHugh/Hayne
reasoning, while
‘the balance of
leans towards
the Callinan/Kirby reasoning.) In 2016, Bagaric et al. supported the
McHugh/Hayne approach:
Public opprobrium should be ignored as a sentencing consideration. Nearly all
criminal guilt attracts some censure and condemnation;
hence, to some extent,
all sentenced offenders are subject to a degree of opprobrium. Condemnation is
an intrinsic aspect of criminal
guilt and it is not tenable to measure with any
accuracy the level of opprobrium to which an individual is subjected. Further,
manner in which public scorn affects an offender is to a large degree within
his or her control. Opprobrium, unlike a fine or incarceration,
is intangible.
Its impact can be diminished and, in fact negated by a resilient offender. The
fact that high-profile offenders and
those convicted of certain offences are
subjected to more opprobrium is a matter of degree; it does not change the
nature of the
hardship ... Given that sentencing aims to elicit denunciation and
opprobrium, it is contradictory to claim that this very goal should,
at the same
time, be a basis for mitigation.
These views are, however, in the minority. Of the 43 cases reviewed for this
report, opprobrium had at least some, even if ‘very
weight in the
vast majority (37 cases). Of the six cases in which opprobrium was given no
weight, it was either because there was
no evidence that the opprobrium had an
effect on the offender
because the opprobrium was a natural and probable consequence of the
Taken together, those
43 cases suggest that adverse media coverage generally has some relevance to the
sentencing exercise, but that
the coverage or its consequences must somehow go
above and beyond what would naturally be expected due to either the nature of
crime or the profile of the offender.
1. Something more than a natural and probable
consequence
Duffy argues that extra-curial punishment should
only become relevant if the harm or consequences are ‘completely
disproportionate’
to the seriousness of the
Chong et al. make a
similar argument, that ‘when the extra-curial punishment has taken the
form of naturally occurring or inevitable
deleterious consequences ...
mitigating an otherwise appropriate sentence would run contrary to the interests
of the victim and the
community in ensuring that the offender is justly and
appropriately punished’.
Courts have also rejected extra-curial punishment as mitigating if it is
premised on ‘adverse consequences that flow
directly or naturally
from’ the offending, instead requiring some exceptionality to the
The New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal took this ‘natural and
probable consequence’ approach in the specific context
of adverse media
coverage as a mitigating factor in
Sabel v R; R v Sabel
, writing that:
[a]ny social embarrassment or consequence that the appellant may suffer from
being convicted of accessing and possessing child pornography
is a direct result
of his offending conduct.
The New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal had made a similar observation
two years earlier, that while ‘having one’s
crimes exposed on
national television could be gruelling and possibly deleterious to one’s
mental health ... the applicant
had undertaken an unusual and brazen
seemingly suggested that the nature of the offence rendered any media coverage
and consequent psychological harm a foreseeable
and less relevant consideration.
Indeed, some courts have observed that sex offences, especially against
children, are prone to result
in not just media coverage but also high levels of
opprobrium and shame.
have observed that those offenders should expect a level of public humiliation
after being convicted of sex offences,
such that any mitigation due to adverse
media coverage should be constrained unless there is some additional feature of
the coverage
and its consequences.
A pre-existing public profile can also enhance the likelihood of media
coverage through what might be described as a celebrity effect.
offenders’ crimes attract media attention due entirely to the nature of
the crimes themselves, such as those committed
by Adrian Bayley and James
Gargasoulas.
Other people,
though, attract media attention (or
attention) because they
already have some public profile or reputation, such as footballer Jarryd Hayne,
cardinal George Pell, former
Supreme Court Justice Marcus Einfeld or former
parliamentarian Eddie Obeid.
A question arises about whether an offender’s public profile should
affect the extent to which they would reasonably
coverage and opprobrium as a natural and probable consequence of their offending
(and therefore reduce any mitigation they
have otherwise received due to adverse
media coverage).
The Queensland
Court of Appeal thought so in
in 2011, writing that:
[t]he attainment of high public office brings with it public exposure and media
scrutiny as well as power, fame and prestige. Criminal
abuse of the office, if
detected, will inevitably attract media
Similarly, in 2014 the New South Wales District Court did not take media
coverage into account in sentencing a city councillor for
offences of misconduct
in public office, because it was no ‘more than the usual degree of public
opprobrium or publicity that
occurs when any prominent citizen commits a
In 2016, a New
South Wales court observed that media reports about a case were ‘concerned
with an issue of public importance,
namely, political corruption’ such
that it would be ‘incongruous that the consequential public humiliation
should mitigate
And in 2020, a
Victorian court sentencing a former ‘motorcycle
for cultivating
a commercial quantity of cannabis wrote that ‘it is entirely unclear to me
that you have suffered any true
loss of reputation ... through the media
coverage of your
offending’.
There is, however, a point at which heightened media scrutiny of criminal
proceedings against people in the public eye can become
disproportionate. In
, for example, the sentencing court wrote:
[t]his case has been, apparently the subject of intense media coverage, much of
it, it is submitted, extending beyond the fair and
accurate reporting of the
case. I have seen some publications handed to me in the sentence proceedings,
both from the mainstream
media and in re-publications from other platforms. I
tend to agree, to some extent, that Mr Hayne’s privacy, but more
egregiously
that of his family, has been grossly and unnecessarily invaded
beyond what would be expected, even in a high profile matter. I accept
some extent, the offender may have courted media attention for his own purposes
in the past, but some of the reporting recently
has been sensationalist,
inaccurate and not the slightest bit informative. I fail to see how reporting
stupid things that people
post on social media sites, can be considered
newsworthy or even vaguely informative.
In addition, I observe an article published in The Australian newspaper on 8
April this year entitled, ‘Jarryd Hayne’s
Final Days of
Freedom’, which showed worryingly in my view, a photograph of the offender
playing with his daughter on a beach
on the Central Coast. No attempt was made
to disguise the identity of the child and her presence was referred to in the
This is an unnecessarily cruel and abusive intrusion onto the
child’s privacy. The press do not do themselves or their reputation
favours if they publish in these childish and disrespectful ways. I would hope
that reporting from now on is done by a group
of responsible adults.
I accept that the publicity and humiliation suffered by Hayne may be taken into
account in ameliorating the need for specific deterrence,
as a sentence for
consideration.
Similarly, in
the County Court made ‘some
allowance’ for the ‘unprecedented level of public scorn and
criticism’ after
Pell had ‘endure[d] protests and verbal
abuse’ and was ‘publicly pilloried, both in the media, and through
publication of a particular
And in sentencing a
Victorian magistrate for historical sex offences committed against two
17-year-olds, the County Court accepted
that some mitigation was appropriate:
Widespread publicity concerning crimes committed by people with important public
responsibilities, or who are otherwise in the public
gaze, is of course entirely
proper. In many respects it helps serve the purpose of general deterrence,
because it spreads the message
throughout the community that persons who are
popular, important, well-known or privileged are not free to commit crimes and
not escape detection, prosecution and appropriate punishment.
The fact is that the offender has suffered a deserved spectacular fall from
grace which has wrought upon him embarrassment, shame
and humiliation in the
full public gaze which has been more extensive than would be suffered by other
offenders charged with similar
offences. Of course, this must be expected in a
situation as unique as this, but it is still a relevant matter to be taken into
in assessing the extent of punishment the Court should inflict upon the
Further, in 2009 the New South Wales Supreme Court took into account the
public opprobrium that a former judge, who had been found
guilty of perjury, had
experienced after ‘extraordinary’ media coverage, which ‘had a
devastating psychological
On appeal, though,
the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal observed that while the
offender’s public status ‘gave
rise to a greater level of public
opprobrium’, it also ‘gave rise to the heightened seriousness of the
That is, while
the public role of the offender mitigated the sentence because it resulted in
‘extraordinary’ media coverage,
it also aggravated it because the
offender’s position rendered the offence more objectively serious.
Indeed, sometimes the offender does not even need a
pre-existing
public profile for the abuse of their position to reasonably be expected to
attract a certain amount of public attention and opprobrium.
Commissioner of Police
, a police officer unlawfully shared a domestic abuse
victim’s address with her former
officer’s offending resulted in considerable national media
The District Court
said that it did not ‘place too much weight’ on the media scrutiny
because ‘[a]n offender who
commits offences,
especially a police
, cannot complain about widespread publicity of his
As a point of
contrast, though, in
DPP v Rossi
a police officer had used deception to
try and claim possession of a number of vacant
properties.
Her case also
attracted considerable media
But where the court
considered criminal offending by police unlikely to attract
much mitigation when the offending was related to their role, the court
took ‘into account the public opprobrium that [she]
precipitated upon [her]self’ because her ‘fall from grace has
dramatic, profound, public and gravely
embarrassing’.
having a public profile can increase the likelihood of piquing the
public’s interest, so too can having a position
of public trust (at least
in some cases), rendering media coverage more natural and probable.
A further issue arises about the heightened effect of media coverage in less
populous areas. Even limited ‘local publicity’
can result in
‘considerable public opprobrium in the area in which [offenders]
As one court said,
‘it is well-known that crimes committed by local citizens are given much
more prominence in the media in
small country towns than they are in
metropolises like Sydney’.
For instance, an owner of a hardware store in Noosa (Queensland) who was active
in the local community ‘received resulting
notoriety both on local
television and in the local press over some months’ after being found
guilty of child pornography offences,
and that notoriety was one of the reasons
the Queensland Court of Appeal refused to increase his sentence on
Media coverage in a
small town does not guarantee mitigation, though. For instance, a New South
Wales police officer’s conspiracy
to falsify evidence got
‘front-page’ coverage in a local newspaper in Wagga Wagga
(Victoria), and the court said that
‘unless the public opprobrium is such
as has the consequences [i.e. physical or psychological effects] referred to in
case the weight to be attached to this matter should not be
significant’.
, the Queensland Court of Appeal said the sentencing judge
was correct to not place any weight on any public humiliation suffered
result of a local newspaper article:
The evidence was that the applicant was the subject of a front page article in
the newspaper published in his local area. One can
readily infer that such a
publication was seen by, and discussed amongst, people who knew, or knew of, the
applicant in the local
area. It was not contended that this newspaper article
was inaccurate, unfair or unduly inflammatory. It seems to me that if an accused
would seek to persuade a sentencing judge that ‘public shaming’ is a
relevant factor to be considered in a particular
case, then something more is
required[.]
Overall, the weight of authority suggests that both the nature of the crime
and the public profile or public role of the offender
(even if localised) can
affect whether media coverage, opprobrium and shame will be ‘natural and
probable’ consequences
of being convicted. But even for morally outrageous
crimes, or offenders of considerable fame or positions of public trust, the
can exceed what is natural and probable and reach a point of
disproportion justifying
mitigation.
2. The potential harms of adverse media coverage
A brief article that is published on an inside page
of a weekday newspaper in a capital city, includes a bare recitation of the
in a case, and results in no tangible opprobrium or harm to the offender,
is unlikely to justify mitigation. So what is it that might
push media coverage
beyond the threshold of irrelevance to relevance? The cases seem to indicate
that there are four bases that,
in the right circumstances, can permissibly,
often in tandem, found a submission in mitigation: stigmatisation and fear of
backlash, actual community backlash, psychological sequelae and/or
sensationalist or inaccurate coverage.
Stigmatisation:
, Kirby J suggested that the offender’s
‘stigma’ arising from publicity added ‘a significant element
and isolation’ that could justify mitigation on the basis of
adverse media coverage.
was, for example, the case for a man who became housebound out of fear of
community reprisals after the leniency of his sentence
criticised.
community backlash is particularly severe
(potentially even rising to
vigilantism
), this can justify
mitigation of sentence. This was, for example, the case for a young offender who
beat a number of fairy penguins
to death and had his social media feed flooded
with abusive messages, even death
Psychological
One of the more common arguments about why media coverage is
mitigating is that the offender has developed some psychological condition
response to the publicity.
such cases, there can be difficulty disentangling the extent to which the
offender’s psychological condition is truly due
to media coverage and not
some other factors. For instance, one New South Wales court rejected a
submission that the offender had
suffered psychologically as a result of feeling
‘crucified and humiliated by the media coverage’, in part because
more likely cause of his depression was being caught and facing a prison
Sensational/inaccurate
Finally, the media may
sensationalise
mischaracterise
some feature
of the case, resulting in media coverage or vilification that is objectively
disproportionate to the
This may be
especially so when the offender pleads guilty to substantially less serious
charges than those that were initially prosecuted,
retrospectively rendering the
media coverage
disproportionate.
One example
is the prosecution of Harriet Wran, daughter of a former New South Wales
She and two men had
entered a man’s home with the intention of stealing drugs and money. The
two men attacked and stabbed one
of the occupants, who later died. While Wran
was originally prosecuted for murder, she pleaded guilty to being an accessory
(and robbery in company) on the basis that she later harboured the man
who had committed the stabbing. The court described the subsequent
reporting as
an ‘ill-informed’, ‘disproportionate’, ‘sustained
and unpleasant
summarises the coverage as follows:
The ‘campaign’ by
The Daily Telegraph
included what the judge described as ‘distasteful and wholly
misleading headlines’; private letters from Ms Wran to a
friend; her
distraught phone calls to her mother ... which were transcribed and re-enacted
for on-line listeners; details of what
should have been confidential
negotiations between Ms Wran’s lawyers and the DPP; claims of a
‘sex, drug binge after
murder’ which was not advanced by the Crown
and ‘vehemently denied by Ms Wran’; and a narrative framing that
that Ms Wran had ‘willingly taken part in a planned murder’
when this was not part of the Crown
The court concluded that:
the publication of these egregious articles warrants the imposition of a
sentence that takes account of Ms Wran’s continuing
exposure to the risk
of custodial retribution, the unavoidable spectre of enduring damage to her
reputation and an impeded recovery
from her ongoing mental health and drug
related problems.
3. Evidence of adverse media coverage
Whatever the basis on which media coverage might be
mitigating, there is also uncertainty about whether evidence is required and,
so, what evidence. In
, Kirby J suggested that evidence would be
a prerequisite to taking public opprobrium into
Whether he was
referring to evidence of the media coverage itself, the consequences of the
media coverage, or most likely a combination
of both, is not immediately
apparent. Some practitioners have presented sentencing courts with examples of
media coverage about a
Others have presented evidence of the effect
of media coverage on the
Similarly, some
courts have
to acknowledge public opprobrium and humiliation in
the absence of evidence.
instance, in
Whealy JA of the New South Wales Supreme Court said
I was able to make my own observations about the way in which Ms Lane was
subjected to the most invasive media attention throughout
the trial ... [t]here
[still] needs to be clear evidence that extra-curial punishment has
significantly impacted on the offender
before it can be taken into account ...
Consequently, this is not a matter for which I propose to make allowance in the
of sentence.
The comments of Whealy JA raise a further issue about the extent to which a
sentencing court can permissibly take ‘judicial
notice’ of the media
coverage about a case,
– especially a case that has dominated the 24-hour news cycle – and
perhaps even whether the coverage was inaccurate
or misleading given the
judicial officer’s first-hand experience with the case.
Whether evidence is required to prove adverse media coverage and its
consequences, and if so what evidence, will no doubt turn on
the basis on which
the coverage is submitted as a factor in mitigation. If, for example, it is
asserted that the psychological consequences
on the offender have been
especially severe, a mental health expert may be required. As the Queensland
Court of Appeal said in
R v Galeano
, ‘[y]ou do not need the opinion
of a medical expert’ to know someone has suffered extensive burns or a
bullet wound,
‘[b]ut the same confidence cannot always be expressed about
a psychiatric
condition’.
Alternatively, if it is the perceived or actual community backlash against the
offender that is said to mitigate, the offender’s
own testimony may be
4. Dismissing the notion that adverse media coverage could be
aggravating
A final point on how extensive media coverage might
conceivably affect sentencing is that it has sometimes been treated as an
aggravating
factor in the United States. This is apparently on the basis
that the case presents a rare opportunity to reach the masses and enhance
deterrent effect of the sentence (and, so the theory goes, the more severe the
sentence, the more deterring its
A recent empirical
study of over 43,000 sentencing decisions in three American states found that
crime coverage did indeed increase
Such reasoning has
not yet found much favour in
This could be
partly because unlike judicial officers in the United States, judicial officers
in Australia are not elected and therefore
are less likely to be swayed by
populist views.
It may also
be due to judicial awareness
of research consistently showing that while the risk of being caught is known to
have a deterrent effect,
potential length of a sentence does not (or at least, not
Would-be offenders of
unpremeditated crimes simply are not influenced by a slightly more severe
sentence being imposed on another
offender. That said, research shows that
judicial officers tend to prioritise general deterrence as the most important
sentencing at a significantly higher rate (35% of cases) than do
jurors (9%), as a proxy for community
In addition to there
being almost no evidential basis for the suggestion that a slightly longer
sentence will deter other offenders,
it would also arguably be unfair and
contrary to the requirement of consistency in
to allow a factor
outside both the offender’s and the court’s control to
an offender’s
Media coverage
often has ‘more to do with the whims of the press corps’ than with
‘the individual defendant’s
C. The weighting issue: How relevant is adverse media
For the moment, it is
assumed that it is possible for adverse media coverage and public opprobrium to
be mitigating, and that mitigation
will usually only be in cases where there is
an exceptional feature to the coverage or its consequences. The final issue, as
to by McHugh J in
is how courts should
assess the weight to give to such an amorphous factor. While adverse media
coverage may be difficult to measure,
‘it is certain and we all know it
can be keenly felt’.
some cases, it may even be weighty enough to justify a less severe sentence type
altogether, not just less time in prison. For
instance, one court seemed to
suggest that it imposed a community sanction (as opposed, presumably, to
imprisonment) because of the
extensive publicity and its effect on the
To date, there does
not appear to have been a concerted attempt to distil the various factors that
might be relevant to assessing
the weight that adverse media coverage should be
given in sentencing. In 2021, the Victorian Court of Appeal heard an application
for leave to appeal a sentence, argued partly on the grounds that the adverse
media coverage should have been given
than ‘modest’
weight in the sentencing
Kaye JA intimated
that if the case had been a proper vehicle, he would have referred the issue to
a full bench of the Court of Appeal
but declined to do so ‘in a case such
Some guidance
can be found in
, though, in which the Queensland Court of
Appeal proffered five factors that might be relevant, including:
(a) the identity and position of the accused; (b) the nature and seriousness of
the offences; (c) the circumstances of the offending
conduct ...; (d) the
nature, content, duration and extent of the public communication which induces
the opprobrium, and (e) the effect
of the public shaming on the
In light of the conflicting case law and academic commentary, it is difficult
to establish anything resembling a bright-line rule
extent adverse media coverage becomes relevant to
sentencing.
Chong et al.
argue, for example, that even the initial decision about whether to treat
extra-curial punishment as mitigatory
should be governed by a
‘common sense’
However, there are some features of media coverage that courts might consider
in determining whether and how much to take adverse
media coverage into account,
building on the Queensland Court of Appeal’s list in
duration of the coverage (was it a single day, as in
DKN v Western
, or years, as in
the prolific
nature of the coverage (was it front-page news in multiple newspapers?);
the accuracy of
the coverage (was it sensationalised or mischaracterised?);
the locality of
the coverage (such that media coverage in less populous areas will be more
detrimental if the offender lives or works
in that area, but this may be
counterbalanced by the coverage being a natural and probable consequence of
their offending);
extent to which the level of coverage was either disproportionate to the
offending (as was the case in, for example,
) or a natural and probable consequence of the
which will be
affected by:
nature of the offending (child sex offences and breaches of trust in public
positions often provoke not just media coverage but
also extreme moral outrage,
and courts have shown less sympathy for consequent stigmatisation and
humiliation); and
public profile or position of the offender (such that people who assume a role
in the public eye, or a position of public trust,
should expect a certain level
of media coverage when they commit crimes, especially when their role is related
to the offending,
as was the case in
the emotional
and psychological effect of the media coverage on the offender (preferably with
evidence from a mental health expert
psychological condition, to distinguish the anguish associated with being caught
and facing the
prospect of being punished);
stigmatisation
of the offender caused by the media coverage to such an extent that they have
effectively become a recluse, that is,
of community backlash
(preferably with oral or written testimony from the offender and their friends
or family); and
community backlash against the offender (such as being approached in public,
subjected to abuse on social media and being
subjected to vandalising,
threatening or assaultive vigilantism).
There is also often an interrelatedness between the humiliation and shame
that attend media scrutiny on the one hand, and loss of
or hardship to
on the other. Some
courts have indicated that these should be considered separately: one New South
Wales court observed that ‘[t]he
issue of public opprobrium needs to be
distinguished from the loss of a job or similar personal financial
Others have
suggested that separation is not always possible: ‘the public opprobrium
that you precipitated upon yourself ...
resulted as I understand it in Coles
Supermarkets retracting their recent offer of employment to you, and it may
interfere with future
opportunities’.
context of loss of chosen career, the difference is perhaps in whether the
employment lost is
. While there will be
occasions where criminal offending will understandably cause someone to lose
their current employment, particularly
where the two are intertwined, it is
infeasible to maintain the complete, life-long demonisation and unemployment of
people who commit
crimes. Research too consistently demonstrates the fundamental
importance of employment in reducing
reoffending.
In any event, it
may simply be that there are cases where adverse media coverage and other forms
of extra-curial punishment are capable
of being considered separately, and cases
where they are not.
This report aimed to
review the literature and case law on the role of public opprobrium stemming
from adverse media coverage as a
factor that courts may take into consideration
in sentencing. Its key findings include that:
while courts,
practitioners and advisory bodies all tend to acknowledge that the issue of
media coverage as a mitigating factor is
unsettled, the vast majority
nevertheless show a tendency towards allowing media coverage to have some (even
limited) role in the
synthesis process in appropriate cases;
most courts,
however, also seem to suggest that adverse media coverage may not be relevant to
sentencing if the coverage was a natural
and probable consequence of the
offending, an assessment informed by the nature of the crime and the profile of
the offender;
there are a
number of bases on which adverse media coverage could be considered mitigating,
including the experience of stigmatisation,
community backlash, sensational or
inaccurate reporting and/or psychological sequelae; and
in assessing the
weight to be given to adverse media coverage and its consequences, there are a
number of factors (above) that may
be helpful for courts while the issue remains
unresolved.
With the exception of discounting adverse media coverage
as an aggravating factor, no view is offered on the appropriateness or otherwise
of the current state of the law. It does, however, seem that there is
considerable inconsistency in whether adverse media coverage
is taken into
account at all, the basis on which it is taken into account and how much weight
is given to it in sentencing. Whether
through legislation or, more likely,
appellate guidance, Australian courts would benefit from clearer guidance about
whether, when
and how adverse media coverage and public opprobrium should affect
sentencing.
Authored by Paul McGorrery
Published by the Sentencing Advisory Council, Melbourne, Victoria,
© Copyright State of Victoria, Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022
This publication is protected by the laws of copyright. No part may be
reproduced by any process except in accordance with the provisions
ISBN 978-1-925071-68-9 (Online)
Authorised by the Sentencing Advisory Council,
Level 3, 333 Queen Street,
Melbourne VIC 3000
Copyedited and typeset by Catherine Jeffreys AE
The Council thanks Michaella Schwartzshtein for her research assistance.
v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25, [37].
can be a ‘mitigating factor’ that is permissibly taken into account
section 5(2)(g)
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) and similar
provisions in other jurisdictions: see, for example,
R v Galeano
, [109]–[110].
New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal has defined extra-curial punishment as
‘loss or detriment imposed on an offender
by persons other than the
sentencing court, for the purpose of punishing the offender for [the] offence or
at least by reason of
the offender having committed the offence’:
Silvano v R
[2008] NSWCCA 118
Christodoulou v R
[2008] NSWCCA 102
for example,
Al-Kateb v Godwin
[2004] HCA 37
for example, Andrew Ashworth,
Sentencing and Criminal Justice
2010) 183–184.
Queen v Calica
[2021] NTSCFC 2
, [178]; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Deportation and Sentencing: An Emerging Area of Jurisprudence
Queen v Tran & Ors
[2013] VSC 363
[2020] NSWDC
, [65]–[81];
Braimah-Mahamah v R
[2016] NSWDC 138
[44]–[45]. Contra
[2021] NSWDC 242
(‘I do accept
that he has lost a playing contract, but that does seem to be a normal and
natural consequence of a conviction
for this offence’).
[2009] QCA 283
Caddies v Birchell
[2018] QDC 180.
also James Duffy, ‘Roll the Dice, Rational Agent: Should Extra-Curial
Punishment Mitigate an Offender’s Sentence?’
[2012] UQLawJl 5
(2012) 31(1)
University of Queensland Law Journal
v The Queen; Pantelic v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 105.
See also Wendy
Kukulies-Smith, ‘Punishing Parents: A Study of Family Hardship in
Australian Sentencing’
(PhD Thesis, Australian National University,
2019); Tamara Walsh and Heather Douglas, ‘Sentencing Parents: The
Consideration
of Dependent Children’
[2016] AdelLawRw 6
(2016) 37(1)
Adelaide Law Review
sentencing factor goes by multiple names, such as public opprobrium, adverse
publicity and public shaming.
report does not consider corporate offenders. The utility of publicity as a
formal or extra-curial sanction in sentencing corporate
offenders has been
discussed elsewhere: see, for example,
R v Pilarinos
[2001] VSCA 9
ASIC v Lindberg
[2012] VSC 332
, [107]–[108];
ASIC v McDonald (No
(2009) 259 ALR 116, [308], [311]; Brent Fisse, ‘The Use of
Publicity as a Criminal Sanction Against Business Corporations’
[1971] MelbULawRw 5
Melbourne University Law Review
; Arie Freiberg,
Freiberg’s Sentencing: State and Federal Law in Victoria
2014) 907–910.
(2014), above n 11, 1, 262.
Advisory Council,
Myths and Misconceptions: Public Opinion versus Public
Judgment About Sentencing
(2006) 15–16; Sara S. Beale, ‘The News
Media’s Influence on Criminal Justice Policy: How Market-Driven News
Punitiveness’
(2006) 48(2)
William and Mary Law Review
Bowers and Paul H. Robinson, ‘Perceptions of Fairness and Justice: The
Shared Aims and Occasional Conflicts of Legitimacy
and Moral Credibility’
(2012) 47(2)
Wake Forest Law Review
Rosales-Mireles v United
, 138 S Ct 1897, 1908 (2018); Kevin Kwok-Yin Cheng et al.,
‘Enhancing the Legitimacy of Sentences in the Minds of the Public:
Evidence from a Public Opinion Survey in Hong Kong (2020) 22(5)
617; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Public Opinion About
Sentencing: A Research Overview
(2018); Sentencing Advisory Council,
Predictors of Confidence: Community Views in Victoria
[2014] VSCA 308
, [5] (‘Courts have neither the expertise nor
the resources to engage in the kind of sustained community education which is
necessary if general deterrence is to be a reality. That is a task for
government’).
Freiberg (2014), above n 11, 190, 254:
In many cases the sentence
imposed is intended to ‘send a message’ to others ... through the
publication of the sentencing
remarks or, in some cases, through media coverage
... Courts often declare that they intend to ‘send a message’ to the
community through the sentencing process that the behaviour in question
‘will not be tolerated’. This assumes that the
sentences, or reports
of them in the media, will be known and understood.
[2010] VSCA 230
, [42]–[43].
County Court of Victoria, for example, published over 1,300 judgments in 2020:
Australasian Legal Information Institute (AustLII),
‘County Court of
Victoria’ (austlii.edu.au, 2020)
<https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewtoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2020/>
R. Stamm and Daniel M. Jacoubovitch, ‘How Much Do They Read in the Daily
Newspaper: A Measurement Study’ (1980)
Journalism Quarterly
234 (finding that readers typically read about 2.8 inches of a news
Gabielkov et al., ‘Social Clicks: What and Who Gets Read on
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGMETRICS International
Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Science
(2016) (finding
that 59% of social media users did not click on news articles before sharing
them online).
one reporter recently said during a podcast about the relationship between the
media and the courts, ‘[w]e cover cases because
they’re interesting,
because we think people want to know about them’: Supreme Court of
Victoria, ‘Episode 13:
Reporting the Court –
Law (Supreme Court of Victoria, 30 August 2019)
<https://www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/about-the-court/multimedia-on-demand/gerties-law-podcast>
17 May 2022. Similarly, Justice Kunc argues that media coverage of court
proceedings ‘is not an act of selfless public service
but is motivated by
the desire to earn a profit from the sale of newspapers or advertising’:
Francois Kunc, ‘Current
Issues: Sentencing and Media Coverage: Unintended
Consequences?’ (2016) 90(10)
Australian Law Journal
Harper, ‘Sentencing: Public Perceptions, the Reality and Their Social
Implications’ (Kerferd Oration, Beechworth,
31 July 2011). See also the
comments of Justice Bell in Supreme Court of Victoria, ‘Episode 12:
Reporting the Court –
Gertie’s Law
Court of Victoria, 26 August 2019)
<https://www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/about-the-court/multimedia-on-demand/gerties-law-podcast>
at 17 May 2022 (‘I think there is institutional tension between the media
and the courts ... and I think it’s perfectly
understandable that those
tensions might exist’).
for example, Frank Vincent,
Open Courts Act Review
(2017) 16–17,
123; Roxanne Burd and Jacqueline Horan, ‘Protecting the Right to a Fair
Trial in the 21st Century: Has Trial
by Jury Been Caught in the World Wide
(2012) 36(2)
Criminal Law Journal
; Michael Chesterman et
Managing Prejudicial Publicity: An Empirical Study of Criminal Jury
Trials in New South Wales
(2001); Allan Ardill, ‘The Right to a Fair
Trial: Prejudicial Pre-Trial Media Publicity’
[2000] AltLawJl 2
(2000) 25(1)
Alternative
Law Journal
R v Glennon
[1992] HCA 16
, [10]–[11];
v DPP (Cth)
[2021] VSCA 94
, [56]–[57].
[2019] VCC 260
, [148], a point reiterated in
DPP v Pusey
[2021] VCC 478
D. Chong et al., ‘Sentencing the “Victimised Criminal”:
Delineating the Uncertain Scope of Mitigatory Extra-Curial
Punishment’
[2013] SydLawRw 14
(2016) 35(2)
Sydney Law Review
(2014), above n 11, 909.
Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions,
Sentencing of Federal Offenders in
Australia: A Guide for Practitioners
(5th ed., 2022) 92 (discussing the
conflicting comments in the High Court decision of
, and the cases of
Sabel v R; R v Sabel
[2014] NSWCCA 101
[2010] NSWCCA 6
where adverse media coverage was found to be irrelevant
as a ‘direct result’ of the offending (
at [211]), but
relevant where it results in ‘some physical or psychological effect on the
offender’ (
College of Victoria, ‘7.8.1 – Public Opprobrium’,
Sentencing Manual
(Judicial College of Victoria, 2020)
<https://resources.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/article/669236/section/843611>
2022, 212 (also stating that opprobrium is typically only relevant
when the publicity was ‘significantly damaging’).
Judicial College of Australia, ‘4.1 Public Opprobrium’,
to the Offender
(Commonwealth Sentencing Database, 2016)
<https://csd.njca.com.au/principlespractice/general_sentencing_principles/s16a_specific_relevant_factors/hardship/>
at 17 May 2022.
[2001] HCA 21.
This case is discussed in more detail below.
M. Dunsby and Loene M. Howes, ‘The NEW Adventure of the Digital Vigilante!
Facebook Users’ Views on Online Naming
and Shaming’ (2019) 52(1)
Australian & New Zealand Journal of Criminology
41; Chris Cunneen and
Sophie Russell, ‘Vilification, Vigilantism and Violence’: Troubling
Social Media in Australia’,
in Kim D. Weinert et al. (eds),
Lawyers and Justice
(2020) 82–105.
is not unique to Australia. The appropriate role of media coverage in the
sentencing process is also unsettled in the United
States, with various courts
taking diverse and contradictory approaches to media coverage as being an
aggravating, mitigating or
neutral factor: Mirko Bagaric and Peter Isham,
‘A Rational Approach to the Role of Publicity and Condemnation in the
of Offenders’ (2019) 46(2)
Florida State University Law
OR ‘extracurial’ OR ‘publicity’
opprobrium’ AND ‘sentencing’.
for example,
R v Standen
[2011] NSWSC 1422
the potential for media coverage to achieve specific deterrence, see
[2019] NSWSC 1466
, [65] (‘The adverse publicity and community
backlash already caused by reason of these proceedings have already operated as
a strong disincentive to further similar offending’).
Richards, ‘Extra-Curial Punishment and Mitigation of Sentence’
et al. (2016), above n 24, 387. The only purpose that doesn’t appear to be
included here is protection of the community:
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
[1988] HCA 14.
[2009] QCA 40
(2012), above n 8, 116, 119.
115, 120–124.
[2010] VSC 138
(2012), above n 8, 129.
D. Fellow and Mark D. Chong, ‘Extra-Curial Punishment in Criminal Law
Sentencing: A Principles-Based Approach’
[2016] SCULawRw 4
Southern Cross
University Law Review
They also argued that
section 70(1)(e)
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) provides a legislative foundation for mercy to
play a role in sentencing; however, that provision only applies if the sentence
is going to be an adjourned undertaking, dismissal or discharge.
however, Richard G. Fox, ‘When Justice Sheds a Tear: The Place of Mercy in
Sentencing’
[1999] MonashULawRw 1
(1999) 25(1)
Monash University Law Review
; Walsh and
Douglas (2016), above n 9, 140–143.
v The Queen; Pantelic v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 105
, [1], citing
[1969] HCA 26.
See, subsequently,
DPP (Cth) v Masange
, [71]–[73];
DPP v Milson
[2019] VSCA 55
, [51]. See also
Julian R. Murphy et al., ‘An Ancient Remedy for Modern Ills: The
Prerogative of Mercy and Mandatory Sentencing’
[2020] MonashULawRw 24
(2021) 46(3)
University Law Review
Brien, ‘Mercy: The Concept and Its Moral Standing’
Thesis, Australian National University, 1991). See also ibid 206–207, 209,
at which Brien writes that ‘mercy is justifiable
within the legal system,
and indeed any institution, if the actors charged with administering the system
have discretionary powers
... If there is some objection to the existence of
discretionary powers within the legal system, such an objection will also
an objection to mercy’.
v Snow (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VSCA 67
, [88], citing Andrew Brien, ‘Mercy
Within Legal Justice’ (1998) 24(1)
Social Theory and Practice
105, as quoted in Fox (1999), above n 45, 23.
v Snow (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VSCA 67
, [15], [93]. See also
DPP v Queale (A
[2021] VCC 73
, [59]–[60], citing
. Some courts have also limited the relevance of adverse media
coverage to exceptional cases: see, for example,
[2012] NSWCCA
, [34] (‘I accept that the actions of the media can,
, amount to extra-curial punishment’) (emphasis added).
v Williscroft & Ors
[1975] VicRp 27
[1975] VR 292
the date of writing, there is no apparent research on the effect of adverse
media coverage and public opprobrium in specifically
deterring offenders from
engaging in further offending.
[2001] HCA 21.
for example,
Sentencing Act 1991
; Commonwealth of Australia,
Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse,
Justice Report:
(2017) 292–299.
[2001] HCA 21
, [61]–[73].
[2001] HCA 21
[2001] HCA 21
[2001] HCA 21
, [52]–[55].
[2001] HCA 21
[2001] HCA 21
v Payne-Moore
[2021] ACTSC 125
, [55]. See also
[2011] QCA 147
for example,
R v Thornton
[2019] NSWDC 56
, [127] (‘I share the
reservations expressed by McHugh J in
Ryan v The Queen
’). See also
[2010] NSWCCA 6
, [49]–[50] (‘My initial reaction
was that public humiliation that arises from the commission of the offence
give rise to a mitigation of sentence without more ...
Insofar as in the present case his Honour was not prepared to take into account
as a mitigating factor the public humiliation suffered by the applicant, I agree
with that view. But even if it were wrong, the impact
upon the sentence would be
very slight’).
and Isham (2019), above 31, 268. See, for example,
[2021] NSWDC
SG v Tasmania
[2017] TASCCA 12
[2002] WASCA
Bagaric et al., ‘The Irrelevance to Sentencing of (most) Incidental
Hardships Suffered by Offenders’
[2016] UNSWLawJl 2
(2016) 39(1)
UNSW Law Journal
49, 73. Bagaric repeated this point three years later, that opprobrium should
not mitigate sentence because (1) some people are
unaffected by the opinion of
others or their opinions can be ignored, (2) it is not feasible to measure the
level of hardship caused
by publicity and (3) the sentencing exercise should not
‘turn on the vagaries and inclinations of journalists and other[s]’:
Bagaric and Isham (2019), above 31, 285–286.
v Gittany (No 5)
[2014] NSWSC 49
[2011] NSWSC 289
[2011] QCA 147
DPP v Fergusson
[2020] VCC 1565
v R; R v Sabel
[2014] NSWCCA 101
R v Obeid (No 12)
[2014] NSWDC 242
(2012), above n 8, 128.
et al. (2016), above n 24, 402.
for example,
Whybrow v R
[2008] NSWCCA 270
Sabel v R; R v Sabel
[2014] NSWCCA 101
R v Obeid (No 12)
[2016] NSWSC 1815
[2014] NSWDC 242
, [46]. On the ‘exceptional
circumstances’ test in the context of family hardship, see
The Queen; Pantelic v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 105.
v R; R v Sabel
[2014] NSWCCA 101
, [211]. See also
DPP v Heeraman
[2021] VCC 1210
, [57]–[59] (finding that the public humiliation that the
offender endured from adverse media coverage as a result of her theft
was ‘a consequence of [her] grossly dishonest conduct’).
[2012] NSWCCA 149
, [34]. See also
[2020] NSWCCA 81
[133] (finding that any damage to the offender’s reputation amounted to
natural ‘consequences of the offending behaviour’).
for example,
Sabel v R; R v Sabel
[2014] NSWCCA 101
R v Payne-Moore
[2021] ACTSC 125
, [56]–[57].
DPP v Gargasoulas
[2019] VSC 87
did not discuss whether adverse
media coverage or opprobrium was relevant. Nor did courts in a number of other
high-profile murder
[2019] VSC 585
DPP v Herrmann
[2019] VSC 694
The Queen v Price
[2016] VSC 105
The Queen v
[2013] VSC 313.
is an analogy to be drawn here with the ‘public figure’ defence in
United States defamation law, whereby public
figures can only recover damages
for defamation if there was actual malice:
New York Times v Sullivan
[1964] USSC 40
(1964). This includes non-government officials, such as a university
football coach and a retired army general, who invite close
public scrutiny
through their actions or role:
Curtis Publishing Co v Butts
[1967] USSC 200
v Nuttall; Ex parte Attorney-General (Qld)
[2011] QCA 120
, [65]. See also
[2002] SASC 306
, [123] (‘The appellant was a former
prosecutor in the Crown Prosecutor’s Office and a magistrate ... he would
of the public opprobrium which his offending would
[2014] NSWDC 242
, [46]. The court said that it would have been
willing to take media coverage into account if ‘the press’s or the
reaction [was] so great, for example where it may lead to death
threats and the like’.
v Obeid (No 12)
[2016] NSWSC 1815
Woodger, ‘Former Motorcycle Racer Adam Fergusson Jailed for Growing 110kg
of Cannabis in Corio Rental Home’,
Geelong Advertiser
September 2020
<https://www.geelongadvertiser.com.au/truecrimeaustralia/police-courts/former-motorcycle-racer-adam-fergusson-jailed-for-growing-110kg-of-cannabis-in-corio-rental-home/news-story/58309def91fe53b7484773bfbc935d6e>
at 17 May 2022.
v Fergusson
[2020] VCC 1565
[2021] NSWDC 242.
Note that the New South Wales Court of Criminal
Appeal subsequently quashed the convictions; however, at the date of writing,
judgment is not yet available: Georgina Mitchell, ‘Jarryd Hayne Sexual
Assault Convictions Quashed on Appeal, Retrial Ordered’,
Sydney Morning
, 14 February 2022
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/nsw/jarryd-hayne-sexual-assault-convictions-quashed-on-appeal-retrial-ordered-20220214-p59w4n.html>
at 17 May 2022.
[2019] VCC 260
, [141]–[148].
[2013] VCC 1763
, [57], [84].
[2009] NSWSC 119
, [157]–[162]. See also
R v Obeid (No 12)
[2016] NSWSC 1815
, [103] (the medical and testimonial material did not
demonstrate that ‘the adverse publicity ... had any direct physical or
psychological effect on [the offender]’).
[2010] NSWCCA 87
v Commissioner of Police
[2020] QDC 211.
The District Court’s
interference with the magistrate’s original sentence was later overturned
on appeal, but the basis
of that appeal was unrelated to the issue of
extra-curial punishment:
Commissioner of Police v Punchard
for example, Ben Smee, ‘Queensland Police Officer Who Leaked Domestic
Abuse Victim’s Address Resigns’,
The Guardian
, 4 October 2021
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2021/oct/04/queensland-police-officer-neil-punchard-who-leaked-domestic-abuse-victims-address-resigns>
at 17 May 2022.
v Commissioner of Police
[2020] QDC 211
, [91] (emphasis added).
[2020] VCC 1471.
Tran, ‘Former Victoria Police Sergeant Rosa Rossi, Who Claimed Vacant
Houses in Property Scam, Has Jail Term Cut’,
, 3 November
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-11-03/rosa-rossi-police-sergeant-property-scam-jail-sentence/100590542>
at 17 May 2022.
[2020] VCC 1471
[2017] TASCCA 12
, [13]. Contra
[2014] NSWDC
, [44]–[46] (finding that despite the matter attracting ‘a
significant degree of local publicity’, there was ‘no
evidence of
the offender suffering any more than the usual degree of public opprobrium or
publicity that occurs when any prominent
citizen commits a crime’).
[2012] NSWCCA 149
v Burdon; Ex parte Attorney-General (Qld)
[2005] QCA 147.
v Cox & Lucas
[2011] NSWDC 58
, [36], [114], discussing
[2010] NSWCCA 6.
Kontaxis v R
[2021] NSWCCA 72
(‘some of what is relied upon was an entirely foreseeable consequence of
the revelation of the offending ... the opprobrium
that the child sexual
assaults committed by the applicant attracted in a small town’).
[2011] QCA 147
[2001] HCA 21
for example,
[2009] NSWCCA 117
, [67]–[71] (‘After
his release ... the respondent became for all intents and purposes housebound in
his family’s
public as a result of media coverage given to the sentence imposed
and criticism
for example,
R v Payne-Moore
[2021] ACTSC 125
, [55]–[61]
(‘CCTV footage was played depicting what was submitted to be an assault on
the offender involving an unknown
woman throwing hot wax over the offender in a
public bar ... [she] had been speaking about the offences when she did so ...
the offender
had also received anonymous telephone calls from people threatening
to run his motorcycle off the road’);
R v Allpass
(1993) 72 A Crim
(‘The case has excited a deal of public attention ... the respondent
and his elderly wife were subjected to a campaign of abuse
and harassment,
involving threats of serious injury to person and property ... It reached such a
level that the respondent was forced
into a psychiatric clinic for treatment,
and, according to the evidence, he was pursued even there. The respondent and
his wife have
had to leave their home, removing their belongings under cover of
darkness, and they now live elsewhere under assumed names. Quite
apart from the
decision of this Court, the respondent and his wife have paid a high price for
his wrongdoing’);
R v Wilhelm
[2010] NSWSC 378
, [22] (‘the
offender has been subject to an enormous amount of public derision that has
stigmatised him and ... led to death
threats being sent to him by members of the
community so whipped up have they been by the reporting of the incident’);
DPP v Finnin
[2019] VCC 2054
, [70] (‘Your case, I am told, was the
subject of much media attention. I note also that you have been harassed by
... You were on one occasion physically assaulted by a man who called
you a paedophile. I am prepared to take this matter of extra
curial punishment
into account’).
Carey, ‘Members of the Public and Experts Slam Tasmanian Animal
Abuser’s “Light Sentence”’
<https://www.heraldsun.com.au/business/members-of-the-public-and-experts-slam-tasmanian-animal-abusers-light-sentence/news-story/bcea0a8d32743e0cc036cb2275c54a83>
at 17 May 2022 (‘The majority of comments seen by news.com.au are of a
threatening nature against [the offender], and can’t
be published’).
R v AB (A Pseudonym) (No 2)
[2021] NSWDC 175
accept the offender’s evidence of her being spat at in a shop and
suffering a loss of friends (and even family)
as a consequence of the media
publicity and the Facebook posts. This goes beyond the normal public opprobrium
which might naturally
follow from disclosure of the offending’);
[2019] VCC 2054
, [70] (‘You have been subjected to much
harassment in the community by reason of your offending. Your case, I am told,
the subject of much media attention. I note also that you have been harassed
by neighbours and that you have recently taken out a
personal safety order
against one of them’).
for example,
[2010] NSWCCA 6
, [49] (‘Clearly there may be
an exceptional case where [public humiliation] reaches such a proportion that it
has had some
physical or psychological effect on the person so that it could be
taken into account as additional punishment’);
R v Wilhelm
, [19] (‘the offender has, over a long period of time, suffered
from severe mental illness as a result of the allegations against
publicity of them
, and the ramifications of what he has done’)
(emphasis added);
R v Cox & Lucas
[2011] NSWDC 58
, [114] (‘I
incline to the view expressed by Howie J that unless the public opprobrium is
such as has the consequences referred
case the weight
to be attached to this matter should not be significant’).
v Gittany (No 5)
[2014] NSWSC 49
, [79]–[88].
for example,
DPP (Cth) v Samarakoon
[2017] VCC 1426
, [72]–[73]
(‘you have endured embarrassment as a result of a media article which
reported on this offending and on you
... The article entitled “Millions
rorted from government R&D scheme” was published by the Sydney Morning
on 3 July 2017, online and in print. The article contained information
that went beyond this offending, including an allegation that
you further owe
more than $2.5m to the ATO and stated that you are closely linked to an
individual who was implicated in a multi-million
dollar fraud in the United
States ... I accept that you would have endured some embarrassment as a result
of the publication of this
article, particularly in circumstances where the
article reports on matters
beyond allegations of this offending
(emphasis added);
R v Maguire
(Unreported, New South Wales District
Court, Whitford J, 20 March 2015), [31] (‘Publicity generally, concerning
outcomes, whether
they be acquittals or convictions, is right and proper and,
provided it is balanced and accurate, is not reasonably regarded as punishment
in my view. It is an inevitable consequence of the dictates of open justice ...
Where reporting is inflammatory, inaccurate or misleading
and vitriolic, as is
the case for some of the material which has been published concerning the
offender, then there is some scope
in my view for giving some, albeit limited,
favourable recognition in the synthesis to the attendant opprobrium, public
humiliation
and vilification as a form of extra-curial punishment’).
for example,
DPP v Cooper
[2013] VCC 1763
, [54]–[57];
[2010] NSWSC 378
, [16] (‘there was a degree of hysteria which
surrounded the allegations ... which was brought about by rumours and mistakes
or misunderstandings ... The relevance ... is the effect this has had upon the
offender’).
argues that it is usually ‘a particular type of coverage’ that
justifies mitigation, especially ‘overblown
(rhetorical, utilising
hackneyed narrative frames, toxic); misleading (factually or legally incorrect);
the product of improperly
obtained police or prosecution material ... or which
does not accord with the media’s own stated ethics and standards of
David Brown, ‘The Sentencing of Harriet Wran: Tabloid
Press Induced Extra Curial Punishment as Mitigation’ (2016) 41(4)
Alternative Law Journal
for example,
DPP v Mendieta-Blanco
[2020] VCC 1319
, [40] (‘The
reporting of your case was extreme and in only the slightest of ways does the
reportage reflect the criminality
before me’).
[2016] NSWSC 1015
[2016] NSWSC 1015
, [27], [72], [77].
(2016), above n 105, 275.
[2016] NSWSC 1015
, [79]. The court also later refused a request to
access certain materials by
The Daily Telegraph
, in part because
‘[o]ne could be excused for forming the view that The Daily Telegraph
has some form of vendetta against Ms Wran’:
[2001] HCA 21
for example,
R v Einfeld
[2009] NSWSC 119
R v Obeid (No 12)
[2016] NSWSC 1815
DPP v Ellerton
[2020] VCC 1639
DPP v O’Reilly
[2010] VSC 138
for example,
Dickinson v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 50
for example,
Hine v Western Australia
[2010] WASCA 216
(‘Public opprobrium is not a matter which can be assumed without some
factual basis for it’). Some courts, though,
have inferred that even
limited reporting had an effect on the offender, despite no apparent evidence of
R v Kisun (No 5)
[2018] ACTSC 311
, [14] (‘His conviction has
been associated with some media coverage, which, I infer, gives rise to a degree
of public opprobrium’);
The Queen v Gould
[2020] NSWDC 831
(‘There is ... no evidence before me as to the effect that the limited
reporting of these proceedings has had upon the
[o]ffender. I nevertheless
consider it reasonable to infer that it may have had some effect ... albeit to a
minimal degree’);
R v Curtis (No 3)
[2016] NSWSC 866
(‘although the degree of adverse media reporting has not reached the level
of some cases, I accept that Mr Curtis is
likely to have suffered to some
[2020] VCC 1947
, [34] (‘You have
committed a serious crime which is a legitimate topic of public discussion, and
which will inevitably attract
some degree of public opprobrium. However, I
accept the publicity in your case, although limited, has caused you and your
some unnecessary distress, and I will allow some modest mitigation of
sentence in the exercise of my discretion to accommodate that
[2011] NSWSC 289
section 144
Evidence Act 2008
(Vic) provides
(1) Proof is not required about knowledge that is not reasonably open to
question and is—
(a) common knowledge in the locality in which the proceeding is being held or
generally; or
(b) capable of verification by reference to a document the authority of which
cannot reasonably be questioned.
(2) The judge may acquire knowledge of that kind in any way the judge thinks
(3) The court ... is to take knowledge of that kind into account.
(4) The judge is to give a party such opportunity to make submissions ... as is
necessary to ensure that the party is not unfairly
prejudiced.
See further, Peter McClellan and Amber Doyle, ‘Legislative Facts and
Section 144
– A Contemporary Problem?’ (2016) 12(4)
421, 449–454.
[2013] QCA 51
for example,
United States v Ulbricht
, no. 15-1815 1, 34–35
(2nd Cir, 2017) (‘the sentence imposed on Ulbricht could have a
powerful general deterrent effect because the case had attracted
an unusually
large amount of publicity’); Johannes Andenaes, ‘The Morality of
Deterrence’
(1970) 37(4)
University of Chicago Law Review
(‘If a case has for some reason attracted greater publicity, a severe
sentence could be expected to have great deterrent
Ravid, ‘Judging by the Cover: On the Relationship Between Media Coverage
on Crime and Harshness in Sentencing’ (2020)
Southern California
R v Wilhelm
[2010] NSWSC 378
, [30], in which the court took public
opprobrium into account as a mitigating factor, but
the sentence of the offender will probably receive a degree of media interest
... he is a suitable case for general
deterrence because so very frequently the
Court imposes deterrent sentences upon people where that deterrence is of a
theoretical
nature rather than of a real effect’;
, [39] (‘this is also not one of those cases where general
deterrence might be regarded as particularly important because of
the notoriety
of the respondent’).
was one of three reasons posited for the finding that media coverage enhances
sentence severity in the United States: Ravid (2020),
above n 119, 1175.
for example,
Munda v Western Australia
[2013] HCA 38
(A Pseudonym)
[2020] VSCA 67
, [79] (‘in relation to unpremeditated
crimes ... the theory on which general deterrence rests has little or no
application’).
is known as the ‘certainty of apprehension’: Daniel S. Nagin,
‘Deterrent Effects of the Certainty and Severity
of Punishment’, in
Daniel S. Nagin et al. (eds),
Deterrence, Choice and Crime
(2018) 158.
See also the various studies discussed in Sentencing Advisory Council,
Imprisonment Deter? A Review of the Evidence
Advisory Council (2011), above n 123, 14–15; Peter J. Henning, ‘Is
Deterrence Relevant in Sentencing White-Collar
Criminals?’
(2015) 61(1)
Wayne Law Review
; Raymond Paternoster, ‘How Much Do We Really
Know About Criminal Deterrence?’
(2010) 100(3)
Journal of Criminal Law
& Criminology
Warner et al., ‘Why Sentence? Comparing the Views of Judges, Jurors and
the Legislature on the Purposes of Sentencing in
Victoria, Australia’
(2019) 19(1)
Criminology & Criminal Justice
for example, Geraldine Mackenzie, ‘Achieving Consistency in Sentencing:
Moving to Best Practice’
[2002] UQLawJl 4
(2002) 22(1)
University of Queensland Law
; Sarah Krasnostein and Arie Freiberg, ‘Pursuing Consistency
in an Individualistic Sentencing Framework: If You Know Where You’re
Going, How Do You Know When You’ve Got There?’
(2013) 76(1)
and Contemporary Problems
and Isham make a similar argument: Bagaric and Isham (2019), above 31, 242, 257,
288. See also
Wakim v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 301
, [53] (‘The
coverage led to the complainant and his family being identified ... The
deleterious effect of such publicity is
most unfortunate, but it is not a
relevant sentencing consideration as it did not occur through any fault of the
applicant’).
Jacobs, ‘The Role of Publicity in Sentencing’,
October 2017
<https://www.forbes.com/sites/insider/2017/10/23/the-role-of-publicity-in-sentencing/?sh=19d018c23e5c>
17 May 2022.
particular, McHugh J said that ‘[t]he opprobrium attaching to offences
varies greatly from one offender and one offence to
another. How a judge could
realistically take such a matter into account is not easy to see. Whether or not
public opprobrium will
attach to an offence and, if so, to what extent, will
depend on the individual, his or her position and reputation in society, whether
and when the offender will return to the community where the offence occurred
and the nature of the publicity, if any, that the conviction
[2001] HCA 21
[2013] QCA 51
[2015] VCC 189
, [27] (‘In my view in this case given the
publicity that this case has attracted the effect on you, a Community Correction
Order could appropriately meet the sentencing requirements’).
v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 50
v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 50
[2011] QCA 147
for example,
R v Daetz; R v Wilson
[2003] NSWCCA 216
, [62] (‘How
much weight a sentencing judge should give any extra-curial punishment will, of
course, depend on all the circumstances
of the case’).
et al. (2016), above n 24, 384–386.
Attorney-General
(Qld) v Jackway
[2019] QSC 261.
This is not a sentencing decision but rather
a judgment about whether the offender should continue to be detained as a
sexually dangerous
offender. It does, though, show the potentially lengthy media
interest in some offenders. Years after the case had ended, the offender
indicated to a psychiatrist that he was ‘scared of getting out’
because whenever he ‘went to court, there’s
a big burst of
media’: at [54].
[2010] NSWSC 378
, [27], [33] (‘The public humiliation that
has gone on for so many years for Mr Wilhelm can now be seen against the actual
for which he is being sentenced, that is supply of a drug to a consenting
adult who asked him to give it to her. Such a matter would
hardly rate any
mention in any newspaper ... There is in my view no need to impose any further
punishment on Mr Wilhelm. No punishment
that I could give would be anything like
the punishment that he has suffered over the years as a result of the activity
of this night’).
v Southern Motors Box Hill Pty Ltd
[1977] FCA 2
(‘Adverse publicity is
often one of the most inevitable consequences of wrongdoing and in most cases is
without influence in
the assessment of the appropriate penalty’).
for example,
DPP v Dhankar
[2015] VCC 189
for example,
DPP (Cth) v Kassan
[2021] VSC 439
, [170], [188], [206] (the
court accepted that the ‘adverse media attention ... had a deleterious
effect on [the offender’s]
children ... includ[ing] publication of [his]
daughter’s image’, and therefore was ‘prepared to accept that
ha[d] suffered, and will continue to suffer, a degree of extra-curial
as a result of circumstances relating to your children
(emphasis added);
R v Obeid (No 12)
[2016] NSWSC 1815
, [103] (the
evidence did not establish that the adverse media coverage affected the
offender, ‘Instead, it has had an effect
on his family’);
[2013] VCC 1763
DPP v Spits & Anor
[2021] VCC 822
[86] (‘the negative publicity has also had a direct impact on [your
v Cox & Lucas
[2011] NSWDC 58
, [93], citing
[2020] VCC 1471
for example, Caroline Doyle et al., ‘“If I Don’t Get a Job in
Six Months’ Time, I Can See Myself Being
Back in There”: Post-Prison
Employment Experiences of People in Canberra’ (2021)
Australian Journal
of Social Issues
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (387 KB)
PDF format (341 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter