URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VLPT/2005/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:33:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Law Institute of Victoria Limited v Bernstein [2005] VLPT 3 (30 September 2005)
Tribunal reference: T0092 OF 2005
Name, address, and
reference Maurice Bernstein
of legal practitioner:
Charge referred by: Law Institute of Victoria Limited
DX 350 Melbourne
RPA reference: Mr J Mazaris VLR/03/1776
Magistrate Court No
CONCERNING A CHARGE
brought before the Full Tribunal by the
Law Institute of Victoria Limited against Maurice Bernstein (“the legal
practitioner”).
REASONS OF FULL TRIBUNAL OF LEGAL PROFESSION TRIBUNAL
FOR DECISION GIVEN ON 30 SEPTEMBER 2005
(Section 409 Legal Practice
This is the hearing of six misconduct charges against the legal
practitioner Mr. Bernstein under section 151 of the Legal Practice
(“the Act”) referred by the Law Institute of Victoria Limited. A
certificate pursuant to s.435(1) of the Act
was tendered certifying that the
legal practitioner was admitted to practise on 1 September 1966. He was the
holder of a Principal
Practising certificate from 3 June 1969 to 3 December
2004. Mr Bernstein is a regulated practitioner of the Law Institute of Victoria
Limited and aged 63 years.
It appears from the notice issued under s.151
he practised:
(a) from at least 1998 to 16 November 2001 as a member of the firm Shatin
Bernstein Kolsky at 25-27 Ballantyne Street, South Melbourne.
(b) The period 17 November 2001 to 3 December 2004 under the name Bernstein and
Associates at Suite 5/412 Toorak Road, Toorak.
complaint was made against the legal practitioner by his former partner Mr. Gad
Kolsky. The Law Institute conducted the investigation
of the legal practitioner
required under section 146(1)(a) of the Act. It then laid against Mr. Bernstein
six charges of misconduct
in the course of engaging in legal practice. These
six charges involve five separate incidents of wrongful appropriation of funds.
Before us Mr Randall of Counsel appeared for the Law Institute of Victoria
Limited and Mr O’Bryan for the legal practitioner.
At the outset
of proceedings one charge of misconduct was withdrawn and one charge (Charge 6)
was amended to misconduct by appropriation
of the sum of $17,285 from the
Freshman Estate by way of executor’s commission prior to obtaining an
order of the court.
A copy of the amended particulars of the six charges
before the Tribunal is annexed hereto.
It can be seen the five incidents
of giving rise to the charges occurred between 30 January 2001 and 16 January
To the six charges of misconduct the legal practitioner pleaded
guilty and the case proceeded as a plea.
The charges 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 are
brought by the Law Institute of Victoria Limited as misconduct “at common
law” that is
to say with conduct in the course of engaging in legal
practice being conduct which legal practitioners of competence and good repute
would reasonably regard as dishonourable or disgraceful. This wide area of
misconduct is now preserved as one form of statutory
misconduct by the first
fifteen words of paragraph (a) of the definition of “misconduct” in
Section 137 of the Act.
For purposes of brevity the wide preserved area is
called misconduct at common law.
See Mark Woods T0134 of 1999, Full
Tribunal, The Honourable Richard Fullagher Q.C. (Chairperson) 18 October 1999.
Charge three was brought in addition to charge 2. This being a charge of
misconduct as defined in s.137(a)(i) in that he wilfully
or recklessly
contravened section 182 of the Act by making a false entry in the trust ledger
for the Estate of Elizabeth Freshman
in respect of cheque no. 010543. The Law
Institute of Victoria Limited elected to proceed on charge 2 and charge 3 was
There was no dispute as to the facts set out in the
particulars of charge which were before the Tribunal. All charges related to
one particular client, the estate of Elizabeth Freshman, in respect of which Mr.
Bernstein was the sole Executor. The Will provided
for Mrs. Freshman’s
daughter Fay Kayser to have an income for life and on her death the capital was
to be paid to the Fay Kayser’s
children. Elizabeth Freshman died on 5
November 1998 and Mr. Bernstein was granted Probate on 7 May 1999.
The legal practitioner appropriated the total amount of
$148,135.00 in five separate incidents the subject of the charges between
January 2001 and 16 January 2003. The practitioner made false entries in his
Trust Account to disguise misappropriations.
In chronological order:
1. Charge 6
The earliest charge related to the transfer from Mr. Bernstein’s Trust
Account to his Office Account of the sum of $17,285.00.
The Trust Account entry
read “on account of executor’s commission billed to the
30/6/2000”. Mrs. Freshman’s
Will did not provide for the payment of
executor’s commission: Mr. Bernstein had not obtained agreement for the
payout from
the beneficiaries; nor had he obtained an Order from the Court. In
these circumstances Mr. Bernstein was not entitled to the payment
executor’s commission. The Law Institute conceded that if he had of
applied to the Court, he would have been granted payment
commission.
January 2000 a payment of $20,000.00 was made from the
Freshman monies in the firm’s Trust Account to Mr. Bernstein’s
personal bank account. It was recorded in his trust ledger as “Fay
Kayser-distribution”.
On 16 January 2003 Mr. Bernstein received a cheque for $19,350.00 payable to
himself as part proceeds of settlement of the sale of
real estate property owned
by the Freshman estate.
On 21 February 2003 Mr. Bernstein drew from the Estate Funds in the firm’s
trust account a cheque of $75,000.00, which he used
to repay a personal
On 23 April 2002 Mr. Bernstein drew a cheque for $16,500.00 on his Trust
Account, debited to the Freshman Estate and made payable
to Gryffenberg Nominees
Pty. Ltd. Gryffenberg Nominees Pty.Ltd. was a client of Mr. Bernstein’s
from which he had borrowed
$20,000.00, and the money was used to repay that
After its investigation the Law Institute of Victoria
Limited obtained an Order from the Supreme Court of Victoria on 3 December 2004
appointing a Receiver to Mr. Bernstein’s legal practice and the Trust
Account. Mr. Bernstein’s full practising certificate,
which he had held
since 3rd June 1969, was surrendered on 3 December 2004. Within a few days
thereafter Mr. Bernstein paid the sum
of $114,350.00 to the Receiver in
restitution.
Mr. Justin O’Bryan confirmed his client’s plea
of guilty to all charges. An additional charge 5A prepared by the Law
was withdrawn with the consent of Mr. O’Bryan. We note it was drafted in
any event as an alternative to charge 5.
Mr. O’Bryan told the Tribunal
that his client was 63 years of age. He was admitted to practice in New South
Wales in 1955.
In 1966 he commenced employment in Victoria with the firm of J
& S. Shatin. In 1971 he was admitted to partnership with Mr
and Mrs Shatin.
In 1980 Mr. Shatin died. Mrs. Shatin died in 1984. From 1985 until 1995 the
firm continued as a partnership between
Michael Koralis, Gad Kolsky and Maurice
Bernstein. In 1995 Mr Koralis resigned from the partnership and Messrs.
Bernstein and Kolsky
continued until November 2001 when their partnership was
dissolved. The legal practitioner then continued as a sole practitioner
the firm name Bernstein & Shatin.
The dissolution of the partnership
left Mr. Bernstein indebted to Mr. Kolsky for over $150,000.00. It had been a
difficult partnership,
and Mr. Bernstein now found himself in financial
difficulties. He failed to deal with the situation and felt unable to disclose
his problems to his wife. He further felt ashamed at what he saw as his
professional and financial failure. His psychiatrist Dr.
Paul Fawkes gave
evidence on his behalf. He told the Tribunal that his patient had tried to
commit suicide in 2001, and again took
an overdose in December 2004 when the
Receiver was appointed.
Mr. O’Bryan called two character
witnesses on behalf of Mr. Bernstein and they both said they found him to be
very professional
and honest. Mr. Reeve, the Assistant Director of Nursing at
Stawell Regional Health had been a client for 32 years and praised his
advice, integrity and customer service. He only recently knew of the charges
and had personally no honesty concerns regarding
Mr. Bernstein.
Joseph Dennis Churkovich, solicitor, who purchased Mr. Bernstein’s
practice from the Receiver, had known him professionally
for some five years.
He had found the files were of good standard and there was a good interaction
with his clients. He would be
happy to have Mr. Bernstein work for him as a
solicitor or law clerk, without any access to trust accounts. Written
references were
also exhibited to the Tribunal.
Mr. O’Bryan also
informed the Tribunal regarding the previous occasion when Mr. Bernstein was
before the Tribunal for having
intercepted Mr. Kolsky’s correspondence
from the Tribunal. This event arose from the same difficult partnership
background.
On that occasion Mr. Bernstein received a severe reprimand and a
$3,000.00 fine. This charge corroborated the difficulties being
experienced
between Mr Bernstein and Mr Kolsky.
At this point in the proceedings Mr.
Kolsky, who had been present in the Tribunal throughout the hearing, submitted a
note to both
Mr. Randall and the Tribunal asking that he be allowed to make a
statement to the Tribunal in relation to some of the evidence called.
Tribunal declined this request. Neither the Law Institute nor Defence Counsel
had seen fit to call Mr. Kolsky, and both parties
refused to give consent. The
Tribunal pointed out that it would be taking an unusual step to grant Mr.
Kolsky’s application,
and although it noted his concerns in the matter,
the application was refused.
The Tribunal has given careful consideration
to the matters put to it by both Counsel in deciding an appropriate penalty.
The wrongful
appropriation of $148,135.00 was a substantial amount involving
five separate incidents. They occurred over a significant period
of time. Mr.
Bernstein had deliberately disguised these events. All the monies were taken
from a family with whom he had had a long
association since 1966. This was a
serious abuse of the position of trust in which he had clearly been held. The
five incidents
involved considerable dishonesty. Mr Bernstein’s own
family attended in support of him at the Tribunal.
The Tribunal also
considered the remorse and shame clearly felt by Mr. Bernstein. He repaid a
substantial amount of the misappropriated
funds, and all outstanding funds have
now been attended to. He immediately surrendered his practising certificate
when the Receiver
was appointed. He has suffered anxiety and depression, and at
63 years of age is unlikely to easily return to employment. He will
severe financial consequences. We of course take into account his plea of
guilty and all the submissions made on the legal
practitioner’s account by
Mr O’Bryan. We also take into account all the oral evidence called on his
behalf both as to
character and the psychiatric evidence of Dr Faulkes and his
report dated 22 July 2005.
Nevertheless the misappropriations and
deliberate falsification of records in order to disguise them are a very serious
matter. The
Tribunal has a responsibility to protect the public. There is also
a responsibility to impose a ‘penalty’ which reflects
in particular
on aspects of specific deterrence that is to deter this legal practitioner and
general deterrence that is to deter
others who might be tempted to engage in
similar conduct. After taking all factors into account and giving weight to a
career which
was previously unblemished, apart from the appearance before the
Tribunal which essentially involved his partnership difficulties,
the Tribunal
is compelled to remove Mr. Bernstein’s ability to practise for a
considerable period. In considering this penalty
it is to be kept firmly in
mind that this Tribunal is not a court exercising the powers and functions of a
criminal court. Those
powers and functions are very different to those of this
Tribunal. In our view criminal proceedings could have been brought against
practitioner and still may be. In such a case his acts of dishonesty would
expose him to the sanctions of the criminal law.
The orders of the Tribunal are
1. The legal practitioner may not apply for a practising certificate before 3
December 2009;
2. The legal practitioner may not apply for a practising certificate entitling
him to operate a Trust Account until 3 December
3. The legal practitioner is to pay to the Law Institute of Victoria Limited the
costs which have been fixed at the sum of $15,860.
4. There will be a stay of six months for payment of
.......................................................................
Chairperson
of Legal Profession Tribunal
1. Copies of this document will be provided by the Tribunal to the legal
practitioner, the legal practitioner’s recognised
professional
association, the Legal Ombudsman, the complainant and the Legal Practice
2. More information about the operation of the Tribunal can be found on the
Tribunal’s website at
www.legalpt.vic.gov.au
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter