URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2024/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jayawardana v Telstra Limited [2024] VMC 17 (11 October 2024)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
No. MAG-CI-230098150
SHEHAN JAYAWARDANA
TELSTRA LIMITED TRADING AS TELSTRA
MAGISTRATE:
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
4, 5 and 6 March, written submissions 15 and 20 March
DATE OF DECISION:
11 October 2024
CASE MAY BE CITED AS:
Jayawardana v Telstra Limited
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2024] VMC 17
INDUSTRIAL LAW –
Fair Work Act 2009
alleged contravention of enterprise agreement – dispute as to
Plaintiff’s classification level under enterprise agreement
principles of construction of enterprise agreements – principles for
determining applicable classification.
APPEARANCES:
For the Plaintiff
Daniel Dwyer
Communications Electrical and Plumbing Union
For the Defendant
Chris O’Grady
Dimitri Ternovski
Seyfarth Shaw Australia
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Repair and maintenance of the network, or a
part of it 48
Installation and repair of CPE products
and cabling, and associated work 49
Work on small and large Pair Gain
Systems and Radio based connections. 50
Non-network interference and network
interference work 52
Examples without equivalent in other
Prescribed Diagnostics/Complex
Diagnostics/Very Complex Diagnostics 69
Range of solutions 71
HER HONOUR:
INTRODUCTION
Plaintiff Mr Shehan Jayawardana is employed by Telstra Limited
Technician, working on Telstra’s optical fibre network. Mr Jayawardana
claims he has been underpaid by Telstra since
2019, in breach of the enterprise
agreements applicable to his employment and
Fair Work Act 2009
), because Telstra has incorrectly classified his role.
Telstra denies that Mr Jayawardana has been underpaid and says he has been
correctly classified.
Court, an eligible State or Territory Court pursuant to
of the Act, has
enterprise agreement pursuant to
of the Act and to impose pecuniary
penalties pursuant to
Determining
Mr Jayawardana’s classification level requires consideration of Core Job
Descriptions (CJDs) which underpin the
enterprise agreement classification
structure, and which have not been updated since 2002. At that time
Telstra’s network predominantly
used older transmission technologies, such
as copper, rather than optical fibre, and the CJDs primarily refer to products
and services
based on these older technologies. Mr Jayawardana does not work on
the copper network. The key issue in the proceeding is the interpretation
CJDs designed predominantly for the copper network and their application to Mr
Jayawardana’s work on the optical fibre network.
MR JAYAWARDANA’S CONTRACTS AND THE CLASSIFICATION
of the facts in the matter were agreed by way of a Statement of Agreed Facts
dated 21 December 2023 (
).The following background matters were not
in dispute.
Jayawardana has been employed pursuant to three successive written contracts.
His 30 January 2012 contract provided that he was
employed as ‘Constructor
Repairer’ classified at CFW3. His 30 January 2013 contract provided that
he was employed as
‘CAN Infrastructure Builder’ classified at CFW4.
His current contract dated 26 October 2022 (
2022 Contract
) provides that
he is employed as a ‘Service Technician’ classified as CFW4. The
2022 Contract was entered into following
a corporate restructure and did not
result in any changes to Mr Jayawardana’s role or duties.
all relevant times, Telstra has classified Mr Jayawardana as CFW4. Mr
Jayawardana contends that he should have been classified
alternatively CFW5 since at least 1 October 2019.
classification references in Mr Jayawardana’s contracts, and in respect of
the claim, are derived from the enterprise agreements
applicable to Mr
Jayawardana’s employment, being:
(a) the Telstra Enterprise Agreement 2015-2018 (
), from 12 November 2015 until 18 June 2020;
(b) the Telstra Enterprise Agreement 2019-2021 (
), from 19 June 2020 until 12 July 2022; and
(c) the Telstra Limited Enterprise Agreement 2022-2024
2022 Agreement
) from 13 July 2022 onwards.
classification provisions have not materially changed across the enterprise
agreements and the parties agreed that the 2022 Agreement
provisions may be used
as a proxy for the classification structure across each of the enterprise
agreements.
Jayawardana is a ‘workstream
under the 2022
Agreement. Accordingly, his minimum fixed remuneration rate is determined based
on the relevant Band,
which refers
to the level of a job within the relevant
workstream.
Mr Jayawardana falls
under the ‘Customer Field Workstream’ or ‘CFW’, which is
defined as:
Employees engaged in Customer Access Network (CAN) construction and/or in the
end to end installation, operation, maintenance and
repair of all services for
customers and/or in the supervision and/or direct operational support of such
employees and the testers
in the service assurance call
C ‘Workstream Arrangements’ at clause C1 provides:
C1. WORKSTREAM PRINCIPLES
C1.1. Telstra will allocate a Workstream Employee to a Workstream (see the
Dictionary for Workstream definitions).
C1.2. The following principles apply:
a) Work in each Workstream will be evaluated in accordance with the Telstra Job
Evaluation and Classification System and these principles.
b) Each Band, within a Workstream, will have agreed representative Core Job
Descriptions which form part of this Agreement. There
may be more than one Core
Job Description for each Band.
c) As part of the Telstra Job Evaluation and Classification process, managers
will design any new jobs that will go into a Workstream.
If Telstra and any new
employee to whom the new job applies cannot reach agreement on the grading of
the new job, the matter will
be referred to a review team
comprising:
external consultant expert in Telstra's Job Evaluation and Classification
ii) a Telstra representative;
iii) the employee (who may be represented, including by a Telstra Union).
d) A majority of the three person team will determine the outcome and this
outcome will be binding on the Parties to this Agreement
without recourse to
further review or appeal.
e) Telstra and the Telstra Unions may agree to change the current Core Job
Descriptions during the life of the Agreement. However,
they will not be changed
without such agreement.
Dictionary defines ‘Core Jobs [sic] Descriptions’ (CJDs) as:
Job descriptions that underpin the classification of
These have been graded and placed into
Job Evaluation and Classification System
using agreed job descriptions. Core
jobs align particular job duties with
for the life of this
, are subject to a review (see Appendix C), and guide evaluators
in determining the appropriate
for new or substantially altered
CJDs collectively form the ‘Job Evaluation and Classification
System’ referred to in the enterprise agreements, and
there are four CJDs
relevant to this proceeding: CAN Infrastructure Build CFW4; Installer/Repairer
CFW4; Installer/Repairer CFW5
and Installer/Repairer CFW7. A detailed comparison
of the text of the relevant CJDs prepared and agreed by the parties is copied
Appendix 1.
RELEVANT LEGAL PRINCIPLES
Principles guiding the proper construction of an Enterprise
parties agreed that the principles governing the construction of enterprise
agreements are as set out in
Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union v
Berri Pty Ltd
The principles relevant to the task of construing a single enterprise agreement
may be summarised as follows:
construction of an enterprise agreement, like that of a statute or contract,
begins with a consideration of the ordinary meaning
of the relevant words. The
resolution of a disputed construction of an agreement will turn on the language
of the agreement having
regard to its context and purpose. Context might appear
(i) the text of the agreement viewed as a whole;
(ii) the disputed provision’s place and arrangement in the agreement;
(iii) the legislative context under which the agreement was made and in which
it operates.
task of interpreting an agreement does not involve rewriting the agreement to
achieve what might be regarded as a fair or just
outcome. The task is always one
of interpreting the agreement produced by parties.
common intention of the parties is sought to be identified objectively, that is
by reference to that which a reasonable person
would understand by the language
the parties have used to express their agreement, without regard to the
subjective intentions or
expectations of the parties.
fact that the instrument being construed is an enterprise agreement made
pursuant to Pt 2-4 of the FW Act is itself an important
consideration. It may be inferred that such agreements are intended to establish
binding obligations.
FW Act does not speak in terms of the “parties” to enterprise
agreements made pursuant to Pt 2-4 agreements, rather
it refers to the persons
and organisations who are “covered by” such agreements. Relevantly s
172(2)(a) provides that
an employer may make an enterprise agreement “with
the employees who are employed at the time the agreement is made and who
covered by the agreement”. Section 182(1) provides that an agreement is
“made” if the employees to be covered
by the agreement “have
been asked to approve the agreement and a majority of those employees who cast a
valid vote approve
the agreement”. This is so because an enterprise
agreement is “made” when a majority of the employees asked to
approve the agreement cast a valid vote to approve the agreement.
agreements are not instruments to which the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) applies, however the modes of textual analysis developed in the general
law may assist in the interpretation of enterprise
agreements. An overly
technical approach to interpretation should be avoided and consequently some
general principles of statutory
construction may have less force in the context
of construing an enterprise agreement.
construing an enterprise agreement it is first necessary to determine whether an
agreement has a plain meaning or it is ambiguous
or susceptible of more than one
may be had to evidence of surrounding circumstances to assist in determining
whether an ambiguity exists.
the agreement has a plain meaning, evidence of the surrounding circumstances
will not be admitted to contradict the plain language
of the agreement.
the language of the agreement is ambiguous or susceptible of more than one
meaning then evidence of the surrounding circumstance
will be admissible to aide
the interpretation of the agreement.
admissibility of evidence of the surrounding circumstances is limited to
evidence tending to establish objective background facts
which were known to
both parties which inform and [sic] the subject matter of the agreement.
Evidence of such objective facts is
to be distinguished from evidence of the
subjective intentions of the parties, such as statements and actions of the
parties which
are reflective of their actual intentions and expectations.
12. Evidence of objective background facts will include:
(i) evidence of prior negotiations to the extent that the negotiations tend to
establish objective background facts known to all
parties and the subject matter
of the agreement;
(ii) notorious facts of which knowledge is to be presumed; and
(iii) evidence of matters in common contemplation and constituting a common
assumption.
diversity of interests involved in the negotiation and making of enterprise
agreements (see point 4 above) warrants the adoption
of a cautious approach to
the admission and reliance upon the evidence of prior negotiations and the
positions advanced during the
negotiation process. Evidence as to what the
employees covered by the agreement were told (either during the course of the
negotiations
or pursuant to s 180(5) of the FW Act) may be of more assistance
than evidence of the bargaining positions taken by the employer
or a bargaining
representative during the negotiation of the agreement.
extrinsic material may be used to aid the interpretation of a provision in an
enterprise agreement with a disputed meaning,
but it cannot be used to disregard
or rewrite the provision in order to give effect to an externally derived
conception of what the
parties’ intention or purpose was.
the industrial context it has been accepted that, in some circumstances,
subsequent conduct may be relevant to the interpretation
of an industrial
instrument. But such post-agreement conduct must be such as to show that there
has been a meeting of minds, a consensus.
Post-agreement conduct which amounts
to little more than the absence of a complaint or common inadvertence is
insufficient to establish
understanding.
further relied on
Sheehan v Thiess Pty Ltd
Target Australia Pty Ltd v Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees’
Association
support of the principle that because enterprise agreements are instruments with
statutory force, distinct from commercial agreements
between parties, contextual
matters should not be taken into account unless they are notorious or known to
the persons intended to
be bound by the agreement.
decision also cites the applicable broad principles for construing
an enterprise agreement from
WorkPac Pty Ltd v Skene
recognise, amongst other things, that the words of an agreement must be
understood in their industrial context, in light of
customs and working
conditions, with intentions expressed in practical terms intelligible to parties
but without careful attention
to form and drafting, legal niceties or jargon. A
purposive approach must be taken.
Approach to determining an employee’s classification
principles applicable to determining Mr Jayawardana’s classification level
were also not in dispute. The following extract
Davies v Carnachan
Family Trust Pty Ltd
describes the required approach:
[12] The courts and industrial tribunals have developed principles to be applied
ascertain whether an employee falls within a particular classification described
in an award or agreement. Where the employee performs
mixed functions, the
approach has been to examine the “
major and substantial
” of the employee or the “
primary function
” of the employee.
For example, in
Logan v Otis Elevator Company Pty Ltd
, Moore J referred to and applied the decision of Sheldon J in
O’Donnell Griffin (Television Services) Pty Ltd
[1971] AR (NSW) 18
his Honour, applying the “
major and substantial
” test, relevantly observed:
...it is not merely a matter of quantifying the time spent on the various
of work performed by a complainant; the quality of the different types of
done is also a relevant consideration.
[14] The task of the Court in examining the major, substantial or principal
aspect of the work performed by the employee will include
consideration of the
amount of time spent performing particular tasks, but also the circumstances of
the employment, and what the
employee was employed to do. The question is one of
fact, to be determined by reference to the duties actually attaching to the
rather than its title:
City of Wanneroo v Holmes
Joyce v Christofferson
Additionally,
each classification level must be considered in context, consistent with the
approach described in
Michael Watson v Safe Places Community Services Limited
Safe Places
Further, the principles of construction of enterprise agreements also operate
considering classification structures, including indicative tasks specified for
various levels, for the purpose of determining the
appropriate classification
Level of an employee. Each level of a classification structure and the
underpinning definitions must be
read in the context of higher or lower levels
having regard to the descriptions at higher and lower levels of similar tasks
ascending and descending degrees of
complexity.
Jayawardana bears the onus of proving on the balance of probabilities that
Telstra has contravened the relevant enterprise agreements
by failing to
classify and pay him in accordance with the CFW7 classification level, or
alternatively the CFW5 classification level.
APPROACH TO THE EVIDENCE
adopt as findings the facts as agreed in the SOAF, with limited exceptions,
where indicated.
addition, Mr Jayawardana and Mr John Ellery, union official in the Victorian
Branch of the Communications Electrical and Plumbing
Union Communications
Division, Telecommunications & Services Branch (
evidence for Mr Jayawardana. For Telstra, employees Mr Michael Cooper, Mr Tony
Considine and Mr Riccardo De Blasio gave evidence.
Ellery has been an official of the Union for 29 years and prior to this was an
employee of Telstra from February 1975 to 1994.
At the time he left Telstra, he
was a senior technical employee and did not work with cable in the field. He
experienced ‘the
dawn of the fibre age’ in a research environment.
Cooper is the ‘Principal – Access Networks’ and is responsible
for the financial and operations functions in
the Customer Access Network
Over the 28 years
he has been employed by Telstra he has worked in the field on copper cable and
optical fibre maintenance. He was
also team manager of the optical fibre team.
Considine is the Business Senior Lead in Field Services and has national
responsibility across the optical fibre, copper wire,
pits and duct network.
This includes cable incident restoration, the fibre maintenance program and
construction and installation
of wideband services. He reports to Mr Cooper. He
has been employed by Telstra for 24 years and from 1999 to 2010 was a Field
Communications
Technician, working on the copper then fibre network after
obtaining fibre accreditation in 2007.
De Blasio is the CAN Program Coordinator – Optic Fibre. He coordinates the
repair and maintenance of optical fibre cable
in the network and is responsible
for the geographic area covering the eastern side of Victoria (including all of
Melbourne), all
of Tasmania and part of southern NSW. Mr De Blasio reports to Mr
Considine. In his 38 years as a Telstra employee he has worked predominantly
optical fibre and copper cable jointing and maintenance roles.
also tendered by consent the Witness Statement of Emma Tullberg, attaching the
Telecommunications Training Package ICT97 Technical & Call Centre Streams
Volume 1 – General Information Assessment Guidelines
Qualifications
dated January 2001 (
2001 Curriculum Document
provides details about AQF qualifications listed in the relevant
Frequently,
the witness evidence traversed subject matters addressed in the SOAF. I have
considered this evidence as supplementary
to the SOAF, given both parties led
evidence of this nature, and neither party objected to its admissibility on the
basis that it
contradicted or qualified an agreed fact.
witness gave opinion evidence as to the complexity of the work of Mr Jayawardana
and others. Telstra submitted that because its
witnesses were not challenged on
their opinions in cross examination, I should accept their evidence. I disagree
that the evidence
should be accepted on this basis. The issue of complexity was
clearly disputed, and I am satisfied that the Telstra witnesses were
and did, answer Mr Jayawardana’s evidence on this issue. Mr Jayawardana
and Mr Ellery tended to say that Mr Jayawardana’s
work is complex, and the
Telstra witnesses tended to say that his work is simple, or not complex, or that
other work is more complex.
Given the lack of independence of any of the
witnesses, and their almost universal unwillingness to depart from the opinions
suited their case, I have generally given little weight to the opinion
evidence. Where no evidence was led of the facts on which
the opinion was based,
I have generally given it no weight. Insofar as I have relied on opinion
evidence, I considered the Telstra
witnesses had relatively greater expertise,
being more familiar with the relevant work and having performed the same or
similar work
themselves. I have also had regard to opinions Mr Jayawardana
offered as to his own work. However I consider Mr Ellery had only limited
relevant expertise based on his past research work.
than in respect of the opinion evidence, there were no issues with the
credibility or reliability of the witness evidence.
THE OPTICAL FIBRE NETWORK COMPARED TO THE COPPER NETWORK
was agreed that optical fibre is a medium to transmit information between two
points by sending and receiving light wavelengths.
A single optical fibre is
slightly thicker than a strand of hair. In the Telstra network, optical fibres
are used for three main
connection types: the connection of customer premises
equipment (communications equipment at customer premises) (
equipment at a Telstra exchange; to connect equipment within a Telstra exchange;
and to connect Telstra exchanges to each other
via the Inter Exchange Network
). Mostly, optical fibres are individually coated in plastic then
bundled inside of cables, which can hold up to 360, or less commonly
720 fibres.
Cables may or may not be buried underground. Fibre Access Points (
are plastic cannisters installed throughout the network to provide access to
cables. They are labelled to allow technicians to identify
the relevant
Cooper said, and I accept, that in 1995, copper connected residential homes and
a significant portion of enterprise customers to
the network, with optical fibre
used for larger scale connections, such as linking exchanges. Approximately 10%
of the telecommunications
network in Australia remains on copper, and Telstra
still has approximately 1200 technicians working on copper technology, with
approximately
600 on any given day. Mr Ellery, said, and I accept, that
‘circa 2000’ optical fibre was just beginning to expand into
network. The copper network comprised copper wire cables configured in pairs,
with the capacity to send two phone lines over
one pair of copper wires, in
contrast to an optical fibre capable of carrying a very large number of lines.
contended that work on the copper network was in some respects more complex than
work on the optic fibre network, whereas
Mr Jayawardana contended that work on
the optic fibre network was more complex than the copper network.
Considine said working on the copper network involves complications that do not
arise in fibre optic work. Copper cables are subject
to electrical interference,
whereas optic cables are not, and finding the source of this can be difficult
and time consuming. In
addition, older copper cables were not colour coded,
making it more difficult to find the right pair. Further, locating a leak in
gas-pressurised copper cables can be difficult, and involves the use of hydrogen
gas and a hydrogen sensor to locate the fault, whereas
for optic fibre, an
automatic tool (
) displays the fault location. He disagreed that work
on the fibre network is more complex than the copper network.
Jayawardana said that copper was obsolete and the fibre network is more
advanced. Mr Jayawardana agreed that there were tools for
fault finding and
rectification available for fibre but said there were fault finding tools for
the copper network too. He agreed
that the tools for fibre had evolved over
time. Mr Ellery said the network is equally complex now. Whilst there is no
longer capacity
for electromagnetic interference, there is other interference on
the fibre network. He disagreed that higher problem solving skills
were required
on the copper network.
Notwithstanding
that the expansion of the optical fibre network has involved technological
advancement, I am not satisfied that work
on it is inherently more complex.
Further, I accept that complications arose on the copper network that do not
arise with fibre,
however I do not conclude that this makes work on the copper
network inherently more complex. These general opinions do not assist
interpreting the CJDs and determining Mr Jayawardana’s classification
MR JAYAWARDANA’S WORK
The Melbourne Fibre Team
was agreed that since 2013, Mr Jayawardana has worked in the Melbourne Fibre
), which has approximately 16 technicians. The core role of the
MFT is to perform repair and maintenance work on Telstra’s optical
Repair and Maintenance Work)
. This involves rectifying fibre
faults. Since about mid-2021, the MFT’s work has expanded to improve the
utilisation of its
technicians, meaning technicians from the MFT can also be
allocated to perform project work (
Project Work
), wideband work
Wideband Work
) and basic inspection and maintenance work (
Inspection Work
). The work of MFT technicians overwhelmingly consists of
cabling work. They are primarily responsible for building or repairing fibre
links between two points. MFT technicians may bolt on equipment at either end of
a cable in accordance with a design, turn equipment
on or off or plug/unplug a
fibre link into a piece of equipment. However the configuration, activation,
testing and troubleshooting
of that equipment is not undertaken by MFT
technicians.
De Blasio said, and I accept, that of the 16 technicians in the MFT, around 10
(including Mr Jayawardana) mainly undertake Repair
and Maintenance Work, with
the remainder mainly performing Wideband Work. Mr Jayawardana described this
group within the MFT as the
‘Fibre Maintenance Group’ (
comprising around eight employees. Mr Jayawardana and Mr De Blasio both said,
and I find, that Mr Jayawardana is one of only two
CFW4 classified employees in
the FMG, with the remaining employees (be it six or eight) classified as CFW5.
Mr Jayawardana’s role
was agreed that Mr Jayawardana’s core role is to:
(a) Construct, repair and replace fibre optic cables in
Telstra’s fibre network. This involves hauling, splicing and testing
cables. It also requires filling in workbooks (for wideband and project work)
and using fibre record databases;
(b) Install hardware (such as patch panels and trays)
by bolting them on to another structure (such as a rack) in accordance with
design plan. Mr Jayawardana’s role is limited to physically affixing the
hardware in the location specified in the design
plan. He does not configure,
activate or test any equipment or troubleshoot and rectify equipment faults; and
(c) Inspect pits, pipes, ducts, poles, ladders and
payphones and clean payphones.
was agreed that Mr Jayawardana is also rostered to perform Area Point of Contact
) work on weekends on a rotating roster.
was agreed that between 2021 and late 2023 Mr Jayawardana spent around 70 per
cent of his work time undertaking Repair and Maintenance
Work (and around 60 per
cent of his time from late 2023 to February 2024). Between 2021 and late 2023,
Mr Jayawardana spent about
13 per cent of his time on Project Work (and around
40 per cent from late 2023 to February 2024.) Between 2021 and late 2023, Mr
Jayawardana spent about 9.5 per cent of his time on Wideband Work, which he
ceased performing in May 2023. Between 2021 and late
2023, Mr Jayawardana spent
subsequently undertake that work.
Repair and Maintenance Work
Identifying the location of a fault
was agreed that the typical process when a fault on the fibre network is
reported is that a technician from a different team identifies
its approximate
location, then notifies the Global Operations Centre (
) which then
allocates it to a technician such as Mr Jayawardana. The technician may test the
fibre with an ‘OTDR’ to
determine or confirm the location of the
fault. An OTDR is an automated tool that tests a fibre link and identifies the
of any fault. To use it, the technician plugs in a fibre, selects the
wavelength and presses a button.
The OTDR then
displays a line graph, showing if there is a fault and its location (as distance
of the fault from the OTDR). Based
on that distance, the technician can
determine the approximate physical location of the fault.
Jayawardana said he undertakes testing from the exchange to work out the
distance of the fault and its location. To do so, he uses
which shows where the cable
is running, and ‘Vis Net’ or ‘Visio’ which is a line
diagram from the fault to
locate the closest FAP. Mr De Blasio said that Visio
is no longer used by technicians as drawings are provided, but described Vis
in similar terms to Mr Jayawardana. Mr De Blasio said that MFT technicians
always re-test the cable with an OTDR to prove the
location of the fault. He
said this is largely automated however some manual settings such as the distance
range need to be selected.
To read the OTD, Mr De Blasio said a straight line
represents normal working fibre, and a spike or a drop shows an
at that location in the fibre. A fibre joint shows up as a
small spike. A sharp drop represents a cut (or the end of the fibre link).
spike could be an excessive bend. Mr De Blasio said a break was obvious but
agreed it was not so obvious where there is a bad
joint or a kink. The
technician places a cursor on the spike or drop on the line diagram and the OTDR
tells them the distance of
the fault along the link. Mr Jayawardana’s
evidence as to how to read the OTDR was similar to Mr De Blasio’s.
on this evidence I find that following the allocation of a fault by the GOC,
locating the fault is work commonly undertaken
by Mr Jayawardana using Net Maps,
Vis Net and the OTDR, which allows the location of the fault on the network to
be cross referenced
with the approximate physical location of the fault. I find
that whilst the OTDR is an automated tool, it requires manual input,
experience and judgment in interpreting its display and identifying which fibre
‘events’ are depicted by the display.
Options for rectifying the fault
was agreed that to rectify the fault the technician travels to the location of
the fault or to the nearest FAP and identifies the
source of the fault. The
fault can be fixed by either: straightening a kink in the fibre; replacing and
‘resplicing’
a damaged section of fibre; using a spare fibre; or
installing a new cable. The process of joining two pieces of optical fibre
) involves: stripping off the cover with a hand tool; cleaning
the fibre with solvent; putting a splice protector tube on one of the
sliding it to one side; cutting the fibre with another hand tool; inserting two
fibres to be spliced into a splicing machine
and pressing a button. The machine
automatically fuses the fibres, tests the splice and tells the technician
whether the splice is
good or bad. If the splice is bad, the process needs to be
repeated. If the splice is good, the technician slides the splice protector
the splice and heats it within the same device, so it shrinks and covers the
splice. Alternatively, if the damaged fibre is
inaccessible, the technician can
resplice the customer’s service onto a spare fibre. Spare fibres can be
identified using
a fibre record database. A handheld device called a fibre
identifier detects whether there is traffic on a fibre listed in the database
vacant, as sometimes the database records are wrong.
was agreed that if no spare fibre is available or a whole cable is cut or
damaged, a whole section of cable may need to be cut
and replaced by hauling in
a new cable (
). ‘Hauling’ means physically
transporting cable and inserting a length through a conduit between two access
such as manholes or pits. External contractors are engaged if hauling
cable beyond about 120m long is required. As a damaged cable
is still partially
functioning, a Cutover will typically involve service disruption to other
customers. Accordingly, the technician
needs to obtain GOC approval before
performing a Cutover. Cutovers are done out of hours, and in the meantime, the
technician may
put in a temporary fix by running a temporary fibre above ground.
was agreed that a range of other testing and diagnostic tools may be used by a
technician including a light pen; video scope; an
inline PON/GPON Meter (used to
simultaneously test multiple wavelengths up and down fibre); and an
‘optical power meter and
light source’ (an automated tool to measure
signal loss or reduction in amplitude). A technician may also need to identify
equipment and after consulting the GOC, turn off a piece of equipment, unplug
the fibre, plug the fibre back in and turn the equipment
back on. Once the
repair is complete, the technician sends an email to another team identifying
the work done, and that team updates
the fibre databases.
Mr De Blasio and Mr Jayawardana said that the technician is also required to
test the spliced joints with an OTDR from the exchange.
Mr Jayawardana said this
function used to be performed by employees in the exchange who have now been
retrenched. Mr De Blasio said
following that testing, the technician notifies
the GOC of the completed repair, and the GOC performs a remote test to confirm
repair was successful. I find based on this evidence that Mr Jayawardana is
also required to test a completed repair with an OTDR
from the exchange.
De Blasio agreed that after the fault has been fixed, administrative follow up
work required of a technician could include: a police
report; a red line markup
report with a map; provision of details for a work order to the GOC; or
provision of damage details and
so a bill can be
prepared. I find based on this evidence that Mr Jayawardana may be required to
perform work of this nature.
Major fault work
was agreed that the typical process for rectifying fibre faults, such as cut or
damaged fibre, is followed regardless of the scale
of the repair or maintenance
job. The difference is that larger scale jobs are more time consuming, as more
tests and splicing are
required, but the nature of the work is the same.
Jayawardana provided a small number of examples of major faults he had worked
on, but said any fault could potentially be a major
fault considering the
customer traffic on each fibre. Mr De Blasio said that most faults are minor
faults where only one or two fibres
are damaged. Mr Considine said that Mr
Jayawardana’s examples were more serious than a typical fibre fault. I
find based on
this evidence that part of Mr Jayawardana’s Repair and
Maintenance Work is to rectify major faults, however most faults Mr
Jayawardana
is required to repair are not major faults.
Jayawardana provided the example of a major fault in Bonang, New South Wales in
October 2023 he attended with a colleague. He travelled
six hours to find the
site had no mobile reception including for local emergency services. He located
the damage to a direct-buried
cable in fading light, in bush land near a river
crossing. He contacted Mr De Blasio to organise an excavator. He worked almost
hours to restore service to the town. Mr Jayawardana was required to
determine the plan of work to restore services as quickly as
possible, keep
relevant departments informed and record details for paperwork. He was paid
overtime for the work. Mr De Blasio described
the Bonang incident as a
‘big one’. He agreed Mr Jayawardana had decided an excavator was
required and contacted him
and asked him to arrange the excavator. He agreed
that otherwise, the complete job was done by Mr Jayawardana and his associate.
Mr De Blasio also dealt with the GOC and Major Incident Management Team because
the terrain was remote, there was no mobile reception
and there was community
isolation. Mr Considine said he became involved in the Bonang incident because
the severity had hit a certain
level and they established a communication group
with the incident management team, the transmission team and the field team
Mr Jayawardana and Mr De Blasio said that for major faults, additional personnel
are arranged. Mr Jayawardana said he informs
the GOC and his co-ordinator to
arrange additional staff and sometimes civil contractors. Mr De Blasio said he
will arrange for another
crew, or contractors, to assist.
the typical process for optic fibre repair work applies to major faults, I find
based on this evidence that Mr Jayawardana’s
role includes determining the
scope of the repair, repair plan and where necessary, staffing or contractor
requirements. Further,
I find that Telstra distinguishes between faults based on
their severity in its internal processes, with escalated severity faults
involving more senior staff and requiring communication between the field team
and other internal groups.
was agreed that major fault work may involve disruption to a very large number
of customers and/or large geographic areas. Mr De
Blasio said, and I find, that
the difference is that large faults are more urgent as more customers are
affected and they require
more hours to fix.
Country fault work
Jayawardana said he is required at times to undertake work in the country
because country staff don’t have a full knowledge
of testing and repairing
of fibre faults. Most country staff are not able to test and create fibre
workbooks, or splice to a certain
tolerance so that it passes the tests. Mr De
Blasio said that MFT technicians assist Victorian country staff from time to
there are limited resources with splicing experience in country areas,
and most country technicians cannot do splicing work. Mr Considine
technicians are sometimes allocated faults in the country because country teams
do not have dedicated fibre technicians,
but generalists working on all aspects
of the network. Hence, they are typically less experienced with fibre. I find
based on the
evidence of the three witnesses that as part of his Repair and
Maintenance Work, Mr Jayawardana is sometimes allocated to faults
in the country
because he is a more experienced splicer than most country technicians, most of
whom are generalists, not dedicated
fibre technicians, and cannot do splicing
Jayawardana said that whilst he still has access to the same testing equipment,
maps and tools to see if a fibre is carrying traffic,
locating a country fault
can be more difficult due to inaccurate plans of what he sees in the field. In
this case, Mr Jayawardana
has to redesign as he goes in consultation with the
designer as to the route the cable will take and the availability of fibres.
splicing is the same, but the cable is older and not as basic. Both Mr Considine
and Mr De Blasio asserted that country work
was no more complex than city work.
However, their evidence did not address the basis of their opinion, or the
specific matters raised
in Mr Jayawardana’s evidence, and I have preferred
Mr Jayawardana’s evidence. I find based on this that additional
difficulties
arise in country work. I conclude that dealing with inaccurate
records, assisting with the redesign of the route and the need to
older and different cable are matters which add complexity to Mr
Jayawardana’s work.
Time frames for fault work
Cooper and Mr Considine both said that service level agreements provide for the
restoration of fibre faults in the metro area within
12 hours and in regional
areas within 18 hours, with some exceptions. Mr Considine agreed that in some
cases considerable penalties
and compensation are payable if these timeframes
are not met, but said most of those systems are be backed up so service can be
Mr Cooper said these timeframes are not an expectation on Mr
Jayawardana but on the business. Mr De Blasio said Mr Jayawardana’s
is asked to try to meet the timeframes. He agreed that fixing optical fibre
faults is high priority because fibre carries many
customers’ data.
Technicians are required to be available to repair fibre faults immediately, and
drop other work to fix a
on this evidence I find that Mr Jayawardana is required to complete fault work
urgently and so far as is possible within the
timeframes provided by service
level agreements, due to the number of customers and amount of data each fibre
carries. I preferred
Mr De Blasio’s evidence as to the expectations on
technicians regarding timing, given his relative proximity to the MFT as
co-ordinator, to Mr Cooper’s evidence on this issue.
Advances in technology and complexity of Repair and Maintenance
Cooper said that over the last 30 years or so, there have been significant
advances in the equipment and technology used for field
work which have made the
work of technicians less complex, including because less analysis is required.
Mr Ellery disagreed that
the advances of technology mean the work is less
complicated.
Cooper gave the example of the growth in the Remote Field Monitoring System
), which covers an increasing proportion of the network and
automatically pinpoints the distance of a fibre fault, meaning the GOC
provide this to a technician. Mr Cooper’s evidence as to the RFMS did not
address how Mr Jayawardana’s work would
have been more complex in its
absence. It does not alter my earlier findings regarding the requirements upon
Mr Jayawardana to locate
Cooper also gave the example of fibre splicing machine technology. The parties
agreed that progressively over time, the process
of splicing has become easier
with modern equipment. Mr De Blasio also said that advances in the speed and
ease of splicing made
the work quicker. The Telstra witnesses described the
previous process of manually lining up the fibres using a microscope, which
now largely automated. Mr Considine agreed that the process still involves
stripping the plastic cover off the fibre, cleaning
the fibre with solvent,
using a protector tube, cleaving the fibre and inserting it in the machine which
melts the cables together.
I find on this evidence that the lining up and fusing
of the fibre has become easier over time, making the work quicker, with the
other aspects of the splicing process remaining unchanged.
Cooper also said OTDRs are now smaller and more accurate compared to those used
in the early 2000s, and readings can be taken by
the press of a button. Mr De
Blasio said that OTDR automation makes things easier than the earlier ODTR
model. However, neither witness
addressed in any detail how this made the
process of fault diagnosis less complex.
that the process of splicing optical fibre is easier and quicker than it once
was, I am otherwise not satisfied that the
advances in technology relied on by
Telstra make Mr Jayawardana’s Repair and Maintenance Work less complex.
Wideband Work
was agreed that the Wideband Work undertaken by the MFT requires a technician to
build a fibre link from point A to point B following
a given path in accordance
with a design, and commission the link by testing it, calling another group to
activate the equipment,
and completing required database entries. The building
of the fibre link involves the same cabling tasks as Repair and Maintenance
(hauling, testing and splicing fibre) along with three additional tasks. First,
test results must be recorded in a ‘workbook’.
Technicians are
provided with template excel spreadsheets containing blank cells to be populated
by performing the test and then
typing the result into the corresponding cell.
Formulas then automatically populate a column in the spreadsheet with a
or ‘fail’. Workbooks are prepared for new
connections only (Wideband Work and Project Work), not for repairs on existing
connections. The second additional task involves utilising databases for network
inventory, confirming active fibre paths and booking
activation appointments,
however Mr Jayawardana has not accessed these databases for between one to two
years. Thirdly, a MFT technician
may install equipment at customer premises, by
bolting the equipment onto a ‘Rack’ (a standard-size metal frame
to house communication equipment) at customer premises, plugging in the
fibre, then calling a different team to activate the equipment.
was agreed that the majority of Wideband Work is done by the Digital Fibre
Services Team (
), a different business unit within Telstra. However,
since July 2021, as part of Telstra’s expansion of the MFT’s work,
Wideband Work on 5 of the 40 service types undertaken by the DFST has been
allocated to MFT technicians. MFT technicians are allocated
only one wideband
task at a time, and approximately 6 of 16 MTF fibre technicians, not including
Mr Jayawardana, perform exclusively
Wideband Work. Mr Cooper said, and I find,
that this arrangement involves only the lowest level wideband tasks, including
fibre splicing,
testing and building line systems, but not programming, customer
interaction, organising contractors or civil works except some small
accept Mr Cooper’s evidence that this arrangement came about to better
utilise technicians between faults and thus
involves the simpler, single fibre
services, meaning less customer disruption when technicians attend faults.
was agreed that Mr Jayawardana has not performed Wideband Work since May 2023.
Mr Jayawardana said that from mid-2021 he was part
of the initial MFT group
doing all the Wideband Work. He helped upskill newer staff. In May 2023, after
he questioned his supervisor
Mark Mays whether the upskilling work should be
classified at level 5 or level 7, Mr Mays took Mr Jayawardana off Wideband Work.
He did not refuse to do the work; the work was not provided to him. Mr De Blasio
said that Wideband Work ceased being allocated to
technicians who did not
perform data base entry, however none of the Telstra witnesses had direct
knowledge of why Mr Jayawardana
was taken off Wideband Work. I find Mr
Jayawardana ceased performing Wideband Work because Telstra stopped allocating
Telstra’s reason for doing so is not a matter which arises for
determination in this proceeding.
Project Work
Work refers to MFT work other than Repair and Maintenance Work and Wideband
Work. A typical example of Project Work is installing
a short length of cable
within a building (
) at an exchange. Other examples are
installation of ‘patch panels’, an assembly containing ports into
which cables plug
in. Installing a patch panel means bolting it onto a rack in
accordance with a design plan or working on a ‘link’ connecting
point A to point B over a very long distance (eg 100km). Project Work also
involves the population of workbooks. MFT technicians
work to a design
specifying the work required. An example of a project design which Mr
Jayawardana was allocated to work on required
the creation of a 72-fibre
‘tie cable’ between two points and identifying the location of the
two points. Mr Jayawardana
gave examples of sub racks which I accept he had
installed. He said, and I accept, that Project Work also involves him sourcing
material for the project and liaising with other project staff.
Jayawardana said that Project Work design plans are never 100 per cent accurate
because the records are not always accurate. Accordingly,
he must test if
allocated fibres are available, and if not must find a new fibre path and
pack and records. Mr Considine agreed
that there are instances where some of the plans are inaccurate or do not exist,
because they
haven't been captured properly when the lines were first built.
When there is an inaccuracy on a wideband plan, the technician can
‘Fibre Line’ who can advise alternative fibres and paths to try. Mr
Considine said there is capacity for a technician
to identify spare fibre
themselves using ‘Multiman’ and ‘Tomahawk’ and suggest
that to Fibre Line to hurry
things up. Alternatively, the technician can
allocate the work back to the delivery specialists via Mr Considine’s team
say it needs to go into ‘redesign’ for a site assessment path or
another review. I find based on this evidence that Mr
Jayawardana contributes to
required redesigns by identifying alternative fibre paths using available tools,
and it is beneficial
if he does so.
Complexity - Wideband Work/Project Work v Repair and
Maintenance Work
Cooper said the Project Work and Wideband Work performed by Mr Jayawardana is no
more complex than his Repair and Maintenance Work
and is in some respects
simpler because the technicians simply follow a plan in building a fibre link
and do not need to locate a
fault or select a repair solution. Further, it is
not subject to the same time pressures as Repair and Maintenance Work. Mr De
also said in some respects Project Work and Wideband Work is simpler
because technicians work to a design plan, and no diagnostic
process is required
to locate a fault or determine a solution. Fault work restores live fibres, an
interruption to which disrupts
a customer. Repair and Maintenance Work is thus
more time sensitive.
De Blasio said Project Work and Wideband Work are very similar to Repair and
Maintenance Work and are typically straightforward,
but because the projects are
larger scale, populating the workbook is time consuming and sometimes takes
longer than building the
link. It is tedious but not complicated. Mr Jayawardana
disagreed, saying it had become extremely complex, as the function which
automatically populated the fibre workbook with FAP locations now has to be done
accepted that the Wideband Work of the Fibre Maintenance Technicians are the
simpler services or lower level tasks, I conclude
that this work is no more
complex than Repair and Maintenance work. I also conclude that Project Work, as
a class of work, is no
more complex than Repair and Maintenance work, as a class
of work. The cabling tasks required for each are the same.
Mr Jayawardana’s role as a technician involves, or has involved,
performing all three types of work as required by
Telstra. Project Work and
Wideband Work involve the different functions of installation of customer
equipment and arranging activation,
working to a design plan (including
participating in required redesigns) and population of voluminous data into
workbooks. These
functions require the utilisation of qualitatively different
skills than those used in Repair and Maintenance Work. Whilst I accept
categories of work are in comparison no more complex than Repair and Maintenance
Work, I conclude that the addition of these
qualitatively different functions
adds complexity to Mr Jayawardana’s role overall.
General Inspection Work
was agreed that Mr Jayawardana performs basic inspection and maintenance work,
including inspection of pits, pipes, ducts, poles,
payphones and payphone
Area Point of Contact (APOC) Work
was agreed that as part of his role as CAN Program Coordinator, Mr De Blasio
acts as APOC for the eastern side of Victoria (including
all of Melbourne), all
of Tasmania and part of southern NSW from Monday until 4pm Friday each week. Two
technicians from the MFT,
including Mr Jayawardana, are allocated to be APOCs on
weekends (starting from 4pm on Friday), on a rotating roster. The APOC is
responsible for allocating faults to a fibre technician within the region. If a
fault arises on the weekend, an automated system
calls the first APOC from the
list notifying a fault. Once the APOC accepts the fault, the system emails the
fault details. In the
case of a major fault, a person from the GOC might also
telephone to highlight the urgency of the repair. The APOC fills out a webform
to create a work ‘ticket’ in the ’Promise’ database or
fault if it is within the
Victorian urban area or otherwise allocates the fault to an available technician
in country areas. Typically,
the APOC repairs the fault themselves, however if
it is too far away or the APOC cannot attend, they must find an available
technician.
on Mr Jayawardana’s uncontested evidence I find that he performs APOC work
on a rolling roster every four weeks. He receives
an ‘immediate on
call’ allowance for the time he is rostered to perform the APOC work and
receives overtime on top of
the allowance if required to attend to a fault. The
allowance he receives is an ‘essential customer servicing allowance’
of about $600 for the weekend or $9 per hour pursuant to cl 67.4 of the 2022
Agreement for the requirement to be immediately available
to undertake work. Mr
De Blasio receives the same allowance for performing APOC work. It was not in
issue that Mr Jayawardana performed
this work at all relevant times over the
period to which his claim relates.
De Blasio and Mr Considine said APOC is not a role in itself, but is a type of
work or responsibility, which involves being on
call to allocate technicians to
faults. Mr Considine said being weekday APOC is not Mr De Blasio’s role
but is one of the functions
of his role. It was put to Mr Jayawardana that this
function was not part of his core role, with which he disagreed. I find on this
evidence that being the APOC is a function, type of work or responsibility of
both the Coordinator role and Mr Jayawardana’s
De Blasio distinguished his APOC responsibilities from those of Mr Jayawardana
as he does not perform field work but allocates
technicians to do so. Mr
Jayawardana said he also allocates technicians to attend faults in country NSW
and Tasmania. I find based
on this evidence that as APOC, Mr Jayawardana
allocates field work to other technicians when he cannot physically attend to
De Blasio said that the weekend APOC does not deal with the work orders required
after a temporary fix, which often involve arranging
an external contractor, nor
do they sign off on repair advices. Mr Jayawardana said that if he is required
to undertake a temporary
fix, he is required to identify the work required to
complete a permanent fix, create a Map (Red Line Mark-up) of that work and
all paperwork for Mr De Blasio to then complete the work order. I find
based on this evidence that as APOC, Mr Jayawardana is not
required to prepare
work orders but is required to complete preparatory paperwork.
Supervision, training and work performance
was uncontested that Mr Jayawardana usually works in pairs with another
technician and usually works unsupervised, but does not
have any direct reports.
I find, based on Mr Jayawardana’s evidence that whoever is onsite first
usually takes charge of the
was uncontested that Mr Jayawardana does not hold any formal or official
training role. I find, based on Mr Considine’s evidence,
that formal fibre
training and accreditation are conducted by external training providers, with
five-day optical fibre jointing classroom
training covering splicing, testing
and OTDRs and an additional two-day course in respect of licence accreditation.
Mr Jayawardana
said he has trained and supervised trainees and other technical
staff at a CFW4 and CFW5 level, which involves showing other staff
undertake particular tasks. Mr De Blasio said that where Mr Jayawardana works
with a less experienced technician he may demonstrate
how to do something,
provide tips or show them the ropes, as a part of teamwork. I find based on
this evidence that Mr Jayawardana
provides informal ‘on the job’
training and supervision to less experienced technicians, including those
classified as
CFW5. The difference in the evidence appeared to be no more than
was no dispute that Mr Jayawardana is good at his job. As Mr De Blasio said, he
is a good and reliable worker who takes pride
in his work, performs neatly done
builds, is a team player and his ‘go-to’ man. The performance
reviews Mr Jayawardana
relied on assessed him as rating between three and five
with the most recent rating being four, in 2022-23 by his manager Mr Mays,
states his performance has been ‘commendable and deserving of
recognition.’ I am satisfied based on this, and his
uncontested evidence
as to the rating system, that this is a rating of above competent.
Parts of the network on which Mr Jayawardana works
was uncontested that Mr Jayawardana works across three different parts of the
network, being the CAN, the IEN and within Exchanges.
Mr Cooper and Mr Considine said, there was no difference in the process or tasks
involved in diagnosing or repairing a fault
or undertaking Wideband Work whether
it occurs on the CAN, the IEN or in respect of tie cabling. Mr Considine also
said that the
fibre in a P1 (priority) Exchange is the same, the same type of
connection exists between fibres, and agreed that the MFT works on
between P1 exchanges. Mr Ellery agreed the nature of fault work doesn’t
change whether it is between exchanges or between
the exchange and the customer,
saying ‘fibre is fibre’. Mr Jayawardana agreed that the process of
splicing a fibre is
the same. I find based on this evidence that the nature of
the tasks required with respect to fibre optic cable are the same on each
of the network.
Mr Considine also said that working on the core network in P1 (priority)
Exchanges was an example of the ‘more complex
wideband work’
undertaken by the DFST, and distinguished between ‘P1 techs’ and MFT
technicians work on this basis.
However, Mr Considine did not articulate why
this work is more complex. The only specific evidence as to what work ‘P1
undertake in a P1 Exchange was Mr Considine’s evidence that
‘patching’ (splicing a service onto another fibre)
occurs where the
network does not switch automatically from a faulty link. It was not in dispute
that patching was an option available
to Mr Jayawardana for rectifying a cable
fault. Telstra submitted that the effect of Mr Considine’s evidence was
that in addition
to the less complicated work Mr Jayawardana does, it can be
assumed there is work done in P1 Exchanges that is inherently complicated,
that performed by the DFST. I do not consider I can make this assumption on the
above evidence. It does not alter my finding
that the nature of cabling work is
the same on each part of the network. However, I find based on this evidence
that Telstra distinguishes
the work undertaken in a P1 Exchange from work
undertaken elsewhere on the network, notwithstanding that the nature of the
work is the same.
Mr Jayawardana and Mr Ellery said in effect that the impact of fault work on the
IEN was more significant than the impact of
fault work on the CAN. Mr
Jayawardana said there was a difference between working on the CAN and the IEN
because in the IEN, one
fibre can run thousands of customers on it, including
emergency services, and you need to know what you are doing. Mr Ellery also
that as you get closer to the customer there are less fibres, the volume
changes. Mr Cooper said the impact of a fault on an
IEN, tie cable or CAN is
pretty much the same. All will potentially have a customer impact, however there
is a difference in the
number of customers impacted as a smaller cable will have
less customers. Mr Considine said there are sometimes multiple links between
exchanges, and for the vast majority of IEN cable, so if one cable is faulty the
connection can be switched to ensure continuity
of service for the important
links in that sense. He said that switching to an alternative link is an
automatic process in a lot
of cases, which means nil or very little customer
impact, or alternatively it needs to be patched by a technician.
find based on the evidence of Mr Jayawardana and Mr Ellery that as a general
proposition, fibres and cables on the IEN are likely
to carry a higher volume of
customers, and that the closer a cable or fibre is to the customer, the less
traffic there is likely
to be. This was in effect acknowledged by Mr Cooper. I
did not consider Mr Cooper’s conclusion that customer impact is the
despite more customers being affected to be persuasive. I find that where more
customers are affected, the customer impact will
be greater. However, I find
based on Mr Considine’s evidence that this impact is minimised where there
are multiple links between
P1 exchanges or on the IEN.
MR JAYAWARDANA’S MAJOR AND SUBSTANTIAL EMPLOYMENT
with the principles set out paragraph
, Mr Jayawardana’s classification
is to be determined with reference to his major and substantial employment,
principal purpose
or primary function. This is a question of fact, to be
determined by the duties of his position, the circumstances of his employment,
the time spent performing particular tasks as well as the quality of different
job functions other than
pole inspection work fall within the description of his major and substantial
Telstra submitted
that the principal function or substantial purpose of Mr Jayawardana's
employment was to repair cable by finding
faults, splicing and testing, and the
Court should apply the classification appropriate to that work, regardless of
whether occasional
activities fell outside that work.
assess Mr Jayawardana’s major and substantial employment I have considered
both the terms of Mr Jayawardana’s contract
and the work he has been
required to and has actually performed, including both the proportion of the
time and the qualitative nature
of that work.
Jayawardana’s 2022 Contract provides that he is employed as a Service
Technician, and states ‘your role will be to
perform the same or
substantially the same work ... that you performed’ for the previous
corporate entity.
Accordingly,
the 2022 Contract defines Mr Jayawardana’s role broadly, by reference to
the full range of work he was actually
performing at the relevant time, without
exclusion. These are the duties actually attached to his position, and what he
is employed
then to a quantitative and qualitative assessment of that work. It was not in
dispute that from mid-2021 onwards, Mr Jayawardana
could be required by Telstra,
and was so required, to perform functions across all the categories of
‘work’ earlier described.
This is reflective of the decision made by
Telstra to improve the utilisation of technicians from the MFT. I find based on
breakdown set out at paragraph
that the proportion of time spent on
each of the categories of work was material, and more than occasional. Even Mr
Jayawardana’s
basic inspection and maintenance work (with the lowest time
percentage) equates on average to approximately half a day every fortnight.
Further, because of the inevitable fluctuation of the type of work required of
Mr Jayawardana, different forms of work were more
or less prevalent at different
times. I consider Mr Jayawardana’s major and substantial employment
includes each of these forms
of work. However, I would exclude Wideband Work
after May 2023, as I infer that since that time, Telstra no longer requires Mr
Jayawardana
to perform that work.
was agreed that Mr Jayawardana’s ‘core role’ is to construct,
repair and replace fibre optic cables in Telstra’s
fibre network,
including hauling, splicing and testing cables, filling in workbooks and using
fibre record databases; installation
of hardware such as patch panels and trays;
and basic inspection and maintenance work. It was not in dispute that he
performed this
work across all parts of the network, including the CAN, IEN and
within Exchanges.
which are not in the agreed ‘core role’ list but which the evidence
demonstrates Mr Jayawardana also performs
(a) Repair and Maintenance Work: fault location and
diagnosis; determining the method of repair to be executed; determining the
requirements for the repair; liaison with other groups within Telstra
depending on the escalation level of a fault.
(b) Project Work: working to a design plan and
contributing to redesign where required; and
(c) Wideband Work: installation of customer equipment
and arranging activation of equipment.
find that each of the functions described in paragraphs
form part of Mr Jayawardana’s
major and substantial employment, as the functions described in paragraph
arise in the context of, and in a
qualitative sense are necessary incidents of, the categories of work and the
agreed core functions.
Similarly, accepting that the time Mr Jayawardana spends
on major fault work and country fault work is limited, I conclude that this
is part of Mr Jayawardana’s major and substantial employment. Performing
this work is inherent to Mr Jayawardana’s
Repair and Maintenance Work. The
FMG is responsible for rectifying fibre faults, and Mr Jayawardana is required
to attend the full
range of faults allocated to him, whether they are major
faults or located in the country.
further conclude that Mr Jayawardana’s major and substantial employment
also includes his APOC work given my finding that
it is a function of his role,
both in fact and pursuant to his contract. It is a necessary function, he
performs it regularly, and
as it is a 24-hour function, the proportion of his
work time it makes up is at least comparable to the other categories of work
identified.
The fact that it is undertaken outside normal hours or that Mr
Jayawardana receives an immediate recall allowance for this work (along
overtime when required to work) do not derogate from this conclusion.
WORK AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTHER CFW EMPLOYEES
contrast to the detailed evidence as to Mr Jayawardana’s work, the
evidence as to the broader range of functions, duties
and roles covered by the
CFW stream, within which to contextualise Mr Jayawardana’s work, was
limited to other MFT work, employees
in the DFST and to the witnesses
themselves.
DFST employees
was agreed that the DFST comprises about 140–150 technicians who are
mostly classified at CFW5, with some CFW7 and CFW4 technicians.
performs wideband work across approximately 40 service types. DFST technicians
deal directly with Wideband Delivery Specialists
and manage between 10 and 12
orders to completion at a time. This includes confirming appointments with
customers, booking activation
appointments or “cutovers” with the
required workforce and coordinating inductions to secure sites. They then
the required physical work on each order and update databases. DFST
technicians are responsible for:
(a) end to end
management and coordination of multiple orders at a time, including resolving
design and scope issues, optimising resources
and consolidating
infrastructure.
(b) Managing resources, including engaging with
other work groups and scheduling install dates with customers and
technicians.
(c) Installation and commission (activation) of equipment and fibre cabling.
This includes making IPMAN/SMNG bookings through the
Wideband Service Activation
team who are accountable for activating the service and testing.
(d) Stakeholder management, including scheduling
dates for installation in direct consultation with the programming team,
and technicians, liaising with InfraCo Service Delivery Leads (project
coordinators), and managing design changes, ensuring installations
design standards.
(e) Using Telstra’s Ideal system, which is a work basket dispatch/order
management system.
Considine said, and I find, that he manages a team of three ‘wideband
coordinators’ who are responsible for: managing
the DFST work; dealing
directly with Wideband Delivery Specialists; providing stakeholder updates and
management; task coordination;
resource management; and managing customer
appointments.
Cooper said, and I find, that the additional functions of the DFST are performed
by CFW5 and CFW7 employees, not CFW4 employees.
He said a CFW5 employee in the
DFST is required to liaise directly with customers for appointments, make
IPMAN/SMNG bookings, provide
project coordinators with updates and use the Ideal
system. These are not duties performed by a CFW4 technician or by Mr
Jayawardana.
Further, the CFW5 and CFW7 employees in the DFST do their own
dispatching, customer interaction and organise support between themselves,
whereas the wideband work of the MFT is just building the line system, splicing
and jointing in the street, potentially connecting
up a box in a customer's
premises and getting another part of Telstra to commission and activate it.
Cooper said, and I find, that in respect of wideband programs, the DFST liaises
directly with Service Delivery Leads (program owners)
for example in respect of
designers, whereas the MFT liaise with one of the coordinators in Mr
Cooper’s team who does that
interaction for them, with the MFT just doing
the physical street work and connecting the service.
Complexity - DFST Wideband Work v MFT Wideband Work
Cooper said the DFST Wideband Work is more complex than the MFT Wideband Work.
For the most part I accept this evidence, on which
Mr Cooper was not
challenged.
find that the Wideband Work of CFW5 and CFW7 employees in the DFST involves the
following additional complexities compared to the
Wideband Work of the MFT:
(a) Undertaking a wider range of Wideband Work than the
MFT: whilst there was no direct evidence as to what features of the other
wideband work made it more complex, I accept the requirement to work across a
larger range of service types in itself adds to the
complexity of the role,
noting my earlier finding that there is no difference in the physical cabling
work required irrespective
of the context;
(b) Managing multiple wideband orders at a time: I
accept that managing multiple orders at a time, rather than one, adds to the
of the role;
(c) Direct customer liaison: I accept that liaising
directly with customers involves the exercise of a qualitatively different set
of skills to the technical skills otherwise associated with the role and adds to
the complexity of the role accordingly;
(d) Coordination of secure site inductions: this is not
a function required of the MFT in undertaking Wideband Work and I accept that
adds complexity to the role;
(e) Making IPMAN/SMNG bookings and use the Ideal
system: I accept that the use of additional technology platforms adds to the
of the role; and
(f) Liaising directly with
Service Delivery Leads, resolving design and scope issues, managing design
changes and ensuring installations
comply to design standards: I accept that
more direct engagement with Service Delivery Leads (rather than through a
coordinator)
may add to the complexity of the role. However, I am not satisfied
that ‘ensuring installations comply to design standards’
anything additional to the work Mr Jayawardana undertakes when he builds a
Wideband link in compliance with a design.
Other witnesses
find on Mr De Blasio’s uncontested evidence that his role is classified as
CFW7 and his responsibilities include: arranging
and scheduling work orders;
communicating with stakeholders including customers and entities; allocating and
scheduling work; arranging
for external contractors where required; ensuring
required paperwork and databases are correctly completed by technicians;
completed job details via SharePoint (staff also have access to the
SharePoint document and are able to update it); doing financials
for faults and
ensuring costs are captured; submitting FAPs for approval and assisting with
implementing new systems, processes and
CFW2 and CFW3 CJDs were not in evidence. Some witnesses gave evidence of having
been employed in these classifications however
I did not consider this evidence
sufficient to form a view as to the work covered by them.
Other MFT Work
Jayawardana gave uncontested evidence that he performs the same work as all the
other CFW5 employees in the FMG. The SOAF does
not distinguish between the work
of Mr Jayawardana and other technicians in the MFT. The Telstra witnesses did
not address why employees
performing the same work as Mr Jayawardana in the FMG
are classified at CFW5, other than Mr Cooper’s evidence referring in
non-specific way to legacy arrangements. Telstra submitted that it was not open
to conclude that the work of other employees is
relevantly the same as Mr
Jayawardana, having not heard evidence from those other employees. I consider
the evidence I have referred
to is sufficient, and I find that Telstra currently
classifies all but two employees who perform the same work as Mr Jayawardana
the FMG as CFW5 employees.
De Blasio said in cross examination that from 2007 to 2012, he was in the same
team as Mr Jayawardana doing the same work that
Mr Jayawardana is now doing. He
was classified as a CFW4 until, without application, he and around 14 others in
the team were ‘given’
the CFW5 classification. When re-examined on
this evidence, he said developments in technology since that time in the speed
of splicing made the work quicker, helping those that undertake the
work. Telstra submitted based on this evidence that it was not
open to conclude
that Mr De Blasio was performing the same work as Mr Jayawardana, as there may
have been changes in technology impacting
on the complexity of the work.
However, I did not understand Mr De Blasio to be resiling from his clear
evidence that the work he
was performing was the same as Mr Jayawardana’s,
albeit that splicing technology advances have helped by making it quicker.
find that in 2012, Telstra reclassified about 14 staff in the FMG from CFW4 to
CFW5, including Mr De Blasio, who was doing the
same work as Mr Jayawardana.
Jayawardana said CFW7 technicians in the FMG had been retrenched, with remaining
staff now doing their work (including testing
from the exchange). In respect of
these employees, I preferred the more detailed evidence of Mr De Blasio, and I
find based on this
evidence that the group previously had CFW7 technicians,
retrenched about 10 years ago, who had previously travelled across Australia
performing highly specialised Polarization Mode Dispersion and Chromatic Mode
Dispersion testing and kept their CFW7 classification
on a grandfathered basis.
Only the more basic parts of the work they did are now performed by current
staff, being standard fibre
testing and workbooks.
Relevance of the classification levels of other employees
Jayawardana submitted that the Court can presume that the other FMG employees
performing the same work as Mr Jayawardana were correctly
classified by Telstra
as CFW5 employees. Telstra submitted that there may be commercial or industrial
reasons for an employer classifying
other employees performing the same or
similar work at a higher level, such as rewarding valued employees, recognising
seeking to retain workers in a competitive environment. Further, the
proper classification of Mr Jayawardana is an objective question
for the Court,
to be determined by applying the proper construction of the CJDs to the findings
of fact about the nature and complexity
of his work, not with regard to the
classification of the other fibre maintenance technicians in the MFT as CFW5.
characterised its classification of like employees as CFW5 as equivalent to
post-contractual conduct, which cannot inform
the proper construction of the
contract, citing
FAI Traders Insurance Company v Savoy Plaza Pty
and Colvin J in
in respect of the position under industrial agreements
[23] Further, the Agreement is not to be construed by reference to the conduct
of parties subsequent to its approval. This position
has been adopted in respect
of industrial awards:
City of Wanneroo v Holmes
[1989] FCA 553
(French J) (a decision quoted with approval in the context of industrial awards
in the recent decision of
as applied in
). It is a position that applies to commercial instruments because
they take their meaning at the time they were made, not as adjusted
subsequent conduct. The same can be said of industrial agreements. Therefore, it
is not legitimate to use anything the parties
said or did after the agreement
was made as an aid to construction:
Agricultural and Rural
Finance Pty
Ltd v Gardiner
[2008] HCA 57; (2008) 238 CLR 570 at
accepted, consistent with principle 15 from
that subsequent
conduct may be relevant in an industrial context, however referred to
Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v KDR Victoria Pty Ltd t/as Yarra
as authority for the
need for caution when drawing upon a suggested common understanding by the
parties as an aid to constructing
an agreement.
issue gives rise to two questions. The first is whether the evidence permits a
factual finding to be made that Telstra classifies
the majority of employees
undertaking the same work as Mr Jayawardana in the FMG as CFW5 based on the work
they perform, and has
not ‘overclassified’ those employees for other
unrelated reasons. On this issue, I consider the Court is entitled to
as a general proposition, that Telstra classifies its employees based on the
work they perform. I consider this presumption
is open because that is the very
function of a classification structure such as the one being considered in this
proceeding. I accept
that there may be alternative reasons for classifying an
employee above the legal minimum classification for their role. For example,
direct evidence was given by Telstra as to the grandfathering of the CFW7
employees in the MFT, based on their previous roles, and
I have accepted that
evidence. It was similarly within Telstra’s capacity to lead evidence that
it classified almost all of
the other employees in Mr Jayawardana’s team
as CFW5, or Mr De Blasio and 14 other employees in his team when he was
the same work as Mr Jayawardana for commercial or industrial
imperatives, but it did not do so. In the absence of evidence from Telstra
any alternative reason, I find that these employees were so classified because
of their duties and functions.
second question is what flows from that finding. I do not conclude that CFW5 is
the correct classification for the other members
of the FMG performing the same
work as Mr Jayawardana because Telstra classifies them as such, or that this is
consequently determinative
of Mr Jayawardana’s classification. Whilst
evidence of a common understanding is capable of being relevant to a
construction
of the CJDs, the evidence is insufficient to establish a common
understanding. Not all current employees in Mr Jayawardana’s
are classified as CFW5. I am unable to be satisfied that this has been the case
over successive agreements, or in respect
of all employees performing the same
work as Mr Jayawardana, for example in other States, as the evidence did not
address these matters.
Further, the evidence is of a very general nature and
does not detail the aspects of the CFW5 CJD which result in these employees
being correctly classified as CFW5.
the fact that Telstra classifies most DFST technicians as CFW5 is not evidence
of the objective correctness of that classification,
and neither is the fact
that Telstra classifies Mr De Blasio as CFW7 determinative of his correct
classification. Mr Jayawardana
did not dispute these employees were properly
classified as CFW5 and CFW7 respectively and accordingly, I accept they are
for the purposes of this proceeding. But, appropriately, Telstra also
relied on evidence as to the work of Mr De Blasio and the
DFST technicians, as
it assists in identifying the range of functions involving fibre technicians and
the location of those functions
within the CFW classification structure.
Applying the principle from
that each level of a
classification structure must be read in the context of higher and lower levels
of similar tasks with ascending
and descending degrees of complexity, the Court
must consider the work performed by Mr Jayawardana in the context of the range
work performed by other employees. On that basis, I consider it permissible
to have regard to the fact that other members of the
FMG performing the same
work as Mr Jayawardana are classified as CFW5 by Telstra. I find on that
evidence that there are no distinguishing
features and no greater complexity or
degree of specialisation between the work performed by other employees in the
FMG and Mr Jayawardana.
Further, I find that there are no longer any CFW7
employees in that team, meaning the most complex work within that team is
by CFW5 employees.
ISSUES RELATING TO THE INTERPRETATION OF THE CJDs
turning to a detailed consideration of the CJDs, I have first considered several
discrete issues as to the approach the Court
should take to interpreting the
Historical distinction between External and Internal work
Ellery’s evidence outlined a historical differentiation between outside
field work (called Lines or External Plant) and inside
work (called Technical or
Internal Plant) which he said informed the development of the CJDs. Telstra
objected to Mr Ellery’s
evidence based on relevance, submitting with
reference to the principles in
evidence could not assist the Court in construing the agreements in
circumstances where there is no evidence that the people
who voted up the
agreements had any knowledge of the matters he refers to. I accept
Telstra’s submission. There was no evidence
that the history described by
Mr Ellery was commonly known to either the bargaining representatives or the
employees to which any
of the relevant enterprise agreements apply. I have not
had regard to this evidence.
Telstra’s capacity to direct Mr Jayawardana to perform
less complex tasks
submitted that because Mr Jayawardana’s 2022 Contract permits him to be
deployed flexibly, he could be required to undertake
aspects of the CFW4 roles
which he does not currently perform, and Telstra need not have required him to
do so for those CJDs to
C3.1 of the 2022 Agreement provides:
C3 MULTIFUNCTIONAL WORK PROVISIONS
C3.1 We may ask a CFW, TW or TPW employee to perform any function in their
Workstream at or below the employee’s work Band.
If they have the
necessary tool set (i.e.: training, competency, tools, required equipment,
vehicle etc), the employee will use their
skills and ability to complete the job
competently.
consider that the assessment must be based on the scope of Mr
Jayawardana’s major and substantial employment in accordance
findings. I do not consider Telstra’s capacity to direct Mr Jayawardana to
perform lower level work impacts his classification.
Clause C3.1 supports this
conclusion as it permits Telstra to direct Mr Jayawardana to perform lower band
work without impacting
his band within the workstream.
Treatment of identical content in some or all CJDs
are several instances of content common to some or all CJDs. Broadly described,
these relate to working without supervision,
customer service, compliance with
policies and practices, contribution to the company’s financial wellbeing,
desirable personal
characteristics such as leadership and initiative and
compliance with resource and deployment business rules.
consider that common content reflects baseline expectations of all of the CJDs
and each associated classification level. Most significantly
in respect of Mr
Jayawardana, I find that the requirement to work without supervision is a
feature of each of the CJDs and each of
the classification levels to which they
relate. This is a clear and definitive statement that employees in the CFW4
classification
work without supervision. Accordingly, the fact that Mr
Jayawardana works without supervision is not determinative of a higher
classification.
I otherwise do not regard common
content within the CJDs to be of assistance in distinguishing between the CJDs
in determining Mr
Jayawardana’s classification level.
The impact of changed technology on interpreting the
was agreed that the CJDs primarily relate to older technologies such as copper
which Mr Jayawardana does not work on. Whilst the
Workstream Principles envisage
the joint creation of new CJDs and allocation of those into Bands for ‘new
or substantially
altered jobs,’ neither party argued that those provisions
had application to this matter, and both submitted that the existing
(albeit different ones).
submitted that the changed technology should inform the interpretation of the
CJDs as their text largely describes functions
associated with the copper
network and indicates that they have not been updated since 2002. Further,
Telstra submitted that the
Court can safely infer from the well-publicised and
fundamental nature of the change from copper to fibre that this was well known
to the Telstra employees voting to approve the relevant agreements. Accordingly,
the Court should have regard to ‘the gist’
of the CJDs, irrespective
of the changed technology, in the same manner that the powers in the Australian
Constitution
are interpreted in light of changed technology. Further, Telstra
submitted that the typical functions remain relevant as illustrative
complexity of work covered by each CJD.
Jayawardana acknowledged that the CJDs have not kept up with the real way the
work is now organised but submitted that Telstra
still does copper work, and it
is not simply a matter of substituting fibre for copper. There are elements of
the CJDs which reflect
current work practices, such as the reference to optic
fibre jointing, and the CAN and IEN which continue to exist. Further, the
typical functions associated with a CJD are the most significant indicators of
the classification, as the words avoid subjective
and general descriptions and
are clear indicators of the work contemplated. I understood Mr Jayawardana to be
contending that aspects
of the terms in the CJDs should continue to be given
their meaning so far as is possible notwithstanding this technological change,
and a straight substitution of optic fibre functions for the copper network
functions may not be appropriate.
CJDs are capable of interpretation either with or without regard to the context
of changed technology. However, an approach which
ignored this context would
require terms in the CJDs relating to the copper network to be applied as though
those functions were
still typical for technicians working on Telstra’s
network, despite the majority being obsolete so far as the fibre network
concerned. Further, many functions performed by Mr Jayawardana are not mentioned
in the CJDs. If the change in technology is not
considered, the absence of these
functions from the CJDs would also be a relevant consideration. In my view,
interpreting the CJDs
without regard to the historical context would lead to a
misapplication of their terms. Given those considerations, I conclude that
interpretation of the CJDs must be informed by the fact that they have not been
updated since 2002 and primarily refer to copper-based
products and services. To
my mind, this approach is permissible for the reasons submitted by Telstra.
Further, given there has been
no change to the CJDs despite successive
renegotiations of the enterprise agreements that give them force, it follows
that both Telstra
and the employees to whom the agreements apply had a common
understanding that the CJDs are capable of applying to optic fibre work.
I also conclude that the Court should give effect to the text of the CJDs so far
as it is capable of having ongoing application,
provided the historical context
is considered. Despite the technological change the CJDs continue to describe
the network, and the
nature of work on it.
addition, the CJDs are capable of application insofar as they identify the
purpose and other features of the roles in generic terms.
This includes the
desirable characteristics of a person holding each role and the relative
complexity of the work to which each applies.
I also consider it appropriate to
have regard to the degree of complexity of specific functions related to the
copper network notwithstanding
that those functions are not relevant to Mr
Jayawardana’s work.
Specific interpretation issues flowing from the impact of
changed technology
light of my finding that the CJDs are to be read in light of the changed
technology, I have rejected the following specific submissions
as to how to
interpret the CJDs.
Mr Jayawardana submitted that the absence of a reference to fibre optic jointing
in the CFW4 Installer/Repairer CJD meant
that it did not apply, a demarcation
which he submitted did not extend to the CFW5 and CFW7 CJDs. Telstra submitted
that because
the CFW4 CAN Infrastructure Build CJD includes a specific reference
to fibre optic jointing, whereas the other CJDs do not mention
fibre optic
jointing, work which typically involves a lot of fibre optic jointing is
indicative of a CFW4 classification. I do not
consider the absence of a specific
reference to fibre optic cable in the CJDs is indicative that they do not apply
to fibre optic
cable work. Rather, I conclude that this reflects the CJDs having
been developed at a time when fibre optic cabling was not a significant
the network. I consider it more likely that the reference to fibre optic
jointing in the CAN Infrastructure Build CJD, at
a time where it was relatively
rare on the network, reflects that fibre optic jointing work was permissible for
employees in that
classification, not that fibre optic jointing could
be performed by those employees. The contrary approach would have
the effect that all work associated with fibre optic jointing,
irrespective of
its complexity, must fall within the CAN Infrastructure Build CJD, and the CFW4
classification. This was not contended
for by either party. Mr Jayawardana
contended this work was covered by the CFW5/CFW7 CJDs. Telstra also accepted
that fibre optic
fibre cabling work may be performed across each of the CJDs,
but with a transition from more simple cabling work with a prescribed
solutions dealt with in the CFW4 and CFW5 roles to very complicated cabling work
encompassed by the CFW7 role.
Mr Jayawardana submitted that because the CFW4 CJDs do not refer to completing
workbooks and using databases, they do not
apply to him. Telstra submitted that
completing workbooks and using fibre optic cable databases is not indicative of
CFW5 or CFW7
classifications because these CJDs do not refer to those tasks. It
is unsurprising that this work is not described in the CJDs given
specific to the optical fibre network and the CJDs primarily describe the copper
network. I conclude that the absence of
these functions from the CFW4, CFW5 or
CFW7 CJDs does not mean that those classifications do not apply.
Location of work on the network - the CAN, IEN and
Jayawardana submitted that the distinction between CAN and IEN is significant,
with the IEN work having greater importance because
of the potential for greater
network disruption. Telstra submitted that it doesn’t matter where the
work is undertaken as the
task is the same, ‘fibre is fibre’, and
there is no increased complexity in IEN work as opposed to the CAN work.
CJDs in some instances describe work by reference to a specific part of the
network. Most significantly, the CAN IB CFW4 CJD refers
to work on the CAN, and
the Installer/Repairer CFW5 CJD refers to the IEN. Notwithstanding the changes
in technology, the network
continues to be subcategorised in this way. Having
found that cabling work across the network is common, I nonetheless conclude
meaning must be given to these textual references.
am reinforced in this view by the terms of the 2022 Agreement, which must be the
starting point for assessing the application of
the CJDs. The Customer Field
Workstream description comprises the outer limits of the work which is then
classified within it. The
description of the Customer Field Workstream states:
Employees engaged in Customer Access Network (CAN) construction
in the end to end installation, operation, maintenance and
repair of all services for customers
in the supervision
and/or direct operational support of such employees and the testers in the
service assurance call centres.
(emphasis added)
is apparent from this description that there are three subcategories of
functions described, one of which is CAN construction,
and another of which is
‘end to end installation, operation, maintenance and repair of all
services for customers.’ The
definition recognises these as two separate
streams of work.
ignore these similar subcategories as they are reflected in the CJDs would be to
overlook the distinction drawn in the 2022 Agreement,
as well as the clear words
of the CJDs as to the parts of the network on which work is performed, on the
basis that the work performed
on each is materially the same. In my view, this
would conflate the issue of the relative complexity of the work with the issue
where the work is performed. Complexity of the work is an important
consideration in light of other aspects of the CJDs, but it does
not follow that
the only distinguishing consideration as to the operation of the CJDs is
complexity.
greater potential for customer disruption on the IEN than the CAN would provide
a reasonable explanation for the drawing of a
distinction by the parties.
Further, Mr Cooper’s evidence as to P1 Exchanges illustrates that Telstra
itself distinguishes
between cabling work where it is undertaken in a P1
Exchange as opposed to elsewhere on the network. However, ultimately, the
reasons for describing some functions with respect to only parts
of the network is irrelevant. The CJDs are based on an industrial
agreement. It
was open for the parties to do so for reasons unrelated to the complexity of the
work and I consider that to be what
the text of the CJDs reflects. Accordingly,
I have had regard to descriptors in the CJDs relating to the parts of the
which work is performed in considering their application.
Can both of the CFW4 CJDs be considered together?
Jayawardana submitted that the Court must identify the single CJD that best
applies to his role to determine the applicable classification
submitted that it is not permissible to identify some functions from each of the
two CFW4 CJDs and conclude based on a
combination of them that Mr Jayawardana is
appropriately classified as a CFW4. On the other hand, Telstra submitted that
is not required to distinguish between them, because if the Court is
satisfied that the principal function and purpose of Mr Jayawardana’s
employment is better characterised as falling across both of the CFW4 CJDs,
rather than the CFW5 and CFW7 CJDs, it follows that CFW4
is the correct
classification.
2022 Enterprise Agreement, at principle C1.2(b) regarding allocation of an
employee to a Workstream, provides that each Band within
a Workstream will have
agreed ‘representative Core Job Descriptions’ and there ‘may
be more than one Core Job Description
for each Band. Further, the definition of
CJDs states they are ‘Job descriptions’... [which] have been graded
into Bands, and ‘align particular job duties with Bands’.
I find based on these provisions that the CJDs are ‘representative’
of the jobs which fall within a particular Band. They permit more than one CJD
per Band. Accordingly, I consider the correct approach
is to have regard to both
CFW4 CJDs in determining Mr Jayawardana’s classification.
‘Horizontal’ and ‘vertical’ reading of
Mr Jayawardana submitted that the CJDs must be read both ‘horizontally and
vertically.’ Telstra also accepted
that a holistic assessment of each CJD
is required, as various components interact with each other. I agree it is
necessary to undertake
both exercises. A ‘horizontal’ reading of the
CJDs is consistent with the accepted principle from
above. The definition of CJDs in the 2022 Agreement provides that it is the
‘job descriptions’ which have been
graded and placed into Bands.
Whilst this includes aligning ‘particular job duties’ with Bands, I
consider it necessary
to consider these duties in the context of the CJD as a
whole. A ‘vertical’ or holistic reading of each CFW4 CJD means
despite both yielding the same classification level, the context in which a
function appears within those CJDs remains relevant.
DETAILED COMPARISON OF THE CJDs
follows is first, a comparative ‘horizontal’ analysis, then
secondly, analysis of the applicability of each of the
Jayawardana’s major and substantial employment, having regard to both the
horizontal analysis and a vertical or
holistic consideration of each CJD.
title of the CAN Infrastructure Build CFW4 CJD is materially different from the
Installer/Repairer CJDs. Whilst the Installer/Repairer
titles are generic and
broad and reference a ‘repair’ function, the CAN Infrastructure
Build title reflects a job which
is specific to the CAN and relates to
infrastructure building.
Job Purpose – primary role
statements of ‘Job purpose - primary role’ in the CJDs are
self-evidently a significant feature of the CJDs, as a
broad overarching
statement of the role. As this feature is identical between the CFW4 and CFW5
Installer/Repairer, it follows that
there is substantial similarity between
these two CJDs. There are qualitative differences between the CAN Infrastructure
and the Installer/Repairer CJDs. The CAN Infrastructure Build CJD is
limited to ‘the full range of construction, provisioning
& Maintenance
activities’ whereas the Installer/Repairer CJDs do not refer to
‘construction’ or ‘provisioning’
activities but instead
refer to ‘end to end installation, repair and maintenance
functions.’ Additionally, the CAN Infrastructure
Build CJD limits the
activities described to the CAN whereas the Installer/Repairer CJDs instead
describe functions associated to
‘telecommunications products and
services.’ Further, the CFW7 CJD describes a role with additional
complexity of functions,
products and services.
Job purpose – typical functions
Generic statement
generic statement of typical functions is also a significant aspect of the CJDs.
It is a broad statement of the expected functions
of the role. It takes on
greater significance given the extent to which the examples of typical functions
which follow relate to
the copper network.
aspect of the CJDs requires an assessment of the relative complexity of the
diagnostic process undertaken by Mr Jayawardana and
the breadth of the range of
solutions from which he must select. A CFW4 is required to undertake
‘prescribed diagnostics’
and determine the course of action from a
‘limited range of solutions’, a CFW5 is required to undertake
prescribed diagnostics’ and determine the course of action
from a ‘range of variable solutions’, and a CFW7 is
required to
undertake ‘very
complex diagnostics’ and determine the course
of action from a ‘wide range of variable
solutions.’
assessment is material to determining Mr Jayawardana’s classification and
is considered in detail below.
CJD states ‘typical functions could include, but not exclusive to’
then lists typical functions. Most of the typical
functions for each of the four
CJDs can be categorised into four subject matters. Broadly described, these
subject matters are:
(a) Repair and maintenance of the network, or part of
(b) Installation and repair of CPE products and
cabling, and associated work;
(c) Work on small and large Pair Gain Systems and
Radio-based connections; and
(d) Non-network interference and network interference
work involving switches and transmission.
Repair and maintenance of the network, or a part of it
the four common subject matters, I find that this is the most relevant as it
best describes a key part of Mr Jayawardana’s
major and substantial
employment, being Repair and Maintenance Work, in particular rectifying fibre
faults. The other subject matters
have less or no direct relevance to the work
undertaken by Mr Jayawardana.
relevant typical function for Installer/Repairer CFW4 is ‘Repair and
Maintenance of the Customer Access Network including
Cable TV.’ For
Installer/Repairer CFW5 it is ‘Repair of complex and difficult CAN
transmission and interexchange network
faults (ESD)’. For
Installer/Repairer CFW7 it is ‘Highly specialist complete Repair and
Maintenance of Network and Service
affecting Faults and Isolations associated
with Switches and Transmission activities (eg. difficult and complex fault
rectification,
outage recovery, complex switch fault rectification, DRCS, RIM,
S12, AXE and Customer Radio).’
CAN Infrastructure Build CJD does not include a ‘repair and
maintenance’ related typical function. However, it includes
the typical
function ‘Highly skilled cable jointing (eg. Complex Cable Jointing, Fibre
Optic Jointing).’ The parties
agreed this function is without
equivalent.
However, given my
finding that optic fibre cabling work is encompassed by each of the
and the majority of Mr
Jayawardana’s cable jointing is undertaken in the course of his Repair and
Maintenance Work, I consider
this typical function must be viewed in the context
of the repair and maintenance functions in the other CJDs.
scope of, and difference between, the CFW4 and CFW5 Installer/Repairer repair
and maintenance function is material in determining
Mr Jayawardana’s
classification and is considered in detail below.
Installation and repair of CPE products and cabling, and
associated work
relevant typical function for ‘Installer/Repairer CFW4’ is
‘Installation or Repair of Complex CPE Products and
Cabling (eg. PABX,
SBS, Data & Special Services, Mobiles, Media & Broadcast Services,
associated MDF
activities).’
The relevant
typical function for Installer/Repairer CFW5 is identical to this, except that
‘MDF activities’ is replaced
by ‘Exchange work’. The
relevant Installer/Repairer CFW7 function is ‘Specialist complex repair of
CPE (eg. PABX,
Data, Media, & Broadcast services, associated Exchange
elements). [sic] and/or CPE related networks.’ This group of functions
remains relevant despite many of the specific examples of relevant equipment
being copper-related, as CPE products and cabling continue
to exist on the optic
fibre network. Further, Mr Jayawardana’s major and substantial employment
insofar as it includes Wideband
Work involves some limited installation of
customer equipment.
CFW7 descriptor is clearly distinguishable from the CFW4/CFW5 descriptors, as it
describes ‘specialist’ complex repair.
I do not consider Mr
Jayawardana’s work installing customer equipment can be characterised in
this way. I find that the CFW7
descriptor does not have application to Mr
Jayawardana’s Repair and Maintenance work. Regarding the CFW4/CFW5
descriptor, the
parties both accepted that MDF activities are similar to the
patch panel work which Mr Jayawardana undertakes on optical fibre. However
whilst Mr Jayawardana performs patch panel work and exchange work as part of his
Project Work, the evidence does not establish that
either is undertaken in
association with his Wideband Work installing customer equipment. Accordingly I
find there is no basis to
distinguish between the applicability of the CFW4 or
CFW5 descriptor in respect of Mr Jayawardana’s work.
Work on small and large Pair Gain Systems and Radio based
connections.
CAN Infrastructure Build CFW4 CJD includes the typical function ‘Large
Pair Gain System Installation (eg RIM, DRCS, Customer
Radio).’ Whilst, by
way of the Table at Appendix 1, the parties did not identify any typical
functions of the same nature from
the other CJDs, each of them in fact include
functions relating to Pair Gain Systems and Customer Radio as follows:
(a) Installer/Repairer CFW4: ‘Installation &
Repair of Fixed Radio Access/Small Pair Gain Systems;’
(b) Installer/Repairer CFW5: ‘Repair and
Maintenance of Large Pair Gain Systems (eg. RIM, DRCS & Customer
along with a reference to ‘RIM’ and ‘RCM’
in the typical function relating to network interference, considered
(c) Installer/Repairer CFW7: ‘DRCS, RIM and
Customer Radio’ are listed as examples of the ‘Highly specialist
Repair and Maintenance of Network and Service affecting Faults and
Isolations associated with Switches and Transmission activities.’
on the agreed description of terms, I am satisfied that each of these functions
are related. A Pair Gain System is effectively
a ‘mini exchange’
installed at (or near) customer premises that allows a single line to the
exchange to be used to support
multiple lines to customer premises. Pair Gain
systems can be small or large depending on the number of lines.
stands for ‘Remote Integrated Multiplexer’, a type
of pair gain system. ‘RCM’ is a Pair Gain System. ‘DRCS’
stands for ‘Digital Radio Concentrator System’, a radio-based
connection from customer premises to exchange. ‘Customer
another radio based customer connection system.
Mr Jayawardana and Telstra accepted Pair Gain Systems are a feature of the
copper network. (in the case of Telstra, with the
exception of
‘RIMs’). It was agreed that Mr Jayawardana does not work on Pair
Gain equipment, however he may at times
work on a fibre optic cable connected to
a RIM. I infer from this that RIM Pair Gain Systems interact in some way with
fibre network. However, this group of typical functions is concerned
with installation, repair and maintenance of the Pair Gain Systems
connections themselves, not associated cabling work. Both parties also accepted
that radio-based connections are not a
feature of the optic fibre network. Mr
Jayawardana does not work on DRCS or Customer Radio Systems.
submitted that typical functions of the CFW5 and CFW7 (but not CFW4) CJDs
included: repair of large Pair Gain Systems, RIMs,
RCM, DRCS, customer radio and
DRCS. Accordingly, Telstra submitted that one of the differentiators between the
CFW4 CJDs on the one
hand and the CFW5 and CFW7 CJDs on the other is that the
latter typically involve complex repair of complex equipment. The CFW7 typical
function refers to ‘highly specialised’ repairs of this equipment,
and I find that this indicates complex repairs. However,
I find that the
installation and repair of the same kinds of equipment (small and large Pair
Gain Systems and Customer Radio) is
also provided for in the CFW4 CJDs. Neither
the CFW4 or CFW5 CJDs refer to the equipment or repair as complex. Accordingly,
not conclude that the CFW5 role typically involves complex repair of
complex equipment based on this group of functions.
indicating in a general sense that the work of CFW7 technician is more
specialised than the other classifications, I do not
consider the range of
typical functions relating to Small or Large Pair Gain Systems, or Customer
Radio, assists in the allocation
of a classification to Mr Jayawardana. Mr
Jayawardana does not perform any of the work described in any of the typical
because they are functions overwhelmingly concerned with the copper
network. Even if I assume that there is equivalent equipment
on the optic fibre
network, Mr Jayawardana’s failure to perform work on equipment does not
give rise to any presumption that
he falls outside one or other of the relevant
CJDs, because each of them includes this function. Accordingly I have not
this group of functions further.
Non-network interference and network interference work
respective typical functions in this group
(a) Installer/Repairer CFW4: ‘Non-network
Interference work on Switches & Transmission (eg Alarm resets, board changes
GOC direction, line conditioning and testing);’
(b) Installer/Repairer CFW5: ‘Repair and
Maintenance of potential Network interference and service affecting Faults and
associated to Switches and Transmission Systems (eg. Special service
jumpering, fault rectification and hazardous board replacement
under direction
from GOC, RIM, RCM Faults, etc).’
(c) Installer/Repairer CFW7: ‘complex switch
fault rectification,’ ‘S12’ and ‘AXE’ are listed
as examples of the ‘Highly specialist complete Repair and Maintenance of
Network and Service affecting Faults and Isolations
associated with Switches and
Transmission activities’ (S12 and AXE are systems that form part of the
telephone network core).
was agreed that ‘network interference’ refers to dealing with
electrical interference or radio frequency interference,
a common source of
faults on the copper network but virtually non-existent on the fibre optic
network. ‘Non-network Interference’
means work that does not involve
dealing with electrical interference or radio frequency interference. Switches
and transmission
are types of equipment attached to a line. ‘Board
changes’ means replacing a circuit board in a piece of equipment.
‘Jumpering’
is a type of interfacing from copper lines to equipment.
‘Hazardous board replacement’ means replacing circuit boards
hazardous circumstances. Mr Jayawardana does not replace circuit boards or
repair any equipment. Mr Jayawardana does perform line
parties submitted that aspects of this group of functions are relevant to optic
fibre. Telstra submitted that Mr Jayawardana
performs ‘non-network
interference’ work, the CFW4 descriptor is sufficiently generic to apply
to both the optic fibre
and copper networks, and that whilst some terms are
related to copper technology, Mr Jayawardana undertakes ‘line conditioning
and testing.’ Mr Jayawardana submitted that the CFW7 descriptor was most
relevant because optical fibre work is highly specialist
work needed to
accomplish a complete repair or maintenance of the network, and that the
description of the CFW5 repair of network
interference in consultation with the
GOC function is also comparable to his work with the GOC to coordinate the
managed approach
to an optical fibre outage.
am not persuaded by the submissions of either party that any of the work
performed by Mr Jayawardana is described by any of these
typical functions. The
SOAF states ‘the fibre optic network is not subject to electrical or radio
frequency interference, so
Mr Jayawardana’s work is non-interference
work.’ This appears to be based on the flawed logic that because Mr
Jayawardana
does not perform ‘network interference’ work, he
therefore performs ‘non-network interference’ work. I reject
construction. Mr Considine, on whose evidence this agreed fact was based,
confirmed that both descriptions related to the copper
that, each party’s submission involved selecting discrete phrases out of
context. Whilst Mr Jayawardana does perform
line testing work, the evidence does
not disclose what the associated function of line ‘conditioning’
means, and the
reference to line testing in the CFW4 typical function is clearly
within the context of (copper-based) non-network interference work
on switches
and transmission. Beyond describing switches and transmission as types of
equipment attached to a line, the evidence
does not disclose what type of
equipment, or whether the equipment is present in the optic fibre network, or if
not whether there
is equivalent equipment in the optic fibre network. Similarly,
the CFW5 and CFW7 functions referred to by Mr Jayawardana’s
submissions
are all related to switches and transmissions, or network interference work on
the copper network, which is not a feature
of the optic fibre network. I find
that Mr Jayawardana does not perform work described in this group of functions,
because they are
functions overwhelmingly concerned with the copper
group of typical functions does however illustrate a progressive increase in
complexity in the work performed. Based on the evidence
as to network
interference work on the copper network, I accept it was more complex than
non-network interference work on the copper
network, placing the CFW5 CJD in a
tangibly different category of complexity than the CFW4 CJD. A further degree of
difference is
evident in the distinction between the CFW4 function of
‘board changes’ under GOC direction and the CDW5 function of
‘hazardous board replacement’ under direction from GOC. The CFW7 CJD
describes more specialised work. Telstra submitted,
and I accept, that the CFW7
descriptor insofar as it relates to complex switch fault rectification, repair
of S12 and AXE, means
that a typical function of the CFW7 role is the
performance of complex repairs of complex equipment. Accordingly, this group of
functions demonstrates in a general way that the complexity of the work
increases from CFW4 to CFW5 to CFW7 classifications. Beyond
this, I do not
consider this group of functions to be of assistance in determining Mr
Jayawardana’s classification level.
Examples without equivalent in other CJDs
of the five typical functions for the CAN Infrastructure Build CFW4 CJD have no
equivalent in any of the other CJDs. The first
is ‘Complex CPAS (eg.
Installation and Repair of APCAMS)’: CPAS stands for ‘Cable Pressure
Alarm System’
and APCAMS stands for ‘Air Pressure Cable Alarm
Monitoring System’. These are the sensors and systems used to detect
in pressurised cables. This work is unrelated to optic fibre cables and I find
it is not of assistance in determining Mr Jayawardana’s
classification.
second is ‘Party Leader up to 9 Staff undertaking Pit, Pipe, Conduit Cable
or Service Installation, or Party Leader of a
small team undertaking Directional
Boring (i.e.10,000 Lbs force), Large Mole Plough, Complex Hauling etc’
Construction function
). Directional boring means using a special
steerable drill to bore a horizontal underground hole between two points, into
which conduit
can then be inserted. Mr Jayawardana does not perform that work.
Mr Considine said, and I accept, that there are no directional boring
Telstra, but there would have been back in the day. Ploughing is the process of
using a plough to cut a trench in the ground
from above and insert conduit into
that trench. Mr Jayawardana does not perform that work. Mr Jayawardana performs
hauling work,
limited to cable of 120 metres length or less, beyond which
external contractors are engaged by Telstra. I consider the Construction
Function largely describes the physical construction of the infrastructure
underpinning the copper network. However, I consider it
relevant to determining
Mr Jayawardana’s classification. Because hauling work is not otherwise
referred to in the other CJDs,
I find that the reference to complex hauling, in
the context of the CAN, indicates hauling work is no higher than a CFW4
third is ‘Pole Inspection.’ The parties agreed that pole inspection
relates to the inspection of telephone poles,
and Mr Jayawardana performs this
work as part of his General Inspection work. I find that this work is indicative
of a CFW4 classification.
of the five typical functions for Installer/Repairer CFW4 has no equivalent in
any of the other CJDs, being ‘Repair and
Maintenance of Simplex Products
& Services (eg. Single line services, OnRamp, basic Data, public Payphones
& associated products
i.e.: TOPS, COPS)’
services means single line services. ‘OnRamp’ was a Telstra
Integrated Services Digital Network
that ran over the copper network.
‘Basic Data’ refers to data services and equipment, such as a
dial-up or ADSL services.
Accordingly, these functions relate to the copper
network. Telstra submitted that simplex products and services refers to a single
line service which may or may not be fibre or copper as it can be assumed that
single lines of fibre go to various homes and in these
circumstances the
descriptor applies to both copper and fibre and applies to Mr Jayawardana. I
accept that Mr Jayawardana may work
on single fibre services to homes. To the
extent he does, this is indicative of a CFW4 classification. However, this is an
reflection of Mr Jayawardana’s cabling work, which based on my
findings above goes well beyond single fibre services. ‘TOPS’
‘COPS’ refer to payphones. Mr Jayawardana does not work on the
copper network, maintain or repair payphones. However,
he does inspect and clean
payphones and to this extent maintains them. I find that this work is indicative
of a CFW4 classification.
of the five typical functions for Installer/Repairer CFW5 has no equivalent in
any of the other CJDs, being ‘Install and
replace exchange cards.’
This refers to active equipment in an exchange. Mr Jayawardana occasionally
bolts an exchange card
to a rack as part of Project Work. I find that this
constitutes installation, and this work is indicative of a CFW5 classification.
Accountabilities
are six ‘Accountabilities’ for each CJD, and four of them are
identical for each CJD. All of the accountabilities
are identical for
Installer/Repairer CFW4 and CFW5, again contributing to the substantial
similarities between these classifications.
accountabilities largely identify outcomes to be achieved by a person in each
role, but also at times describe functions of the
role. To the extent there are
differences between them, I consider them material to determining Mr
Jayawardana’s classification.
first accountability for the CAN Infrastructure Build CJD is to ‘achieve
faultless end to end construction, provisioning
& Maintenance of the
customer access network and associated infrastructure’ whereas the first
accountability for each of
the Installer/Repairer CJDs are to ‘achieve
faultless end to end fault rectification and installations.’ There are
differences
in both the subject matter and the scope described, with the former
confined to the CAN and related to construction, provisioning
and maintenance,
including of associated infrastructure, and the latter not confined to the CAN,
and related to fault rectification
and installations. The Installer/Repairer
CJDs also refer to the ‘utilisation of instruments and tools from remote
points within
the network’ and the CAN Infrastructure Build CJD does not.
The reference to utilisation of instruments and tools from the
remote parts of
the network in the Installer/Repairer CJDs indicates that this is a function of
that group of CJDs but not the CAN
Infrastructure Build CJD. Having found that
Mr Jayawardana works across the network and utilises instruments and tools
I find that the accountabilities to be indicative that the
‘Installer/Repairer’ CJDs apply.
accountabilities for the CFW7 CJD differ from CFW4/CFW5 in degree, referring to
compliance with ‘standards’ not ‘prescribed
standards,’
‘expert’ rather than ‘proficient’ use of instruments and
tools, ‘planned and complex
routine’ activities rather than
‘planned activities’ and ‘network & service
infrastructure’ rather
than ‘infrastructure.’ In each case the
CFW7 accountabilities require a higher degree of autonomy and complexity than
the other CJDs.
Qualifications – Mandatory (no person to occupy job
without this)
CJDs mandatory qualifications are in fact not mandatory, but
‘typical’. The CAN Infrastructure Build CJD identifies
Machinery licence as typical, whereas the Installer/Repairer CJDs do not. This
is consistent with the emphasis of this CJD
on construction of the
infrastructure for the copper network. The two CFW4 CJDs identify ‘Austel
Cabling Licence’ as
typical whereas Installer/Repairer CFW5 and CFW7
identify ‘Austel BCL/CATS cabling licence.’ The evidence does
not disclose the difference between them. I find the inclusion
licences as typically required for CFW5 and CFW7 roles is consistent with
cabling being a function of each of those roles.
Qualifications/Experience level – desirable
CJD lists three criteria under ‘Qualifications/Experience Level –
Desirable’ which introduce into consideration
the personal skill level and
experience of the individual performing the role. The first criteria is the only
one which is not common
across the CJDs, and differs between the CFW5/CFW7 CJDs
on the one hand and the CFW4 CJDs on the
distinguishing features are that an employee at the
top of each respective level will demonstrate the following experience and
attributes:
(a) ‘high level of procedural and systematic
proficiency’ (CFW4) compared to a ‘very high level of procedural and
systematic proficiency’ (CFW5/CFW7);
(b) ‘well developed’ (CFW4) compared to
‘very well developed’ (CFW5/CFW7) broad technical skills;
(c) typically, but not being restricted to, having
‘four years’ (CFW4) compared to ‘six years’ (CFW5/CFW7)
relevant experience in at least one of the functional areas defined in the job
(d) ‘logistical skills’ (CFW4) compared to
‘well developed’ (CFW5/CFW7) logistical skills for determining
(e) ‘personal organisation’ (CFW4) compared
to ‘well developed personal organisation’ (CFW5/CFW7);
(f) Sound knowledge of ‘basic data
products’ (CFW4) compared to ‘data products’ (CFW5/CFW7); and
(g) First level leadership skills on site (CFW4) with
no equivalent in CFW5/CFW7.
the criteria are stated to be desirable only, they are in fact the only tangible
indication of the personal characteristics
required of a person holding the
respective roles. I therefore consider that this aspect of the CJDs should be
given appropriate
weight in determining Mr Jayawardana’s classification.
This is considered further below.
Australian Qualifications Framework (AQF) Relativities
underneath the heading ‘Qualifications/Experience –
desirable,’ each of the CJDs contains a subsection stating:
Australian Qualifications Framework Relativities
A person who is assessed as fully competent at this work level and across all
functions performed in this position analysis, would
be eligible to attain the
following Australian Qualifications Framework Competencies and/or certificates.
CJD then lists the competencies as summarised in the Table at Appendix 1.
Following the specification of competencies, each CJD
states ‘NOTE;
Applicable, relevant competencies as identified on 1 October 1998, these can be
varied from time to time as Industry
standards are adjusted.’
Jayawardana submitted that the AQF relativities are not relevant as they are
‘reverse qualifications’ which recognise
skills obtained by
employees while working for Telstra, rather than requiring those skills of an
employee. Telstra submitted that
notwithstanding this, the competencies inform
what an employee must be able to do in order to do the job competently, and who
be hired into the position.
AQF relativities differ between the two CFW4 roles. The only qualifications
attainable by a CAN Infrastructure Build employee
performing all the functions
of that role are limited to cabling (Certificate ii) and the CAN (Certificate
iii). In contrast, the
qualifications attainable for an employee performing all
the functions of the Installer/Repairer CFW4 role include cabling but at
higher (certificate iii and iv) level, a lower number of CAN competencies, and
include ‘telecommunications’ competencies
(a general term, the
subject or subjects of which is not discernible from the CJDs) and CPE
competencies. Further, the AQF relativities
differ between the CFW4 roles, on
the one hand, and the CFW5/CFW7 roles on the other, for which they are
identical. The qualifications
attainable for an employee performing all of the
functions of a CFW5/CFW7 role do not include cabling qualifications at all, but
include higher level ‘telecommunications,’ ‘CAN’ and
‘CPE’ qualifications.
submitted that the AQF relativities indicate cabling work is an important part
of the CFW4 roles but not the CFW5/CFW7 roles,
and that complex CPE work is one
of the distinguishing factors between the CFW5/CFW7 roles on the one hand and
the CFW4 roles on
the other. In support of this contention, Telstra relied on
the 2001 Curriculum Document
which identifies the competency units within each of the qualifications
listed in the CJDs, at the date the CJDs were issued. Telstra
submitted that
because the CJDs refer to the qualifications, the qualifications in turn inform
the content of the CJDs. The 2001
Curriculum Document was tendered by consent,
however Mr Jayawardana submitted that Court must look to the industrial
agreement to
determine the classification, not the 2001 Curriculum Document
which sets out industry standards which may not be aligned. I have
reservations
in using the 2001 Curriculum Document to interpret the CJDs, given the lack of
evidence that it was considered by the
negotiating parties or accessible to
employees voting on the enterprise agreements some 13 years later. However,
given that it establishes
objectively (by reference) the content of the
qualifications referred to in the CJDs at that time, I have had regard to it.
Ultimately,
it has not altered the conclusions I would otherwise have drawn from
the text of the CJDs themselves.
submitted that the competency units within the qualifications for the CFW4 CJDs
included several cabling and optical fibre
related competencies which suggest
that the following tasks can be done within a CFW4 role: installing conduits
and cable; splicing
cable; testing cable and identifying, locating and
rectifying faults; performing cut-overs; installing trays and equipment;
identifying
requirements and preparing design drawings and specifications for
cabling installation; and supervising cabling work. In contrast,
the competency
units falling within the qualifications for CFW5/CFW7 included a range of CPE
related functions including complex
and very complex CPE faults, suggesting that
this focus on complex CPE work is a significant distinction from the CFW4 roles.
find that the AQF relativities are relevant to an interpretation of the CJDs
insofar as they provide a point in time snapshot of
the equivalent
qualifications for an employee performing every function within each CJD. Having
regard to both the text of the CJDs
and the 2001 Curriculum Document, I conclude
that the AQF relativities indicate that cabling work is a greater focus of the
CJDs than the CFW5/CFW7 CJDs, and that CPE work is a greater focus of the
CFW5/CFW7 CJDs than the CFW4 CJDs. However, for the reasons
set out below, I
have given them less weight in determining Mr Jayawardana’s classification
than other matters.
there are also competencies which on their face may be relevant to Mr
Jayawardana’s work amongst those provided for
under the CFW5/CFW7 CJD.
(a) 3 of 5 required competencies for Certificate iv in
telecommunications (CAN). Competencies which on their face appear relevant
the work of Mr Jayawardana include, for example: supervise cabling project;
assign a transmission path; schedule resources; remotely
locate and identify
cable network faults; locate and diagnose cable faults.
(b) 2 of 5 required competencies for Certificate iv in
Telecommunications. Those include competencies from cabling, CAN, Network
CPE streams. Competencies which on their face appear relevant to Mr Jayawardana
include, for example: Undertake routine maintenance
of the telecommunications
network; Undertake remote repair of network faults; Locate and repair network
faults on a first in basis;
Remotely locate and identify cable network faults;
Locate and diagnose cable faults; Supervise cabling project; Schedule and supply
cable installation; Cutover CPE additions, moves and changes.
analysis is limited to the title of the qualification or competency unit, as
opposed to the substance. In some cases the title
is clear as to the task it
describes. For example, ‘splice optical [fibre] cable’ is clear, and
is a competency associated
with the qualifications listed in the CFW4 roles. In
other cases, the content of or interrelationship between competencies is not
able to be determined by the title. For example, the CFW4 qualifications include
‘locate and identify cable system fault’
and the CFW5/CFW7
qualifications include ‘locate and repair network faults on a first in
basis’, ‘remotely locate
and identify cable network faults’
and ‘locate and diagnose cable faults.’ Whilst Telstra submits that
identifying,
locating and rectifying faults falls within a CFW4 qualification, I
do not consider the titles of the competencies are sufficient
to ascertain which
best aligns with Mr Jayawardana’s work.
I give only limited weight to the AQF relativities and associated competencies
given the express terms of the CJDs allow
them to be varied from time to time as
industry standards are adjusted. There is no requirement that any variation be
by agreement
or articulated in any
Ms Tullberg stated that she
obtained the 2001 Curriculum Document from the training.gov.au website and that
it was the latest version
available prior to the training package being
superseded on 27 December 2002. Accordingly, they provide only a ‘point in
snapshot of how the work of the CJDs translated to AQF
qualifications, from October 1998 and December 2002.
the AQF qualifications are those attainable by an employee who is ‘fully
functional’ across ‘all functions’
described in the CJD. Other
aspects of the CJDs indicate that it is not a requirement that an employee be
fully functional in all
functions they describe. In particular, the
‘Qualifications/Experience Level – Desirable’ section of the
CJDs states
that ‘an employee ‘at the top end of this level’
(for the Installer/Repairer CJDs) would have relevant experience
least one of the functional areas defined in the job role.’ Further, the
typical functions of each CJD are indicative,
not mandatory. Thus, the AQF
qualifications do not directly reflect the qualifications or requirements of the
roles as they are otherwise
stated. Rather, they reflect the maximum potential
scope of the role. A related difficulty arises because the AQF qualifications
are identical for the CFW5 and CFW7 CJD. However, in light of other differences
between these two CJDs, a ‘fully functional’
employee across
‘all functions’ of one role would be performing functions of a
substantively different nature to the
other. It is not possible for the
specified AQF qualifications to be what the CJD describes them to be in respect
of both classifications.
Telstra submitted that because of the greater focus or emphasis on CPE work in
the CFW5/CFW7 competencies, an employee must
be performing significant CPE work
for those classifications to apply. I disagree in respect of the CFW4 and CFW5
Installer/Repairer
CJDs, in the context of the typical functions of each CJD. It
is apparent from the consideration of the typical functions of each
of the CJDs
that all three classification levels include work on CPE products. In the case
of both the CFW4 Installer/Repairer CJD
and the CFW5 CJD, the CPE-related
function is one of five typical functions. Accordingly, I do not consider the
fact that Mr Jayawardana
performs only limited CPE work gives rise to a greater
likelihood that he falls outside one or other of those classifications. In
case of the CFW7 CJD, the CPE related function is one of only two typical
functions identified, indicating it is a more significant
focus of that role,
and to that extent the AQF relativities support Telstra’s submission.
CONSIDERATION OF THE APPLICABILITY OF EACH CJD
submitted that there is no basis upon which the Court could conclude that Mr
Jayawardana should be classified as a CFW7, which
it said would be a radical
reclassification. Telstra submitted that the question is really whether or not
Mr Jayawardana is appropriately
classified as CFW4 or should be classified as
CFW5. Telstra submitted that the features of Mr Jayawardana’s employment
overwhelmingly consistent with the CFW4 CJDs. Further, his employment has
many inconsistent features with the CFW5 and CFW7 CJDs.
Mr Jayawardana
acknowledged that he performs some CFW4 work, namely optical fibre jointing work
and pole inspection work. However,
he is required in his role to do a lot more
than that, meaning his role is appropriately classified as a CFW5 or CFW7
CFW7 Installer/Repairer
on the comparative analysis above, the CFW7 role involves additional complexity
in the job purpose - primary role and the job
purpose – generic typical
Whilst the typical
functions relating to ‘small and large Pair Gain Systems and radio-based
connections’ and ‘non-network
interference and network interference
work involving switches and transmission’ do not directly relate to Mr
Jayawardana’s
work, in the context of the range of functions relating to
this subject matter across the CJDs, the CFW7 function for each subject
is illustrative of increased complexity. The repair and maintenance function
described is ‘highly specialist’
and ‘complete.’ In
respect of ‘Installation and repair of CPE products and cabling, and
associated work,’
specialist complex work is described. Accountabilities
for a CFW7 reflect a higher degree of expertise and complexity. Whilst there
some elements of the CFW7 CJD which mirror those in the CFW5 classification
(mandatory cabling qualifications, desirable qualifications
and the AQF
relativities) and others which were common across all CJDs, these do not
derogate from the comparative complexity of
functions and expertise described in
the CFW7 CJD.
holistic or vertical reading of this CJD also demonstrates that this role is
concerned with particularly complex work across the
full breadth of the network.
The primary role indicates that the CJD is confined to complex functions and
complex products and services.
The typical functions relate to ‘very
complex’ diagnostics and programming, and specialist complex repairs of
Network faults. There are only two typical functions described and both
relate to specialist, complex work. One of the two functions
relates to CPE,
indicating that CPE is a significant focus of the CFW7 role. The other relates
to ‘highly specialised’
complete repair and maintenance.
submitted that the language of the CFW7 CJD as a whole indicates an employee
operating at a tangibly higher level than the
other CJDs. The focus is on work
which is necessarily complex and specialised, a ‘troubleshooter’
role called in where
others do not have the technical ability. Telstra submitted
it was applicable to an employee operating at the level of Mr De Blasio.
Jayawardana accepted that the focus of the higher level CJD is away from
manipulative skills and towards system management and
supervision.
conclude that Mr Jayawardana’s major and substantial employment is not as
described by the CFW7 Installer/Repairer role, and
accordingly his claim insofar
as it is based on an entitlement to be classified at CFW7 is not made out.
Whilst it is true that Mr
Jayawardana sometimes takes the lead in repair and
maintenance work performed in pairs, determines resource allocation for repair
work, provides on the job training for other employees, performs something of a
specialist role in respect of his country fault work
and allocates work as part
of his APOC work, I am not persuaded that these aspects of his role are
sufficient to meet the criteria
as to complexity and specialisation set out in
the CFW7 CJD. That all other employees in the FMG perform the same work as Mr
Jayawardana
supports the view that this work does not involve the requisite
degree of specialisation. The other evidence as to the work of CFW7
supports this conclusion. Mr De Blasio undertakes a role less focused on
fieldwork and with a much greater management,
supervision and administration
focus. The highly specialised testing role of the former CFW7 technicians in the
MFT is qualitatively
different to the work performed by Mr Jayawardana.
CAN Infrastructure Build CFW4
above comparative analysis of the CJDs demonstrates several material differences
between the CAN Infrastructure Build CJD on the
one hand and the
Installer/Repairer CJDs on the other. These include: the title of the CJD
referring to both the CAN and the Infrastructure
Build function; the job purpose
– primary role referring to construction and provisioning activities and
not referring to installation
and repair activities; the job purpose –
primary role being confined to the CAN rather than the more general
‘telecommunications
products and services;’ the absence of a general
‘repair and maintenance’ function, present in each other CJD;
specification of ‘highly skilled cable jointing’ as a function,
absent from each of the other CJDs; the limitation
of the first accountability
to the CAN and associated infrastructure; the absence of a reference in the
accountabilities to the use
of instruments and tools remotely on the network;
the typical mandatory requirement of a Heavy Vehicle Licence and the limitations
on the AQF relativities to cabling and the CAN.
Jayawardana submitted that the CAN Infrastructure Build CJD is limited to work
on the CAN. Telstra submitted that whilst this CJD
references the CAN in the
primary role, the typical functions (such as undertaking prescribed diagnostics
and programing of services
and networks in the field) are broader than the CAN.
both a horizontal and vertical analysis of this CJD, I conclude that the role it
describes is limited to the CAN. The plain words
in the title of the CJD and the
‘Job purpose - primary role’ indicates that the role requires its
holder to ‘undertake
the full range of construction, provisioning &
Maintenance activities
in the telecommunications Customer Access
’ (emphasis added). I consider this statement determines the
outer limits of the CJD and the functions contained within it.
Accordingly, both
the generic and specific typical functions described must be read as subject to
this confining qualification. Consistent
with this, the first accountability
confines the activities described to the CAN. In addition, the subject matter of
the relevant
AQF competencies are limited to Cabling and the CAN. Further, the
comparative analysis above indicates that the focus in this CJD
on the CAN is
unique amongst the CJDs. Mr Jayawardana’s work extends across the network,
whereas this CJD applies only to work
on the CAN.
I consider that on a holistic reading of the CJD, the role it describes is
primarily focused on construction and maintenance,
including the construction of
the physical infrastructure associated with the network of cables that comprise
the CAN, including
through boring and ploughing the ground. The title of the CJD
describes the role as ‘Infrastructure Build.’ The main
described in the job purpose – primary role are ‘construction,
provisioning and maintenance.’ The Construction
Function describes in
detail the physical construction of network infrastructure in teams which
install pits, pipes, conduits, cables
or services, or undertake directional
boring, with reference to large mole plough and complex hauling. A Heavy
Machinery Operators
Licence is a typical applicable mandatory licence for the
role. The comparative analysis also illustrates that these features are
to this CJD. Mr Jayawardana’s Wideband Work involves building new fibre
links on the CAN, and his work also involves
hauling and installing short
lengths of cable. However, beyond this he is not engaged in construction of the
physical infrastructure
of the CAN.
Jayawardana submitted that the function ‘highly skilled cable
jointing’ in this CJD does not extend to work such as
fault finding and
testing, and is a reference only to the process of joining together two pieces
of optical fibre. Telstra submitted
that in light of the reference to ‘the
full range of construction, provisioning & maintenance activities’ in
job purpose, the function extends to associated work such as testing and
fault finding. In light of the comparative analysis of the
CJDs, I conclude that
the term is confined in the way contended for by Mr Jayawardana. Comparatively,
the other CJDs do not expressly
refer to cabling work. Instead they describe a
broader function within which cabling work, along with other associated work,
be undertaken. I consider this supports Mr Jayawardana’s contention
that the more specific reference to ‘highly skilled
cable jointing’
is limited to the physical process of jointing, rather than the broader range of
work associated with the repair
of a fibre optic cable fault. Further, the
evidence establishes that fault finding and testing are undertaken by the use of
and instruments. The Installer/Repairer CJDs refer to the use of tools and
instruments remotely on the network however the CAN Infrastructure
does not. In the context of these two aspects of the other CJDs, I conclude that
the narrow reference to cable jointing
in this CJD should not be given a broader
there is no contextual basis in the CJD itself to conclude that the reference to
jointing includes a reference to other work
associated with Mr
Jayawardana’s fault repair work. The reference to the ‘full range of
construction, provisioning &
maintenance activities’ must be read in
the context of the other CJDs which contain specific repair functions, whereas
CJD does not. The cable jointing function is in the context of a role which
is primarily concerned with construction, not fault finding
and rectification.
Mr Jayawardana performs highly skilled cable jointing, he also performs, as part
of his Repair and Maintenance Work, fault
finding and testing (utilising
instruments and tools including remotely on the network). He also determines the
method of fault rectification,
which may include identifying spare fibres from a
fibre record database, and may include contributing to a redesign if records are
inaccurate. He also determines the resource requirements to conduct the repair
and undertakes associated administrative work. I consider
Mr Jayawardana’s
Repair and Maintenance Work alone goes beyond the process of ‘highly
skilled cable jointing.’
Jayawardana’s major and substantial employment includes work described by
three of the five typical functions in this CJD,
being highly skilled cable
jointing, hauling cable and pole inspection. His Wideband Work involves building
fibre links in the CAN.
However, his work is not confined to the CAN. He does
not construct physical infrastructure supporting the CAN. His work goes beyond
cable jointing. On both a ‘horizontal’ and ‘vertical’
reading I consider the role described by this CJD bears
little resemblance to Mr
Jayawardana’s major and substantial employment as I have identified it.
Given this, whilst the functions
of highly skilled cable jointing, hauling cable
and pole inspection are indicative of a CFW4 classification, I otherwise do not
that Mr Jayawardana is appropriately classified at CFW4 on the basis of
CFW4 Installer/Repairer and CFW5 Installer/Repairer
light of the above, the correct classification level of Mr Jayawardana’s
major and substantial employment falls to be determined
by having regard to
those matters from the CAN IB CFW4 CJD which indicate a CFW4 classification,
along with a comparison of the CWF4
and CFW5 Installer/Repairer CJDs.
holistic reading of both the Installer/Repairer CFW4 CJD and the
Installer/Repairer CFW5 roles demonstrates that each is a broad-based
focused on installation, repair and maintenance of telecommunication products
and services. This is apparent from: the title
of the roles; the ‘job
purpose – primary role;’ and the list of specific typical functions,
each of which encompass
four subject matters common to each of the
Installer/Repairer CJDs. The span of AQF relativity competencies across cabling,
Telecommunications and CPE further illustrates the breadth of each role,
and the inclusion of typical mandatory cabling qualifications
indicates that
cabling work is encompassed by both CJDs.
regard also to the comparative analysis of the CJDs, it is also apparent that
these two CJDs describe very similar roles. The
common content includes an
identical job purpose – primary role, which is the key statement as to the
scope of the role. The
six accountabilities are also identical. It is the
application of the distinguishing factors between the two CJDs to Mr
Jayawardana’s
major and substantial employment which must ultimately
determine his classification level.
Differences in Job purpose – typical functions generic
are critical differences between the CFW4 and CFW5 job purpose – typical
functions generic statements, relating to whether
firstly, the role requires
‘prescribed diagnostics’ or ‘complex prescribed
diagnostics,’ and secondly whether
the role requires the course of action
to be determined from a ‘limited range’ of solutions or a
‘range of variable’
solutions. Regarding both of these differences,
I find Mr Jayawardana’s work is best described by the CFW5 generic
rather than the CFW4 descriptor, which I consider does not adequately
describe his work.
submitted that Mr Jayawardana has conceded by way of the SOAF that the tools
used to find, fix and test faults takes his work
outside of the notion of
complex prescribed diagnostics and determining a course of action from a range
of variable solutions. I
reject that submission. The SOAF goes no further than
describing many of the functions Mr Jayawardana performs and the types of work
within which he performs them. Further, the SOAF is supplemented by my other
findings as to Mr Jayawardana’s major and substantial
employment.
Prescribed Diagnostics/Complex Diagnostics/Very Complex
Diagnostics
parties agreed that ‘prescribed diagnostics’ refers to standard
diagnostics used for a particular task. In respect
of the diagnostic task
required to be performed in his Repair and Maintenance Work, Mr Jayawardana
submitted that his fault-finding
and diagnosis work involved complex or very
complex diagnostics. Telstra submitted that Mr Jayawardana does not use complex
diagnostics
but rather a limited range of automated easy-to-use diagnostic
tools. Telstra accepted that the diagnostic process is more complicated
pressing a button, but submitted that as the skills are able to be taught over a
five day course with two day certification,
this reflects a lower level of
complexity. Further, Telstra submitted that complex diagnostic tools for fibre
optic cable do exist,
but Mr Jayawardana does not work with such tools.
consider the diagnostic task Mr Jayawardana performs constitutes
‘prescribed diagnostics’ insofar as he utilises prescribed
undertake a prescribed function. However to my mind, the manner in which he is
required to undertake the diagnostic task
includes complexity beyond merely
‘prescribed diagnostics’. The task includes: the cross-referencing
of information utilising
different tools to determine the physical location of
the fault; manual input; experience; and an element of judgment on Mr
Jayawardana’s
part in diagnosing the fibre event depicted by the
of a diagnostic task is obviously a relative concept. In reaching this view, I
have had regard to the evidence of the more
complex diagnostic tools utilised by
CFW7 employees.
I consider the
use of these diagnostic tools falls within the descriptor ‘very
complex’. This sets a benchmark by which
to determine the degrees of
complexity in the lower two classifications.
relied on the duration of training provided to submit that the diagnostic
function must not be complex. Accepting the diagnostic
skills may be taught in
the timeframes referred to by Telstra, this is supplemented by informal on the
job training, which Mr Jayawardana
provides to other employees including CFW5
employees. Whilst I accept this reflects a lower level of complexity than that
which applies
to the CFW7 CJD, it does not in my view equate to an absence of
complexity in the context of the three classifications and ascending
complexity.
have had regard to the evidence as to the work of the CFW5 DFST technicians in
considering this issue. There was no direct evidence
or submissions as to any
complex prescribed diagnostics they undertake. I envisage that their resolution
of design and scope issues
may involve complex prescribed diagnostics. However,
this is undertaken through liaison with Service Delivery Leads, and the evidence
did not establish what function the CFW5 employees perform or how it in
substance differed to Mr Jayawardana’s contribution
to resolving design
issues in his country fault work and Project Work. Nor was there any evidence
that the DFST technicians undertake
complex programming of services and networks
in the field. The parties agreed that ‘programming of services and
refers to configuring equipment. Based on the evidence as to the
duties of the DFTS technicians, they do not configure equipment.
Rather, the
SOAF states that DFST technicians activate equipment by making bookings through
another team accountable for activating
the service. Further, the Telstra
witnesses acknowledged that the absence of a design plan for fault repair work
contributes to its
complexity.
Range of solutions
Jayawardana submitted that the Repair and Maintenance work requires him to
consider a number of solutions which must be assessed
based on a number of
variable factors. These include: the need to conduct the repair within time
limits; the extent of the effect
of the outage on customers; the impact of the
fault on the integrity of the network; whether it is on live or dead fibre;
additional staff are required and their availability; whether a
temporary or permanent repair is required and whether a repair can
be delayed;
the need for civil works; and the creation of work orders. Further, the capacity
for very large disruptions arising from
one cable fault is a variable which
affects the course of action. He also has to liaise with others such as staff
assisting and coordinating
as to expected progress and time of completion.
submitted that to the extent that Mr Jayawardana’s work requires him to
make decisions, he has to select from only a
limited range of solutions not a
variable range of solutions. The task is to fix the cable. Whilst there are
options, like splicing
or patching, this is not a role captured by CFW5. Mr
Jayawardana undertakes a methodical approach to problem-solving, but this does
not require him to bring to bear a broad range of discretionary
considerations.
analysis focused on the mechanical options for fixing a fibre fault available to
Mr Jayawardana. I conclude that the
range of mechanical options are not properly
described as a ‘limited range’. The range of options spans from the
straightening of a kink or performing a splice of a single fibre through
to replacing a section of damaged fibre or fibres within
a cable, changing the
services on damaged fibre or fibres to other spare fibre or replacing a whole
cable. Determining which solution
to apply may vary based on whether spare
fibres can be identified using a fibre record database and a handheld fibre
identifier.
Determining whether to implement a temporary solution may vary
depending on the extent of damage and the capacity to perform a cutover
implement a permanent solution.
as I have found, Mr Jayawardana’s role goes beyond simply fixing the cable
in that he manages the fault rectification
process for the full range of fibre
faults across the network. This includes major faults, and country faults.
Telstra submitted
that there is no difference in the complexity of the work
required between ordinary fault work and work to rectify major faults and
country faults. However, I conclude that the context of a fault is relevant to
the range of solutions to be considered. As I have
found, Telstra itself
distinguishes between faults based on their severity in its internal processes.
Further, Mr Jayawardana is
required to complete fault work urgently, where
possible within the timeframes contained in the service level agreements, in
of the customer disruption associated with a fault. Whilst the SOAF makes
clear that the same typical process applies, the focus
on the physical steps of
the process required to rectify a cable fault does not account for variability
arising from associated work
which I have found Mr Jayawardana undertakes,
including assessing staff and contractor requirements, identifying inaccurate
records and assisting with the redesign of a fibre route.
relevant question is whether there are a ‘limited range’ or a
‘range of variable’ solutions. I conclude
that the range of
considerations and options available to Mr Jayawardana in determining and
implementing the solutions for a fibre
fault is not a ‘limited
range’ of solutions, and I find that the range of solutions Mr Jayawardana
is required to consider
is variable based on the contextual matters and
associated work described above.
the three descriptors, I conclude that only the CFW7 CJD envisages a broad range
of discretionary considerations, through the term
variable solutions.’ I consider this description to go beyond what Mr
Jayawardana is required to implement. This description
is more fitting for the
considerations undertaken by Mr De Blasio in the course of exercising the wide
range of functions of his
coordinator role.
have also had regard to the work of the CFW5 DFST technicians in considering
this question. The evidence and submissions did not
directly address how their
work involves determining a course of action from a range of variable solutions.
I envisage that this
may arise in the course of prioritising work across
multiple orders, or stakeholder management, or in resolving design or scope
However, there is nothing in the evidence to distinguish the work of
these CFW5 technicians such that the matters I have identified
in respect of Mr
Jayawardana’s work amount by comparison to a limited range of solutions.
Repair and Maintenance Functions
relevant descriptors of the typical functions relating to repair and maintenance
are, for CFW4, ‘Repair and Maintenance
of the Customer Access Network
...’ and for CFW5 ‘Repair of complex and difficult CAN transmission
and interexchange
network faults (
).’ The parties’
submissions were made on the basis that each was capable of applying to fibre
optic cable faults, but
Telstra submitted that the CFW4 descriptor applies
whereas Mr Jayawardana submitted that the CFW5 descriptor applies.
submitted that the Installer/Repairer CFW4 classification extends to repair and
maintenance work on the IEN, notwithstanding
that the typical function refers
only to the CAN, on the basis of the broad description of the job purpose,
because the typical functions
do not exclusively describe the functions of the
role, and because the other typical functions extend beyond the CAN, such as the
reference to ‘diagnostic and programming of service and networks in the
field’ and ‘board changes’ referring
to exchange-based work.
Mr Jayawardana submitted that because the CJD does not refer specifically to the
IEN, it does not extend
to work on the IEN, whereas the Installer/Repairer CFW5
function extends to the IEN.
contrast to the CAN Infrastructure Build CJD, there is no overriding restriction
present in the CFW4 CJD job purpose – primary
role which confines it to
work on the CAN. It applies to ‘the full range of (relevant) functions
associated to telecommunications
products and services.’ Accordingly, I
consider this CJD is not confined to the CAN and extends to work across the
including the IEN. In addition, whilst it does not directly refer to the
IEN in the typical functions, those functions are not limited
to the CAN and in
any event are not an exclusive statement of the work of the role. However,
despite this, there is a clear restriction
in the text of the typical function
relating to repair and maintenance which confines it to the CAN. I consider that
this restriction
must be given some meaning in a context where: firstly, none of
the other typical functions include the restriction; secondly, the
work covered
by the other CFW4 CJD is limited to the CAN; and thirdly, given the distinction
made in the 2022 Agreement description
of the CFW workstream. Having regard to
these contextual factors, so far as repair and maintenance of the network is
concerned, I
conclude that the typical function of the CFW4 Installer/Repairer
role describes work on the CAN.
CFW5 CJD, in contrast, clearly applies to both the CAN and the IEN, as it
specifically refers to both. However, it applies to
repair of ‘complex and
difficult CAN transmission and interexchange network faults (
Telstra submitted that ‘ESD’ is generally reflective of complexity,
and there was no evidence Mr Jayawardana
was called in to
‘troubleshoot’ difficult faults. Mr Jayawardana submitted that the
evidence demonstrates he works on
complex faults.
are two ways of reading the CFW5 typical function. On a proper grammatical
reading, the qualifier ‘complex and difficult’
applies to faults on
both the CAN and IEN. However, the CAN Infrastructure Build CFW4 is confined to
work on the CAN, and the repair
and maintenance typical function of
Installer/Repairer CFW4 also describes work on the CAN. Accordingly, for the
first time ascending
up the classifications, repair of the IEN appears expressly
as a typical function in the CFW5 CJD. Given this context, the alternative,
grammatically incorrect, reading of the CFW5 typical function is that it applies
to complex and difficult faults on the CAN (thus
distinguishing it from the CFW4
repair and maintenance functions), as well as faults on the IEN (not qualified
by ‘complex
and difficult’). I consider on balance that this is the
better interpretation. Otherwise, none of the CJDs expressly contain
non-complex
repair work on the IEN as a typical function. I consider this interpretation
best applies the purposive approach to interpretation
referred to in the extract
recognising the
practical expression of intention by the industrial parties rather than careful
drafting. If this interpretation
is correct, I consider it clear that Mr
Jayawardana’s fault repair work is best described by the CFW5 descriptor
and not adequately
described by the CFW4 descriptor, because his repair work
extends beyond the CAN and includes the IEN.
even if the alternative, grammatically correct reading of the CFW5 typical
function is adopted, I conclude that Mr Jayawardana’s
role requires him
to repair complex and difficult CAN transmission and interexchange network
faults, as described in the CFW5 CJD.
I have found that major fault work and
country fault work are part of Mr Jayawardana’s major and substantial
employment. Mr
Jayawardana is allocated country work because he is a more
experienced splicer than country technicians, and additional difficulties
with country work arise due to inaccurate records, assisting with redesign and
working with older and difficult cables, which
add complexity. Major faults are
escalated within Telstra due to their severity, may involve disruption to large
numbers of customers
and are more urgent. As far as possible faults must be
repaired within the applicable time frames. On the evidence before me, based
the factors I have identified, I find that these are the most complex fibre
optic cable faults, and Mr Jayawardana (and the MFT)
are responsible for
rectifying them.
assessing the complexity of faults, I again have had regard to the relative
ascending complexity in the CJDs. The CFW7 repair and
maintenance function is
clearly set apart from the equivalent functions in the other CJDs by its
reference to ‘highly specialist’
and ‘complete’ repair
and maintenance of network and service affecting faults. Despite the absence of
evidence of more
complex fibre optic cable faults than those referred to above,
I nonetheless conclude that the work undertaken by Mr Jayawardana
and the MFT
falls short of the description of ‘highly specialist.’
Other typical functions
conclude that two of three additional ‘typical functions’ specified
in each of the CFW4 and CFW5 CJDs Installer/Repairer
CJD (relating to the
subject matters of small and large Pair Gain Systems/Customer Radio and
non-network interference and network
interference work involving switches and
transmission) are not relevant to determining Mr Jayawardana’s
classification as they
primarily relate to the copper network. The evidence does
not demonstrate how they translate to the fibre network and Mr Jayawardana
not perform work of the nature described in either CJD.
find that Mr Jayawardana’s work cleaning payphones is encompassed by the
remaining typical function in the CFW4 Installer/Repairer
role. I find that his
work installing exchange cards is encompassed by the remaining typical function
in the CFW5 Installer/Repairer
Desirable experience and attributes
conclude in respect of items (a) to (e) in paragraph
above that Mr Jayawardana meets the
more onerous requirements of the CFW5 descriptor. I take account of: his
performance reviews
from his managers; his capacity to take charge of a job when
he is paired with another CFW5 employee; his informal on the job training
supervision of less experienced technicians; and Mr De Blasio’s assessment
of his work. The years of experience described
in paragraph
(c) relate to an employee at the top of
the level. As at 30 January 2019, Mr Jayawardana had six years’ experience
the FMG in the MFT and I am satisfied accordingly had the requisite
experience working in the functional area of repair and maintenance
network, including repair of faults on the CAN and IEN, prior to the period to
which his claim relates. As to paragraph
(f), the evidence does not establish
what a ‘data product’ or ‘basic data product’ is, and I
have accordingly
not had regard to it.
General complexity of the work
submitted that the CJDs demonstrate a relative increase in complexity, and that
the Court should have regard to this general
notion of complexity
notwithstanding that many specific aspects of the CJDs largely describe the
copper network. Mr Jayawardana did
not dispute this approach. I conclude that it
is necessary to have regard to general notions of complexity in considering the
applicable to Mr Jayawardana.
submitted that the work of the CFW5 DFST technicians is more complex than Mr
Jayawardana’s role, meaning Mr Jayawardana
is appropriately classified at
CFW4. Telstra submitted that the complexity of the DFST technician’s role
arises from the number
of responsibilities and complexities in effecting a fibre
link, such as the range of work, the number of orders being managed at
and design and scope issues. Mr Jayawardana submitted that the DFST technicians
are doing the same or no more complex work
than the Fibre Maintenance work he
undertakes, noting the potentially wide customer impact of Mr
Jayawardana’s fault repair
work and the consequent skills he requires
being at a higher level.
have found that the Wideband Work and the Project Work of the MFT is no more
complex than the Repair and Maintenance Work, however
the addition of
qualitatively different tasks associated with performing all three types of work
adds complexity to Mr Jayawardana’s
role. I have also found that the
Wideband Work of the DFST is more complex than the Wideband Work of the MFT.
assessing complexity in this general sense requires an assessment of Mr
Jayawardana’s major and substantial employment
as a whole, compared to the
work of other employees within the CFW classification structure. I have already
found that there are
no distinguishing features, therefore no greater complexity
between the work performed by the CFW5 employees in the FMG and Mr Jayawardana,
and that the most complex work within that team is performed by CFW5 employees.
other relevant comparison available on the evidence is with the CFW5 DFST
technicians. The FST perform most of the Wideband Work.
Wideband Work (in the
context of the MFT undertaking it) is described as the building of a fibre link
from point A to point B following
a given path, in accordance with a design,
involving the same cabling tasks as the repair and maintenance work (hauling,
and splicing fibre). It was agreed that DFST technicians ‘complete
the required physical work’ on each order. I understand
this to mean that
DFST technicians undertake the cabling work to construct the wideband links on
the services for which they are
responsible. Accepting that external contractors
are used for hauling cable beyond 120 metres in length, and MFT technicians are
used for 5 of 40 service types, I infer that DFST technicians perform the
remaining cabling work. There was no evidence that the
cabling work performed by
DFST technicians is any more complex than the cabling work undertaken by Mr
Jayawardana. The evidence as
to the more complex work of DFST technicians
focused on the tasks DFST technicians perform additional to cabling work.
cabling work, I have found that additional complexities of a DFST technician
role compared to Mr Jayawardana’s role include:
being responsible for
multiple orders at a time; being responsible for work across a greater range of
service types; liaising directly
with customers; liaising directly with service
delivery leads and participating more significantly in the design process; and
coordination
of secure site inductions.
I was not satisfied that compliance with design standards by DFST technicians
involves more complexity than Mr Jayawardana’s
work in building a Wideband
link in compliance with a design. I am similarly not satisfied of this in
respect of Mr Jayawardana’s
compliance with designs in his Project Work.
it is the case that DFST technicians are required to make IPMAN/SMNG bookings
and use the Ideal system and Mr Jayawardana is
not, there is no evidence that
the booking systems used by the DFST to arrange activation of the equipment by
another team are any
more complex than the systems Mr Jayawardana uses to book
the activation of customer equipment he installs. Also, whilst Mr Jayawardana
does not himself activate equipment, the SOAF states that DFST technicians
activate equipment by making bookings through another
team accountable for
activating the service, and I find accordingly that DFST technicians similarly
do not activate equipment.
is unclear what is meant by DFST technicians ‘optimising resources,’
‘managing resources’ and ‘consolidating
infrastructure’
or by Mr Cooper’s evidence that DFST technicians ‘organise support
between themselves.’ The
evidence does not establish in what way this is
qualitatively different to the work Mr Jayawardana does in ascertaining the
requirements for a fault repair. Further, accepting DFST technicians
are required to engage with each other and various other groups
in performing
their work, I am not satisfied there is any greater complexity in this
engagement than Mr Jayawardana’s engagement
with other technicians and
groups in his fault repair work.
have accepted that for DFST technicians, performing work across 40 service types
adds to the complexity of the role. Mr Jayawardana
performs, or has performed,
work across the functional areas of Repair and Maintenance Work, Project Work,
Wideband Work and APOC
Work. I have found that working across functions beyond
Repair and Maintenance Work involves the utilisation of qualitatively different
skills by Mr Jayawardana, including installation and arranging of activation of
CPE, following design plans, participating in required
redesigns and voluminous
data entry. In addition, his APOC work involves the qualitatively different
the effect of Mr Cooper and Mr De Blasio’s evidence that the Wideband Work
of the MFT was less complex than its Repair
and Maintenance Work involved a
concession that the absence of a design plan for fault repair work, and the time
sensitivity required
to complete fault repair work in light of the customer
impact are factors which contribute to the complexity of the Repair and
Maintenance
Work undertaken by Mr Jayawardana. Based on this evidence, I find
that the following matters, which are not features of the work
technician, contribute to the complexity of Mr Jayawardana’s role:
(a) Locating and diagnosing the nature of the fibre
(b) Identifying and executing the plan to rectify the
fault, in the absence of a design plan; and
(c) The customer impact and thus time sensitivity
required to complete the fault work.
addition, I find that Mr Jayawardana’s APOC function, including the
allocation of work to other technicians and the administrative
work associated
with doing so, as well as the requirement that Mr Jayawardana undertake country
work which existing ‘generalist’
technicians are not able to
perform, contribute to the complexity of Mr Jayawardana’s role and are
not features of the DFST
technicians’ role.
I find on Mr Considine’s evidence that there are three wideband
coordinators who manage the DFST work, from which I
infer that the CFW5 DFST
technicians’ work is coordinated, as Mr De Blasio coordinates the work of
the MFT technicians. Considering
this and each of the above matters, I accept
there are some aspects of the DFST technicians’ role that are more complex
Mr Jayawardana’s role. However, there are also some aspects of Mr
Jayawardana’s role that are more complex than the work
technician. I conclude, based on the analysis above, that there is no
significant material difference between the two.
any event, whilst I accept general complexity is a relevant consideration, it
cannot displace the need to give effect to the text
of the CJDs, to the extent
that text remains relevant to the work being performed by CFW technicians in
light of the changed technology.
Beyond considerations of general complexity,
neither party undertook an analysis of how the work of the DFST technicians
corresponds
with the roles described in the CJDs. I have considered this
question in respect of the diagnostic process and range of solutions
involved in
each respective role. I have not undertaken a detailed analysis beyond that,
given both parties accepted that DFST technicians
are appropriately classified
as CFW5. However, in the absence of the parties having addressed this issue, I
am not satisfied that
a textual analysis of the CFW5 CJD would provide any
better or worse basis for DFST technicians to be classified at that level than
Mr Jayawardana.
summary, Mr Jayawardana’s highly skilled optic fibre cable jointing on the
CAN, hauling work on the CAN, pole inspection
work, payphone cleaning work and
his work on single line services to customer premises are indicative of a CFW4
classification. The
AQF relativities in the CJDs also indicate that a CFW4
classification is applicable, however for the reasons identified above, I
given this aspect of the CJDs less weight than others.
However, the remaining considerations are indicative that a CFW5 classification
applies. In particular, I have found that:
(a) Mr Jayawardana undertakes complex prescribed
diagnostics in his fault repair work, consistent with the ‘job purpose
typical functions’ generic statement for the CFW5
Installer/Repairer CJD;
(b) Mr Jayawardana is required in his fault work to
determine a course of action from a range of variable solutions, consistent with
the ‘job purpose – typical functions’ generic statement for
the CFW5 Installer/Repairer CJD;
(c) Mr Jayawardana undertakes Repair and Maintenance
Work across all parts of the network, including the IEN, whereas the CAN IB CFW4
CJD is confined to work on the CAN, and the repair and maintenance function of
the CFW4 Installer/Repairer CJD describes work on
(d) Mr Jayawardana’s repair and maintenance work
on the IEN meets the description in the CFW5 Installer/Repairer CJD in that
Jayawardana performs this work on the IEN and he undertakes work on complex and
difficult faults;
(e) Mr Jayawardana installs exchange cards, consistent
with the CFW5 Installer/Repairer CJD typical function;
(f) Mr Jayawardana has over six years of relevant
experience, and has the proficiency, technical skills, logistical skills and
organisation described in the ‘qualifications/experience level
– desirable’ criteria for the CFW5 Installer/Repairer
(g) Regarding the general complexity of Mr
Jayawardana’s role, he does not perform any less complex work than any
CFW5 employee
in the FMG, and the most complex work in that team is performed by
CFW5 employees. Further, the general complexity of Mr Jayawardana’s
as a whole is not materially different to the general complexity of the DFST
technician role as a whole, which both parties
accept is appropriately
classified at level CFW5.
these reasons, I conclude that on the balance of probabilities, Mr Jayawardana
is properly classified as level CFW5 under the
2022 Agreement. I find Mr
Jayawardana’s major and substantial employment is not appropriately
described by the CFW4 CJDs and
is accordingly he is not appropriately classified
at level CFW4.
conclusion is based largely on Mr Jayawardana’s Repair and Maintenance
Work, as is apparent from the summary above. However,
it is also based in part
on Mr Jayawardana’s APOC Work, with the additional functions that entails
contributing to the complexity
of his role. It is also based in part on Mr
Jayawardana’s personal characteristics, including his years of experience
of competency.
conclusion is also based in part on the increased breadth of Mr
Jayawardana’s role from mid-2021 onwards. In particular:
(a) In Mr Jayawardana’s Project Work, the
installation of Exchange Cards, and the functions of working to a design plan,
contributing
to redesign and populating workbooks contribute to the general
complexity of his role.
(b) In Mr Jayawardana’s Wideband Work, the
additional function of installing customer equipment and arranging activation
contributes
to the general complexity of his role.
omitting considerations relating to Mr Jayawardana’s Project Work and
Wideband Work (and the corresponding counter-considerations
in respect of his
General Inspection Work as to the applicability of the CFW4 classification) I
nonetheless reach the same conclusion,
on balance, that prior to mid-2021, Mr
Jayawardana was not appropriately classified at level CFW4 and should have been
at level CFW5. That conclusion is based on the matters referred to
above regarding Mr Jayawardana’s Repair and Maintenance
Work, APOC Work
and his personal characteristics. Accordingly, I conclude that Mr Jayawardana
was entitled to be classified at CFW5
for the full relevant period to which his
claim relates.
is evident from this decision that the exercise of determining Mr
Jayawardana’s correct classification in the context of
changed technology
has been far from straightforward. It has required extensive analysis of both
historic and current functions.
It has required careful consideration of a range
of opposing and sometimes contradictory submissions in order to determine,
what the CJDs meant at the time they were written, and, secondly, to
arrive at a technology-appropriate and internally consistent
approach to
interpreting the CJDs some 22 years later. It must be observed that complexity
of this nature is hardly beneficial for
either Telstra or the employees to which
the CJDs apply. For completeness I note that the 2022 Agreement contains both a
process for designing new CJDs and robust dispute resolution
procedures. Each of these processes would potentially facilitate not
resolution of classification disputes but the development of new, agreed
approaches which could address this undesirable
complexity to the benefit of
both parties in future agreements.
parties are directed to confer and seek to agree on:
(a) A form of orders giving effect to this decision;
(b) directions in respect of the determination of the
Plaintiff’s claims for pecuniary penalties.
4pm on 25 October 2024:
(a) The Plaintiff is to file any agreed form of order
and/or directions; or
(b) In the absence of agreement, each party is to file
and serve their proposed form of orders and/or directions.
the absence of agreement between the parties, the matter will be listed for
directions on 6 November 2024.
Appendix 1 — comparison
of the text of the relevant Core Job Descriptions
CFW 4 Installer/Repairer
CFW 5 Installer/Repairer
CFW 7 Installer / Repairer
CFW 4 CAN Infrastructure Build
1. Primary Role ...
Without immediate supervision or direction undertake the full range of end
to end installation, repair and maintenance functions associated
telecommunications products and services, to meet customers [sic] expectations
and service commitments and maximise network profitability
and revenue.
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
1. Primary Role ...
Without immediate supervision or direction undertake
end to end installation, repair and
maintenance functions associated to t
he range of complex
telecommunications products and services, to meet customers [sic] expectations
and service commitments and maximise network profitability
and revenue.
1. Primary Role...
Without immediate supervision or direction undertake the full range of
end to end installation, repair
and maintenance
associated to telecommunications
products and services
construction, provisioning &
Maintenance activities in the
telecommunications Customer
Access Network
, to meet customers [sic] expectations and service
commitments and maximise network profitability
and revenue.
2. Typical Functions
Typically an individual performing this role would be required to undertake
prescribed diagnostics and programming of services and
networks in the field and
determine the course of action from a limited range of solutions.
2. Typical Functions
Typically an individual performing this role would be required to undertake
prescribed diagnostics and programming of services and networks
in the field and determine the course of action from a
2. Typical Functions
Typically an individual performing this role would be required to undertake
very complex
diagnostics and programming of
services and networks in the field and determine the course of action from a
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
shows relevant material differences from the CFW 4 Installer/Repairer.
Immaterial or minor differences in wording (such as
re- ordering of the same
wording within a sentence or paragraph) are not tracked.
CFW 4 Installer/Repairer
CFW 5 Installer/Repairer
CFW 7 Installer / Repairer
CFW 4 CAN Infrastructure Build
Typical functions could include, but not exclusive to:
[items in the list re-ordered to line-up equivalent items across the four
Maintenance of the Customer Access Network including Cable TV.
complex and difficult CAN transmission and inter- exchange network faults
[No direct equivalent]
[No direct equivalent]
Maintenance of Simplex Products & Services (eg. single line services,
OnRamp, basic Data, public Payphones & associated
products i.e.: TOPS,
[No direct equivalent]
[No direct equivalent]
[No direct equivalent]
Installation or
Repair of Complex CPE Products and Cabling (eg. PABX, SBS, Data & Special
Services, Mobiles, Media & Broadcast
Services, associated MDF
activities).
Installation and
Repair of Complex CPE products and cabling (eg. PABX, SBS, Data & Special
Services, Mobiles, Media & Broadcast
services, associated
Exchange work
complex repair of CPE (eg. PABX, Data, Media, & Broadcast services,
associated Exchange elements). [sic] and/or CPE
related networks
[No direct equivalent]
Installation
& Repair of Fixed
Radio Access/Small Pair Gain Systems.
Maintenance of Large Pair Gain Systems {eg. RIM, DRCS & Customer
[No direct equivalent]
[No direct equivalent]
CFW 4 Installer/Repairer
CFW 5 Installer/Repairer
CFW 7 Installer / Repairer
CFW 4 CAN Infrastructure Build
Non-Network
Interference work on Switches & Transmission (eg. Alarm resets, board
changes under GOC direction, line conditioning
and testing).
Maintenance of potential Network interference and service affecting Faults and
Isolations associated to Switches and Transmission
Systems (eg. Special service
jumpering, fault rectification and hazardous board replacement under direction
from GOC, RIM , RCM Faults,
specialist complete Repair and Maintenance of Network and Service affecting
Faults and Isolations associated with Switches
and Transmission activities. (eg.
difficult and complex fault rectification, outage recovery, complex switch fault
rectification,
DRCS, RIM, S12, AXE and Customer Radio).
[No direct equivalent]
[No direct equivalent]
Install and
Replace Exchange Cards.
[No direct equivalent]
[No direct equivalent]
[No direct equivalent]
[No direct equivalent]
[No direct equivalent]
Highly skilled
Cable Jointing (eg. Complex Cable Jointing, Fibre Optic Jointing).
Complex CPAS
(eg. Installation and Repair of APCAMS).
Party Leader up
to 9 Staff undertaking Pit, Pipe, Conduit, Cable or Service Installation, or
Party Leader of a small team undertaking
Directional Boring (ie > 10 ,000 Lbs
force ), Large Mole Plough, Complex Hauling etc.
Large Pair Gain
Installation (eg . RIM, DRCS, Customer Radio).
CFW 4 Installer/Repairer
CFW 5 Installer/Repairer
CFW 7 Installer / Repairer
CFW 4 CAN Infrastructure Build
ACCOUNTABILITIES (Primary business outputs set for job) ...
faultless end to end fault rectification and installations to the full
satisfaction of customers [sic] expectations;
compliance to
prescribed standards, practices and
Through correct
and proficient utilisation of instruments and tools from remote points within
the network.
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
faultless end to end fault rectification and installations to the full
satisfaction of customers [sic] expectations.
Compliance to
practices and procedures
Through correct
utilisation of instruments and
tools from remote points within the network.
faultless end to end
fault rectification and
installations
construction,
provisioning &
Maintenance of
the customer access network
and associated
infrastructure
through compliance to prescribed standards, practices and
procedures, and to the full satisfaction of customers [sic] expectations.
correct and
proficient utilisation
instruments and tools from
remote points
planned activities associated to infrastructure maintenance and upgrades within
given time lines.
compliance to prescribed standards, practices and procedures
Through correct
and proficient utilisation of instruments and tools from remote points within
the network.
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
complex routine
activities associated to
infrastructure, maintenance and upgrades, within given
time lines.
Compliance to
practices and procedures
Through correct
utilisation of instruments and
tools from remote points within
the network.
Undertake planned activities associated to infrastructure maintenance
and upgrades within given time lines, through compliance to
standards, practices and procedures within given time lines.
correct and
proficient utilisation
instruments and tools from
remote points
CFW 4 Installer/Repairer
CFW 5 Installer/Repairer
CFW 7 Installer / Repairer
CFW 4 CAN Infrastructure Build
3. Ensure customer delight by constant interaction with the customer to
confirm requirements, inform of progress and confirm the agreed
requirements are
met upon completion.
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
4. Contribute to personal and public image by compliance with all relevant
policies, practices and regulations in an effective and
responsible
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
5. Contribute to the company's financial well being by the timely and
accurate capturing and recording of all relevant cost, time
and revenue data,
along with seeking opportunities to grow revenue
and reduce costs.
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
6. Contribute to the effective resource and workforce deployment through
compliance to Work Management Centre business rules and performance
expectations.
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
CFW 4 Installer/Repairer
CFW 5 Installer/Repairer
CFW 7 Installer / Repairer
CFW 4 CAN Infrastructure Build
QUALIFICATIONS - MANDATORY
(No person to occupy job without this)
An employee will be required to possess/obtain and maintain the relevant
and applicable licences to performing this function as deemed
mandatory by
regulatory and legal authorities and posses/obtain [sic] and maintain a drivers
[sic] licence. Typical Applicable Licence
could be AUSTEL BCL/CATS cabling
licence Where a mandatory licence is required to perform a particular job
function it will be specified
on the individual job description statement (i.e.;
[sic] Riggers Ticket, Articulated Truck Licence, Austel
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer except that BCL/CATS is removed as a
typical applicable licence]
[Same as CFW 5 Installer/Repairer]
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer except that BCL/CATS is removed as a
typical applicable licence and Heavy Machinery Operators [sic]
Licence is added
CFW 4 Installer/Repairer
CFW 5 Installer/Repairer
CFW 7 Installer / Repairer
CFW 4 CAN Infrastructure Build
QUALIFICATIONS/EXPERIENCE LEVEL - DESIRABLE
employee at the top end of this level will demonstrate a high level of
procedural and systematic proficiency in performing those
functions and would be
required to apply well developed broad technical skills, would typically, but
not restricted to, having a
minimum of four years relevant experience in at
least one of the relevant functional areas defined in the job role and posses
the following attributes; [sic]
determining job planning
First level
leadership skills to lead a small team on site
organisation & high level of self motivation
Able to Operate
Screen Based Equipment
Possess a sound
knowledge of voice/basic data products.
employee at the top end of this level will demonstrate a
of procedural and systematic proficiency in performing those functions and would
be required to apply
well developed broad technical skills and
would, typically, but not be restricted to, having a minimum of
years relevant experience in at least one of the relevant
functional areas defined in the job role and posses [sic] the following
attributes; [sic]
skills for determining job
level leadership skills to
lead a small team on
personal organisation & high level of self motivation
Able to Operate
Screen Based Equipment
Possess a sound
data products.
[Same as CFW 5 Installer/Repairer]
An employee
at the top end of
entering into
level would be required to apply well developed broad technical
organisation
skills and typically, but not restricted to, have a minimum
of four years relevant experience in at least one of the relevant functional
areas defined in the job role and posses [sic] the following attributes;
determining job planning
organisation & high level of self motivation
Able to Operate
Screen Based Equipment
First level
Leadership skill to Lead a small Team on site
A high level of
procedural and systematic proficiency in performing those functions.
a sound knowledge
of voice/basic data
CFW 4 Installer/Repairer
CFW 5 Installer/Repairer
CFW 7 Installer / Repairer
CFW 4 CAN Infrastructure Build
2. An occupant performing at this level is a front line ambassador for
Telstra and will require the individual to present the highest
level of customer
service behaviours possible, to take ownership and show initiative in the
resolution of customer related issues
the provision of service.
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
3. The Employee will be required to show a high level of initiative as a
fundamental requirement in the delivery of service to customers
and to operate
dependently [sic].
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
[Same as CFW 4 Installer/Repairer]
A person who is assessed as fully competent at this work level and across
all work functions performed in this position analysis,
would be eligible to
attain the following Australian Qualifications Framework Competencies and/or
certificates.
[items in the list re-ordered to line-up equivalent items across the four
3 of the required 7 competencies for AQF2, Certificate ii (Cabling)
[No direct equivalent]
[No direct equivalent]
7 of the required 7 competencies for AQF2, Certificate ii (Cabling)
4 of the required 6 competencies for AQF3, Certificate iii (Cabling)
1 of the required 5 competencies for AQF4, Certificate iv (Cabling)
2 of the required 6 competencies for AQF3, Certificate iii (CAN)
3 of the required 5 competencies for AQF4, Certificate iv (CAN)
[Same as CFW 5 Installer/Repairer]
6 of the required 6 competencies for AQF3, Certificate iii (CAN)
CFW 4 Installer/Repairer
CFW 5 Installer/Repairer
CFW 7 Installer / Repairer
CFW 4 CAN Infrastructure Build
1 of the required 6 competencies for AQF3, Certificate iii
(Telecommunications)
2 of the required 5 competencies for AQF4, Certificate iv
(Telecommunications)
[Same as CFW 5 Installer/Repairer]
[No direct equivalent]
4 of the required 6 competencies for AQF3, Certificate iii (CPE)
1 of the required 4 competencies for AQF5, Diploma In (CPE)
4 of the required 5 competencies
for AQF4, Certificate iv (CPE)
[Same as CFW 5 Installer/Repairer]
[No direct equivalent]
Mr Jayawardana was employed by
Telstra Corporation Ltd until 8 December 2022, with his employment transfer to
Telstra constituting
a transfer of business under the
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) and all liabilities of Telstra Corporation Ltd transferred to Telstra.
Both entities are referred to as ‘Telstra’
in this decision.
of the Act provides
that a person must not contravene a term of an enterprise agreement.
Section 539
of the Act provides that
is a civil remedy provision.
Section 545(3)
applies in respect of an amount required to be paid by an employer under the Act
or Fair Work Instrument, and the employer has contravened
a civil remedy
provision by failing to pay the amount.
2022 Agreement, s 14,
Dictionary.
2022 Agreement, cl 7, Appendix
B. B2.1 contains the minimum fixed remuneration rates which apply to Mr
Jayawardana, as a Workstream
Employee who is not a member of a defined benefits
fund. It contains rates for Workstream Bands 1- 12.
2022 Agreement, s 14,
Dictionary.
2022 Agreement, s 14,
Dictionary.
[2017] FWCFB 3005
(2017) 268 IR 285
[2017] FWCFB 3005.
Ibid, [114].
[2019] FCA 1762
[22] (Appeal dismissed
Thiess Pty Ltd v Sheehan
[2019] FCAFC 198).
[2023] FCAFC 66
(2023) 324 IR 304
[2023] FCAFC 66
, [71]-[72], citing
Sheehan v Thiess Pty Ltd,
Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v KDR Victoria Pty Ltd (t/as
Yarra Trams)
[2021] FCA 1377
, Wheelahan J.
[8]; citing
Workpac v Skene
[2018] FCAFC 131
(2018) 264 FCR 536
; 280 IR 191,
(Tracey, Bromberg and Rangiah JJ).
(2018) FCCA 45.
Ibid, [12]-[14], cited in
Michael Watson v Safe Places Community Services Limited
[2020] FWCFB
[2020] FWCFB 2993.
Ibid, [33], citing
Christian Carnes v MSS Security Pty Ltd
[2019] FWC 7695
The ‘Customer Access
Network’ or CAN is the network that connects customer premises to Telstra
exchanges, as distinct
from the ‘Inter Exchange Network’
) which connects exchanges to each other.
The parties agreed that Net
Maps is a database that produces a visual top-down view of Telstra’s
physical assets including
the fibre network, with fibre infrastructure overlayed
A platform for recovery
of damages from parties who damage Telstra cable.
I have considered the
complexity of the work of the DFST more generally below.
Mr Jayawardana abandoned a
submission that his classification should be assessed based on the highest level
of work he performed.
The 2022 Contract also
contains a clause permitting changes to Mr Jayawardana’s role. I have not
considered this to be relevant
to an assessment of the classification of his
current role, as changes made pursuant to that clause may also entail a change
of classification.
As described in
Carnachan Family Trust Pty Ltd
(2018) FCCA 45
, [14]. This does not extend to
work performed by Mr Jayawardana whilst on secondment, which I consider falls
outside the scope of
[1993] VicRp 76
[1993] 2 VR 343
(Brooking J).
[2019] FCA 1762
[2017] FWCFB 3005
(2017) 268 IR 285
[2017] FWCFB 3005
[2018] FCAFC 131
(2018) 264 FCR 536
191, (Tracey, Bromberg and Rangiah JJ).
[2021] FCA 1377
[2020] FWCFB 2993
[2017] FWCFB 3005
(2017) 268 IR 285
[2017] FWCFB 3005
[2019] FCA 1762
(Appeal dismissed
Thiess Pty Ltd v Sheehan
[2019] FCAFC 198).
2022 Agreement, s 14,
Dictionary.
[2020] FWCFB 2993
The programming of services
and networks is referred to in each CJD but is not work undertaken by Mr
Jayawardana.
See Appendix 1.
See paragraph
It was agreed that
‘PABX’ (Private Automatic Branch Exchange) is a mini exchange at
customer premises for an internal
telephone network. ‘Data & Special
Services’ refers to a specialised service on the copper network. MDF (Main
Distribution
Frame) is copper infrastructure which connects equipment to cables,
and may be located at an exchange or customer premises.
See paragraph
There is no equivalent function for the CAN Infrastructure Build CJD.
The CAN Infrastructure
Build CJD is substantively the same as Installer/Repairer CFW4, with some minor
differences which are not
See paragraph
In contrast to the process
for changing the CJDs (by agreement between Telstra and the Telstra Unions)
provided for in the 2002
Agreement at cl C1.2(e).
See further paragraphs
See paragraph
Workpac v Skene
[2018] FCAFC 131
(2018) 264 FCR 536
; 280 IR 191,
(Tracey, Bromberg and
Rangiah JJ).
(2023) 324 IR 304
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.09 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter