URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VRAT/2008/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Collins (GREY) - App 20 07 [2008] VRAT 1 (25 January 2008)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
Appeal Number 20 of 2007
In the matter of an Appeal
MR DAVID COLLINS
Against the conviction and penalty of a four year disqualification by the
Greyhound Racing Victoria Stewards for breaching Greyhound
Australasia Rule 125
JUDGE R.G. WILLIAMS
, His Honour
Mr B. Toner,
Mr I. Vigor, Adviser
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT MELBOURNE ON FRIDAY 25
JANUARY 2008 AT 9.18 A.M.
MR HOYNES appeared on behalf of Greyhound Racing Victoria
MR D. COLLINS appeared on his own behalf.
(His Honour Judge Williams)
D E C I S I O N
HIS HONOUR: We have given the matter due consideration, and I am
grateful for the assistance that my colleagues have given me in
discussions and
in general background understanding of the industry, and the various other
relevant considerations to this appeal.
But in the end the decision is mine and
I am guided, of course, by the fact that Greyhound Racing Victoria is required
the Tribunal on this rehearing on the appropriate standard of proof,
which is the Briginshaw standard of proof, namely a satisfaction
on the balance
of probabilities but taking into account the gravity of the offence and the
significance of any penalty to be imposed
as a guide to the way in which the
evidence and the standard is interpreted.
On the 16 October of
2007, the stewards' hearing in this matter resulted in the appellant, Mr
Collins, being found guilty of a breach
of Rule 125 (1)(q) which states, "Any
person who commits or omits to do any act or engages in conduct which in any way
is detrimental
or prejudicial to the interests, welfare, image, control, or
promotion of greyhound racing shall be guilty of an offence." The conduct
question arose at the Warragul Greyhound Meeting on 4 September 07. Following
Race 3, the appellant's dog was required to be
vetted, and following the
examination in the vet's room at the Warragul course an incident occurred.
The evidence on behalf of the stewards, which was given by the
steward Mr Polson and the vet Dr Bowden indicated that the appellant
with his dog had left the vet's room in an irate frame of mind - in an agitated
frame of mind because he had been told that
the dog was suspected of having an
injury and was subject to a seven day stand down. He had used some bad language
and left the
vet's room with the dog, but after going a short distance he turned
around at something that was said to him by the steward Mr Polson
which turned
out to be words to the effect that he would have to put his dog away in the
kennel after.
Upon hearing this, he turned around and came back
at Mr Polson, who was standing in the doorway of the vet's room, and that he
and deliberately "chested"
Mr Polson, and by that I mean
that he walked straight up to Mr Polson so that they were level with one another
and with a thrust-out
chest he brought about a situation where his chest
step or so back into the vet's room. That is the incident in question. The
steward's evidence indicated it was a deliberate chesting
and Mr Polson
disagreed with any proposition that it was accidental, an accidental brushing.
At that stewards' hearing, Mr Collins, the appellant, had put his
proposition that it was an accidental contact. The contact was
not disputed,
but it was said that it was accidental and it occurred in a brushing past manner
as Mr Collins attempted to return
to the vet's room in order to obtain a
certificate and that there was nothing in it and he had no mal-intent when it
occurred. That
was the issue for the stewards, and the stewards found that the
charge had been made out, found that the incident was deliberate
and imposed a
penalty of four years' disqualification.
It is from that hearing
and that finding that Mr Collins appeals today to the Racing Appeals
Tribunal. This is a rehearing, and
we have heard the evidence again. We have
heard Mr Polson and Dr Bowden again in relation to this incident, and we have
Mr Collins. Mr Polson has again described the incident in
similar fashion to his evidence at the stewards' inquiry. He referred
examination of the dog, and after it was over he referred to the fact that he
was standing at the doorway of the vet's room,
that Mr Collins walked out
of the room with his dog, that Mr Polson said to him, "You'll have to put
the dog away."
By this stage Mr Collins was some three or so
metres away from him whereupon the latter, Mr Collins, has turned and came back
the vet's room, that he was agitated, that he deliberately chested Mr Polson
at the doorway. It was not an attempt to get past him,
it was a deliberate
chesting which forced him back into the vet's room. In his view, it was clearly
not a case of the appellant
simply trying to enter the vet's room. The incident
had caused him to be frightened and shaken, and he remained in that state of
mind for the rest of that day.
Of some significance is the fact
that Mr Polson has further testified that after this incident had occurred there
was no discussion
between himself and Mr Collins about the handing over or
obtaining the whereabouts of any vet's certificate; indeed, the topic was
raised. All that was said by him after the incident was that Mr Collins would
be required to go to the stewards' room, or words
to that effect.
Dr Bowden gave evidence. He repeated the evidence concerning the
examination of the dog. He said that all he saw was a confrontation
between the
two of them at the doorway in which the appellant chested the steward, chested
him and indeed he went on to say after
the chest contact, the appellant actually
stood over the steward Mr Polson. He said he believed Mr Collins still had
the dog with
him, and he said that there was never any request made to him by Mr
Collins for the certificate at that stage or at any stage. In
cross-examination, he was asked for some details about the incident, which way
Mr Collins was going, and he did not know. Which way
Mr Collins was facing and he did not know. Which way
Mr Polson was facing, he did not know.
Mr Collins has given the Tribunal his account. He does not deny that
he was agitated; he does not deny that he was frustrated;
he does not deny that
he was angry. All this arose, he says, because of what he believed to be an
incorrect diagnosis of his dog
after the examination.
He does not
deny swearing because of that state of mind, swearing which was dealt with by
the stewards earlier and is not the subject
of this appeal. He puts a quite
different account to the Tribunal. He says that on being requested by Mr Polson
to take his dog
to the kennels, he in fact took it to the kennels. He left the
vet's room and took it to the kennels, an act which
the evidence reveals would have taken a couple of minutes in all
probability, and that he returned to the vet's room without the
dog and the
reason for him returning was to obtain a certificate because although he does
not have much experience in matters pertaining
to the vet's room or the
stewards, nevertheless he believed that he should get a certificate from the vet
from the vet's room.
And hence he claims that for that reason he
was returning from the kennel area to the vet's room, that Mr Polson was in
the doorway,
that he approached him thinking that he would move to the side,
that Mr Polson did in fact move a bit to the side but unfortunately
Mr Collins says he moved the same way and there was accidental and slight
brushing type contact as Mr Collins tried to enter the
vet's room. He says that
that was all there was to it, and in fact there was nothing deliberate and there
was, indeed nothing to
it; it was a minor, accidental contact.
We have considered all of the evidence and the conflicting accounts.
The Tribunal is satisfied to the necessary standard of proof
that the contact
between Mr Collins and Mr Polson was deliberate, and was a chesting
the part of Mr Collins. The
Tribunal takes the view that this is consistent with Mr Collins' agitated,
frustrated, and angry state.
It is thought that Mr Collins, who has an
excellent record in the past, and as a trainer of dogs, has acted quite out of
and has convinced himself over the ensuing weeks or months, that his
version is the correct one, that he is convinced himself that
he did not act
deliberately, but in reality, he did in that critical moment or two, he did act
deliberately.
The Tribunal is unable to form the view that Mr Polson has either
lied or been mistaken in his evidence. There is no reason, as
it seems to the
Tribunal, for Mr Polson to have either fabricated or mistaken his evidence,
it is a simple incident. He knows whether
he was knocked backwards or not,
forced backwards or not, he says he was. He knows whether it was just an
accidental brushing to
get into the room or whether it was a deliberate
chesting, and he says it was a deliberate chesting. It is not an incident which
leads itself to mistake in interpretation, it either happened or it did not.
The Tribunal accepts Mr Polson's evidence that it occurred
in the way he
has described.
As I say, it is corroborated, in the Tribunal's view, by the fact that
Mr Collins was so agitated, frustrated, and angry as he has
himself. Further, the Tribunal does not accept that the dog had been put away,
and that Mr Collins had come back without
the dog. That version was never
clearly put at the previous stewards' inquiry. It is true that in some
instances, there may be
some expressions that are equivocal on that point, but
it is the sort of point that I would have expected Mr Collins to have made
perfectly clear at the stewards' inquiry, and he did not. Mr Polson and
Dr Bowden both have a memory of the dog still being present
incident occurred, and the Tribunal is satisfied on that point.
Furthermore, as to Mr Collins' stated motive for returning to the
vets' room, namely to obtain a certificate, the Tribunal takes
a view that, in
order to corroborate any innocent re-entry to the vets' room, Mr Collins
would have realised that he needed some
innocent reason to return, and that the
issue of the obtaining of the vet's certificate has arisen in that
The reality is, and the Tribunal accepts, that at no stage did
Mr Collins, after the so called incident, which he says was just
innocent brushing, at no stage did he ever make any enquiry of either
Mr Polson or Dr Bowden about the certificate, ask where
whether he was going to get it, who was going to give it to him, there was
nothing said about the certificate, and it seems
to the Tribunal that if
Mr Collins' very reason for returning to the vets' room was to get the
certificate, and if the incident was
just a minor innocent incident, then
Mr Collins would have sought the certificate, obtained it, or at least
obtain a explanation
which leads the Tribunal to have doubts about that as being the motivation
returning to the vets' room, and enhances the evidence of Mr Polson that
what happened was that he returned to the vets' room
in his state of anger and
led to the incident, the deliberate incident, as I have found.
Mr Collins also, in what may well have been a slight give away
line in his cross-examination, conceded that Mr Polson was rattled
the incident, and that too would tend to support Mr Polson's evidence that
whatever the incident was, it was enough to rattle
him, and he indeed agrees
that he was shaken and frightened
for some time by what happened. So for the totality of that reasoning,
the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Mr Polson, and considers
offence against Rule 125 (1)(q) is made out to the necessary
I turn to the question of penalty. Mr Collins, in the course of
the presentation of his appeal, has already raised salient matters
and I don't
consider that there is any need to go into those any further, and similarly,
considerable material relating to the level
of penalty is set out in the
transcript of the stewards' proceedings. Firstly, I will repeat that the
Tribunal takes the view that
Mr Collins does have an excellent record as a
trainer of greyhounds, having been in the industry for some 20-odd years
considerable success in the industry and having assisted the stewards
on a previous occasion in relation to some particular drug
It is also noted that Mr Collins trains professionally. His wife
works. He has no occupation other than his greyhound training.
aged 59 and I repeat that in all the circumstances, the Tribunal is
prepared to find that what happened was out of character.
Mr Hoynes has been at pains to try to refer to some subsequent incident
involving Mr Collins which is within the knowledge
of the Tribunal, but it is
considered that that is quite irrelevant to today's proceeding, both in terms of
findings in relation
to guilt and also in relation to penalty. Whatever happens
at some subsequent hearing is independent of today's events.
So I repeat, Mr Collins is entitled to be treated as having an
excellent record leading up to this incident and is entitled to the
finding that
the Tribunal makes - that this was out of character and was, in large part,
brought about by the agitated and frustrated
and angry state of mind that
Mr Collins had got himself into because of what he perceived to be an
incorrect veterinary examination
and he acted out of character, and he has, in
the Tribunal's view, convinced himself that the act was accidental when in fact
was deliberate.
However, on the other side of the ledger of course, it is important for
the industry that the stewards be protected, that they be
able to go about their
work safely, and that there be a due degree of respect afforded to stewards,
particularly in the course of
their work and in the location of their work.
They are entitled to that respect and the industry will not function in a proper
in an adequate way if stewards are under any threat or risk of either
physical or even verbal abuse. It is important then for the
stewards and, if
need be, the Tribunal to recognise this in dealing with offences of this
So, as is invariably the case when imposing a sentence, there has got
to be a balance between the factors that call for a significant
penalty - the
ones that I've just mentioned in relation to the industry and the stewards'
position in the industry - on the one hand,
yet on the other hand, taking due
account of an individual's circumstances, his record, and any reason that may
appear for the commission
of the offence.
Notwithstanding that Mr Collins has said that it was not his prime
intention in this appeal to seek any alteration of the penalty,
rather that he
was simply here to exonerate his name, notwithstanding that fact and bearing in
mind that we're against him in relation
to the clearing of the name,
nevertheless, we do consider in all the circumstances that the penalty of four
years' disqualification
was significantly higher than was necessary in all the
circumstances.
Bearing in mind the matters that go both ways that I have already
enumerated, it is the Tribunal's view that a disqualification
of six months from
training should be an adequate way to deal with all the relevant factors. Yes,
MR HOYNES: As the Tribunal pleases.
HIS HONOUR: Do you understand all that, Mr Collins?
MR COLLINS: I think so, Your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: No other matter?
MR COLLINS: No.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (49.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter