URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2024/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Readdie v People Shop Pty Ltd [2024] VMC 16 (27 November 2024)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
No. N11679381
LAUREN READDIE
PEOPLE SHOP PTY LTD T/AS ERUDITE LEGAL
MAGISTRATE:
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
2, 3 and 5 September 2024, written submissions 9
September 2024
DATE OF DECISION:
27 November 2024
CASE MAY BE CITED AS:
Readdie v People Shop Pty Ltd
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2024] VMC 16
INDUSTRIAL LAW –
Fair Work Act 2009
Fair Work Regulations 2009
3.33, 3.34, 3.37, 3.46 – contravention of
– presumption
where records not provided – maximum weekly hours – where additional
hours are unreasonable.
APPEARANCES:
For the Plaintiff
Lauren Readdie
Litigant in person
For the Defendant
Shivesh Kuksal
Peter Ansell
Sole Shareholder
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
Plaintiff, Ms Lauren Readdie, was employed as a solicitor by the Defendant,
People Shop Pty Ltd, between 17 February 2022 and
13 March 2022. Ms Readdie
claims that in contravention of the
Fair Work Act 2009
People Shop failed to pay her at all for her work during this period, breached
its record-keeping obligations, required her to
work unreasonable hours, failed
to grant her compassionate leave and failed to reimburse her for expenses
incurred. Ms Readdie seeks
that the underpayment be remedied, that penalties be
imposed for contravention of civil remedy provisions in the Act and seeks
proceeding was brought in the Court’s Industrial Division.
Section 4(3B)
Magistrates Court Act 1989
) provides that
‘despite anything to the contrary in this Act, a party to a proceeding in
the Industrial Division may appear
by a person who is not a legal practitioner
if that person is authorised in writing by the party to appear for the
Mr Shivesh Kuksal, sole shareholder, Mr Peter Ansell, Director and
Ms Lulu Xu, Director, each appeared for People Shop pursuant to
this provision.
to s 4(3C) of the MC Act, the Court’s Industrial Division must exercise
its jurisdiction with the minimum of legal
form and technicality. Despite this
requirement, complexities arose in the proceeding, resulting in substantial
delay to the hearing
of Ms Readdie’s claim, which finally took place on 2,
3 and 5 September 2024. Following multiple unsuccessful adjournment applications
during the hearing, People Shop ceased participating in the hearing on 5
September 2024. I have determined Ms Readdie’s claim
based on the evidence
before me at that time. The following summary of key aspects of the procedural
history of the matter provides
context for my decision to determine the claim in
this manner.
Aspects of the
procedural history are also relevant to findings I have made relating to Ms
Readdie’s substantive claims.
PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Adjournment of the First Hearing Dates
Readdie’s claim was initially set down for hearing on 24 and 25 July 2023
First Hearing Dates
). Directions made on 14 June 2023 permitted Ms
Readdie to file an amended Claim and particulars, permitted People Shop to file
Amended Defence and required People Shop to file all documents it sought to
rely on at the hearing. People Shop did not file an Amended
Defence nor file any
18 July 2023 I granted leave to People Shop to issue subpoenas to Mr Howard
Rapke and the Victorian Legal Services Board (
). In 2022, the VLSB had appointed Mr Rapke to manage People Shop.
People Shop submitted that employment records of Ms Readdie were
in the custody
of the VLSB/Mr Rapke.
21 July 2023, People Shop made application to file an Amended Defence and
Counterclaim, to join Mr Kuksal, Mr Ansell and Ms Xu
as Plaintiffs to the
Counterclaim and to join the VLSB, Mr Rapke, Ms Maria Di Gregorio (former
Director of People Shop) and Mr Luke
Sinclair (former employee of People Shop)
as Defendants to the Counterclaim. The application alleged that Ms Readdie had
in an unlawful purpose conspiracy with the VLSB to make fraudulent
allegations against People Shop and Mr Kuksal in the proceeding
Application
). I vacated the First Hearing Dates to allow the Conspiracy
Application to proceed. I granted leave for People Shop to issue a subpoena
Ms Di Gregorio, on the basis of People Shop’s contention that employment
records of Ms Readdie were in her custody (
Di Gregorio Subpoena
The Conspiracy Application and related matters
proceeding was then entirely taken up by matters associated with the Conspiracy
Application, the Di Gregorio Subpoena and an application
to set aside the
VLSB/Rapke Subpoenas (
VLSB/Rapke Application
) until 7 February 2024. In
an oral decision delivered that day, I recorded that since 14 June 2023 there
had been ten court hearings,
in the course of which I had made eleven
interlocutory decisions and People Shop had raised or foreshadowed at least
thirteen other
applications which I had either refused to deal with or which
People Shop did not press. I had refused the overwhelming majority
Shop’s applications because they lacked merit. Further, People
Shop’s conduct in the proceeding had included:
regularly making
applications orally without notice or without supporting material despite
directions to the contrary; filing voluminous
documentary material without
articulating its relevance; filing material after the commencement of a hearing;
filing unsworn affidavits
or affidavits omitting exhibits; and filing material
by way of ‘Dropbox’ links which expired after a short period. People
Shop’s oral submissions were lengthy, dominated court time, required
extensive intervention by the Court, and were often of
no or limited relevance
to matters requiring determination.
Shop also failed to comply with directions to progress its Conspiracy
Application on numerous occasions and failed to properly
articulate the basis
for that application. The Conspiracy Application was struck out by a
self-executing order on 15 November 2023,
however People Shop nevertheless
continued to press its allegations in various ways. On 7 February 2024 I
prohibited the making of
any further applications similar to the Conspiracy
Application without leave of the Court. I also made directions including that
documents were required to be filed and served before 4pm the day prior to any
hearing, that filing and service by Dropbox would
not be accepted and that oral
submissions would be subject to reasonable time limits.
The separate issue and strike out of parts of People
Shop’s defence
7 February 2024 I also determined to actively case manage the proceeding,
including by considering, as a preliminary and separate
issue, the effect of
Part 2-9 Division 2 of the Act (
Payment of Wages Provisions
contract between the parties. People Shop’s Defence alleged that Ms
Readdie had breached her contract of employment.
In submissions on 18 July 2023,
People Shop had explained its Defence to be, in effect, that if Ms Readdie owed
money to People Shop,
People Shop could deduct that money from what People Shop
owed Ms Readdie pursuant to the contract. I raised the Payment of Wages
Provisions with People Shop at that time, however the proceeding was then
overtaken by the Conspiracy Application. Following the
disposal of the
Conspiracy Application and associated applications, I made directions for the
filing and service of material in respect
of the separate issue, including as to
whether the issue could be determined without a hearing.
Readdie filed submissions to the effect that she was entitled to be paid in
full, and that the issue could be determined without
a hearing. People Shop did
not file any material. On 28 March 2024 I determined the separate issue without
conducting a hearing.
I concluded that the requirement in s 323(1) of the Act,
that People Shop pay amounts payable to Ms Readdie in relation to the
performance
of work in full, is not displaced by the operation of the contract.
I directed the filing and service of material addressing whether
any part of
People Shop’s Defence should be struck out in accordance with
Magistrates’ Court General Civil Procedure Rules 2020
Again, People Shop did not file any material. On 1 May 2024, I struck out those
aspects of the Defence which alleged breach of
Contract by Ms Readdie (
). People Shop did not seek to file an Amended Defence. As a result, the
only remaining matters pleaded in People Shop’s Defence
at the final
hearing were that Ms Readdie failed to perform required duties and obligations
or provide details of hours she worked.
The VLSB/Rapke Application
VLSB/Rapke Application was also heard on 7 February 2024, and I reserved my
decision. Because the Strike Out affected the scope
of the proceeding, on 16 May
2024 I provided the parties an opportunity to make further submissions prior to
delivering my decision.
People Shop submitted that it had been denied procedural
fairness and sought an adjournment to seek prohibition against my continuing
hear the proceeding, and to provide new evidence and submissions in the
VLSB/Rapke Application. I granted the adjournment and
made directions for People
Shop to file further material. People Shop did not file any further material. On
2 August 2024 I granted
the VLSB/Rapke Application and set aside the Subpoenas,
finding that for the most part they had no legitimate forensic purpose, given
the scope of the proceeding both before and after the Strike Out. Insofar as the
Subpoenas captured Ms Readdie’s employment
records, I held that People
Shop had an unfettered right to collect or retrieve them from the VLSB but had
failed to do so.
The Di Gregorio Subpoenas
were not produced to the Court in response to the Di Gregorio Subpoena. An
affidavit of Mr Ansell dated 14 September 2023
evidenced an attempt by Ms Di
Gregorio to produce the documents to an incorrect email address at the Court,
and stated that the documents
had been forwarded directly to People Shop by Ms
Di Gregorio’s legal representative. On 14 September 2023 I gave leave to
Shop to file a further subpoena directed to Ms Di Gregorio, to be
returnable on 2 October 2023 (
Further Di Gregorio Subpoena
), in respect
of the same material. People Shop accepted at a hearing on 24 October 2023 that
it did not properly serve the Further
Di Gregorio Subpoena. I stated it remained
open to People Shop to have a further subpoena issued and to serve it in
accordance with
the Court rules. It did not do so.
On 16 May 2024 I refused an application by People
Shop that the Court find Ms Di Gregorio in contempt for her non-compliance with
the Di Gregorio Subpoena. I made a direction that People Shop had leave to
re-file the Di Gregorio Subpoena, in the same terms, on
or before 20 May 2024.
People Shop did not re-file the Di Gregorio Subpoena on or before 20 May 2024,
Directions for final hearing
on 16 May 2024, I set the matter down for final hearing on 2 September 2024 and
made directions for discovery and inspection
of the following categories of
documents (other than documents already filed and served in the proceeding): pay
records, pay slips
and records of hours of work; other documents evidencing Ms
Readdie’s hours of work or payment by People Shop; and documents
the parties intended to rely at the hearing. People Shop did not make discovery
of any documents. I also made directions
for the filing and service of outlines
of evidence including documents to be relied on. People Shop did not file any
outlines of
evidence or documents. People Shop did not seek any extension of the
timelines in the directions.
People Shop’s participation in the final hearing
final hearing proceeded on 2 September 2024 by way of video link. At the
commencement of the hearing, Ms Xu appeared for People
Shop, with Mr Ansell.
People Shop made an adjournment application orally, without notice, supported by
an Affidavit of Mr Ansell
2 September Ansell Affidavit
) received by me
at around 10.20am. I refused the application.
first ground was that Mr Kuksal was unwell and isolating with COVID-like
symptoms. His condition had significantly worsened since
29 August 2024 and
given his deteriorating health, it was impracticable for him to fully
participate in the proceeding. I was not
satisfied as to Mr Kuksal’s
unfitness to attend the hearing as no medical evidence was produced.
second ground was that Mr Ansell and Ms Xu were unable to represent People Shop
because the VLSB had submitted in Supreme Court
proceedings that by doing so
they would be engaging in unqualified legal practice. I held that Mr Ansell and
Ms Xu both had capacity
to appear for People Shop pursuant to s 4(3B) of the MC
Act; Mr Ansell had previously represented People Shop in the proceeding;
Ansell and Ms Xu had had extensive involvement with the proceeding and I did not
consider there to be any barrier to them
representing People Shop.
third ground was that People Shop was initiating Supreme Court proceedings
seeking injunctive relief prohibiting me from presiding
in the proceeding. I
held that there was no order prohibiting the proceeding from continuing, nor had
any relevant proceeding been
issued. Further, none of the similar applications
foreshadowed by People Shop on previous occasions in the proceeding had been
subsequently
fourth ground was that People Shop did not have access to the material held by
the VLSB. I referred to my finding on 2 August
2024 that People Shop had an
unfettered right to the material held by VLSB which it had failed to collect or
retrieve, and there
was no further evidence as to why this had not
my refusal of the adjournment application, Ms Xu and Mr Ansell determined that
Ms Xu would represent People Shop, and Ms
Readdie commenced her evidence in
chief. At the conclusion of the day’s hearing, in light of People
Shop’s non-compliance
with the pre-hearing directions, and Ms Xu’s
submission that a list of documents could be provided by 10am the next day, I
made directions for People Shop to file and serve a list of the documents it had
already filed and served on which it sought to rely
at the hearing.
Tuesday 3 September 2024, People Shop did not file any list of any documents. A
further Affidavit of Mr Ansell (
3 September Ansell Affidavit
received by me at around 10.11am. At the commencement of the hearing, Ms Xu
initially appeared for People Shop then Mr Ansell
announced he was appearing,
seeking an adjournment.
3 September Ansell Affidavit referred to five exhibits, which were described as
a Victorian Government directive for people displaying
COVID-19 symptoms, and
various documents relating to other proceedings in the Supreme Court. The
exhibits were purported to be filed
by way of a Dropbox link. I determined not
to have regard to the exhibits given my previous direction that documents could
filed by Dropbox.
refused this second adjournment application. Two of the grounds, being Mr
Ansell’s capacity to represent People Shop, and
People Shop’s
intention to file an originating motion, were the same as the first adjournment
application. A third ground also
related to Mr Kuksal’s capacity, however
the 3 September Ansell Affidavit stated that Mr Kuksal ‘tested positive
Covid-19’ on 29 August whereas the 2 September Ansell Affidavit had
stated that Mr Kuksal had ‘Covid-like symptoms’
which worsened on 29
August. I noted this inconsistency and ruled there was still no proper medical
further ground was that Ms Xu was unprepared and unqualified to represent People
Shop due to her inadequate English, especially
legal jargon. I observed that it
is common for parties to be self-represented in the Industrial Division and the
Court’s processes
accommodate that. I had no concerns as to Ms Xu’s
capacity to represent People Shop. From my observation, she spoke English
competently and clearly. She had appeared previously in the proceeding for
People Shop and had advised the Court that she had represented
Supreme Court Proceedings. I considered Ms Xu was adequately appraised of the
nature of Ms Readdie’s claim, because
I had observed her attendance at
previous hearings, because an affidavit she made on 14 March 2023, in support of
a Rehearing Application
brought by People Shop, addressed the detail of Ms
Readdie’s claim and because Ms Readdie’s chronology and other
was available to her.
noting that the two adjournment applications had delayed the proceeding by half
a day and an hour and 40 minutes respectively,
I made an oral direction (later
reflected in writing) prohibiting People Shop from making a further adjournment
application that
relied upon a ground already raised without leave of the Court.
I directed that any application for leave would be considered ex
chambers unless the Court determined a hearing was necessary (
hearing continued with Ms Xu continuing to represent People Shop. Upon Ms
Readdie concluding her evidence in chief, at Ms Xu’s
request, I adjourned
for lunch to allow Ms Xu to prepare her cross-examination. When the hearing
resumed, Mr Ansell and Ms Xu appeared
together. Mr Ansell stated that he and Ms
Xu had each spoken to Mr Kuksal during the break and Mr Kuksal as owner of the
had directed that Ms Xu was not to cross-examine Ms Readdie. People Shop
sought instead to have the matter adjourned due to Ms Xu’s
capacity to cross examine, and Mr Kuksal’s inability to do so due to
illness. I refused to consider this third adjournment
application, including
refusing to allow Mr Kuksal to give evidence in support of it, as it did not
comply with my Oral Direction.
After providing multiple opportunities for Ms Xu
to commence cross examination of Ms Readdie, which were not taken up, I excused
Ms Readdie from giving evidence. Ms Xu then commenced giving evidence for People
matter was listed to resume on Thursday 5 September by agreement of the parties.
At 9.41am that morning, Mr Kuksal emailed the
Court Registry requesting a phone
number to dial into the hearing that morning. The email stated (in part):
Unfortunately, Ms Lulu Xu, who had appeared on behalf of the company earlier
this week, has developed COVID-19 symptoms and is unable
to appear today.
Therefore, I will appear on behalf of the company.
the hearing commenced, Mr Kuksal stated that he wished to raise a few matters. I
allocated an initial 15 minutes for him to state
what the substance of those
matters were. Mr Kuksal sought to make a recusal application. I stated I would
allow him until 1pm to
make and complete that application, and if he sought to
call evidence in support of it, I would hear that evidence. Mr Kuksal stated
that was not reasonable and he would not comply with my determination nor accept
my decision, and that I was obliged to either charge
him with contempt or
consider why he was not accepting my decision.
Kuksal then stated that his first application was that the matter be adjourned
because, variously: he was not feeling well; he
was not in a position to
adequately represent People Shop; he did not have to hand the material and
evidence he would rely on; he
did not have normal office facilities at his
disposal; and Mr Ansell who he would call as a witness was not available until
He requested that I rule on the adjournment application. I sought to
limit the time for Mr Kuksal’s submissions in respect
of this fourth
adjournment application. Following repeated interruptions, I caused Mr
Kuksal’s audio to be muted and stated
I would provide him a further five
minutes. Mr Kuksal left the Webex hearing. I stood down to consider the fourth
adjournment application
based on submissions Mr Kuksal had already made. When
the hearing resumed, Mr Kuksal had rejoined the Webex. I stated I would rule
the adjournment application. Mr Kuksal stated that he had not made the
application yet. After further repeated interruptions I
again caused Mr
Kuksal’s audio to be muted and delivered my ruling on the fourth
adjournment application. Mr Kuksal again left
and rejoined the Webex hearing,
interrupting my ruling part way through. I again caused his audio to be muted
and continued my ruling.
He again left the Webex hearing.
refused the fourth adjournment application. It related to Mr Kuksal’s
capacity, meaning leave was required pursuant to my
Oral Direction. In any event
there was inadequate evidence of Mr Kuksal’s claimed incapacity. Ms
Xu’s unavailability
due to covid-like symptoms was also not supported by
any affidavit nor medical evidence and I was not satisfied she was incapacitated
to attend. No explanation for Mr Ansell’s unavailability was provided. The
grounds for the recusal application articulated
by Mr Kuksal largely related to
previous interlocutory decisions unfavourable to People Shop, a ground which had
been raised by People
Shop in multiple previous recusal applications, weighing
against a further adjournment.
noted Mr Kuksal had left the hearing and asked the registrar to request he
resume attendance by 11.45am to proceed with People Shop’s
application. Mr Kuksal rejoined the hearing at 11.55am and I invited him to make
the recusal application. He continued to
press the adjournment application I had
already ruled on. After further interruptions, I again caused his audio
connection to be
muted, and Mr Kuksal again left the Webex hearing. At my
request, the registry emailed Mr Kuksal at 11.58am indicating that I would
continue with the recusal application at 12.15pm.
Kuksal did not rejoin the hearing but emailed the registry at 12.17pm stating:
Unfortunately, my symptoms are making it oppressively onerous for me to continue
participating in the hearing. The discomfort associated
with my persistent
coughing and sore throat has exacerbated considerably following my attendance at
the hearing.
The resultant discomfort and irritability is also making my indignation at
Magistrate Fawcett’s improper conduct more pronounced.
Not only are these circumstances especially prejudicial to the interests of the
Defendant, as I had mentioned to Her Honour earlier,
in subjecting me to these
conditions, Magistrate Fawcett is acting in contravention of my human rights
guaranteed under the
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities
(Vic) [sic]. Her behaviour, in my submission, constitutes cruel
and unusual treatment as well as a violation of my right to due process
a fair hearing.
I am clearly too ill to continue. It is also a matter of common knowledge that
Victoria is currently experiencing a surge in the
prevalence of COVID-19.
Furthermore, Magistrate Fawcett must take judicial notice of the fact that, as a
matter of policy, visits to doctors in relation
to COVID-19 cases are not a
viable option unless the symptoms are life-threatening or of a similar
magnitude. The recommended course
of action is self-isolation until the symptoms
I therefore seek an adjournment of the hearing today.
resumed the hearing at 12.22pm. I declined to consider this fifth adjournment
application as it was clearly based on grounds previously
raised, and leave had
not been obtained in accordance with my Oral Direction.
then considered and determined the recusal application based on the grounds
articulated. The first ground was that I had engaged
in malicious and improper
conduct in actively seeking a pre-determined outcome to the proceeding. I
rejected this ground, stating
that I had considered it necessary to apply
proactive case management in the proceeding and had provided reasons for doing
second ground was that People Shop was in the process of making a
complaint about my misconduct to the Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption
Commission. I rejected this ground, as the making of a complaint against a
judicial officer does not of itself require the judicial
officer to recuse
themselves. If it did, a litigant could achieve the effect of delaying a case
simply by the making of an allegation.
Further, the judicial system includes
checks and balances, and People Shop's exercise of any such rights is a feature
of the system,
not a basis for departing from it. The third ground was that in
the final hearing, I had made factual findings that People Shop’s
representatives were acting fraudulently and had not given reasons for
decisions. I rejected this ground as my reasons for decisions
had been provided
orally, including relevant factual conclusions. The fourth ground was that
People Shop was prevented from testing
the credibility of Ms Readdie’s
evidence. I rejected this ground, being uncertain as to what it meant, noting
that arguments
as to this issue had already been heard and considered in the
course of previous decisions. Finally, Mr Kuksal had sought to give
observer to demonstrate that I had met the
apprehended bias test. As Mr Kuksal
had elected not to give that evidence, I was unable to consider it. I did not
consider that I
had pre-judged or approached the matter with a closed mind, or
that a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably apprehend that I
bring an impartial mind to the matter. I refused the application.
People Shop’s conduct during the hearing and People Shop’s failure
to comply with any pre-hearing directions, in
the context of the matters I
addressed in my decision of 7 February 2024, I formed the view that People Shop
did not intend to participate
in the hearing further and I took People
Shop’s case to be closed. I made directions for the filing of written
submissions.
People Shop did not file written submissions. For these reasons, I
have determined Ms Readdie’s claim based on the evidence
before me at that
THE EVIDENCE
Readdie tendered a detailed chronology of events with relevant documents
attached. Most of Ms Readdie’s evidence was uncontested
due to the limited
evidence called by People Shop prior to ceasing to participate, and unchallenged
given People Shop’s refusal
to cross examine her. In some respects, I
considered Ms Readdie’s account of what occurred during the employment was
of the benefit of hindsight, however I had no concerns with the
reliability or veracity of her evidence and I considered her to be
witness. Further, in very many instances the documents she tendered verified her
oral evidence.
Xu’s evidence covered a small number of matters before People Shop
withdrew from the hearing. Ms Readdie did not cross examine
her, however had
already given comprehensive evidence covering the same subject matter.
Accordingly, I have had regard to Ms Xu’s
evidence and I considered her to
be a credible witness.
Ms Readdie’s evidence
Readdie completed a virtual Graduate Diploma of Legal Practice during lockdown
in around October/November 2021 and was admitted
to practise on 11 February
2022. She intended to work in family law but was unemployed and receiving
JobSeeker payments at the time.
She applied widely for jobs as required under
JobSeeker. She was surprised to receive a job offer from People Shop given her
of experience, but was keen to get into the industry and start working.
Readdie attended People Shop’s office at 424 St Kilda Road, Melbourne
) at 2pm on Thursday 17 February 2022 to sign her contract,
with the intention of starting work on Saturday 19 February. She met
Gregorio at the office, whom she assumed was a lawyer but later found out was
the company accountant. Emails tendered show
that she received and signed her
the Contract
), provided to her through a document sharing
platform, between 2.02pm – 3.01pm on 17 February 2022. The Contract
provided for
payment on the 27
of each month. She queried this and
Ms Di Gregorio told her she would be paid pro-rata for the first month. After
she had arrived
at the Office on Thursday 17 February, Ms Di Gregorio told her
that the boss, Mr Kuksal, wanted her to start work straight away,
agreed to do. She was not told how long she would be required to work. At 7pm
that evening she learned that her mother,
with whom she lives, had been taken to
hospital with severe abdominal pains. She worked until approximately 11pm that
evening and
was then driven to the hospital by Mr Kuksal and Ms Xu.
Contemporaneous text messages to Ms Readdie’s sister and mother
corroborate
her evidence as to her work that day.
text messages sent by Ms Readdie to her sister and mother on Friday 18 February
she referred to the Contract, including that ‘any
excessive overtime will
be paid at $57/hr.’ In response to her sister asking about breaks, Ms
Readdie stated ‘[l]ike,
yesterday they asked me to sort of potter around
at something straight away, and I didn’t finish until really late, but he
ordered Boosts and nice Asian food for dinner, so.. And he drove us home, and
insisted on taking me via the hospital so I could check
on mum.’ Ms
Readdie said that it was usual throughout her employment that at some point
during an extended shift, Mr Kuksal
and Ms Xu would arrange food to be delivered
by Uber. They would eat together and talk about work. It was not a personal meal
or a complete break, with her only personal breaks when she went to the
Readdie arrived at the office at 11.17am on Friday 18 February, corroborated by
an uber receipt and a text message to her sister
at 10.58am stating she was
‘just heading into work.’ She worked until about midnight that
night. Mr Kuksal again drove
Saturday 19 February, Ms Readdie was advised by Mr Kuksal that they would be at
the Office at 10.45am. When Ms Readdie was on her
way, Ms Xu by text message
said they would be a ‘bit late’. Ms Readdie continued to the Office
as planned. She could
not gain access, so waited outside the building on a
bench. She received further texts and emails from Ms Xu and Mr Kuksal,
at 12.17pm, including instructing her to read various items, and
suggesting she work at a nearby café. At 1.41pm Ms Readdie
sent a text to
Ms Xu asking how much longer they would be, and Ms Xu replied apologising. Ms
Readdie can’t recall what time
Mr Kuksal and Ms Xu arrived at the Office
that afternoon. Ms Readdie did not go home at all that night and worked through
until 12.30pm
the next day, Sunday 20 February. At 10.42am on Sunday 20
February, she sent a text message to her sister stating ‘I haven’t
been home yet since Saturday. We’re leaving soon but I’m literally
going home to like, kip for a few hours and come back
in.’ Mr Kuksal
dropped her home at about 1pm, told her to rest for a few hours then call him at
6pm to see what was happening.
She sent a text message to her sister at 1.09pm
stating she needed 5 minutes to have a quick shower. She also referred to doing
‘all-nighter’ the previous night in a text message to her mother.
at home on Sunday 20 February, Ms Readdie’s sister told her that Ms
Readdie’s former partner had passed away on
18 February. Ms Readdie sent a
text message to Mr Kuksal (later learning that the number was in fact Ms
Xu’s) at 6.13pm advising
him what had occurred and stating she would try
to push through and ‘I’ve made an undertaking to you that I can do
and I don’t want to ‘wimp out’ for want of a better
term.’ She arranged to work at home and by 6.40pm had
begun working. Text
messages and emails demonstrate that she worked until almost 1am.
Readdie arrived at work at 9.38am on Monday 21 February, corroborated by text
messages and an uber receipt. The previous day, Ms
Readdie had been told that
they would be utilising a hotel in the city rather than going home for the next
few nights. That day at
9.20am she text messaged her mother stating
‘there’s a bunch of work this week that we essentially need to work
them [sic] clock, so Shiv has booked a few rooms for everyone so we
don’t have to waste travel time...’. Ms Readdie
said Mr Kuksal
explained this as though it was something that happened often and made it sound
normal. At about midnight, Ms Xu revealed
that she had not booked anywhere for
them to stay. Ms Readdie continued to work and ultimately Ms Xu booked
accommodation at the
Oaks Melbourne off William Street. Upon arriving at the
hotel, Ms Readdie learned that only a single two-bedroom suite had been booked.
She was given the option of sharing a bed with Ms Xu or sleeping on the couch.
She wasn’t happy but was too tired to cause
a fuss, and it was about 1am.
Mr Kuksal required her to recommence working and she was not allowed to stop and
go to bed until 5.30am
Tuesday 22 February.
Readdie commenced work in the Office at around midday on Tuesday 22 February,
confirmed by a text message to Ms Xu. She worked
until 10pm when they returned
to the hotel. No steps were taken to book a second room, and work continued at
the hotel until around
6.30am. A text Ms Readdie sent to her sister at 6.56am on
Wednesday 23 February stated ‘So, I’m just climbing into bed
few hours downtime, but I’m still in a hotel apartment with my boss and
the office manager. She and I are sharing a room
for now, so my only really,
truly alone time is when I’m in the shower ...’.
Readdie believes she commenced work at around 12.30pm on Wednesday 23 February,
based on having sent an earlier text message to
her sister. It was her
mother’s birthday. She sent a message to her mother stating ‘I know
youre [sic] coming home today,
and that it’s your birthday, but I’m
not going to get a chance to see you today. I’ve barely got enough time to
write this text...’. She received a text from her sister at around 3.40pm
and recalled she was at the Office at that time,
as she was stressed about her
mother being released from the hospital. A text message from Ms Readdie to her
sister at 3.04pm indicates
that Ms Readdie was trying to make arrangements for
her mother as she would not be home. She continued to work through the night
the Office, until around 9.30am the following morning, Thursday 24 February,
when they returned to the hotel for Mr Kuksal to
attend an audio visual hearing
at 10am. By this time, Ms Readdie had had enough. She had initially been keen to
work and prove herself
but Mr Kuksal had begun directing verbal insults,
previously directed to Ms Xu, at Ms Readdie. She was tiring of his lectures
classics, history, philosophy, world religion and management style and his
statements as to his superior intellect and IQ. She was
no longer willing to be
spoken to or treated in the way that he'd begun to treat her. She sent a text
message to Ms Di Gregorio at
9.33am requesting a private conversation after the
the car ride between the Office and the hotel, Mr Kuksal informed Ms Readdie for
the first time that she would be appearing at
the upcoming hearing. Ms Readdie
had understood one of the principal solicitors would be involved, she had never
appeared in any
capacity before and she had had no discussion with any
supervising solicitor. An argument ensued, with Ms Readdie saying she did
want to work with Mr Kuksal anymore. When they arrived at the hotel, Mr Kuksal
connected into the hearing. Ms Readdie was unable
to compose herself so went out
to the balcony and at 10.36am sent another text message to Ms Di Gregorio
I’ve already blurted out now to Shivesh that I can’t do this and
that I don’t want to work with him. I honestly
need to just leave and go
to any other tasks related
to the matters you have already brought me in on,
because I have no intention of carelessly leaving the team ‘in the
Once I’ve had the opportunity to just have some time to
myself I will provide you with a proper outline of my reasons, but
cannot and will not tolerate being spoken to or treated like this anymore.
Di Gregorio replied ‘Ok are you getting some rest this morning?’ Ms
Readdie replied:
I’m sitting here in the hotel while he’s doing the hearing.
I’ve had no alone time in three days and I’ve
shared a bed with Lulu
for the last two nights. I just want to grab my bag and go. I am happy to leave
all the business equipment
here, I just want to leave once he’s done on
this hearing.’ A very dear friend of mine died very unexpectedly on
I learned of it a few days later.
Di Gregorio replied asking if Mr Kuksal was aware of this, to which Ms Readdie
replied ‘I told him. He told me emotions are
useless and I need to ignore
them.’ She was directed by Ms Di Gregorio to go home at 12.31pm.
Readdie has a pre-existing medical condition and had an appointment with her
regular psychiatrist on Friday 24 February. By that
time, she was in such a
state she was unable to get herself to the appointment, her mother drove her and
she had a panic attack in
the waiting room. Her psychiatrist provided her with
medical certificates for 24 and 25 February, and for 28 February to 4 March.
Saturday 26 February, Ms Readdie sent a message to Ms Di Gregorio stating that
she still wanted the job but wasn’t sure
when she would be ready to work.
Ms Di Gregorio replied ‘[k]eep me posted we still have a lot of work
on.’ In a conversation
with Ms Di Gregorio, Ms Readdie referred to the
medical certificates, and Ms Di Gregorio said she had not accrued enough leave
Compassionate leave was not mentioned.
Readdie was not paid on 27 February. On Tuesday 1 March she sent a message to Ms
Di Gregorio asking if there was a reason she had
not been paid for the work she
did before the 27
, whether it was in dispute, or whether she had
just forgotten to put her banking details somewhere. Ms Di Gregorio replied
‘[s]orry been in hearing all day. Will send you email in the
morning. We just need to be clear to process.’ On Friday
4 March, Ms
Readdie emailed Ms Di Gregorio stating she could resume work on Monday March 7,
and included her bank details. Ms Di
Gregorio replied that she would ‘get
the pay sorted I am also waiting on Albert to provide his details so I can
in one pay run.’ On Saturday 5 March Ms Xu messaged Ms Readdie
asking for her bank account details which Ms Readdie again provided.
evening of Saturday 5 March Mr Kuksal asked Ms Readdie to return to work
earlier. She agreed to go in for a few hours from
lunchtime on Sunday.
Sunday 6 March Ms Readdie sent a message to Ms Xu asking what time she should
start work, and Ms Xu replied ‘330’.
Ms Readdie was approaching the
Office when she received a further message from Ms Xu at 3.37pm changing the
time to 5pm. Ms Readdie
replied that she could occupy herself until later,
stating ‘5 it is’. At 5.01pm she sent a further message stating she
was out the front of the building. Mr Kuksal and Ms Xu arrived within the next
hour. That day, Ms Readdie was instructed by Mr Kuksal
to re-sign her contract.
Mr Kuksal told her this was because one of the pages incorrectly referred to
Principal Solicitor rather
than Solicitor. She scanned the pages, did not
identify any differences from the Contract, confirmed the salary figure and the
working hours had not changed, was relatively satisfied everything was
above board then e-signed the documents (
the Second Contract
). Mr Kuksal
later checked that she had definitely re-signed the contract, then mentioned
something about one of the pages referring
to the hourly rate for a principal
solicitor not a solicitor. This worried Ms Readdie but she put it to the back of
her mind and
got on with her work. Also that day, Ms Readdie was emailed an
Osko receipt for a $1000 payment from People Shop. Ms Readdie had
told Mr Kuksal
she was concerned that her Centrelink payment would be cut off and that she
wouldn’t have been paid. He told
her that the $1000 was to tide her over,
and due to the complexity of the payroll system, it wouldn’t be possible
until 27 March. Ms Readdie did not receive a pay slip in respect of
the $1000 and considered it a gift.
Readdie continued to work until 11.23am on Monday 7 March, confirmed by the Uber
Receipt for $18.64, which Mr Kuksal agreed to
reimburse her for.
around 8pm on the evening of 7 March 2022 (call logs show a call at 8.06pm), Mr
Kuksal called Ms Readdie to ask her to come back
into work. He had missed a
filing date or similar and was in a panic. She did not want to work, because her
former partner’s
funeral was the following day, which she had organised
off work. Mr Kuksal promised she would be home in time for the funeral, told
to take an Uber and said she would be reimbursed. The uber receipt, for $18.28,
shows her arrival at the Office at 9.30pm. When
Ms Readdie arrived, it was not
clear what work was urgent. She asked several times to leave. She became
distressed and eventually
left the Office at 2.43am on Tuesday 8 March. Mr
Kuksal told her she would be reimbursed for her Uber fare home. The Uber
for $16.68, shows she left the Office at 2.43am. This is corroborated
by text messages to her mother and sister at 2.54am.
the funeral on 8 March, Ms Xu text messaged Ms Readdie at 8.02pm that evening
asking if she could start at 9am the next
day. Ms Readdie agreed. She woke on 9
March to several text messages and missed phone calls between 9.33pm on 8 March
on 9 March. She arrived in the Office at 9.08am, reflected on her
Uber receipt. On her arrival there was no indication of any emergency.
the office at 11.15pm that evening, reflected on her Uber receipt.
Readdie arrived at the Office at 10.39am on Thursday 10 March, confirmed by her
Uber receipt, and left the Office at 3.33am on
Friday 11 March, confirmed by her
Uber receipt for $15.31. Mr Kuksal advised her that he would reimburse her Uber
Friday 11 March, Ms Readdie arrived at the Office at 10.51am, reflected in her
Uber receipt. She had a prearranged medical appointment
at 12 noon which Mr
Kuksal had given her permission to attend. At 12.40pm she sent a text message to
Ms Xu that she was on her way
back and arranged to collect coffees. Mr Kuksal
texted her at 1.01pm as she arrived back stating ‘where are you? We have
things to do?’ She left work that day at 9.30pm. However, Mr Kuksal
called her from around 11pm that night, with her text messages
reflecting that
he called just before 11.13pm.
Saturday 12 March, Ms Readdie was permitted to work from home and commenced at
11am. She had previously not been permitted to work
unsupervised and had at
times been required to work in Mr Kuksal’s office with her screen facing
him, or required to get up
and move workstations every two hours. Ms
Readdie’s records show several text messages and calls between her, Ms Xu
Kuksal throughout the day. A text message she sent to Ms Xu at 7.55pm
stated she was just ‘quickly eating some food and taking
a breather for 5
mins’. Call logs include a 30 minute incoming call from Mr Kuksal at
11.52pm and a 27 minute outgoing call
to Mr Kuksal at 12.22am on 13 March. At
just before 1am, Mr Kuksal demanded Ms Readdie watch a movie and required her to
so before she came into work later that day. She considered this to be
bizarre and was incredulous. He then began sending her text
messages to ensure
she was watching it. It was related to a philosophical point he was trying to
make, but was not otherwise work
related. Her text message records show the
following exchange commencing at 12.56am on 13 March 2022:
Mr Kuksal: Text me when you finish watching it
Ms Readdie: The two hour movie called The Miracle about the 1980 US Olympic
Hockey Team?
Mr Kuksal: Yes
Mr Kuksal: Watch half at least. You can watch another quarter on your way to
Mr Kuksal: Did you watch any of it?
Ms Readdie: I’m watching it now.
Mr Kuksal: Which scene?
Ms Readdie: He’s making them do speed races on the ice – endurance
Mr Kuksal: Gentlemen, you aren’t talented enough to win on talent
Ms Readdie: I’m at 43:00
Ms Readdie (at 3.20am): I’ve just finished it. But im going to bed now.
Sunday 13 March, Ms Readdie estimates she started work around 4pm, as at 3.54pm
she was assigned a task by Ms Xu. Mr Kuksal asked
Ms Readdie to fix another
employee’s work and to get the employee on Skype to watch Ms Readdie fix
the work and explain what
he had done wrong. Ms Readdie refused to do this. At
4.47pm she sent a message to Ms Di Gregorio stating:
I just need to vent. I’m an inch close to quitting at this point. I cant
handle much more of this. I am so sick of the insults
and the lectures – I
honestly feel that he is treating me in a way that is completely unjustified and
utterly disproportionate
to the rest of the team. I also need some kind of
indication of when this round-the-clock nonsense will end and when we’ll
be anywhere close to a “9-6, 40h” structure. I’ve
‘worked’ 110 hours in 8 days. I can’t live
Especially not with the verbal abuse and personal insults on top. I know that
there are some amazing opportunities that
this role presents, and that’s
why I’m trying so hard to stick it out. But from a cost-benefit
perspective, right now,
I’m really struggling to convince myself that this
putting up with this bullshit is going to be worth anything meaningful to
7.41pm, Mr Kuksal called Ms Readdie and joined Ms Di Gregorio on the call as
well. Ms Readdie adopted as accurate an audio recording
provided by People Shop
of this call. Ms Readdie said that Mr Kuksal berated her for how she had dealt
with the employee in question,
and Ms Readdie said she didn’t want the job
anymore. Mr Kuksal threatened to sue her for not providing 4 weeks’ notice
and told her to read her contract. At that point she realised she did not have a
copy of her contract. She said she wanted to quit
right now, she had had a
gutful and she wanted out, she wanted to resign, effective immediately. She
referred to the expectation
that work be done on an around the clock basis and
the way Mr Kuksal spoke to her and treated her. Ms Readdie subsequently
she was constructively dismissed, but did not have the language to
describe that at the time.
8.24pm Ms Di Gregorio sent an email stating:
We acknowledge that you have terminated your employment with immediate effect,
contrary to the Terms of your Contract as well as
statutory and general law
obligations [See Appendix F].
8.48pm Ms Readdie replied stating that she did not have a copy of either version
of the contract she signed, only read-only access,
and stated:
If you are able to provide me with a PDF copy of the employment contract, I
would be most appreciative. Please note that there were
two copies: the first
one I signed apparently indicated an overtime pay rate that was applicable to a
Principal’s contract.
I think that’s what Shivesh said. So, there
was an amended version that I signed later on. I’d appreciate a copy of
versions, if possible.
Di Gregorio sent Ms Readdie PDF copies of her contract at 9.50am on 14 March,
then at 10.02am sent a further email stating ‘Sorry
Lauren, this is the
wrong version will send the updated version. Just realised will get the other
version downloaded and sent to
you.’ At 11.14 am she sent the
‘final version of the contract you signed’.
Tuesday 15 March Ms Readdie sent an email to Ms Di Gregorio, Mr Kuksal and two
Erudite Legal addresses enclosing a letter dated
15 March clarifying her reasons
for resignation, a breakdown of her hours of engagement and four Uber receipts
for pre-authorised
trips, being those relating to the expenses claimed in this
proceeding. The letter stated that Ms Readdie was unable and unwilling
continue to endure the treatment she was subjected to by Mr Kuksal. It attached
a breakdown of the days and hours she was ‘engaged
by the company’
and offered to substantiate those if they were disputed but hoped that People
Shop would agree to properly
remunerate her for the work she had done. Ms
Readdie did not receive a response to the letter.
Readdie said the breakdown of days and hours in the letter was her very quick
basic attempt at compiling the hours she thought
she had worked. She had never
been asked to record her hours, and had assumed People Shop were keeping a
record. There was software
for timing what cases were being worked on, in two
different programs, which was being implemented, but Ms Di Gregorio told her she
hadn’t set it up yet and they would get to it later.
Readdie also tendered an ATO Income Statement from People Shop dated 29 March
2022 obtained by Ms Readdie through her MyGov account.
She said that the amounts
recorded as having been paid on that document ($1,988.16 in salary, wages and
leave and $184.61 in respect
of superannuation) were not paid to her. She also
relied on a screenshot from her superannuation fund illustrating that no
were made by People Shop between 17 February and 1 April 2022
Superannuation Statement
) along with a screenshot of her ANZ Access Visa
account transaction search indicating that between 1 February 2022 and 31 July
there was one transaction involving People Shop, being the payment of $1000
on 6 March 2022 (
Bank Statement
Ms Xu’s evidence
Xu was in the office on 17 February 2022 when Ms Readdie was called to the
office to have a discussion about the Contract. Ms Readdie
was given time to
read and consider the Contract. There were meetings with a lot of people that
day and Mr Kuksal didn’t have
a chance to speak to Ms Readdie until later
that day. It wouldn’t have been possible for Ms Readdie to work straight
she didn’t have work equipment or passwords and had not been
allocated a case. Ms Xu accepted some hours of work but disputed
the number of
hours claimed, as Ms Readdie could have been chatting, waiting for food or
applying for her practising certificate
which she was required to do before she
commenced work. Ms Xu also disputed Ms Readdie’s claimed hours on 18
February, stating
she was free to have discussions with hospital staff and
relatives and was not fully set up with a company login and computer.
Kuksal spent a lot of time giving Ms Readdie the background information that she
needed to know regarding legal proceedings, as
he was the client. Ms Readdie was
supportive and encouraging in terms of litigating the matters with Mr Kuksal.
There were only perhaps
two or three days when Ms Readdie did not seem extremely
happy about what Mr Kuksal was saying. At the time, Mr Kuksal had a lot
going on with a high workload, including criminal proceedings, and was under a
lot of pressure. There were also quite a
lot of issues in the Office because the
newly hired principal solicitor had a major medical incident on the second or
third day of
employment, requiring multiple surgeries and leave from work. This
led to Ms Readdie being called upon more frequently than Ms Readdie
Readdie did not provide People Shop with any supporting documents to
substantiate the relationship with her ex-partner or the timing
of the death,
and People Shop could not be expected to know that there was an immediate family
member relationship, which she understood
to be a condition for compassionate
leave. Whilst she and Mr Kuksal accompanied Ms Readdie to the hospital to see
her mother, Ms
Readdie did not tell Ms Xu or anyone else that her mother had a
life threatening illness. There was no request for compassionate
leave by Ms
CONSIDERATION OF MS READDIE’S CLAIMS
Readdie claims that People Shop had breached the following provisions of the
(a) Sections 535, 536 (
Record keeping claim
(b) Section 323, with an alleged underpayment of
$10,378.36 (
Underpayment claim
(c) Section 44, in respect of maximum weekly hours
Maximum weekly hours claim
(d) Section 44, in respect of compassionate leave,
alleging underpayment of $1000 (
Compassionate leave claim
Readdie seeks the imposition of penalties in respect of the alleged
contraventions of the Act (
Penalties claim
). She also claims $68.61 for
reimbursement of approved Uber expenses (
Reimbursement claim
‘an award of general and/or pecuniary damages, of an amount in the
vicinity of $10,000 - $15,000 or another amount as
awarded by the Court’
Damages claim
Readdie’s Underpayment claim arises from her entitlements pursuant to the
Contract. However, Ms Readdie makes the Underpayment
claim pursuant to s 323(1)
The applicable burden of proof
Readdie generally bears the onus of proving her claim to the civil standard of
proof, on the balance of probabilities. Whilst contravention
of a civil remedy
provision is not an offence,
Evidence Act 2008
(Vic) requires the Court to take into
account the nature of the cause of action, the nature of the subject matter of
the proceeding
and the gravity of the matters alleged. I have approached the
evidence about the alleged contravention of civil remedy provisions
accordingly.
Ms Readdie also submitted (in her final written submissions) that the reverse
onus of proof in s 557C of the Act applies.
Shop did not make any submissions in response. This issue is addressed below in
my consideration of the Underpayment claim.
The Record keeping claim
Readdie claims that People Shop breached the record keeping provisions in ss 535
and 536 of the Act and the Regulations Pt 3-6.
Section 535(1) provides that an
employer is required to make and keep for 7 years employee records of the kind
prescribed by the
Fair Work Regulations 2009
Regulations
in respect of each employee (
Employee Records
). Section 535(2) provides
that those records must be in a form and contain the information prescribed by
the Regulations.
Division 3 Subdivision 1 of the Regulations prescribes
the required Employee Records, which relevantly include pay records (r 3.33),
overtime records (r 3.34) and superannuation contribution records (3.37).
Section 536(1) of the Act provides that an employer must
give a pay slip to each
of its employees within one working day of paying an amount to the employee in
relation to the performance
of work. Section 536(2)(b) provides that the pay
slip must include any information prescribed by the Regulations. Regulation 3.46
sets out in detail the required content of a pay slip.
obligations in r 3.33(1) relating to pay records arises only in respect of
‘remuneration paid.’ The obligation in
s 536(1) relating to pay
slips arises only in respect of ‘paying an amount to the employee in
relation to the performance of
work’. I find on Ms Readdie’s
uncontested evidence that she was paid $1000 on 6 March 2022 (
), but otherwise Ms Readdie received no other payment in respect of
her employment with People Shop. For reasons detailed
I have concluded that the
$1000 Payment was a part payment of her wages, and not a gift as Ms Readdie
contended. Accordingly, the
relevant obligations in r 3.33(1) to make and keep a
record specifying the rate of remuneration, gross and net amounts paid and any
deductions made apply to the $1000 Payment. The obligations to provide a pay
slip pursuant to s 536(1) containing the information
pursuant to s 536(2), as
set out in r 3.46, also apply to the $1000 Payment, including information as to
the period to which the
pay slip relates, the gross and net amount of payment,
any penalty rates, the employer’s ABN, the annual rate of pay and required
superannuation contributions.
The only documents in
evidence relating to payments by People Shop to Ms Readdie are the ATO Income
Statement and the Osko Receipt.
The ATO Income Statement is on its face an ATO
record. It incorrectly states the amount paid to Ms Readdie, and there is no
that People Shop kept the record. I conclude that it does not
constitute an Employee Record pursuant to s 535(1). The Osko Receipt
illustrates
the gross sum of $1000 being transferred to Ms Readdie’s account, however,
does not specify the other matters required
of a pay slip pursuant to r 3.46. I
conclude that it is not a pay slip for the purposes of s 536(1) or,
alternatively, to the extent
that it is, it does not contain the information
required by s 536(2).
obligations in r 3.34 apply if ‘a penalty rate or loading (however
described) must be paid for overtime hours actually worked’.
For reasons
set out below, I have concluded that Ms Readdie is entitled to be paid overtime
pursuant to the Contract, and as such
the obligations in r 3.34 are enlivened.
Those obligations are to make and keep a record of the number of overtime hours
the employee during each day, or when the employee started and ceased
working overtime hours.
obligations in r 3.37 apply ‘if an employer is required to make
superannuation contributions’. For reasons set out
below, I have concluded
that People Shop was required to make superannuation contributions for Ms
Readdie, meaning the obligations
in r 3.37 are enlivened. Those obligations are
to make and keep a record of the amount of contributions, the period over which
were made, the date they were made and the name of the fund, amongst other
things. For reasons already given, I conclude that the
ATO Income Statement does
not constitute such a record.
were no such records in evidence. People Shop’s Defence did not address Ms
Readdie’s Record Keeping claim. People
Shop did not make discovery of, or
file and serve, any employee records or pay slips in accordance with the
Court’s directions.
In the course of the proceeding, People Shop contended
that such documents were held by the VLSB/Mr Rapke, however I have concluded
that People Shop had an unfettered right to that material which it had failed to
collect or retrieve.
In the course
of the proceeding, People Shop contended that Ms Di Gregorio held such
documents. However, to the extent they were
not provided to People Shop
following the issue of the Di Gregorio Subpoena, People Shop failed to
avail itself of two further opportunities to
Subpoena the records from Ms Di
conclude accordingly that People Shop did not make and keep the records required
by s 535(1) in respect of overtime pursuant to
r 3.34 or superannuation pursuant
to r 3.37. I find that People Shop:
(a) contravened ss 535(1) and 536(1) in respect of the
$1000 Payment;
(b) contravened s 535(1) in respect of the failure to
keep overtime records required by r 3.34; and
(c) contravened s 535(1) in respect of the failure to
keep superannuation records required by r 3.37.
The Underpayment claim
Readdie seeks payment of $10,378.36 from People Shop in respect of unpaid wages
pursuant to s 323(1) of the Act. Section 323(1)
323 Method and frequency of payment
(1) An employer must pay an employee amounts payable to the employee
in relation to the performance of work:
(a) in full (except as provided by section 324); and
(b) in money by one, or a combination, of the methods referred to in
subsection (2); and
(c) at least monthly.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria is an eligible State or Territory court
pursuant to s 12 of the Act. Section 545(3) of the
Act provides that:
(3) An eligible State or Territory court may order an employer to pay an
amount to, or on behalf of, an employee of the employer
if the court is
satisfied that:
(a) the employer was required to pay the amount under this Act ...;
(b) the employer has contravened a civil remedy provision by failing to
pay the amount.
Accordingly,
for the Court to have jurisdiction under the Act to rectify an underpayment by
People Shop, People Shop must have been
required to pay the amount under the
I was not referred to any
authorities by either party as to whether s 323(1) imposes this requirement.
However, I have had regard
Euro Car Parts Pty Ltd v
in which Halley J
considered whether an eligible State or Territory court had jurisdiction
pursuant to s 545(3) of the Act to order
an employer to rectify a contractual
underpayment pursuant to s 323 of the Act. After a review of relevant
authorities,
his Honour held that
‘...whilst the source of the obligation to pay may be founded elsewhere, s
323 of the Act nonetheless
imposes a further statutory obligation to pay an
amount in full, in money and at least
monthly...’
and an eligible
State or Territory court thus had jurisdiction. Consistent with this decision, I
have concluded that any amount payable
to Ms Readdie for the performance of work
pursuant to the Contract is also required to be paid pursuant to s 323 of the
Act, in full,
in money and at least monthly, enlivening this Court’s
Section 557C – presumption where records not provided
respect of the Underpayment claim, s 557C of the Act regulates how the Court
must approach evidentiary
Section 557C has the
effect that if Ms Readdie makes an allegation in relation to a matter in the
proceeding, and People Shop contravened
a record keeping requirement in respect
of that matter, People Shop has the burden of disproving Ms Readdie’s
allegation unless
People Shop provides a reasonable excuse as to the
non-compliance (
the Presumption
Readdie alleges that she worked and was entitled to be paid by People Shop for
overtime hours and was not paid for these hours.
Ms Readdie also alleges that
she was entitled to payment of superannuation pursuant to the Contract which was
not paid. I have already
concluded that People Shop contravened the requirements
of ss 535(1) and 536 in respect of the $1000 Payment along with s 535(1)
respect of overtime records and superannuation records. In light of the matters
referred to in paragraph
satisfied People Shop has provided a reasonable excuse for the contraventions.
Accordingly, People Shop bears the burden
of disproving the relevant
allegations. Because of the nature of Ms Readdie’s overtime entitlement,
considered in detail below,
I consider that the total hours worked must be known
in order to ascertain when Ms Readdie is entitled to be paid for overtime hours.
Accordingly, the Presumption must extend to Ms Readdie’s allegations as to
the total hours worked. However, I consider that
if I am positively dissuaded of
an allegation on Ms Readdie’s own evidence, s 557C does not require me to
regard the allegation
as proved. Nor do I consider s 557C requires me to regard
an allegation as proved based on an incorrect construction of Ms Readdie’s
legal entitlements. Given these matters, and in the context where Ms
Readdie’s evidence is largely uncontested, the Presumption
affected one of my findings.
Which version of the contract applies?
Contract included a letter of offer to Ms Readdie dated 17 February 2022
Letter of Offer
) which provided a commencement date of 17 February 2022.
Terms of Employment
Your terms and conditions of employment and the essential responsibilities of
your role are as set out in:
accompanying Terms Sheet; and
accompanying Schedule.
Together, these form your employment contract.
Contract had the following relevant express terms, in the Terms Sheet:
Hours of work
Company’s standard business hours are from 9:30 am to 6:00 pm, Monday to
3.2 However, you
may be required to work outside these hours on occasion in order to discharge
your duties, such as by attending to
urgent filing deadlines or to deal with
unanticipated developments.
expected that you will make yourself available, at all times, when it is
reasonably expected of you to serve the Company’s
needs, including working
extended hours, in order to satisfy and complete the requirements of your
position, including all the obligations
set out in this
Remuneration
(a) Your gross salary for the offered role will be $66,000 per annum [
(b) Your Gross Salary is inclusive of superannuation which the Company will pay
at a level required to meet the superannuation guarantee
contribution required under the
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act
(Cth) in respect of your employment.
(c) The Gross Salary offered to you is in consideration of your commitment to
work for the Company full-time, i.e., up to forty hours
per week, and in
accordance with the Terms of your Contract.
(d) In the event that the Company requires you to undertake more work in a month
the total derived by an extrapolation of forty hours of
work in a week, it agrees to pay you a gross amount of $57.00 per hour
taxes) for every additional hour of work beyond the forty hours.
(f) Your Gross Salary (less any tax and superannuation contributions deductions)
will be remitted to your nominated bank account
monthly, on the 27
day of every month, so long as the date does not fall on a weekend or a public
holiday. If the 27
of the month falls on the weekend or a public
holiday, it will be remitted to your account on the next working day.
4.2 Superannuation
(a) The Gross Salary is inclusive of superannuation payments.
(b) The Company will make superannuation payments to you at a level required to
meet the superannuation guarantee charge [
] contribution required
under the under the
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992
(Cth) in respect of your employment.
Second Contract also comprised a Letter of Offer stating the employment
commences on 18 February 2022, a Terms Sheet and Schedule.
Both versions state
that Ms Readdie was employed as a ‘solicitor.’ However, the Contract
at cl 1.4 of the Terms Sheet
referred to Ms Readdie as the ‘Principal
Solicitor of the Company.’ This reference was changed to
‘solicitor’
in the Second Contract. Further, the Schedule to the
Second Contract contained four changes from the Schedule in the Contract, by
inserting the phrase ‘assisting the principal solicitor’ before
specifying responsibilities. The Second Contract contained
identical terms to
those extracted above from the Contract, including the gross salary, except the
rate specified for working each
additional hour of work beyond the 40 hours at
clause 4.1(d) (
Overtime Rate
) was changed from $57 per hour in the
Contract to $32 per hour in the Second Contract.
is implicit from Ms Readdie’s claim that she considers the Overtime Rate
in the Contract applies,
accordingly did not regard herself as being bound by the lower Overtime Rate in
the Second Contract. People Shop did not address
the issue in its Defence or in
evidence. However, accepting the uncontested evidence of Ms Readdie that Ms Di
Gregorio sent her
copies of both contracts on 14 March 2022, I infer that People
Shop considered the Second Contract to be applicable. Having signed
Contract, it is prima facie binding on Ms Readdie. Neither party referred to any
authorities as to whether a written contract
is binding in comparable
circumstances. However, I have had regard to following principle in
[A] party who has entered into a written contract under a serious mistake about
its contents in relation to a fundamental term will
be entitled in equity to an
order rescinding the contract if the other party is aware that circumstances
exist which indicate that
the first party is entering the contract under some
serious mistake or misapprehension about either the content or the subject
of that term and deliberately sets out to ensure that the first party
does not become aware of the existence of his mistake or
misapprehension.
find based on Ms Readdie’s uncontested evidence that she was unaware of
the change to the Overtime Rate before she signed
the Second Contract and People
Shop did not inform her of it. I find that Mr Kuksal informed Ms Readdie that
the reason she was required
to re-sign the contract was because the Contract
incorrectly referred to principal solicitor not solicitor. I find, based on the
evidence of the surrounding circumstances, that contrary to the reason stated by
Mr Kuksal, a substantial reason for People Shop
requiring Ms Readdie to sign the
Second Contract was to reduce the Overtime Rate payable to her. The change to
the Overtime Rate
was a significant reduction (around 44 per cent). In light of
the ‘commencement date’ in the Second Contract, the change
from 18 February 2022. At the relevant time, based on my findings set out below,
Ms Readdie had already worked over 112 hours
in seven days and was entitled to
payment at the Overtime Rate in respect of 66.94 hours. This payment, due on 27
February 2022,
had not yet been made by People Shop. Accordingly, the change to
the Overtime Rate directly affected and substantially reduced the
remuneration
payable to Ms Readdie, including for work she had already performed. In
contrast, the ‘principal solicitor’
changes were minor.
conclude that People Shop, through Mr Kuksal, misrepresented to Ms Readdie both
the reason he was requiring Ms Readdie to re-sign
her contract, and the content
of the Second Contract, by referring to the minor principal solicitor changes as
the only reason Ms
Readdie was required to re-sign the contract, and not
referring at all to the far more significant reduction in her Overtime Rate.
a consequence of this misrepresentation, Ms Readdie undertook only a cursory
check of her salary and hours before signing the
Second Contract and was
mistaken as to the Overtime Rate.
find, on Ms Readdie’s uncontested evidence, that it was only after Mr
Kuksal had satisfied himself that Ms Readdie had signed
the Second Contract that
he then mentioned the Overtime Rate in the Contract being for a principal
solicitor. I infer from the timing
of this disclosure that Mr Kuksal was aware
that Ms Readdie may sign the Second Contract without noticing the change to the
Rate, and accordingly did not draw it to her attention until after she
had signed. Mr Kuksal’s misrepresentation, and the timing
of his later
disclosure, facilitated Ms Readdie’s mistake as to the contents of the
Second Contract. In these circumstances,
I conclude that Ms Readdie is entitled
to have the Second Contract rescinded, and thus the Overtime Rate specified in
the Contract
have also considered whether, notwithstanding her mistake in entering the Second
Contract, Ms Readdie acquiesced to the change in
the Overtime Rate after Mr
Kuksal mentioned it subsequent to her signing the Second Contract, by continuing
to work. However, I accept
Ms Readdie’s uncontested evidence that she put
what Mr Kuksal said to the back of her mind. I am satisfied based on the
of her email to Ms Di Gregorio a week later on 13 March 2022, after her
employment ended, that Ms Readdie remained unaware of the
details of the change.
I conclude that Ms Readdie did not accept the changed Overtime Rate by her
What activities is Ms Readdie entitled to payment for?
Readdie’s claim covers periods she spent at the Office; waiting outside
the Office when she had been required to attend but
could not get into the
premises; working at the hotel and working from home. I am satisfied on Ms
Readdie’s uncontested evidence
that on each such occasion, Ms Readdie
attended the relevant locations or performed the work because she was asked or
required to
by People Shop (either Mr Kuksal, Ms Xu or Ms Di Gregorio) to do so.
The terms of Ms Readdie’s contract provide that she is
paid her Gross
Salary ‘in consideration of her commitment to work’ full-time for
People Shop. She is entitled to payment
for additional hours in the event that
People Shop ‘requires her to undertake’ that work. I conclude that
where Ms Readdie
attended or made herself available for work or service as
requested or required by People Shop in accordance with her Contract, she
entitled to payment (I will refer to this as ‘work’).
find based on the evidence of Ms Readdie and Ms Xu that during periods of work,
Ms Readdie was permitted to undertake personal communication
with her family,
and also had meal breaks where work was discussed. Ms Xu contended accordingly
that Ms Readdie’s time claimed
was not all work, due to these personal
activities being permitted. However, I find based on Ms Readdie’s evidence
breaks occurred at a time and in a manner directed by Mr Kuksal,
during which Ms Readdie was not free to leave for a personal break
but remained
available for work and undertook work. Ms Readdie’s capacity to undertake
limited personal communications with
her family during work hours, or her
performance of work from a different location, does not alter my view that Ms
Readdie was at
work and is entitled to payment for that time.
note People Shop’s Defence that Ms Readdie failed to perform her duties
and obligations as required. Leaving aside the events
of 13 March 2022, which I
have addressed below, there is no evidence that Ms Readdie did not work as
Findings as to hours and days worked by Ms Readdie
than where indicated below, I accept Ms Readdie’s evidence, including the
various documents corroborating those hours,
as to the hours and days that she
worked, and find accordingly.
1 - Thursday 17 February 2022 (3.15pm – 11pm, 7.5
hours claimed) I
accept Ms Xu’s evidence that Ms Readdie would have been waiting around for
some time prior to commencing work,
did not have access to People Shop’s
systems, may have been chatting or applying for her practising certificate.
However, Ms
Readdie was nonetheless at work and is entitled to payment. I find
Ms Readdie is entitled to be paid for 7 hours and 30 minutes work.
2 - Friday 18 February 2022 (11.30am – 12 midnight next day, 12 hours
claimed): Again, I accept Ms Xu’s evidence
that Ms Readdie was permitted
to make personal calls during this time, however Ms Readdie was nonetheless at
work and entitled to
payment. I find Ms Readdie is entitled to be paid for 12
hours’ work.
3 - Saturday 19 February 2022 (12 noon - 12.30pm Sunday 20 February 2022, 25.5
hours claimed): I find that Ms Readdie was at
work and entitled to be paid for
this period, including whilst waiting outside the office. However, the evidence
establishes that
Ms Readdie worked for 24.5 hours, not 25.5 hours as claimed. Ms
Readdie is entitled to be paid for 24 hours and 30 minutes.
4 - Sunday 20 February 2022 (7pm – 12 midnight, 7 hours claimed): I find
based on Ms Readdie’s uncontested evidence
that she worked from 6.40pm
until 1am the following day. Ms Readdie claims a total of 7 hours for work she
describes as being between
7pm and 12am. However, the period between 7pm and
12am is only 5 hours, and the period worked between 6.40pm and 1am is 6 hours
20 minutes. I find that Ms Readdie is entitled to be paid for 6 hours and 20
5 - Monday 21 February 2022 (9.30am – 5.30am next day, 20 hours claimed):
I find based on Ms Readdie’s uncontested
evidence that she worked from
approximately 9.40am until 5.30am the next morning. Ms Readdie claims a total of
20 hours for work.
However her evidence establishes that she did not arrive at
work until 9.38am. I find that Ms Readdie is entitled to be paid for
and 50 minutes.
6 - Tuesday 22 February 2022 (12 noon – 6.30am next day, 18.5 hours
claimed): I find that Ms Readdie is entitled to be
paid for 18 hours and 30
7 - Wednesday 23 February 2022 (12pm –12.30pm next day, 24 hours claimed):
I find that Ms Readdie is entitled to be paid
for 24 hours.
8 - Sunday 6 March 2022 (3.30pm – 11.15am next day, 19.5 hours claimed): I
find on Ms Readdie’s evidence that she
agreed with People Shop that she
would commence work at the Office at 5pm. The emails and phone records suggest
that she re-signed
her contract prior to this, however I am not satisfied that
she commenced work at 3.30pm as claimed. I find that she worked and is
to payment for 18 hours and 15 minutes, from 5pm until 11.15am the next
9 - Monday 7 – Tuesday 8 March 2022 (9.30pm – 2.30am next day, 5
hours claimed): I find that Ms Readdie is entitled
to be paid for 5 hours.
10 - Wednesday 9 March 2022 (9am – 11pm, 14 hours claimed): I find on Ms
Readdie’s uncontested evidence that she
worked and is entitled to be paid
for work from shortly after 9.08am until 11.15pm that evening, a total claim of
11 - Thursday 10 March 2022 (11am – 3.30am next day, 16.5 hours claimed):
I find that Ms Readdie is entitled to be paid
for 16 hours and 30 minutes.
12 - Friday 11 March 2022 (11am - 9.45pm, 12.5 hours claimed): Based on Ms
Readdie’s uncontested evidence, I find that
she commenced work at 11am and
ceased work at 9.30pm, a total of 10.5 hours, and took approximately an hour for
her medical appointment.
However, Ms Readdie’s evidence refers to further
alleged. Accordingly, the Presumption has the effect that the allegation that Ms
Readdie worked 12.5 hours has not been disproved.
I find that Ms Readdie is
entitled to be paid for 12.5 hours.
13 - Saturday 12 March 2022 (11.00am – 3.20am next day, 16 hours claimed):
I conclude that Ms Readdie was at work and
entitled to be paid for her time in
watching ‘The Miracle.’ It is apparent from the text exchange with
Mr Kuksal that
he was directing Ms Readdie to watch the movie, and to maintain
communication with him. He required her to have substantially completed
the film prior to attending work the next day. I find that Ms Readdie is
entitled to be paid for 16 hours.
14 - Sunday 13 March 2022 (4pm – 8pm, 4 hours claimed): I find that Ms
Readdie is entitled to be paid for 4 hours from
4pm to 8pm.
summarises the days and hours I have concluded Ms Readdie worked. Based on
Ms Readdie’s uncontested evidence, I find that she
had not commenced work
and accordingly was not required to work before 17 February 2022. Ms Readdie was
not required to work between
25 February 2022 – 5 March 2022. Ms Readdie
ceased work on 13 March 2022.
Ms Readdie’s payment entitlements under the Contract
Readdie’s payment entitlements are wholly derived from the Contract. There
is some complexity in the interaction of the Contract’s
relating to weekly hours, monthly payments and the Overtime Rate. Ms Readdie
contends for a method of applying these provisions
however I have reached the
following, different, view.
to cl 4.1(a)-(c) of the Contract, Ms Readdie is entitled to be paid a Gross
Salary of $66,000, inclusive of superannuation.
The Letter of Offer provides
that the Gross Salary is a per annum sum. Clause 4.1(c) provides that this sum
is ‘in consideration
of your commitment to work for the Company full-time,
i.e., up to forty hours per week’. This description establishes that
Readdie’s Gross Salary is based on full time hours of ‘up to
40’ each week (
Gross Salary Hours
to cl 4.1(d), when Ms Readdie is required to undertake more work in a month than
what ‘would [be] the total derived
by an extrapolation of forty hours of
work in a week,’ she is entitled to payment of the Overtime Rate,
inclusive of tax but
exclusive of superannuation, for each additional hour of
work. Clause 4.1(d) accordingly makes provision for the averaging or
‘extrapolation’
of 40 hours per week across a monthly period, and
provides that once that extrapolation has occurred, hours worked in addition
Overtime Hours
) are payable at the Overtime Rate.
4.1(f) provides that the Gross Salary, less any taxation and superannuation
deductions, will be paid monthly, on the 27
day of each month or
the next working day thereafter where the 27
falls on a weekend
Payment Date
). It is implicit that cl 4.1(f) requires payment of
of the Gross Salary (less tax and superannuation) on each
Payment Date, where Ms Readdie has worked the requisite Gross Salary Hours.
Further, based on the need to calculate Overtime Hours by ‘month’ in
cl 4.1(d), I consider it implicit that Overtime
Hours are also payable monthly
on the Payment Date.
express terms of the Contract are silent as to when the ‘month,’ for
which payment is due on the Payment Date, commences
and concludes. I consider
that the provision should be interpreted so as to conform to the requirement in
s 323 that payments are
made ‘at least monthly’. In the absence of
any specific designation, I consider it implicit that the payment required
the Payment Date is for the monthly period immediately preceding the Payment
Date, ending on the 26
day of the month (
Payment Month
express terms of the Contract are also silent as to the dates on which a 40 hour
‘week,’ commences and concludes.
Ms Readdie submitted, and I agree,
that in light of cl 3.1, a week begins on Monday and ends on Sunday. Given
‘standard business
hours’ commence on a Monday it is implicit that a
‘week’ begins on a Monday.
the entitlement to Gross Salary arises by reference to the work in a
‘week’ but payment is determined by Payment
Month, it is necessary
to ascertain which weeks or parts thereof fall within each Payment Month, to
determine what Gross Salary is
payable. The duration of a Payment Month may
range from 28 to 31 days. As a Payment Month may encompass incomplete portions
week, I consider it implicit that the Contract permits and requires
pro-rata portions of a week to be considered. Pursuant to cl
3.2 and 3.3, Ms
Readdie may be required to work Gross Salary Hours on any day of the week,
notwithstanding ‘standard business
hours’. Accordingly, I consider
it implicit that to determine a pro-rata portion of a week, for the purpose of a
Payment Month,
40 hours must be averaged across the seven days of the week.
express terms of the Contract are silent as to how to account for the periods
within a week or Payment Month where Ms Readdie
was either not yet employed, no
longer employed or it was agreed she would be absent from work with a medical
certificate. Clause
4.1(c) refers to ‘up to 40 hours work per week’
which on a strict reading suggests she is entitled to the full weekly
Salary irrespective of whether she works less than 40 hours. However, in the
context of the remainder of cl 4.1(c) and cl 3,
I find it is implicit that where
Ms Readdie has not been required to work for part of a week, she is not entitled
to payment of her
Gross Salary for that part of a week. So, in weeks where Ms
Readdie has only been required to work for part of the week for one of
reasons, she is entitled to a pro-rata portion of her Gross Salary Hours.
must follow from this that for the purposes of cl 4.1(d), any part of a week
that is excluded for the purposes of Ms Readdie’s
Gross Salary Hours is
similarly excluded during the ‘extrapolation’ provided for by cl
4.1(d). This approach maintains
the objectively determined intended effect of cl
4.1(d), which is to allow averaging of hours over a monthly period such that
in excess of the equivalent of 40 Gross Salary Hours in a week are paid at
the Overtime Rate. Otherwise, these relativities would
not be maintained.
Conclusion as to Underpayment claim
on the analysis above of the operation of the contractual provisions, and my
findings as to the hours and days worked by Ms
out my calculations in respect of Ms Readdie’s entitlement to be paid
pursuant to the Contract. I conclude that for her
work in the February Payment
Month, Ms Readdie was entitled to be paid
on 27 February 2022.
For her work in the March Payment Month, Ms Readdie was entitled to be paid
on 27 March 2022, totalling
In contravention
of s 323(1) of the Act, People Shop failed to make either of these payments to
Ms Readdie.
Superannuation
find on Ms Readdie’s evidence that she was not paid superannuation. This
was corroborated by her Superannuation Statement.
I have rejected the ATO Income
Statement as a record of what Ms Readdie received. Ms Readdie’s Complaint
does not expressly
articulate a claim for superannuation. However, the
Chronology and superannuation statement annexed to her Complaint make clear that
she complains of having received no payment for Superannuation. On this basis I
have accepted that her claim extends to a claim for
unpaid superannuation. Ms
Readdie’s entitlement to payment for her Gross Salary Hours pursuant to
the Contract is inclusive
of an entitlement to superannuation, underpinned by cl
4.2. The calculations in Appendix B are exclusive of superannuation. In the
2021-2022 Financial Year, superannuation was payable at a rate of 10 per cent of
ordinary time earnings.
that Ms Readdie’s ordinary time earnings are comprised by her Gross Salary
as reflected in Appendix B. She earned $1,290.43
and $1,428.44 in Gross Salary
each respective month, totalling $2,718.87 in Gross Salary, resulting in an
entitlement to superannuation
The $1000 Payment
Readdie submitted that the $1000 Payment from People Shop on 6 March 2022 was
not wages but a gift to tide her over. Notwithstanding
the s 557C Presumption, I
am positively satisfied on Ms Readdie’s evidence that the payment of $1000
was a part-payment of
the amount owing to Ms Readdie on the February Payment
Date. The $1000 was paid by People Shop after Ms Readdie had inquired twice
be terminated. Further, Mr Kuksal linked the payment
with the inability to use
the payroll system. The amount remaining payable for the February Payment Month
and the total amount remaining payable is
Other issues
Shop’s Defence includes the claim that Ms Readdie failed to provide
details of any hours worked over and above 40 hours
per week. I find on Ms
Readdie’s uncontested evidence that she provided People Shop with a
breakdown of all hours she worked
by email on 15 March 2022, and offered to
substantiate them if required. The claim is factually incorrect, and in any
event, People
Shop was itself required to keep records of Ms Readdie’s
hours and did not do so.
Readdie submitted that her overtime rate should be $65.79, not $57.00. She
contended that because the National Employment Standards
for maximum weekly hours of 38 for a full time employee, her hourly rate should
be derived by dividing her weekly rate by
38 hours not 40, then doubling that
sum. I do not consider that the NES has the effect contended for by Ms Readdie.
is titled ‘maximum weekly hours’, it does not require an
employer to make payment at overtime rates for hours above 38
per week. Further,
the Contract contains a fixed Overtime Rate and there is no basis to interpret
it as requiring payment at double
time. Ms Readdie further contended that
because the Contract does not mention mandatory rest periods between shifts, s
20.6 of the
Legal Services Award 2020
should be applied. However, I do
not find any basis to imply such a term in the Contract.
The Maximum hours claim
of the Act provides that an employer must not contravene the NES. Section 62
of the Act sets out the NES regarding maximum weekly
hours. It provides:
62 Maximum weekly hours
Maximum weekly hours of work
(1) An employer must not request or require an employee to work more than the
following number of hours in a week unless the additional
reasonable:
(a) for a full‑time employee—38 hours; ...
Determining whether additional hours are reasonable
(3) In determining whether additional hours are reasonable or unreasonable for
the purposes of subsections (1) and (2), the following
must be taken into
(a) any risk to employee health and safety from working the additional
(b) the employee’s personal circumstances, including family
responsibilities;
(c) the needs of the workplace or enterprise in which the employee is
(d) whether the employee is entitled to receive overtime payments, penalty
rates or other compensation for, or a level of remuneration
that reflects an
expectation of, working additional hours;
(e) any notice given by the employer of any request or requirement to work the
additional hours;
(f) any notice given by the employee of his or her intention to refuse to work
the additional hours;
(g) the usual patterns of work in the industry, or the part of an industry, in
which the employee works;
(h) the nature of the employee’s role, and the employee’s level of
responsibility;
(i) whether the additional hours are in accordance with averaging terms
included under section 63 in a modern award or enterprise
agreement that applies
to the employee, or with an averaging arrangement agreed to by the employer and
employee under section 64;
(j) any other relevant matter.
Authorised leave or absence treated as hours worked
(4) For the purposes of subsection (1), the hours an employee works in a week
are taken to include any hours of leave, or absence,
whether paid or unpaid,
that the employee takes in the week and that are authorised:
(a) by the employee’s employer; or
(b) by or under a term or condition of the employee’s employment; or
(c) by or under a law of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory, or an
instrument in force under such a law.
Readdie contends that People Shop has contravened s 62 as she was forced to work
an egregiously excessive number of hours above
38 each week. People Shop did not
address this claim in its Defence. Neither Ms Readdie nor People Shop referred
me to any authorities
on the operation of s 62 of the Act. However, I have had
regard to two decisions of her Honour Katzmann J, from which the following
principles are derived. Firstly, s 62(1) ‘imposes a limit on the number of
hours an employee may be asked or required to
That limit for a
full time employee is 38 hours in a week, ‘unless the additional hours are
reasonable.’
[T]he effect of s 62(1) is that requiring or requesting a full-time employee to
work in excess of 38 hours a week is prima facie
unreasonable. The burden
then shifts to the employer to prove that the excess hours were reasonable:
Currie v Dempsey
(1967) 69 SR (NSW) 116
at 125 (Walsh
s 62(3) sets out the relevant considerations for determining reasonableness.
What is “reasonable” is necessarily assessed on a case-by case
basis, by reference to the employee’s circumstances
employer’s business in accordance with the terms of s 62(3): see
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v BHP Coal Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 25
230 FCR 298
(Logan, Bromberg and Katzmann
find that People Shop required Ms Readdie to work more than 38 hours a week. The
Act does not define the meaning of ‘week’
for the purposes of
s62(1). Ms Readdie’s actual hours of work were undertaken in two blocks.
In the first block, Ms Readdie
in fact worked a total of 112 hours and 40
minutes within the time period of a week. In the second block, Ms Readdie in
fact worked
a total of 86 hours and 15 minutes within the time period of a week
and one day. However, I have applied s 62(1) to the ‘contractual’
weeks as I have found them to operate, and accounted for each day absent within
that week in accordance with s 62(4) on the basis
that Ms Readdie is to be taken
to have worked 5.71 hours on each such day. In the week beginning 14 February,
Ms Readdie worked 67.46
hours. In the week beginning 21 February, Ms Readdie
worked 79.46 hours. In the week beginning 7 March, Ms Readdie worked 79.25
In addition, the Contract expressly permits People Shop to require Ms Readdie to
work up to 40 hours a week, and she may be required
to work in excess of 40
hours in a given week ‘when it is reasonably
Shop therefore bears the burden of establishing that the hours Ms Readdie was
required to work were reasonable. I find, based
on this evidence of Ms Xu, that
People Shop had a high workload at the time, that there were availability
problems with other solicitors,
and Ms Readdie needed to be given a lot of
background about the various legal proceedings on foot. These are matters which
to the needs of the workplace or enterprise, pursuant to s 62(3)(c), and
they support a finding that it was reasonable to require
Ms Readdie to work
additional hours. However, this is only one of a number of enumerated matters in
s 62(3)(c) which must be considered,
based on the circumstances of this case, in
determining whether additional hours are
reasonable.
have considered Ms Readdie’s entitlement to the Overtime Rates (s
62(3)(d)). Ms Readdie was entitled to additional payment
for overtime, which
supports a finding that additional hours are reasonable. However, the averaging
aspect of the entitlement, given
its potential to permit work in excess of 40
hours per week at the Gross Salary Rate, in my view neutralises this
consideration.
other considerations lead me to conclude that the additional hours were
unreasonable.
have considered any risk to Ms Readdie’s health and safety from working
the additional hours (s 62(3)(a)). I find based on
Ms Readdie’s evidence
and the medical certificates provided that the hours she worked prior to 23
February 2022 contributed
to an exacerbation of her pre-existing medical
have considered Ms Readdie’s personal circumstances, including family
responsibilities (s 62(3)(b)). I find based on Ms Readdie’s
evidence that
the context of her mother’s serious illness, her mother’s birthday
and the death of her former partner
were factors which made the additional hours
unreasonable. In particular, Ms Readdie was working additional hours when her
had returned home from hospital and was trying to make arrangements for
her. Ms Readdie did not see her mother on her birthday at
all, as she was
required to work, and despite having requested the day of her former
partner’s funeral as leave, she was required
to attend work in
circumstances where, on her uncontested evidence, there was no
‘emergency’ or urgency to the work she
was required to do.
have considered the notice provided by People Shop of the requirement to work
additional hours (s 62(3)(e)). I find on Ms Readdie’s
evidence that she
was rarely provided with notice of the hours she would be required to work. This
is graphically illustrated by
her evidence that upon attending the Office to
sign the Contract she was asked on the spot to commence work and worked until
that night. Ms Readdie’s text messages to her mother, sister and to
Ms Xu illustrate that Ms Readdie was often not aware of
when she would start, or
how long she would be required to work, on any given day.
have considered the nature of Ms Readdie’s role and level of
responsibility (s 62(3)(g)). I find on Ms Readdie’s uncontested
that this was her first solicitor role. She was a junior employee and required
supervision. This is the case notwithstanding
that, based on Ms Readdie and Ms
Xu’s evidence, she in fact was not supervised by another solicitor but was
herself required
to supervise other staff.
are several other matters which I consider support a finding that the additional
hours required to be worked by Ms Readdie were
unreasonable, with my findings as
to the relevant factual matters based on Ms Readdie’s evidence. The sheer
number of hours
she was required to work are, in my view, self-evidently
excessive. The times of the day, night and weekends she was required to
were arbitrary and unusual. Ms Readdie’s capacity to obtain a reasonable
amount of sleep was impeded. The requirement
that she work excessive hours
whilst staying in a hotel room with Mr Kuksal and Ms Xu deprived her of any form
of personal autonomy
or agency without any rational justification apparent.
Whilst performing the additional hours, Ms Readdie’s time was monopolised
by People Shop and she was isolated both physically, and in her capacity to
communicate, from her family. Ms Readdie was vulnerable
in this situation. She
had no experience of how law firms ordinarily operate by which to judge the
requirements imposed on her. Finally,
Mr Kuksal’s requirement that Ms
Readdie watch the Ice Hockey movie, unrelated to her work, at around 1am on a
Sunday morning
after having already worked approximately 14 hours on a Saturday,
and maintain communication with him whilst doing so, was on any
unreasonable.
have had regard to Ms Xu’s evidence that Ms Readdie rarely seemed anything
other than extremely happy in respect of her role.
Ms Readdie on her own
evidence tried to make the best of the role. It is not surprising that she
displayed the appearance described
at most times. However, this does not to my
mind derogate from my findings as to the actual impact of her working
conditions.
considered all of these matters, I conclude that the additional hours People
Shop required Ms Readdie to work in the weeks
beginning 14 February, 21 February
and 7 March, were unreasonable. I find that People Shop contravened s 62(1) of
the Act on these
three occasions. The considerations I have outlined above lead
me to conclude that the contraventions were particularly egregious.
The Compassionate leave claim
Readdie claims she should have been entitled to four days of compassionate leave
pursuant to s 61(2)(e) and Part 2-2 Division 7
of the Act; two days to support
her mother during and after emergency surgery, and two days to grieve the death
of her former partner.
Ms Readdie claims $1000 and also alleges contravention of
the NES entitlement to compassionate leave pursuant to s 44 of the Act.
Readdie relied on her evidence, which I accept, that Ms Di Gregorio told her on
26 February that she had no entitlement to leave
in respect of medical
certificates she referred to having obtained, as she had not accrued leave yet.
She also relied on her evidence
as to her mother’s condition, and the
death of her former partner, which I accept. I also accept Ms Xu’s
evidence that
Ms Readdie did not request compassionate leave or provide relevant
information to People Shop. Ms Readdie implicitly accepted this
but contended
People Shop should have made her aware of her entitlement.
2-2 Division 7 Subdivision C of the Act sets out the NES entitlement to
Compassionate Leave. It also contains, at s 107, notice
and evidence
requirements. Section 107 requires an employee who intends to take compassionate
leave to give notice to the employer
and advise of the expected period of the
leave. Then, if the employer requires, the employee must provide evidence that
the conditions
for taking compassionate leave are satisfied. Section 107(4) then
provides that unless these requirements are complied with, an employee
entitled to take the leave. I find that Ms Readdie did not provide notice of the
taking of compassionate leave in accordance
with s 107(1). Her failure to
provide notice deprived People Shop of the opportunity to request evidence of
the entitlement. In the
case of Ms Readdie’s former partner, this would
have needed to address whether he was a member of Ms Readdie’s immediate
family, a requirement of s 104 of the Act. In the case of Ms Readdie’s
mother’s illness, this evidence would have needed
to address whether her
personal illness posed a serious threat to her life, a requirement of s 104, and
that the leave would be taken
to spend time with her mother, a requirement of s
105. Section 107(4) provides that an employee is not entitled to take
compassionate
leave unless the employee complies with s 107. Accordingly, I find
that Ms Readdie did not have a compassionate leave entitlement
and the alleged
contraventions are not made out.
The claim for reimbursement of expenses
Readdie claims $68.61 for reimbursement of approved Uber expenses. Ms
Readdie’s Reimbursement claim arises under the Contract.
This Court has
do not consider s 323 of the Act
has application to the reimbursement of
expenses, as I am not satisfied that these are payments due to Ms Readdie
‘in relation
to the performance of work.’
Contract provides:
5. Expenses
5.1 You will be reimbursed for reasonable business expenses incurred in the
proper performance of your duties.
5.2 However, you will only be reimbursed for expenses that are authorized in
advance by the Company and supported by appropriate
receipts (or other
documentation required by the Company) in the manner preferred by the Company.
find on Ms Readdie’s uncontested evidence that Ms Readdie’s Uber
expenses of $18.64 and $18.28 on 7 March 2022, $16.68
on Tuesday 8 March 2022
and $15.31 on 11 March 2022 were incurred by her, authorised in advance by Mr
Kuksal on behalf of People
Shop and supported by a receipt provided to People
Shop by Ms Readdie on Tuesday 15 March 2022. I conclude that Ms Readdie was
to reimbursement of these sums pursuant to cl 5, and her claim for
$68.61 is made out.
Damages claim
Readdie’s complaint initially included a claim for ‘[a]n award of
damages: the category and value of which to be calculated
with the assistance of
the Court.’ At the Directions Hearing on 14 June 2023, People Shop sought
further and better particulars
of this claim. Ms Readdie had filed and served a
document titled ‘Applicant’s submissions regarding the possibility
entitlement to damages’ (
Damages Submissions
) and provided it to
People Shop. People Shop submitted that there were no details in that document
as to how damages sought were
calculated, or the basis for them. I ultimately
directed that Ms Readdie had leave to file and serve an amended claim including
particulars
of her claim for general damages. Pursuant to this order, Ms Readdie
filed a document headed ‘Amendment to Plaintiff’s
Claim’ which
in respect of damages, stated that she sought ‘[a]n award of general
and/or pecuniary damages, of an amount
in the vicinity of $10,000 - $15,000, or
other amount as awarded by the court – outlined in the [Damages
Submissions].’
Damages Submissions state:
I have been hesitant to either name a particular category of damages or provide
a monetary estimate of any damages primarily because
I genuinely don’t
know what to do in these circumstances. Additionally, I am particularly mindful
of making a mistake and inadvertently
opening an avenue for my former employer
to attack the court’s judgement on what may be perceived as an error of
being said, I do have some thoughts on the matter and I have conducted
a little of my own research – as limited as it may be.
I therefore offer
these thoughts to the Court in a similar way that I imagine I may prepare a
Memorandum of advice for a senior colleague
or supervisor.
have considered whether the Damages Submissions, and the articulation of a sum
of $10,000-$15,000 in Ms Readdie’s Amended
Complaint, sufficiently
particularise her damages claim.
Damages Submissions raise the questions of any entitlement to damages and
exemplary damages arising from: the nature of termination;
breaches of civil
remedy provisions in the Act; inconvenience caused with Centrelink, the ATO,
breach of criminal provisions in the
Social Security (Administration) Act
Wage Theft Act 2020
and Ms Readdie’s incapacity to seek assistance in her claim for reasons
related to her work at People Shop.
respect of the ‘nature of the termination’ the Damages Submissions
go some way to articulating the claim. They state:
‘Question: Although I
am not eligible for the statutory remedy for constructive/unfair dismissal
afforded by
of the [Act], am I entitled to damages for
contractual
breach?’ They state that the termination of Ms Readdie’s
employment came about by way of constructive dismissal, following
Shop’s repudiation of the Contract, citing
Mendicino v Tour Dex Pty
as follows:
[10] ... Whether or not an employee has no choice sometimes manifests itself in
quite apparent circumstances. These might include
where an employer may refuse
to ...provide payment for work. It might also include circumstances in which an
employer may threaten
an employee in some particularly serious terms or
otherwise harass or victimise an employee. In such circumstances the work
environment
would be found to have been so repugnant or oppressive that it
should not have been reasonably endured by the employee.
consider that the allegation of constructive dismissal was sufficiently
particularised. I find on Ms Readdie’s uncontested
evidence that, as at 13
March 2022, People Shop had breached the Contract by failing to pay her wages on
27 February 2022. In addition,
for the reasons set out above regarding the
Maximum hours claim, I conclude that People Shop had made the work environment
so ‘repugnant’
as to have not been reasonable for Ms Readdie to
endure. These two matters were repudiatory breaches of the Contract.
Accordingly,
I find that it was People Shop, not Ms Readdie, that initiated the
termination of the employment relationship by its repudiatory
breach of the
Contract, which Ms Readdie accepted through her ‘resignation’ on 13
March 2022.
Damages Submissions then refer to extracts from
Fishlock v Campaign Palace
stated to be of relevance. The principles in the extracts include that where an
employee is contractually entitled to pay
in lieu of notice, that amount can be
recovered as a debt. Where an employer has a choice as to whether to pay in lieu
a failure to give notice or pay in lieu entitles the employee to
Damages for repudiation
are to put the Plaintiff in the position that they would have been in, had the
contract of employment been
However, the Damages
Submissions did not articulate Ms Readdie’s claim in respect of the nature
of termination any further.
respect of inconveniences with Centrelink and the ATO and the alleged breach of
criminal provisions in the respective legislation
referred to, the Damages
Submissions ask whether these are analogous to torts, state that People
Shop’s conduct should be described
as both egregious and contumelious and
Lamb v Cotogno
authority that exemplary damages are not confined to any one Tort in particular.
However, the Damages Submissions go no further
in articulating which torts are
breaches of civil remedy provisions in the Act and matters relating to Ms
Readdie’s incapacity to seek assistance
in her claim due to her work at
People Shop, the Damages Submissions do not articulate any cause of action.
Industrial Division is required to act without technicality and legal form.
However, it is a substantive matter of procedural
fairness that a Defendant must
be able to understand the nature of the claim being brought by a Plaintiff.
Despite the informality
of the material making up Ms Readdie’s claim, I
consider Ms Readdie’s Complaint and associated documentation met this
requirement in respect of each other aspect of her claim. However, in respect of
her Damages Claim, I do not consider that Ms Readdie
did so. Whilst the
‘nature of termination’ claim is partly articulated, Ms Readdie has
not identified the source or quantum
of her loss and damage, in circumstances
where People Shop raised this specific concern at the Directions Hearing on 14
In respect of all other aspects of the Damages Submissions it is
unclear what cause of action is relied on. The Damages Submissions
are posed as
questions, and whilst the Court has an obligation to assist an unrepresented
party, I do not consider that this extends
to assisting one party formulate
their claim against the other. Accordingly, I decline to award any damages.
Penalties claim
Readdie seeks the imposition of penalties for People Shop’s contravention
of civil remedy provisions of the Act. Pursuant
to s 546(1) of the Act, this
Court has jurisdiction to order that a person pay a pecuniary penalty that the
court considers is appropriate
if the court is satisfied that the person has
contravened a civil remedy
I have found that People Shop contravened the following civil remedy provisions:
, by contravening
in requiring Ms
Readdie to work more than 38 hours in the weeks of 14 February, 21 February and
7 March 2022, with those additional
hours being unreasonable;
(b) s 323(1), in respect of People Shop’s failure
to pay Ms Readdie as required for the February Payment Month and the March
Payment Month;
(c) s 535(1) in respect of the $1000 Payment, by
failing to keep pay records required by r 3.33;
(d) s 535(1) in respect of the failure to keep overtime
records required by r 3.34;
(e) s 535(1) in respect of the failure to keep
superannuation records required by r 3.37; and
(f) s 536(1) in respect of the failure to provide a pay
slip, containing the information set out in r 4.36, in respect of the $1000
found that People Shop contravened these provisions, I will make directions for
the filing of further material by the parties
in respect of the Penalties claim.
To inform the parties’ submissions and evidence, I note the following:
(a) The Court’s power to impose penalties arises
from s 546 of the Act.
(b) Pursuant to s 546(2)(b) of the Act, the maximum
penalty in respect of a contravention of a civil remedy provision for a body
is five times the maximum number of penalty units set out in the table
at s 539(2) in respect of the relevant provision.
(c) In the case of each of the civil remedy provisions
contravened, the table at s 539(2) provides that the maximum penalty for a
serious contravention is 600 penalty units, or otherwise, 60 penalty units.
Accordingly, the maximum penalty for a serious contravention
corporate is 3000 penalty units, or otherwise is 300 penalty units.
(d) The value of a penalty unit at the time of the
contraventions was $222,
the maximum penalty for a serious contravention is $666,000 and the maximum
penalty is otherwise $66,600.
to s 546(3), the Court may order that the penalty, or part of the penalty, be
paid to the Commonwealth, a particular organisation
or a particular person.
contravention’ is defined in s 557A of the Act. Section 557B of the Act
deals with the liability of a body corporate
for serious contraventions.
respect of each of the civil remedy provisions which I have found to have been
contravened, s 557 of the Act prescribes that two
or more contraventions of a
provision are taken to constitute a single contravention if they are committed
by the same person, and
arose out of a course of conduct by the person.
High Court recently considered the scope of the power conferred by s 546 of the
Act to impose civil pecuniary penalties in
Australian Building and
Construction Commissioner v
547 of the Act deals with interest up to judgment. It applies to orders of the
nature made in this proceeding. It provides
at s 547(2) that the Court must, on
application, include an amount of interest in the sum ordered, unless good cause
is shown to
the contrary. It provides at s 547(3) that without limiting s
547(2), in determining the amount of interest, the court must take
into account
the period between the day the relevant cause of action arose and the day the
order is made. I will also make directions
for the parties to make submissions
on any appropriate order in respect of interest.
make the following orders:
Defendant is ordered to pay the sum of $7,913.84 to the Plaintiff.
Defendant is ordered to pay the sum of $271.89 to the Plaintiff’s
nominated superannuation fund.
Defendant has contravened the following provisions of the
Fair Work Act
of the Act, by contravening
of the Act by requiring the Plaintiff to
work more than 38 hours in the weeks of 14 February, 21 February and 7 March
those additional hours being unreasonable;
of the Act, by failing to pay the Plaintiff as required on 27 February
2022 and 27 March 2022;
of the Act in respect of its payment to her of $1000 on 6 March 2022, by
failing to keep pay records required by r 3.33 of the
Fair Work Regulations
the Regulations
535(1) of the Act, in respect of the failure to keep overtime records required
by r 3.34 of the Regulations;
535(1) of the Act, in respect of the failure to keep superannuation records
required by r 3.37 of the Regulations; and
536(1) of the Act, in respect of its payment to her of $1000 on 6 March 2022, by
failing to provide a pay slip containing the information
set out in r 4.36 of
the Regulations.
parties are directed as follows:
Plaintiff is to file and serve any Affidavit/s and an outline of submissions
addressing ss 546 and 547 of the Act by 4pm on 8
January 2025.
Defendant is directed to file and serve any Affidavit/s and an outline of
submissions addressing ss 546 and 547 of the Act by
4pm on 19 February
matter is adjourned to a date to be fixed. Unless both parties indicate
otherwise, the matter will be listed for hearing on a
future date for the
determination of penalties and interest.
APPENDIX A – HOURS OF WORK CLAIMED AND FINDINGS
Claimed Start
Claimed End
Claimed hours
Findings - hours worked
17.2.22 3.15pm
(start and end time as claimed)
(6.40pm 20.2.22 – 1am 21.2.22)
(9.40am 21.2.22 – 5.30am 22.2.22)
(5pm 6.3.22 – 11.15am 7.3.22)
APPENDIX B – ENTITLEMENT TO PAYMENT
Payment Month
Days included
27 Jan 2022 – 26 Feb 2022 – 31 days
Gross Salary Hours
Week beginning Mon 24 Jan: 27-30 Jan = 4 days = 4/7 x 40 =
Weeks beginning Mon 31 Jan, 7 Feb, 14 Feb = 3 x 40 = 120
Week beginning Mon 21 Feb: 21-26 Feb = 6 days = 6/7 x 40 =
TOTAL 177.15 Gross Salary Hours
Excluded Gross Salary Hours
(Days Ms Readdie did not work)
Week beginning Mon 24 Jan: 27-30 Jan = 4 days = 4/7 x 40 =
Weeks beginning Mon 31 Jan, 7 Feb = 14 days = 2 x 40 = 80
Week beginning 14 Feb: 14-16 Feb = 3 days = 3/7 x 40 = 17.14
beginning 21 Feb: 25-26 Feb = 2 days = 2/7 x 40 = 11.43
TOTAL 23 days and
131.43 Gross Salary Hours excluded
Number of Gross Salary Hours for which Ms Readdie is entitled to payment
177.15 – 131.43 = 45.72 Gross Salary Hours
Amount Ms Readdie is entitled to be paid for Gross Salary Hours
$66,000 / 12 months = $5500 per month
$5500 per month excluding 10%
superannuation = $5000 per month
45.72/177.15 x $5000 =
Pro rata extrapolation of Gross Salary Hours under cl 4(1)(d)
Gross salary hours for 31 days – 177.15
Days worked by Ms
Readdie = 8/31
8/31 x 177.15 = 45.72 Gross Salary Hours for purpose of
extrapolation
Total Overtime Hours worked by Ms Readdie
7.5 + 12 + 24.5 + 6.33 + 19.83 + 18.5 + 24 = 112.66 Total Hours Worked
112.66 (Total Hours) – 45.72 (Gross Salary Hours) = 66.94 Overtime
Amount Ms Readdie is entitled to be paid for Overtime Hours
66.94 x $57 =
$1290.43 + 3815.58 =
March Payment Month
Days included
27 Feb 2022 – 26 Mar 2022 = 28 days
Gross Salary Hours
Week beginning Mon 21 Feb: 27 Feb = 1 day = 1/7 x 40 = 5.71
beginning Mon 28 Feb, 7 Mar, 14 Mar – 21 days = 3 x 40 = 120
beginning Mon 21 Mar: 21-26 Mar = 6 days = 6/7 x 40 = 34.29
Gross Salary Hours
Excluded Gross Salary Hours
(Days Ms Readdie did not work)
Week beginning Mon 21 Feb: 27 Feb = 1 day = 1/7 x 40 =
Weeks beginning Mon 28 Feb: 28 Feb – 5 Mar = 6 days = 6/7 x
Week beginning 14 Mar = 7 days = 40
Week beginning 21
Mar = 6 days = 6/7 x 40 = 34.29
TOTAL 20 days and 114.29 Gross Salary
Hours excluded
Number of Gross Salary Hours for which Ms Readdie is entitled to payment
160 – 114.29 = 45.71 Gross Salary Hours
Amount Ms Readdie is entitled to be paid for Gross Salary Hours
$66,000 / 12 months = $5500 per month
$5500 per month excluding 10%
superannuation = $5000 per month
45.71/160 x $5000 =
Pro rata extrapolation of Gross Salary Hours under cl 4(1)(d)
Gross salary hours for 28 days – 160
Days worked by Ms Readdie
8/28 x 160 = 45.71 Gross Salary Hours for purpose of extrapolation
Total Overtime Hours worked by Ms Readdie
18.25 + 5 + 14 + 16.5 + 12.5 + 16 + 4 = 86.25 Total Hours Worked
86.25 (Total Hours) – 45.71 (Gross Salary Hours) = 40.54 Overtime
Amount Ms Readdie is entitled to be paid for Overtime Hours
40.54 x $57 =
$1428.44 + $2,310.78 =
I have already given oral or
written reasons for each interlocutory decision made in the proceeding prior to
my decision to determine
the claim despite People Shop ceasing to participate.
Act, s 549.
See paragraph
See paragraph
See paragraph
Section 323(1), on which Ms
Readdie relies, is a civil remedy provision pursuant to s 539(1) of the Act,
meaning the second condition
is satisfied.
[2024] FCA 828.
Ibid, [65]-[74],
Ibid, [85] (see also
Act s 557(4)(g).
Ms Readdie further claimed
this amount should be adjusted to reflect a 38 hour week. This is dealt with
further below.
[1983] HCA 5
(1983) 151 CLR 422.
Ibid, per Mason ACJ, Murphy
and Deane JJ, [14].
Superannuation Guarantee
(Administration) Act 1992
Australasian Meat Industry Employees Union v Dick Stone
[2022] FCA 512
Fair Work Ombudsman v
DTF World Square Pty Ltd (in liq) (No 3)
[2023] FCA 201
I have not had regard to
the week beginning 28 February as Ms Readdie was on leave for six days.
Contract, cl 3.3.
I have not considered the
as there was no evidence as to this matter.
[2010] FWA 9114.
[2013] NSWSC 531
(2013) 234 IR 1.
Ibid, [280]-[281].
Ibid, [273].
[1987] HCA 47
(1987) 74 ALR 188.
Section 539(1) of the Act
provides that each of
, 323(1), 535(1), 535(2) and 536(1) are civil remedy
provisions.
Crimes Act 2014
(Cth), s 4AA.
[2022] HCA 13
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.44 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter