URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2024/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:44:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BBQ-K Plus Pty Ltd at BBQ-K Plus [2024] VicLiqComm 10; (22 July 2024)
BBQ-K Plus Pty Ltd at BBQ-K Plus [2024] VicLiqComm 10 (22 July 2024)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application under
section 153
Liquor Control
Reform Act 1998
by BBQ-K Plus Pty Ltd for an internal review of a decision
by a delegate to grant an application to vary the category of a licence
premises located at Level 3, 52 Montclair Avenue, Glen Waverley, trading as
Commission:
Mr John Larkins, Deputy Chair
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair Ms Thu-Trang Tran, Commissioner
Date of Decision: 22 July 2024
Date of Reasons: 22 July 2024
The Commission has determined to vary the decision of the
delegate and grant the application for a change of category of licence subject
to the conditions set out in Appendix A
Signed: John Larkins
Deputy Chair
Original Application
8 June 2023, BBQ-K Plus Pty Ltd (
) applied to the Victorian
Liquor Commission (
) under the
Liquor Control Reform Act
to vary the category of its restaurant and
cafe licence to an on-premises licence (
Original Application
premises located at Level 3, 52 Montclair Avenue, Glen Waverley
Licensee primarily serves Korean-style barbeque food at the Premises and offers
an option of karaoke in four ‘private dining
rooms’ as an ancillary
part of its restaurant business.
Licensee had been trading at the Premises under a restaurant and cafe licence
since being transferred that licence on 19 November
reason for making the Original Application was for the Licensee to be able to
have karaoke or live entertainment played on the
Premises at a level higher than
background music level.
22 September 2023, a delegate of the Commission (
) sought further
information from the Licensee. On 13 October 2023, the Licensee submitted,
amongst other pieces of information, an
outline of amenity controls, including
proposed signage and CCTV installation.
accordance with section 33(1), the Commission served a copy of the Original
Application on the Chief Commissioner of Police and
the Licensing
) on 5 December 2023. On 2 January 2024, Victoria Police advised that
they did not object to the Original Application.
accordance with section 33(2), the Commission served a copy of the Original
Application on the City of Monash (
) on 5 December 2023. No
response was received from the Council.
8 December 2023, the Licensee provided confirmation that the public notice of
the Original Application had been displayed in accordance
with the LCR
t,33 Ibid, section 34.
and provided an updated venue management plan noting that CCTV
would be installed in the private karaoke rooms for monitoring purposes
staff would regularly physically check the rooms for any ‘antisocial
behaviour and alcohol intoxication’.
13 December 2023, the Delegate wrote to the Licensee advising:
...premises providing karaoke entertainment are considered high-risk due to
the association of excessive liquor consumption with this
activity. Therefore it
is standard procedure to endorse conditions to mitigate this risk on these
licenses if granted.
Delegate requested further information regarding the Licensee’s proposed
operation hours of its karaoke facilities.
18 December 2023, the Licensee responded (in summary):
a) karaoke would be available to patrons in the private dining rooms from 7pm to
1am the following day, all week; and
b) ‘staff will not serve alcohol to minors and will instruct that the
customers do not allow alcohol to minors’.
8 February 2024, the Licensee informed the Delegate as part of its
communications regarding the Original Application that it did
not want minors to
be excluded from accessing any private karaoke room. Specifically, the Licensee
We want a family with minors to be able to use these facilities similar to
our restaurant. We do not serve alcohol to minors in the
restaurant and in these
function rooms. [...] It is noted that there will be conditions required [sic]
CCTVs to be installed to all
these rooms to monitor the occupants’
behaviours.
red line plan of the licensed area (as submitted by the Licensee) indicated that
the maximum capacity for each of the four private
karaoke rooms was 12
Delegate’s decision
Original Application was determined as an uncontested application pursuant to
section 44(1) and considered on the grounds provided
in section 44(2).
13 February 2024, the Delegate granted the Original Application (
on-premises licence (32376342) (
) included, amongst other
conditions, the following:
Minors are not permitted in the karaoke rooms at any time.
conditions imposed by the Delegate as part of the Original Decision
MAXIMUM CAPACITIES
Internal area 310 patrons External area 50 patrons
CROWD CONTROLLERS
When karaoke is provided, crowd controllers, licensed under the
Security Act 2004
, are to be employed at a ratio of 1 crowd controller for the
first 50 patrons partaking in karaoke and 1 crowd controller for each
50 patrons or part thereof partaking in karaoke. Crowd controllers are to be
present from 30 minutes before the start
of the karaoke being provided, until 30
minutes after closure.
Applications for Internal Review
19 February 2024, the Licensee lodged an application for internal review of the
Original Decision (
Review Application
). By way of the Review Application,
the Licensee sought to vary the condition imposed on the Licence by the Delegate
regarding minors
from ‘[m]inors are not permitted in the karaoke rooms at
any time’ to:
Minors are not permitted in the karaoke rooms at any time, except when they
are under the supervision of their adult family members.
Licensee provided the following reasons in support of the Review
Application:
a) the primary use of the Premises is as a family restaurant. The four private
karaoke rooms, whilst ancillary to the restaurant
space, are not used
exclusively for karaoke, they are used for dining too;
b) while it is agreed that minors should not be unaccompanied in the private
karaoke rooms, they should be permitted in the private
karaoke rooms with adult
supervision as ‘a family with minors under their parents’
supervision should be allowed to use
these rooms for karaoke’; and
c) CCTV will be installed in the private karaoke rooms and monitored by staff.
Further, staff will regularly enter the private karaoke
rooms to monitor the
conduct of patrons.
Licensee lodged no objection to the conditions imposed by the Delegate regarding
‘Maximum Capacities’ or ‘Crowd
Controllers’ as set out
in paragraph 17 above.
the focus of concern for the Licensee related to the prohibition of any minors
in the private karaoke rooms. This is because
the Licensee wanted families with
children to not be precluded from enjoying the private karaoke rooms,
particularly at pre-booked
functions at the Premises.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
2 of part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under section
152, the decision made by the Delegate in
the Original Decision is a reviewable
Licensee is considered an eligible person to apply for review of the Original
Decision, by way of its Review Application, made
pursuant to section 153.
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the Original Decision; or
(b) sets aside
the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the Commission on
review considers
appropriate.
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Original Application.
In this case, the Commission must decide whether to:
(a) grant the Original Application and, if so, whether to do so subject to
conditions;
(b) refuse to grant the Original
Application.
Determination of a contested application
the LCR Act, an application for the grant of a licence may be contested or
uncontested. The Original Application was uncontested,
as no objections were
received under division 5 of part 2 within the relevant
an application is an uncontested application, pursuant to section
Subject to Division 3, the Commission must grant or refuse to grant an
uncontested application at any time after the expiry of the
period for objection
under Division 5 (or that period as extended under section 174).
44(2) empowers the Commission to refuse to grant the Review Application on
various grounds, including that granting of the
application would be conducive
to or encourage harm.
Exercising the internal review power
172D(3) and 172U(3)(b) require the Commission, in exercising its internal review
power, to have regard to the objects of
the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines in respect of the regulation of liquor issued by the Minister.
objects of the LCR Act are set out at section 4(1) as follows:
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of
the liquor, licensed hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
section 4(2) provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion,
must be exercised and
performed with due regard to harm
minimisation.
3(1) defines ‘harm’ as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol,
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury or
property damage.
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision make
Act, section 157(2).
(b) may consider further information, material or
Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in section
44(2) are relevant considerations, the determination
of a contested application
is ultimately to be made pursuant to sections 47(1) and 157(1) at the discretion
of the Commission, with
reference to the objects of the LCR Act.
section 49, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the grant
of an application.
Conduct of an inquiry
44(4) provides that the Commission may have regard to any matter it considers
relevant and make any enquiries it considers
appropriate. The Commission is not
required to give any person an opportunity to be heard concerning the Review
Application.
172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit
and is bound by the rules of natural
Material before the Commission
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the materials before the
Delegate. The Commission also received and considered
the following
(a) the Delegate’s decision record, dated 13 February 2024;
(b) the Review Application, received 19 February 2024; and
(c) further submissions from the Licensee, dated 15 May 2024, including an
updated venue management plan.
Additionally,
two of three Commissioners hearing the matter attended the Premises and
immediate surrounds, in the company of Mr Dong
Chun, manager for the Licensee,
on 25 March 2024.
On-the-papers determination of the Review Application
Commission informed the Licensee that it was possible to determine the Review
Application ‘on the papers,’ without
a hearing, and the Licensee
confirmed that it was comfortable with the Commission determining the matter on
the papers.
Further submissions, 15 May 2024
response to enquiries made by the Commission on 1 May 2024, the Licensee
confirmed (in summary):
(i) barbeque cooking facilities were to be installed in each of the private
karaoke rooms to make it clear to patrons that karaoke
facilities remain
ancillary to the Premises’ operation as a restaurant; and
(ii) the proposed wording for a revised condition regarding minors as specified
in the Review Application should be amended from,
Minors are not
permitted in the karaoke rooms at any time, except when they are under the
supervision of their adult family members
to, ‘Minors are
not permitted in the karaoke rooms at any time, except when they are under the
supervision of a responsible
42. The Licensee
also proposed an additional licence condition to the effect that it would be
required to comply with its latest venue
management plan submitted on 15 May
2024, if the Review Application were to be granted. The 15 May 2024 venue
management plan contained
controls to eliminate risks associated with minors
with a responsible adult in private karaoke rooms, such as any alcohol to be
with meals, free self-serve water to always be available, and
RSA-trained
staff regularly
monitoring the rooms.
Licensee also lodged an amended red line plan of the licensed area, which
proposed an increase in the maximum number of patrons
for the largest private
karaoke room from 12 to 17. The amended red line plan also proposed a reduction
in the maximum patron capacity
number for the smaller private karaoke rooms from
the Licensee did not seek an amendment to the ‘Maximum Capacities’
as imposed by the Delegate on the Licence, the
Licensee advised that the maximum
number of patrons as any one time did not exceed 202.
45. The Licensee
confirmed that the planning permit contained no maximum patron capacity given
that the Premises is located within
a public principal transport network area
and noted that the ‘Maximum Capacities’ as imposed by the Delegate
are consistent
with the ‘Maximum Capacities’ imposed on the former
restaurant and cafe licence for the
Reasons for decision on review
Issues for determination on review
deciding whether to exercise its discretion to affirm, vary or set aside the
Original Decision and in turn grant or refuse the
Original Application that is
the subject of the Review Application, the Commission must consider the grounds
for refusal set out
in the LCR Act, and the objects of the LCR Act, in
particular harm minimisation, which is the primary
Discretion to grant or refuse the Review
Application
Commission has a discretion under section 44(1) to grant or refuse the Review
Application. In exercising this discretion, the
Commission must have regard to
the objects of the LCR Act, particularly harm minimisation, which is the primary
Commission could also refuse to grant the Review Application on the basis of any
of the matters listed in section 44(2)(a) and
(b), which relevantly include that
the granting of the application would be conducive to or encourage the misuse
and abuse of alcoho
.1515 Ibid, section 44(2)(b)(ii).
Misuse and abuse of alcohol
Commission considers that the Licensee provided detailed information as part of
the Review Application, and notes that some of
that information was not before
the Delegate as part of the Original Application.
Commission considers that the Licensee is cognisant of its obligations as a
licensee, including in relation to the ancillary part
of its restaurant business
involving the option of offering karaoke in private dining rooms.
Commission also noted that the Licensee submitted on 15 May 2024 a revised
proposed licence condition which specifies that minors
are not permitted in the
karaoke rooms at any time, except when in the company of a responsible adult.
Further, the Commission notes
that the Licensee proposed an additional licence
condition to the effect that it must comply with its venue management plan. This
plan provides that staff will be trained to monitor for risks of secondary
supply and ‘anti-social behaviours’, alcohol
is to be served with
meals, and free self-serve water is to always be available.
part of its commitment to the responsible service of alcohol on the Premises,
the Commission notes the Licensee’s 15 May
2024 venue management plan
incorporates a commitment to ‘educating patrons, particularly young
people, about potential harms
associated with alcohol by display [sic]
advertising in the toilet about the harms associated with alcohol
Commission has taken into account the Licensee’s considerable experience
in running venues similar to the Premises, and
notes that neither Victoria
Police, the Council, nor a member of the public objected to the Original
Application.
though the maximum number of patrons for the largest private karaoke room was
proposed to be increased on internal review from
12 to 17, the Commission notes
that such a proposed maximum number for that space would not be inconsistent
with any planning permit,
building surveyor report, or the Commission’s
own internal policy on maximum patron capacity, particularly having regard to
the dimensions of the largest private karaoke
.1616 Ibid.
Licensee also confirmed on internal review a reduction in the maximum patron
capacity number for the smaller private karaoke rooms
from 12 to 11, if the
Review Application were to be granted.
site visit at the Premises as referred to in paragraph 39 above assisted the
Commissioners with their deliberations of this Review
Application.
Commission has also had regard to the Crowd Controllers condition as imposed by
the Delegate on the Licence, which the Licensee
has not objected to on internal
a combination of the above reasons, the Commission does not consider the
potential for the misuse and abuse of alcohol as a ground
to refuse to grant the
Review Application, particularly with the imposition of the conditions as set
out in Appendix A.
the Commission is satisfied that no grounds exist for refusal under section
Objects of the LCR Act
regard to the objects of the LCR Act, particularly the harm minimisation object,
the Commission is satisfied that adequate
controls exist over the supply and
consumption of liquor at the Premises and that any risk of harm would be
minimised with the imposition
of the conditions as set out in Appendix
Decision on review
on the reasons set out above, the Commission is satisfied that, subject to the
conditions set out in Appendix A herein, the
granting of the Review Application
is appropriate in the circumstances.
Accordingly,
the Commission has determined to vary the decision of the delegate and grant the
application for a change of category
of licence subject to the conditions set
out in Appendix A.
The preceding 62 paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of
Mr John Larkins (Deputy Chair), Mr James O’Halloran
(Deputy Chair) and Ms
Thu-Trang Tran (Commissioner).
This licence is an on-premises
licence and authorises the licensee to supply liquor on the licensed premises
for consumption on the
licensed premises during the trading hours specified
The licensee shall not cause or permit undue detriment
to the amenity of the area to arise out of or in connection with the use of
premises to which the licence relates during or immediately after the trading
hours authorised under this licence.
Special conditions
are not permitted in the karaoke rooms at any time, except when in the company
of a responsible adult.
Food must be
available at the Premises, including in each of the karaoke rooms, at all times
alcohol is served.
The licensee
shall install and maintain a surveillance recording system able to clearly
identify individuals, which shows time and
date and provides continuous images
of all entrances and exits, bars, dining, and entertainment areas including all
cubicles where
karaoke occurs. The surveillance recording system must operate
from 30 minutes before the start of the trade until 30 minutes after
A copy of the
recorded images must be available upon request for immediate viewing or removal
by the Victoria Police, or a person
authorised in writing by the Commission, or
otherwise retained for at least 1 month. The positioning of the cameras is to be
satisfaction of the Licensing Inspector.
When karaoke or
live entertainment is provided, crowd controllers, licensed under the
Security Act 2004
, are to be employed at a ratio of 1 crowd controller for
the first 50 patrons partaking in karaoke and 1 crowd controller for each
additional 50 patrons or part thereof partaking in karaoke. Crowd controllers
are to be present from 30 minutes before the start
of the karaoke being
provided, until 30 minutes after closure.
described below, are to be displayed in all areas subject to camera
surveillance. Such signs shall read:
"For the safety and security of patrons and staff this area is under electronic
surveillance".
Free drinking
water must be provided at the Premises at all times, including self-service in
each of the karaoke rooms.
Venue Management Plan
The licensee must conduct and supervise all aspects of the management of the
premises in accordance with the licensee’s Venue
Management Plan, as
amended from time to time.
The Venue Management Plan must be retained on the licensed premises in the
possession of the licensee, nominee, manager or other
person in charge.
The Venue Management Plan must be available to an authorised member of Victoria
Police or a person authorised in writing by the Commission
if requested.
Maximum Capacities in the Karaoke Rooms
Maximum capacity of 11 patrons in each of the smaller
karaoke rooms and 12 patrons for the largest karaoke room, as per the endorsed
red line plan.
Trading hours
Sunday Between 10am and 1am the following morning Good
Friday and ANZAC Day Between 12pm and 1am the following morning On any other
day Between 7am and 1am the following morning
All references to legislation are
references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
LCR Act, section 3(1), see
licensing inspector
Ibid, sections 157(2) to (5)
further prescribe the manner in which the Commission is to undertake internal
Ibid, sections 44, 49 and
Ibid, sections 44 and
Ibid, section 3(1), see
uncontested
application
section 44(2)(b)(ii).
Kordister Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2012] VSCA 325
, which confirms that harm minimisation is the primary regulatory
object of the LCR Act and therefore the primary consideration in
licensing decisions (although not to the exclusion of the other
Ibid, section 157(3).
Understood by the Commission to
be employees of the Licensee having completed an
approved responsible service
of alcohol program
as defined in section 3(1) of the LCR Act, for the
purposes of sections 26B and 26C of the LCR Act.
The Commission acknowledges the
Licensee’s submissions lodged on 13 October 2023.
sections 4 and
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.94 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter