URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/45.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:24:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Moorabool C108moor(PSA) [2025] PPV 45 (10 September 2025)
Moorabool Planning Scheme Amendment C108moor
Ballan Precinct 5
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
10 September 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue, you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
Moorabool Planning Scheme Amendment C108moor
Ballan Precinct 5
10 September 2025
Sarah Carlisle, Chair Elizabeth McIntosh, Member
Glossary and abbreviations
Bacchus Marsh Platypus Alliance
Country Fire Authority
Cultural Heritage Management Plan
Central Highlands Water
Moorabool Shire Council
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (former)
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 9
Development Services Scheme
DTP Transport
Department of Transport and Planning (Transport)
Environment Protection Authority
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
General Residential Zone
intersection of Geelong-Ballan Road and Old Melbourne Road
Moorabool Environment Group
Neighbourhood Residential Zone Schedule 10
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning Scheme
Moorabool Planning Scheme
Planning Practice Note
PSP Guidelines
Precinct Structure Planning Guidelines: New Communities in Victoria
Victorian Planning Authority, October 2021
Rural Conservation Zone
Residential Growth Zone
Stormwater Management Strategy
Vegetation Protection Overlay Schedule 2
Wadawurrung Traditional Owners Aboriginal Corporation
Amendment summary
The Amendment
Moorabool Planning Scheme Amendment C108moor
Common name
Ballan Precinct 5
Brief description
Introduction of a development framework for future residential development
of land identified as Precinct 5 in the Ballan Framework
Subject land
Land bounded by the Western Freeway, Geelong-Ballan Road, Old Melbourne
Road and the Werribee River, Ballan
The Proponent
Whiteman Property and Associates Pty Ltd on behalf of Wel.Co.
Planning Authority
Moorabool Shire Council
Authorisation
5 August 2024, with conditions
24 January to 3 March 2025
Submissions
Number of Submissions: 68
Panel process
Sarah Carlisle (Chair) and Elizabeth McIntosh
Supported by
Chris Brennan, Georgia Thomas and Sarah Vojinovic of Planning Panels
Directions Hearing
By video, 4 June 2025
Panel Hearing
Moorabool Shire Council offices in Darley and by video, from 23 to 31 July
Site inspections
Unaccompanied, 15 July 2025
Parties to the Hearing
See Appendix A
Moorabool PSA C108moor [2025] PPV
Date of this report
10 September 2025
Executive summary
Ballan is a small
country town in a peri-urban municipality. It has long been identified in the
policy framework as a suitable location
for growth. The Ballan Framework Plan,
introduced into the Moorabool Planning Scheme in March 2020, designates a number
of precincts
for residential development to accommodate this growth.
Moorabool Planning Scheme Amendment C108moor (the Amendment) relates to
Precinct 5, which is the first of the greenfield growth precincts
identified in
the Ballan Framework Plan to be rezoned. Precinct 5 is at the western edge of
Ballan, separated from the town by the
Werribee River which runs along the
eastern edge of the Precinct. The land is in a gateway location to Ballan,
along Old Melbourne
Road. Land to its north and west is outside the town
boundary and will remain rural land.
The proposal is to develop the relatively flat land above the river
escarpment for residential purposes, with a 100 metre buffer to
the river (the
river corridor). The river corridor contains the river floodplain which has
some high value native vegetation, and
most of the escarpment. Some community
and drainage infrastructure is proposed in the river corridor. Lower density
residential
lots are proposed along the edge of the river corridor and around
the perimeter of the Precinct, to maintain the country town character
while the core of the Precinct is proposed for a mix of conventional and medium
density housing. A co-located active
open space reserve and community facility
is proposed along part of the edge to the river corridor.
The Amendment proposes rezoning Precinct 5 to the Neighbourhood Residential
Zone (NRZ) and applying the Development Plan Overlay Schedule
9 (DPO9) to guide
the future residential development of the land. It proposes to apply the
Vegetation Protection Overlay Schedule
2 (VPO2) to protect native vegetation
along the river corridor and roadsides adjacent to the Precinct, as well as some
trees on the subject land.
At full development, Precinct 5 would almost double the size of Ballan.
Submitters, while not against development, raised a range
of concerns primarily
related to the impact of the proposed development on township character and
impacts associated with the additional
traffic generated by the proposed
development. Impacts on the sensitive ecological values of the river environs
were a key concern
for submitters.
A considerable amount of background work has informed the Amendment. In some
respects the work is further advanced than what might
ordinarily be expected at
this stage of the planning process, particularly in relation to cultural
heritage values, ecology and the
river corridor interface.
The Amendment gives effect to the planning policy framework for the growth of
Ballan and will facilitate a mix of housing types to
cater for the existing and
future population of Ballan. Provided the impacts of development are
appropriately managed, the Panel
is satisfied the Amendment is strategically
justified and will deliver net community benefit.
The Panel considers the NRZ is the appropriate zone for Precinct 5, given the subject land’s unique setting and constraints
including its sensitive interfaces with the
and surrounding rural areas and its gateway location on one of the main
approaches into Ballan (Old Melbourne
. This is not to say that the NRZ will necessarily be the appropriate zone for other greenfield growth areas identified in the Ballan
Framework Plan.
Environmental and biodiversity values
Despite some oversights in the Flora and Fauna Assessment supporting the Amendment, the Panel is satisfied the assessment, together
with expert evidence presented to the Panel by the Proponent, provide a sufficient understanding of environmental and biodiversity
values to inform the Amendment.
The proposed development has generally been designed in accordance with ‘avoid, minimise and offset’ principles.
the Werribee River corridor is the Amendment’s most important ecological
outcome, and
is an appropriate response to the sensitive river environs. High value native vegetation is to be retained in the river corridor
and road sides, and large scattered trees will be retained in local parks, protected by the VPO2.
The DPO9 provides sufficient guidance for the further identification and mitigation of risks to ecological values, including the river
environs. It includes comprehensive requirements for a Biodiversity Management Plan. This, coupled with the requirements for a
Construction Environment Management Plan and an Integrated Water Management Plan, will ensure the river values and environment are
appropriately protected. Notably, the DPO9 requirements are generally supported by both the Department of Environment, Energy and
Climate Action and Melbourne Water.
Further flora and fauna surveys for potential threatened species will need to be conducted, and it will be important that they occur
at the appropriate time of year when threatened species are likely to be identifiable. This may result in further adjustments to
the Development Concept Plan, including consideration of environmental values that may be present along the former Barwon Water aqueduct
in the western part of the subject land.
Apart from a minor adjustment required to the mapping of the VPO2 covering Habitat Zone Patch A (a patch of native vegetation in the
northern end of the river corridor), the Panel is satisfied the Amendment deals appropriately with environmental and ecological values.
Township character
While the Panel appreciates the concerns of Ballan residents about maintaining the country town character and feel of Ballan, the
town is identified in the policy framework as an appropriate location for growth. The town has been evolving for decades and has
already developed a varied character across different parts of the town. Precinct 5 will, in time, develop its own character.
The Amendment represents an appropriate response to the Precinct’s gateway location and the town character.
treatments proposed for Old Melbourne Road and Geelong-Ballan Road respond to
planning policy and will help integrate the new
development into its
surroundings, consistent with the land’s rural setting. The river
corridor edged by lower density residential
lots and the active open space
reserve is an appropriate character response to this sensitive interface.
Traffic, transport and movement networks
While the Panel appreciates the concerns of Ballan residents in relation to traffic, there is no evidence that the proposed development
of Precinct 5 will result in unacceptable traffic congestion in Ballan. Traffic impacts have been assessed based on a conservative
trip generation rate and modelling demonstrates that key intersections on the surrounding road network will not reach capacity with
the addition of traffic generated by the Precinct’s development.
The Department of Transport and Planning (Transport), Council and the Proponent all agreed that the intersection of Geelong-Ballan
Road and Old Melbourne Road will need to be upgraded at some point to ensure safe movements through the intersection. Given the
uncertainties associated with the upgrades, the requirement in the DPO9 for a
section 173
agreement is the appropriate approach.
The active transport network shown on the Development Concept Plan is appropriate. Council’s proposal to add a shared path
river crossing has not been strategically justified. There is merit in showing a potential shared path along the aqueduct alignment,
particularly if the further ecological assessments required under the Biodiversity Management Plan identify high value native vegetation
along the aqueduct and recommend that it be preserved.
Locating drainage assets in areas of likely cultural heritage sensitivity
One of the more controversial aspects of the Development Concept Plan was the location of wetland retarding basins along the escarpment
in areas where large artefact scatters are thought to be located.
Melbourne Water requested that the Development Concept Plan be amended to show a Cultural Heritage Investigation Area measured 200
metres from the river, and that the proposed drainage assets be relocated outside the Cultural Heritage Investigation Area with an
option to move them back on the understanding that the developer would be responsible for salvage costs. Melbourne Water pointed
to examples in other developments where the discovery of cultural heritage had dramatically increased the costs of constructing drainage
assets, and in some cases even prevented their construction.
A substantial amount of
cultural heritage investigation work has been undertaken in consultation with
the Wadawurrung Traditional
Owners Aboriginal Corporation (WTOAC). While this
work demonstrates the likely presence of artefacts along the escarpment within
200 metres of the river, the Panel does not support the identification of a
Cultural Heritage Investigation Area as proposed by Melbourne
Water. This was
not supported by the WTOAC or the Proponent’s cultural heritage expert, is
not contemplated in the draft Cultural
Heritage Management Plan, and could
potentially have significant impacts on the design and layout of the proposed
development.
The WTOAC has indicated in principle support for the drainage assets (and
active open space reserve) to be located on the top of the
escarpment as shown
in the exhibited Development Concept Plan, provided salvage works are
undertaken. The Proponent has undertaken
to meet any associated salvage costs.
Council proposed an addition to the DPO9 to provide flexibility to relocate or resize the drainage assets (and other features) if
needed to avoid or minimise cultural heritage impacts. This approach is supported by the WTOAC, and the Panel considers this to
be an appropriate response to the Aboriginal cultural heritage values on the land.
Recommendations
Based on the reasons set out in this Report, the
Panel recommends that Council:
1. Adopt Moorabool Planning Scheme Amendment C108moor as exhibited, with the changes recommended in this report.
2. Amend the Development Plan Overlay Schedule 9 as shown in Appendix C:
a) Amend the conditions and requirements for permits in Clause 3.0
condition requiring a
section 173
agreement or restriction on title to secure
any social and affordable housing contribution.
b) Amend the
conditions and requirements for permits in Clause
3.0 relating to the
Construction Management Plan to:
require soil erosion and sediment control measures to protect the escarpment (as well as stormwater infrastructure and the Werribee
the requirement to consider lighting impacts to
mend the Masterplan requirements in Clause 4.0 to:
remove the average lot size requirement.
d) Amend the Public Open Space and Landscape Masterplan requirements in Clause 4.0 to:
the requirement to consider lighting impacts to
active open space playing fields and courts from the 30 percent canopy cover
requirements
e) Amend the Biodiversity Management Plan requirements in Clause 4.0 to:
the requirement to consider lighting impacts to
remove the requirements relating to a shared path waterway crossing.
f) Amend the Acoustic Design Response Plan requirements in Clause 4.0 to:
require a consistent visual presentation to the Western Freeway interface and other precinct edges
make it clear that either the developer or future home builders, as appropriate, will bear the costs of mitigation measures.
g) Amend the Integrated Transport Management Plan requirements in Clause 4.0 to:
remove the requirements relating to a shared path waterway crossing.
3. Amend the Vegetation Protection Overlay Schedule 2 mapping to reflect the full extent of the patch of native vegetation known as
Habitat Zone Patch A, as shown in Figure 4 in this report.
1 Introduction
1.1 The Amendment
(i) Amendment description
purpose of the Amendment is to introduce planning provisions into the Moorabool
Planning Scheme (the Planning Scheme) to guide
the future residential
development of Precinct 5 identified in the Ballan Framework Plan.
Specifically, the Amendment proposes to:
subject land from Rural Living Zone to Neighbourhood Residential Zone Schedule
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 9 (DPO9) to guide and facilitate staged,
master-planned development of the subject land
Vegetation Protection Overlay Schedule 2 (VPO2) to protect patches of remnant
native vegetation and remnant large scattered
native trees on the subject land
and adjacent road reserves
Environmental Audit Overlay to 5580 Geelong-Ballan Road, Ballan
delete the now
obsolete Design and Development Overlay Schedule 2 from the subject land
make associated
administrative and mapping changes.
(ii) The subject land
The Amendment applies to
the land outlined in red in Figure 1, bounded by the Western Freeway,
Geelong-Ballan Road, Old Melbourne
Road and the Werribee River, Ballan. A
disused Barwon Water aqueduct traverses the western part of the land.
Source: Explanatory Report
(iii) Development Concept Plan
The DPO9 requires the subject land to be developed
generally in accordance with the Development Concept Plan included at Map 1 (see
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 2 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Development Concept Plan (Map 1 in DPO9)
Source: Exhibited DPO9
1.2 Key issues
Key issues raised in
submissions were:
town character,
including the extent of growth, lot sizes and loss of land used for agricultural
and rural living purposes
ecological and
environmental issues, including biodiversity impacts, water quality,
environmental management during construction and
urban heat island effects
public open
space and landscaping, including the appropriateness of the proposed active open
space reserve
drainage, including water quality and flood risk and the interaction of drainage
assets and Aboriginal cultural heritage
water supply,
sewerage infrastructure and electricity infrastructure
infrastructure including retail services and education facilities
congestion, public transport, active transport and car parking
post-contact
heritage issues
1.3 Versions of the Amendment
Panel was presented with several versions of the DPO9:
post exhibition version including changes requested by the Department of
Transport and Planning (Transport) (DTP Transport)
Water’s initial preferred version, tracked against D55 (D73)
the Council Day
1 version (D60)
the Ballan South
Pty Ltd preferred version (D83)
the Bacchus
Marsh Platypus Alliance (BMPA) preferred version (D87)
the Moorabool
Environment Group (MEG) preferred version (D90(b)).
requested Council to prepare a preferred final version after considering the
various versions tabled by the parties (D55,
D73, D83, D87 and D90(b)), as well
as opportunities to improve the drafting by removing duplication and improving
clarity. Council’s
final preferred version was D106 (clean) and D107
(tracked changes).
The Panel provided the parties with the opportunity to provide comments or
marled up changes to Council’s final preferred version.
It received
responses from:
Property & Associates/OMRB Developments (Proponent) (D108)
Ms Robinson
BMPA and MEG
DTP Transport
(D111 and D112)
Ballan South Pty
Melbourne Water
Council provided reply comments (D115) to the various party
responses to its final preferred version of the DPO9 (D108 to D114).
The Panel has had regard to all versions of the DPO9 presented to it in
developing its recommended version in
, and to Council’s reply
comments. Except where stated otherwise and subject to minor drafting
refinements, the Panel supports
the changes in Council’s final version,
which generally provide greater clarity and improve the operation of the
Council’s final version (D106) as the starting point.
1.4 The Panel’s approach
The Panel considered all
written submissions made in response to the exhibition of the Amendment,
observations from site visits, submissions,
evidence and other material
presented to it during the Hearing. All submissions and materials have been
considered by the Panel
in reaching its conclusions, regardless of whether they
are specifically mentioned in the Report.
1.5 Limitations
Several submissions
raised issues that relate to existing conditions, for example that Ballan needs
additional regional bus services,
there is a lack of parking in the town centre,
and the old railway station at Gordon should be reopened to reduce pressure for
at Ballan. These are not relevant to the Amendment and have not been
considered by the Panel.
2 Strategic issues
2.1 Planning context
(i) Planning context
identifies key parts of the
planning context relevant to the Amendment.
Planning context
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
Section 4 of the
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Municipal Planning Strategy
Clause 2.01 (Context)
Clause 2.03 (Strategic directions)
Planning Policy Framework
Clause 11.01 (Victoria),
11.01-1S (Settlement)
11.01-1R (Settlement - Central Highlands)
11.01-1L-01 (Settlement in Moorabool)
11.01-1L-03 (Ballan)
Clause 11.02 (Managing growth),
11.02-1S (Supply of urban land), including:
11.02-2S (Structure planning)
11.02-2L (Structure planning in Moorabool)
11.02-3S (Sequencing of development)
Clause 12 (Environmental
and landscape values),
12.01-1S (Protection of biodiversity)
12.01-1L (Biodiversity)
12.01-2S (Native Vegetation Management)
(Environmental risks and amenity),
13.02-1S (Bushfire planning)
13.03-1S (Floodplain management)
13.04-1S (Contaminated and potentially contaminated land),
13.05-1S (Noise management)
13.07-1S (Land use compatibility)
Clause 14 (Natural resource
management),
14.02-1S (Catchment planning and management)
14.02-1L (Declared special water supply catchments)
14.02-2S (Water quality)
Clause 15 (Built environment and
15.01-1S (Urban Design)
15.01-1L (Urban design)
15.01-3S (Subdivision design)
15.01-4S (Healthy neighbourhoods)
Clause 16 (Housing),
16.01-1S (Housing Supply)
16.01-1L (Housing supply in Moorabool)
16.01-2S (Housing affordability)
(Infrastructure),
19.02-4S (Social and cultural infrastructure)
19.02-6S (Open space)
19.02-6L (Open space in Moorabool)
19.03-3S (Integrated Water Management)
19.03-3L-02 (Integrated water management)
Other planning strategies and policies
Plan for Victoria*
Plan Melbourne 2017 – 2050*
Central Highlands Regional Growth Plan
Ballan Strategic Directions
Planning scheme provisions
Clause 32.09 (Neighbourhood Residential Zone)
Clause 42.01 (Environmental Significance Overlay)
Clause 42.02 (Vegetation Protection Overlay)
Clause 43.04 (Development Plan Overlay)
Clause 44.04 (Land Subject to Inundation Overlay)
Clause 45.03 (Environmental Audit Overlay)
Clause 52.17 (Native Vegetation)
Clause 56.05 (Urban Landscape)
Planning scheme amendments
Moorabool Planning Scheme Amendment C88moor
Ministerial directions
Ministerial Direction 1 (Potentially Contaminated Land)
Ministerial Direction 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments)
Planning practice notes (PPNs)
PPN07: Vegetation Protection in Urban Areas, August 1999
PPN23: Applying the Incorporated Plan and Development Plan Overlays,
September 2022
PPN30: Potentially contaminated land, July 2021
PPN46: Strategic Assessment Guidelines, September 2022
PPN91: Using the Residential Zones, July 2023
* After the Hearing concluded VC283 was
gazetted that (among other things) removed references to Plan Melbourne from the
Scheme and inserted references and made various policy changes
consistent with Plan for Victoria.
(ii) Ballan Strategic Directions
The Ballan Strategic Directions is a background
document which informed Amendment C88moor and resulted in the existing planning
content relating to Ballan at Clauses 02.03 and 11.01-1L-03 of the
Planning Scheme. It (and earlier strategic work including the
Central Highlands
Regional Growth Plan):
Ballan as a suitable location for additional residential growth within the
municipality
Precinct 5 as a growth area.
The Ballan Strategic Directions
identified the General Residential Zone (GRZ) as potentially suitable for the
central core of Precinct
5, and the Rural Living Zone and Low Density
Residential Zone as potentially suitable for its sensitive interfaces.
(iii) Ballan Framework Plan
The Ballan Framework Plan (Figure 3), included in
Clause 11.01-1L-03, implements the Ballan Strategic Directions. It identifies
core of Precinct 5 as ‘greenfield growth’ with ‘greenfield
growth – proposed lower densities’ along
the Freeway and
Geelong-Ballan Road, ‘greenfield growth – proposed larger
residential allotments’ along Old Melbourne
Road and ‘proposed open
space’ along the Werribee River corridor.
Ballan Framework Plan
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 3 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Source: Moorabool Planning Scheme
Clause 11.01-1L-03 provides no specific guidance on the choice of zones for
Precinct 5.
(iv) Planning Practice Note 91: Using the Residential
PPN91 describes the role and application of the NRZ
as being applied to areas where:
there is no
anticipated change to the predominantly one and two storey character
identified neighbourhood, heritage, environmental or landscape character values
that distinguish the land from other parts
municipality.
2.2 Strategic justification
(i) Evidence and submissions
overall strategic justification for the Amendment was not significantly
challenged in submissions. Most of the submissions were
concerned about the
impacts of the Amendment on town character, ecological and environmental values,
traffic congestion and infrastructure
and servicing. These issues are discussed
in the following chapters.
Some submissions asserted it was not appropriate for Precinct 5 to be
developed first. They submitted that other precincts (in particular
the south of the railway line) are better located to accommodate early growth in
Ballan given their closer proximity to
the station and schools, services and
facilities in central Ballan and better accesses in and out of town.
Council submitted the Amendment has a strong strategic rationale, founded in
the Ballan Strategic Directions and the Ballan Framework
Plan implemented into
the Planning Scheme through Amendment C88moor. Council submitted the subject
land has long been identified
in the strategic framework as an area suitable for
greenfield growth, and:
Accordingly, the key questions that arise in this matter are not about
whether the area should be the subject of strategic planning
to facilitate urban
growth, but how the controls should be framed to appropriately manage the
intended growth through the area.
Council was generally satisfied with the level of background work undertaken
in support of the Amendment, submitting it was sufficient
to inform the proposed
controls and guide the future preparation of a development plan under the
In response to concerns about the sequencing of development of the precincts
in the Framework Plan, Council submitted Precinct 5 has
been endorsed as a
potential short term proposal through the Ballan Strategic Directions and
Amendment C88moor. It submitted the
Amendment does not preclude other
amendments to facilitate residential development of land to the south of the
railway line, which
are presently undergoing
investigations
Ballan Dev Co and Ballan South Pty Ltd, landowners in other precincts,
supported the Amendment, submitting it was consistent with
more than a
decade’s worth of strategic planning in Ballan and that it was essential
to unlock developable land in the township.
They submitted proper
implementation of the Ballan Framework Plan was essential to meeting the policy
objectives for housing and
growth in Ballan.
The two planning experts that presented evidence to the Panel, Mr Barnes (for
the Proponent) and Mr Black (for Ballan Dev Co), both
found that the Amendment
was strongly aligned with the strategic context.
(ii) Discussion
The Panel has assessed the Amendment against the
principles of net community benefit and sustainable development, as set out in
71.02-3 (Integrated decision making) of the Planning Scheme.
The subject land has long been identified in the strategic framework as
suitable for growth, including the Central Highland Growth
Plan, the Ballan
Strategic Directions and the Ballan Framework Plan.
The policy framework requires planning authorities to maintain a 15 year
supply of residential land across their municipalities.
The Amendment is
supported by a Residential Retail Assessment prepared by Ethos Urban that
identified a critical shortage of residential
land supply in Ballan
(2.9 years). While the Ethos Urban analysis highlights the shortage in
Ballan (rather than the municipality
as a whole), the Panel is satisfied there
is a relatively pressing need for more residential land in Ballan.
The Panel is satisfied Precinct 5 is a logical place to start delivering
growth in Ballan’s greenfield areas. It is commensurate
precincts in terms of accessibility to the existing facilities and amenities in
the town centre, and has a majority landowner
who appears ready and willing to
develop. Clause 11 does not direct or encourage the development of other
precincts, including those
south of the railway line, ahead of Precinct 5.
The Amendment gives effect to the planning
policy framework for the growth of Ballan and will facilitate development that
a mix of housing types to cater for the existing and future population
of Ballan. Provided the impacts of development are appropriately
managed, the
Panel is satisfied the Amendment is strategically justified and will deliver net
community benefit.
(iii) Conclusion and recommendation
The Amendment is supported by, and implements, the
planning policy framework, is well founded and strategically justified, and
proceed subject to addressing the more specific issues raised in
submissions discussed in the following chapters.
The Panel recommends Council:
Adopt Moorabool Planning Scheme Amendment
C108moor as exhibited, with the changes recommended in this report.
2.3 Choice of zones
(i) The issues
issues are:
whether the NRZ
is the appropriate zone for Precinct 5 (rather than the GRZ)
whether the
Rural Conservation Zone (RCZ) should be applied to the Werribee River
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Neighbourhood Residential Zone
submitted the NRZ10 represents an appropriate response to the Ballan context,
noting that it:
development to two storeys or 9 metres in height
does not limit
In response to questions from the Panel at the Hearing,
Council and the Proponent explained the NRZ had been chosen as the appropriate
zone through discussions between them prior to the Amendment being prepared.
They noted the NRZ allows for a variety of lot sizes
and densities, and the
mandatory two storey height limit is not considered problematic as residential
development of more than two
storeys is not considered likely in Ballan for the
anticipated development life of Precinct 5.
Mr Barnes (who gave expert planning evidence for the Proponent) noted that
the GRZ is the most commonly applied zone for greenfield
growth areas. However,
he considered the NRZ appropriate for Precinct 5, given:
its setting
country town character
the subject land
is transitioning from a rural to residential setting
the C88moor
Panel supported use of the NRZ in other parts of the township as an effective
tool for protecting neighbourhood character.
Relying on Mr
Black’s evidence, Ballan Dev Co opposed the NRZ and submitted the GRZ is
the appropriate zone to apply to Precinct
5. It noted that the background
reports supporting the Amendment demonstrate land supply in Ballan is severely
restricted, and the
NRZ is unnecessarily restrictive and inconsistent with the
strategic intent outlined in the Ballan Strategic Directions. It submitted
NRZ could undermine the growth potential of greenfield growth areas in
Mr Black noted the NRZ appeared to have been arrived at through a process of
negotiation rather than strategic justification, which
he did not consider
appropriate. His view was that the NRZ is inconsistent with the direction for
the subject land set out in the
Ballan Strategic Directions, and the GRZ is more
appropriate in the context of greenfield growth areas, particularly for the
part of Precinct 5 which is relatively unconstrained. He
considered:
the NRZ could
undermine the intent to support more substantial residential growth in
greenfield growth areas
the GRZ will
enable a more diverse housing product, including affordable and medium density
typologies that are consistent with State
housing policy
if height was
the key reason to apply the NRZ (which has a two storey mandatory height limit),
the DPO could control height.
Under cross examination Mr Black
conceded the NRZ10 does not limit density, and would facilitate the housing mix
envisaged for Precinct
5 including conventional density in the core, medium
density around amenities such as open space and the retail uses, and larger
around the Precinct’s sensitive perimeters. In response to a question
from the Panel, he noted that unlike the GRZ, the
purposes of the NRZ include
specific reference to environmental constraints which would appropriately
recognise the Precinct’s
interface with the Werribee River corridor.
Ballan Dev Co was concerned that applying the NRZ to Precinct 5 would set a
precedent for other greenfield growth areas in Ballan.
It submitted that if the
Panel supported the application of the NRZ to Precinct 5, it should provide
clear commentary stating why
it is appropriate in the context of Precinct 5.
Council responded that what applies to Precinct 5 does not form a template or
for other precincts. The only question before the Panel was whether
the NRZ is appropriate for Precinct 5.
Rural Conservation Zone
MEG and BMPA submitted the RCZ should be applied to
the Werribee River corridor. They submitted the fundamental principle of
the environmental assets within the river corridor means that the
land should be zoned RCZ as part of this Amendment, rather than
waiting for the
land to be subdivided and vested in Council as a reserve.
When MEG and BMPA cross examined Mr Barnes, he acknowledged that the RCZ
is an option
” provided stormwater retarding basins and
similar works were not prohibited under the RCZ.
(iii) Discussion
Neighbourhood Residential Zone
Panel acknowledges that the Ballan Strategic Directions envisages GRZ for
conventional residential areas in the town’s greenfield
growth areas.
However the Ballan Strategic Directions is a background document and has limited
weight. Amendment C88moor did not
translate the preferred zones outlined in the
Ballan Strategic Directions into Clause 11.01-1L-03 of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel agrees with Mr Black and Mr Barnes that the GRZ is the more usual
zone applied to greenfield growth areas, particularly
growth areas within
Melbourne’s urban growth boundary. However Ballan is not within
Melbourne’s urban growth boundary.
It is a country town in a peri urban
municipality. While the planning policy framework identifies Ballan as suitable
for accommodating
growth, the growth expectations in Ballan are not the same as
Melbourne’s growth areas. This is particularly the case in the
stages of delivering the growth anticipated by the Ballan Framework Plan.
The Panel accepts the position of the Proponent and Council that three storey
residential development is unlikely to be attractive
to those looking to
purchase a home in Ballan, at least in the medium term. The Panel therefore has
no concerns that the mandatory
two storey height limit in the NRZ will
unnecessarily or inappropriately constrain development in Precinct 5.
Nor does the Panel have any concerns that the NRZ would inappropriately limit
density in Precinct 5, or hinder the delivery of the
densities (including
medium density housing) envisaged for the Precinct. As Council pointed out, the
NRZ does not contain density
controls, and the minimum garden area requirements
(which might otherwise limit medium density product) do not apply where land is
subdivided in accordance with an approved development plan as will be the case
Precinct 5 is located on the edge of town, in a gateway location to Ballan
immediately adjacent to rural areas, the Freeway and the
Werribee River. It has
unique constraints that make the NRZ the appropriate choice of zone for this
Precinct. This does not mean
the NRZ will be appropriate for other greenfield
growth areas identified in the Ballan Framework Plan, including those to the
of the railway line.
Rural Conservation Zone
It is good planning
practice to align zone boundaries with property boundaries. The precise
boundary of the Werribee River corridor
will not be known until the land is
subdivided and the corridor is vested in Council as a reserve. It is not
appropriate to apply
the RCZ before the land has been subdivided. Further, once
the land vests in Council and becomes public land, one of the public
is likely to be more appropriate than the RCZ.
(iv) Conclusions
The Panel concludes:
NRZ is the appropriate zone for Precinct 5. This does not set a precedent for
other greenfield growth areas identified in the
Ballan Framework Plan.
Werribee River corridor should not be zoned RCZ as part of this Amendment.
Consideration should be given to the appropriate zone
once the land is
subdivided and the corridor vested in Council.
2.4 Average lot size
(i) The issue
issue is whether it is appropriate to include a requirement in the DPO9 for an
average lot size of 600 square metres in the conventional
residential areas.
(ii) Background
The Proponent proposes lots of between 400 and 700
square metres in conventional residential areas.
Council’s Day 1 version of the DPO9 included requirements for any
subdivision to demonstrate an average lot size of 600 square
conventional residential areas. The exhibited DPO9 did not include an average
lot size requirement.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Council explained that the average lot size
requirement had been inserted into the Day 1 version of the DPO9 to respond to
concerns about character. Council submitted that an average lot size
of 600 square metres was consistent with the outcomes sought
for Precinct 5 in
the policy framework.
The Proponent opposed the average lot size requirement, submitting that it is
cumbersome and may work against the provision of the mix of lot sizes
based on the overall design
”. It submitted the requirement
is misguided and represents a crude attempt to control density and lot
sizes without regard to the pattern of development and mix
of housing product
sought to be provided
”. The requirement would also be difficult to
implement given the Precinct will be subdivided and developed in stages.
The Proponent submitted that peri-urban areas present a valuable opportunity
to provide affordable housing options, including smaller
lots. This is
particularly relevant in Ballan, where both an ageing population and young
families face challenges related to housing
affordability and rising costs.
Making the most of land within the township boundary was essential for
accommodating growth, while
also protecting the rural and agricultural values of
the land outside these boundaries.
Mr Barnes noted there is always tension in the size of residential lots when
new greenfield residential development is proposed in
a country town such as
Ballan. He did not support the average lot size requirement, noting:
Precinct 5 will
be a long term greenfield growth area that is likely to be developed over
10 to 15 years or more
the development
plan and the planning controls should provide flexibility for a mix of lot sizes
and housing types to evolve over
time, as the community’s housing needs
appropriate, feasible or consistent with current planning policy to try to
replicate lot pattern or density within the existing
township in the greenfield
growth areas.
He considered Precinct 5 is largely separated from the
town centre, providing the opportunity for the Precinct to establish its own
character without unreasonably impacting on the character of other parts of the
town. Further, he considered the Proponent’s
proposed pattern and
distribution of lots represents an appropriate balance between:
the provision of
diverse, sustainable and affordable housing
the efficient
use of greenfield land
avoiding the
expansion of the township beyond the town boundaries, thereby protecting the
surrounding rural areas.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel does not agree with the Proponent that an
average lot size requirements will be difficult or impractical to implement.
The DPO9 requires a masterplan to be prepared which includes lot sizes and
layouts. Lot sizes are therefore likely to be determined
at the master planning
stage for Precinct 5, not when subdivision permits are sought for individual
parts of the land. The Masterplan
could (if required) demonstrate that
conventional residential development areas would deliver an average lot size
across the different
That said, the Panel does not consider the average lot size requirement is
strategically justified. It agrees with Mr Barnes that
the lot sizes and layout
of the conventional residential areas should be allowed to evolve organically in
response to market demand.
Further, Ballan’s housing context is changing
and with the demand for smaller households may well increase over time.
The average lot size requirement is not justified on the basis of the need to
respond to township character. As Mr Barnes pointed
out, Ballan already has
varied character across the different parts of the town. Precinct 5 is
separated from the established parts
of Ballan by the river, which presents an
opportunity for the Precinct to develop its own character. There is limited
of the core of Precinct 5 from outside the Precinct, and the larger
lots around the perimeter will soften the impact of smaller lot
sizes in the
core and will help retain Ballan’s country town character. Character is
addressed in more detail in Chapter
(v) Conclusion and recommendation
The Panel concludes:
average lot size requirement introduced in Council’s Day 1 DPO9 is not
justified and should be removed.
The Panel recommends Council:
Amend the Development Plan Overlay Schedule 9
as shown in
a) Amend the Masterplan requirements in Clause
average lot size requirement.
2.5 Local commercial centre
(i) The issue
issue is whether the local commercial centre is appropriate in size and
(ii) Background
The Development Concept
Plan identifies a small commercial area along the main connector road in the
east of the Precinct, opposite
the community facility and adjacent to the active
open space. The Residential Retail Assessment that supported the Amendment
that a modest local convenience centre in Precinct 5 aligns with the
draft Moorabool Retail Strategy and would not undermine the
role of the Ballan
town centre. The assessment noted the proposed commercial centre is located
beyond a comfortable walking distance
from the town centre, and is unlikely to
draw demand from the shops, services and facilities in the town centre.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
The Proponent submitted
that the local commercial centre would appropriately serve the daily needs of
residents within a walkable
catchment. The commercial centre would be zoned NRZ
which allows for a limited range of non-residential uses to serve local
needs including medical centre, childcare centre, convenience shop and
food and drink premises.
Mr Barnes supported the inclusion of a small local commercial centre within
the Precinct given most of the land is more than 800 metres
(a convenient walk)
from central Ballan. He considered the centre would appropriately cater for the
day-to-day needs of the future
residents of the Precinct and respond to the
modest projected demand in the Residential Retail Assessment for additional
retail floorspace.
Mr Barnes did not consider the proposed location of the local commercial
centre (opposite the community facility) to be inappropriate,
but observed it
may be better positioned further to the south, at the southern end of the active
open space and adjacent to the medium
density housing in that location, to:
accessibility to a larger number of lots
provide a more
central location in the Precinct.
Mr Barnes considered that if the
centre remains in the exhibited location, the Development Concept Plan should
show a small area of
medium density housing around the centre.
MEG and BMPA requested the local commercial centre be relocated west of the
proposed main connector road further away from the Werribee
River corridor
interface, as discussed in Chapter
(iv) Discussion
The Panel supports the
provision of a small local retail area in Precinct 5. The strategic rationale
for the centre is established
in the Residential Retail Assessment, and the
Panel is satisfied that it will not compete with the primacy of the shops in the
centre (predominantly along Ingles Street).
In terms of location, the Panel expresses no particular view on whether the
exhibited location or the alternative suggested by Mr
Barnes would be more
appropriate. Planning policy supports co-locating medium density housing with
local commercial facilities,
so Mr Barnes’ alternative has some advantage
in that regard. Equally, policy supports co-locating commercial and retail
with community facilities, so the exhibited location also has
advantages.
Council and the Proponent should further consider which is the preferable
location before the Amendment is adopted. If the more southerly
location is
preferred, Council should amend the Development Concept Plan to avoid any
concern that the location of the centre as
shown on a future development plan is
not ‘generally in accordance with’ the Development Concept Plan.
If the preferred location remains as exhibited, the Development Concept Plan
could be amended to designate a small amount of medium
density housing around
the centre, although this would potentially intensify development closer to the
Werribee River corridor (discussed
in more detail in Chapter
The Panel notes that while the small scale retail uses proposed in the
commercial centre can occur in the NRZ, it may be appropriate
to rezone the
centre in future once its location has been confirmed and the lot boundaries are
(v) Conclusions
supports the inclusion of a small local commercial centre on the Development
Concept Plan.
sees merit in both the location shown on the exhibited Development Concept and
the alternative location (further south) suggested
by Mr Barnes.
and the Proponent should further consider which is the preferable location and
amend the Development Concept Plan (if required)
before the Amendment is
Locating medium
density housing around the local commercial centre is supported in either
2.6 Bushfire risk
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment appropriately plans for bushfire risk.
(ii) Background
Clause 13.02-1S directs
that protection of human life be prioritised over all other policy
considerations. It directs population
growth and development to low risk
Clause 13.02-1L states that subdivision of towns subject to severe bushfire
risk should be limited. It names high risk towns in the
municipality –
Ballan is not named.
(iii) Submissions and discussion
Precinct 5 is not
identified as a high risk bushfire area in the policy framework or the planning
controls. The Amendment was supported
by a comprehensive Bushfire Hazard
Assessment including a bushfire hazard landscape assessment that concluded
Precinct 5 is:
... a location where residential growth presents a relatively low risk,
subject to appropriate structure planning details.
The Bushfire Hazard Assessment considered the proposed layout of Precinct 5
is responsive to the bushfire risks, including the use
of perimeter roads and an
appropriate lot and road distribution. It concluded:
... the rezoning proposal and [DPO9] can meet the relevant requirements in
the Planning Scheme including the policy objectives at
Clause 13.02-1S and the
Bushfire Interface Guidance published by DELWP.
The Bushfire Hazard Assessment recommended the
DPO9 include a requirement for a Bushfire Management Plan, which requires (among
a revised hazard
assessment that considers the ultimate revegetated state of the Werribee River
management in defendable space areas to the standard specified by the Country
Fire Authority (CFA)
future open
space and landscaping areas to be managed and maintained to a low threat
vulnerable and hazardous uses in locations with a direct interface with
unmanaged vegetation
setbacks for
defendable space that will ensure radiant heat exposure at future development is
less than 12.5kW per square metre in
accordance with the Australian Standard
(AS3959) for new dwellings and lower exposure for vulnerable uses
recommendations
for bushfire risk mitigation at the various stages of subdivision
development.
The Amendment was referred to the CFA who did not
oppose the Amendment provided certain conditions were met, such as achieving
heat benchmarks, managing vegetation and the like (D4 and D11).
One submission (S19) expressed concern about how new residents would safely
evacuate given there is only one access in and out of
the Precinct. There are
in fact three access points in and out of the Precinct, as discussed in Chapter
. Access and egress were considered
in the Bushfire Hazard Assessment and found to be appropriate.
The Panel is satisfied the DPO9 effectively addresses the recommendations in
the Bushfire Hazard Assessment and the CFA’s response,
and is appropriate
from a bushfire management perspective. It is satisfied the proposed road
network (which includes more than one
road out of Precinct 5) has been designed
to appropriately respond to the relatively low bushfire risk.
(iv) Conclusion
The Panel concludes:
The Amendment
responds appropriately to bushfire risk.
3 Character
3.1 Character response
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment provides an appropriate character response.
(ii) Background
the existing and proposed planning framework seek a character response on the
subject land that responds to Ballan’s existing
rural character,
particularly along the Precinct edges. Planning policy seeks to achieve this
residential lots along key gateway approaches into town
streetscapes and treelined streets internal to the Precinct
retaining and
enhancing vegetation
development
design that responds to topography, landscape, vegetation and natural
The Amendment
The Development Concept Plan and DPO9 relevantly
larger lots
along the Precinct edges (but to a depth less than the depth nominated in the
Ballan Framework Plan)
requirements for
a landscape plan that considers canopy cover, setbacks and retained
grid-like road network set around a 25 metre wide ‘boulevard
requirements for
subdivision to respond to topography and natural features.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
expressed concern about the potential loss of Ballan’s country town
character of treelined streets. Some called
for larger lots throughout the
Precinct, to avoid a ‘suburban’ character response.
The Proponent and Council supported the proposed character response primarily
for its alignment with the strategic intent of the Ballan
Framework Plan, as did
The Proponent submitted the Framework Plan provides a visual representation
of the strategic direction for the Precinct and nominates
clear development
expectations for land use and interface treatments that form a gateway role. It
submitted the Development Concept
Plan was developed in accordance with the
Framework Plan.
The Proponent argued that from a broader perspective, the Amendment
contributes positively to the character of Ballan as it aligns
with its mix of
character and emerging subdivision styles. While the traditional settlement
grid is evident south of the Werribee
River, areas to the north of the River are
distinguished with newer subdivisions patterns. The Amendment will change the
of the western edge of the township, but the DPO9 and the Development
Concept Plan provided a thoughtful response, including through
residential lots along the interface, setbacks, street planting and road
Council submitted the Amendment will create housing with a different
character from the current Ballan but sees this as appropriate
Ballan’s evolving role in accommodating growth aligned with the Ballan
Framework Plan. It supported the boulevard
connector treatment for placemaking
character, tree canopy and urban heat benefits.
Mr Barnes highlighted the importance of maintaining clear urban growth
boundaries to protect Ballan’s rural, country town feel.
He acknowledged
the Amendment would inevitably bring change to the western edge of the town, but
found the Development Concept Plan
to be an appropriate and contemporary
response to character considerations. The separation of the Precinct from the
remainder of
urban Ballan was seen as providing an ability for the Precinct to
form its own character, without unreasonable impacts on other areas.
observed that Ballan's character has evolved in phases, and that the addition of
Precinct 5 would continue this pattern.
Mr Barnes endorsed the proposal for a lesser depth of large lots along the
Precinct interfaces than nominated in the Ballan Framework
Plan. He found the
proposed depth suitable for gateway and rural-residential transition treatments,
and considered that extending
lower density lots further into the Precinct was
unnecessary to achieve the desired character outcomes. His reasons
a single row of
larger lots along the major roads establishes a spacious character with
increased vegetation and greater building
separation than lots beyond the
the proposed
service road and front-facing lots would offer an attractive presentation to
major road frontages
the wide verges
along Old Melbourne Road and Geelong-Ballan Road provide opportunity for
substantial landscaped setbacks to help integrate
the subdivision into its
(iv) Discussion
Planning policy
provides clear direction for the desired character outcomes within the Precinct.
The proposed planning framework,
especially the Development Concept Plan, has
been designed to align with the vision set out in Clause 11 and particularly the
Framework Plan. It responds to the town’s character primarily by
setting a lower density response at the Precinct’s
edges and introducing a
contemporary yet sympathetic character beyond these interfaces.
Both Council and the Proponent share the view that the proposed character
response is suitable, consistent with the strategic intent
for the Precinct, and
will produce development that respects both its immediate context and the
broader township identity. The Panel
agrees. A requirement of the Masterplan
is for subdivision layouts to respond sensitively to the site’s topography
and integrate
with the established township. This response is already evident
in the Development Concept Plan.
Mr Barnes’ evidence highlighted the progressive evolution of
Ballan’s character and phases of development can be seen
when moving
through the town. It is inevitable that new development in Precinct 5 (and
other greenfield growth areas) will contribute
to this ongoing evolution.
The gateway treatments proposed for Old Melbourne Road and Geelong-Ballan
Road respond to planning policy and will help integrate
the new development into
its surroundings. The Panel agrees with Mr Barnes’ observations that the
existing wide road verges,
a future service road and setbacks to dwellings will
position new development away from main roads and will help maintain the country
town feel of Ballan. New homes will be set behind existing mature trees and
further landscaping required by DPO9, resulting in a
gateway experience of
larger residential lots nestled within landscaping, consistent with a rural
setting. In the Panel’s
view, extending the depth of these larger lots
further into the Precinct would not provide additional character benefits.
Within the Precinct, the public realm will reference Ballan’s township
character with a modern interpretation. The main connector
road will feature a
wide verge capable of supporting mature trees, and the road network will create
a generally gridded, ‘treelined
street’ effect. The Development
Concept Plan preserves significant vegetation, incorporating it into public open
continue the landscape character from the Precinct’s edges.
Dwelling development will be limited to two storeys and encouraged
limited fencing and front setbacks capable of accommodating canopy trees. These
are features consist with the Ballan
(v) Conclusion
The Amendment
provides an appropriate character response.
3.2 Werribee River corridor interface
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment provides for an appropriate interface to the
Werribee River corridor.
This chapter deals with the proposed interface
beyond the 100 metre setback to the Werribee River. The environmental values of
Werribee River and corridor itself are dealt with at Chapter
(ii) Background
state and local planning policies, such as at Clause 11 and 12, emphasise the
protection and enhancement of the river’s
ecology, amenity and landscape
identity. These policies encourage the creation of public land reserves,
revegetation and careful
management of visual impacts from new development. The
ESO2 (Waterway Protection) aims to ensure appropriate development within
metres of the waterway.
The Amendment
The Development Concept Plan shows a 100 metre
setback from the river designated as the ‘Werribee River corridor’.
the setback edge, the Plan proposes a perimeter road, a community facility
and an active open space reserve as well as an active
transport link (shared
path). The local commercial centre and ‘interface residential’ lots
sit beyond this.
The DPO9 guides the interface response to the Werribee River corridor by
setbacks to meet
Melbourne Water standards
landscape design
that complements the Werribee River corridor
a concept plan
for the active open space reserve that includes a cut and fill plan (which is a
post-exhibition change)
a Biodiversity
Management Plan that addresses risks to the river corridor from adjacent
(iii) Evidence and submissions
The Proponent submitted the Amendment would activate
the Werribee River corridor for public use, contrasting with its current state.
It tabled Viewshed Analyses (D27 to D31) that illustrated the proposed
revegetation along the Werribee River corridor intervening
the waterway and
development interface.
Council submitted impacts on the Werribee River interface can be
appropriately managed under the proposed planning controls, development
and permit processes. Locating active open space beside the river contributes
to the buffer between housing development and
the river corridor. More detailed
design work that will occur through preparation of the development plan will
further address the
BMPA and MEG contended that the community facility and active open space are
‘active’ uses which are incompatible with,
and provide an inadequate
buffer to, the river. They argued the extent of cut and fill required for the
active open space would
negatively impact the interface. They noted the Ballan
Framework Plan designates active open space further from the interface and
the land adjacent to the waterway as passive open space. They submitted low
density housing (if done well) was the preferred
interface treatment.
Mr Barnes highlighted the importance of the Werribee River as a significant
natural feature of the Precinct. He considered the proposed
interface ensures
the significance is not impacted by new urban development. His evidence
The Development
Concept Plan allocates a comparable area of land to the river corridor as the
Ballan Framework Plan, and includes
wetlands and public uses within the
The active open
space reserve is almost entirely outside the 100 metre setback.
The Public Open
Space and Landscape Plan provisions in the DPO9 require open space and
landscaping to complement the river corridor
and identify opportunities for
revegetation.
The active open
space interface design would be strengthened by additional guidance on
landscaping screens for car parks near the
sports reserve, helping to enhance
the visual amenity of the interface.
The Development
Concept Plan “
opens up and activates
” the corridor for public
use, differing from its current private farm use.
If well managed,
the local commercial centre near the river corridor edge could enable greater
enjoyment of the natural setting.
Mr Panozzo considered co-locating
active open space and the river corridor creates a positive mix of active and
passive recreation
in a natural setting and aligns with the Victorian Planning
Authority’s
Precinct Structure Planning Guidelines: New Communities in
(PSP Guidelines) which encourage locating sports reserves along
(iv) Discussion
Werribee River interface was recognised by parties as the most sensitive and
significant Precinct interface. Considerations regarding
the appropriateness of
the proposed interface were primarily confined to the location of the active
open space reserve, community
facility and local commercial centre along this
Planning policy acknowledges the delivery of development along waterways and
the Ballan Framework Plan establishes an expectation
for urban growth along the
Werribee River edge. The key aim in this regard is to ensure that the visual
impacts of new development
are minimised, remain visually subordinate to the
landscape and that existing topography and vegetation is protected.
The Panel is satisfied the Amendment will effectively manage character and
visual amenity along the Werribee River interface. The
provisions of the DPO9
set out a framework ensuring the character response to the interface will be
determined appropriately at later
stages and these are well supplemented with
planning policy that seek responsive design.
The 100 metre buffer will make a substantial contribution to maintaining
the natural character of this interface. The placement of
a perimeter road and
larger residential interface lots beyond it are consistent with the Ballan
Framework Plan. Further:
provision of
active open space in this location can stimulate activity along the interface
and positively shape the identity and visual
presentation of the urban edge
the viewshed
analysis illustrates that vegetation along the interface will contribute to the
character response, sense of place and
visual screening of new development
consideration of cut and fill along the escarpment to accommodate the active
- a landscape
design that will enhance the Werribee River corridor, including through canopy
The Panel supports Mr Barnes’
recommendation for vegetation screening of car parking and any other ‘back
facilities associated with the active open space use and
community facility that have potential cause unsightly or visually dominate
views. The Day 1 version of the DPO9, together with existing planning policy,
includes sufficient guidance to achieve this outcome.
The Panel has considered concerns raised by the environmental groups
regarding the proposed interface, but is satisfied that the DPO9
provides for
these matters to be properly addressed during preparation of the development
plan. Ecological impacts are addressed
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes:
The Amendment
provides for an appropriate interface to the character of the Werribee River
3.3 Freeway interface
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment provides for an appropriate interface to the
Western Freeway.
(ii) Background
The subject land sits at a higher elevation than the
Western Freeway. According to the Acoustic Assessment, a noise barrier (earth
bund or wall) will be needed along this edge, reaching heights of up to seven
metres in certain areas. Noise barriers will also
be necessary at the
Precinct's north-eastern and western boundaries.
The existing DDO3 (which will be retained) aims
to protect the amenity of Freeway users and includes decision guidelines about
landscaping,
visual impact and preserving skyline and landscape values. The
DPO9 further guides the design of the Freeway interface by:
master-planned development that is sensitive to the landscape
requiring low
density lots and landscaped buffers along the Freeway boundary, as well as
landscape treatments in road reserves
requiring the
Acoustic Design Response Plan to prioritise ‘natural’ noise
mitigation treatments (such as vegetated earth
bunds) over walls (as requested
by DTP Transport).
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Council submitted that
managing the Freeway interface was a ‘common matter’ to address in
growth area planning. It submitted
the DPO9 provides an appropriate framework
for considering the interface, including the presentation of any noise
mitigation measures
that will be required.
The Proponent submitted the DPO9 and the Development Concept Plan
appropriately give effect to the strategic direction to provide
lower densities
along the Freeway interface to emphasise Ballan’s rural township
Mr Barnes considered the Freeway interface was very important from a visual
amenity point of view and formed part the broader urban-rural
transition of the
Precinct. He found the lots proposed along the Freeway edge would create a
spacious and low density transition
which would reduce the visual impact of
development from the arterial road.
Mr Barnes considered there was uncertainty about ensuring uniformity in the
visual presentation along the road edge. He considered
it worthwhile to explore
how a consistent strategy could be delivered, whether by noise barriers or
landscaping. This approach could
be represented in the Development Concept Plan
by marking the sections where noise attenuation is necessary as ‘Freeway
(iv) Discussion
The Western Freeway
interface is a critical edge to the Precinct, requiring careful management of
visual amenity as indicated by existing
controls. The Panel considers the
Amendment delivers an appropriate response, primarily achieved through design
and presentation
of the future noise barrier along the edge followed by the
lower density residential development beyond it.
A noise barrier rising to approximately seven metres in height will
significantly influence both the visual impact and character of
this interface
from the road. The DDO3 provides assurance that the Freeway’s amenity is
a key consideration, while the DPO9
favours natural landscape features over
constructed walls. These tools will be important in achieving a suitable visual
The Panel acknowledges Mr Barnes’ observation regarding the need for a
consistent, precinct-wide approach to visual amenity
along this interface. This
is particularly pertinent given noise barriers required along other Precinct
boundaries will also contribute
to the overall Freeway experience. Given the
primary intent of the additional guidance is to manage visual impacts along the
interfaces, rather than demarcate the specific extent of noise mitigation,
the Panel prefers an additional requirement in the provisions
relating to the
Acoustic Design Response Plan that articulates the desired visual outcome.
Beyond the noise barrier, the DPO9 and the Development Concept Plan propose
lower density lots along the interface. This strategy
aligns with the direction
established by the Ballan Framework Plan and supports the Precinct’s
contribution to the rural character
of the area.
(v) Conclusions and recommendation
The Panel concludes:
The Amendment
provides an appropriate response to the Western Freeway interface.
Further guidance
is needed to ensure a consistent visual presentation to the Western Freeway
interface and other precinct edges.
The Panel recommends:
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 9 as shown in
a) Amend the Acoustic
Design Response Plan requirements in Clause 4.0 to:
consistent visual presentation to the Western Freeway interface and other
precinct edges.
4 Environmental and biodiversity values
4.1 The issue
issue is whether the Amendment adequately considers impacts on the environmental
and biodiversity values of the subject land and
the Werribee River environs.
4.2 Background
policy (at Clause 11 and Clause 12) seeks to protect and enhance biodiversity
generally and the Werribee River particularly.
The primary strategy is to
ensure decisions that involve the removal of native vegetation apply the three
step approach to avoid,
minimise and offset impacts to ensure there is no net
loss of biodiversity. Other strategies include to:
biodiversity values of roadsides
re-establish vegetation cover along the Werribee River
set development
back from retained watercourses in growth areas
create public
land reserves along the Werribee River adjacent to new developments.
The Amendment
The Amendment will retain the ESO1 and ESO2, both of
which trigger a permit for native vegetation removal. The ESO2 manages water
quality entering the Werribee River and applies to all land within 100 metres of
the Werribee River centreline.
The Development Concept Plan identifies retained patches of native vegetation
in the road reserves and along the Werribee River corridor,
and retained
scattered trees located in local parks or road reserves. As noted in Chapter
, land within 100 metres of the
Werribee River is set aside as a reserve, consistent with Melbourne Water
requirements. Some drainage
assets are shown within the river corridor, and the
corridor is edged by a perimeter road, ‘interface’ residential lots,
and the active open space reserve co-located with the community facility and a
commercial centre.
The Amendment introduces two controls for managing ecological impacts:
the VPO2 is
proposed to protect remnant vegetation and scattered trees in the Precinct
includes environmental protection objectives and requires:
- a Biodiversity
Management Plan including targeted flora and fauna surveys, native vegetation
retention recommendations, Werribee
River management and risk mitigation
- a Construction
Management Plan to address environmental risks, waste management, and erosion
and sediment controls for the Werribee
- an Integrated
Water Management Plan focused on protecting natural systems and water quality,
with suitable outfalls to the Werribee
- a Public Open
Space and Landscape Masterplan that provides for revegetation of the river
corridor with indigenous species.
The Biodiversity
Management Plan requirements were updated after exhibition in response to
requests from the Department of Environment,
Energy and Climate Change
Background technical reports
The Amendment was supported by a Flora and Fauna
Assessment (prepared by Nature Advisory) which included a site survey for the
Proponent’s
land only, being Parcel 5 (and a desktop assessment for the
remaining parcels in Precinct 5). The survey was conducted during autumn
winter, potentially missing seasonal species. The assessment:
found the land
was mostly cleared of native vegetation except for some patches and flora and
fauna species listed under the
Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988
found no species
listed under the
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act
(EPBC Act) were likely to be present
calculated the
offset needs and noted removal of native vegetation would trigger a
Clause 52.17 assessment and require offsets in
general habitat units (which
are available).
The assessment found conservation of the Werribee
River corridor is critical to preserving ecological values and concluded the
development will result in minor impacts on native vegetation and
listed species. It recommended:
retaining native
vegetation along the Werribee River and large scattered trees across the
Precinct where possible
further seasonal flora surveys and establishing protection zones and pollution
controls during construction.
The Amendment was supported by a Stormwater Management Strategy (SWMS)
prepared by Spiire that, among other things, identified ways
of designing
drainage assets to ensure the protection of water quality in the Werribee
4.3 Evidence and submissions
importance of the ecology in the Werribee River corridor was undisputed between
the parties. Maintaining the health and ecological
integrity of the corridor
was a shared aim, however submitters disputed the Amendment would achieve
The Proponent submitted that the Amendment is a
low-impact response to existing biodiversity values and provides an adequate
to the ecological values of the Precinct and the river corridor. Areas
of significance have been identified, with further flora
and fauna assessments
to occur to meet the requirements of the DPO9 and the EPBC Act. It submitted
incursions into the 100 metre
river corridor were minor and confined to public
open space, community uses, small sections of road and drainage
infrastructure.
The Proponent contended that development is appropriately set back from the
riparian corridor to avoid native vegetation, and that
the Biodiversity
Management Plan would offer measures to mitigate impacts to the escarpment and
river floodplain. This included
sediment and litter controls, and managing
disturbance from pets and artificial lighting.
Mr Mueck gave ecological evidence for the Proponent. His evidence included a
peer review of the Nature Advisory Flora and Fauna Assessment.
He concluded the
Amendment will ensure a low-impact response to the biodiversity values of
Precinct 5 and the river corridor.
Mr Mueck agreed with most of the Nature Advisory assessment’s mapping
of native vegetation, but noted:
it had missed
six native vegetation patches (five of which were located in the disused
aqueduct), one scattered tree
scattered tree required reclassification
the assessment
missed some species including the EPBC-listed Matted Flax-lily, evidence of
which he found along the aqueduct.
Mr Mueck recalculated the offset
requirement and confirmed General Habitat Units would be required. He
considered the mapping of
Habitat Zone Patch A near the river corridor in the
north east part of the subject land should be extended to the red line shown
Mapping correction to the extent of Habitat Zone Patch
Source: Annexure A to the Proponent’s closing submission (Document
Mr Mueck considered the proposed change of land use from farming to
residential (with the proposed setbacks) will have a negligible
impact on the
flora of the subject land. Relevantly:
most of the
subject land is dominated by introduced species, with high-value native
vegetation confined to the Werribee River floodplain
and remnant areas along the
the Development
Concept Plan retains native vegetation in the Werribee River corridor and places
other scattered trees and patches
in local parks.
He noted the
targeted surveys required under the Biodiversity Management Plan requirements in
the DPO9 will need to include the Matted
Flax-lily, and should be conducted at
an appropriate time of year (spring or summer).
Mr Mueck considered threatened fauna are unlikely to occur on site except in
the Werribee River corridor which may support species
including the Growling
Grass Frog, the Tussock Skink and platypus. He considered:
the buffer to
the river will assist to mitigate impacts from development and is sufficiently
wide to maintain its function as a movement
corridor for any significant
intrusions of
development into the setback are minor and are mainly drainage assets, which
themselves act as buffers
wetland design
and construction would need to follow DEECA Growling Grass Frog guidelines which
would also manage impacts on platypus
the active open
space reserve provides further buffering, despite some potential for impacts
including from artificial lighting and
chemicals used on the sporting fields
– these impacts will need to be managed and various mitigation options are
platypus and other fauna could occur, including from sediments and pets but
these will be largely managed by the Biodiversity
Management Plan
management of litter and waste will be required.
questioned Mr Mueck on the timing and extent of his site inspection and the
surveys that informed the Nature Advisory assessment.
His view what that,
overall, his and Nature Advisory’s assessments were collectively
sufficient to gain an understanding of
the biodiversity values on the subject
land and in the river corridor, and that the inspections have likely captured
the native vegetation
patches accurately.
Council submitted environmental and biodiversity
impacts will be appropriately managed through the development plan and
permits, noting:
the Biodiversity
Management Plan needs to include a targeted flora and fauna survey prior to
development
the Development
Concept Plan generally meets Melbourne Water’s 100 metre setback
requirement, with minor incursions for stormwater
infrastructure which still
buffer the waterway from development.
Melbourne Water explained that the setback to
Werribee River had been determined in accordance with the Melbourne Water
Waterway Corridor Guidelines to respond to the ESO, ecological values
and geomorphic values (including the escarpment) along the
While it did not oppose the Amendment, Melbourne Water requested updates to
the SWMS and associated documents to better address waterway
protection. It
recommended revising the SWMS to include suitable locations for drainage assets
which consider avoidance and minimisation,
and further details be provided
regarding outfalls. It also requested that:
the ESO2 be
extended to include all land within 100 metres of the river centreline or
75 metres from the flood boundary.
infrastructure (such as roads and the community facility) be moved outside the
100 metre setback to the river.
Council explained it was not
possible to extend the ESO2 through this Amendment because it was a regional
DEECA generally supported the Amendment including the proposed overlays to
protect native vegetation and the location of drainage
assets within the river
corridor. However it considered stronger biodiversity protections were needed
and recommended strengthening
the Biodiversity Management Plan requirements in
the DPO9. These changes were reflected in Council’s Day 1 version. DEECA
encouraged Council to consider long term conservation management for areas
remaining in private ownership.
BMPA and MEG
BMPA and MEG expressed concern that significant
trees were not adequately protected and development would negatively impact the
corridor. They were particularly concerned about the impact on fauna
species that use the river corridor, such as platypus and Growling
Grass Frog.
They opposed any incursions of development into the 100 metre river
setback, and were concerned about the impacts of
litter, sediment, pets, noise
and artificial lighting. MEG further submitted the Amendment was a missed
opportunity to create a
conservation corridor along the disused aqueduct, which
holds both ecological and historical significance.
The environment groups requested various changes to the Amendment, including
expand the VPO2
to include native grasses, reeds and significant trees
relocate the
community facility, active open space and commercial centre further away from
designate the
disused aqueduct as a conservation corridor
establish a
benefit-sharing scheme to fund ongoing conservation efforts managed by Council
and volunteer groups
increase Council
resources to monitor and enforce environmental compliance during
construction
prohibit cats in
the Precinct.
4.4 Discussion
The Panel considers the
Amendment appropriately addresses ecological impacts and enables a staged and
progressively detailed consideration
of impacts. The Panel agrees with the
expert evidence that flora and fauna impacts are relatively low, with further
assessment and
mitigation to be addressed in future planning stages, primarily
through the Biodiversity Management Plan and the Integrated Water
Strategy required under the DPO9.
The Panel is satisfied the proposed development has generally been designed
in accordance with planning policy, including avoiding
and minimising impacts on
native vegetation. The most significant native vegetation, largely within the
Werribee River corridor,
will be retained and measures to ensure ongoing
management are proposed. Higher value native vegetation outside the river
will be retained, including patches along external road reserves and
groupings of scattered trees within local parks.
Mr Mueck identified several oversights in the Nature Advisory assessment,
however the Panel accepts that, together, the Nature Advisory
assessment and his
evidence provide a sufficient understanding of ecological values to inform the
Amendment. The limitations of
the survey work undertaken to date can be
addressed in the future targeted survey work required under the Biodiversity
Plan and to address EPBC Act requirements. Further surveys will need
to be conducted at the appropriate time of year.
The error to the mapping of Habitat Zone Patch A should be corrected as part
of this Amendment.
The Amendment’s most important ecological outcome is the retention and
protection of the Werribee River corridor, and the requirements
to retain native
vegetation in this area and substantially revegetate the corridor. The proposed
buffer to the river will minimise
development impacts on the river’s
environmental values. The Panel supports Melbourne Water’s recommendation
infrastructure be relocated outside the 100-metre setback. Any other
incursions can be further assessed as the development plan
is prepared and
The Panel does not consider a wider buffer is necessary. The buffer aligns
with Melbourne Water requirements and the requirements
of the ESO2.
The Panel supports the proposed location of the active open space reserve,
community facility and the local commercial centre along
the edge of the river
corridor. Community access and engagement with the river corridor is a positive
outcome, and is likely to
increase public awareness and appreciation of the
area’s natural values.
The DPO9 requirements for a Construction Management Plan, Biodiversity
Management Plan and an Integrated Water Management Plan provide
an appropriate
framework to identify and manage any risks to the river environs from both
construction and ongoing use of the land.
These are complemented by a specific
requirement in the DPO9 for lighting design that considers impacts on wildlife,
which should
include consideration of both temporary (during construction) and
permanent lighting and reference to the relevant guidelines.
Additional medium density housing (if placed
around the local commercial centre) would be unlikely to significantly increase
on the river environs as it would be set well back from the corridor
edge. That said, managing the impacts of the uses on the corridor
will be very
important. The Panel agrees with concerns raised by submitters about the need
to control both construction and post-development
risks such as sediment, waste,
litter, pets and artificial lighting. Impacts of sediment and litter are dealt
with further in Chapter
Importantly, both DEECA and Melbourne Water support the Amendment and will
remain closely involved in the later stages of planning,
including through the
Biodiversity Management Plan and an Integrated Water Management Plan. This
ongoing collaboration and oversight
will help ensure biodiversity values are
identified and protected through the planning process. However ongoing
management of land
in the corridor, particularly while the land remains
privately owned, will need further consideration by Council as development of
the Precinct advances.
The Panel acknowledges the request from BMPA and MEG to designate the
aqueduct corridor as a conservation reserve. However, the full
distribution of biodiversity values along the aqueduct will only become clear
after targeted surveys are completed. Retention
of values in the aqueduct can
be considered at future planning stages, noting there may be other master
planning factors that influence
any such decisions.
The Panel finds no strategic or statutory basis to impose a benefit-sharing
scheme to fund the ongoing conservation of the corridor.
4.5 Conclusions and recommendations
The Panel concludes:
some oversights in the Flora and Fauna Assessment prepared to support the
Amendment request, the Panel is satisfied the assessment,
together with Mr
Mueck’s evidence, provide a sufficient understanding of ecological values
to inform the Amendment.
DPO9 provides sufficient guidance for the further identification and mitigation
of risks to ecological values, including the Werribee
flora and fauna surveys for potential threatened species will need to be
conducted and at the appropriate time of year.
VPO2 mapping covering Habitat Zone Patch A should be extended to reflect the
full extent of the patch.
infrastructure should not be located within the 100 metre setback to the
Werribee River, and any other incursions can be appropriately
assessed at later
planning stages.
The DPO9 should
manage the potential impacts of temporary and permanent light spill into the
Werribee River corridor, including reference
to the relevant
guidelines.
The Panel recommends:
the Development Plan Overlay Schedule 9 as shown in
a) Amend the
conditions and
requirements for permits in Clause 3.0 relating to the
Construction Management Plan to:
the requirement to consider lighting impacts to wildlife.
b) Amend the Public
Open Space and Landscape Masterplan requirements in Clause 4.0 to:
the requirement to consider lighting impacts to wildlife.
the Biodiversity Management Plan requirements in Clause 4.0 to:
the requirement to consider lighting impacts to
Amend the Vegetation Protection Overlay
Schedule 2 mapping to reflect the full extent of the patch of native vegetation
known as Habitat
Zone Patch A, as shown in
in this report.
5 Open space and community infrastructure
5.1 The issue
issue is whether the Amendment appropriately plans for the provision open space
and community infrastructure.
5.2 Background
policy (Clauses 11 and 19) promotes early and accessible provision of open space
and community infrastructure, with a diverse,
integrated open space network
supporting recreation, conservation and social connection. Key strategies
include co-locating facilities
to improve access, safety and surveillance, as
well as identifying infrastructure gaps and ensuring education facilities meet
and future needs.
The Ballan Strategic Directions found community facilities to be generally
adequate for growth projections to 2041, though many require
upgrades to remain
fit for purpose. A secondary school was not required based on projections, but
could be reconsidered with accelerated
The PSP Guidelines apply to greenfield development in metropolitan contexts
and set open space targets of:
a minimum of
10 percent of net developable area, comprising 5 to 7 percent for
active open space and 3 to 5 percent for passive open
a sports reserve
larger than 1 hectare within 800 metres walking distance of all dwellings
local parks
within 400 metres walking distance of all dwellings.
Clause 56 set
the same standards but adds that active open space should be at least
8 hectares and located within 1 kilometre of 95
percent of dwellings.
The Amendment
The Development Concept Plan identifies the
following open space and social infrastructure:
the active open
space reserve co-located with a community facility (which is positioned around
the former Ballan Homestead site)
three local
parks in the Precinct’s north, centre and south, generally around existing
trees to be retained
no provision for
The DPO9 provisions require:
development
staging that includes early provision of open space and community
a public open
space network that provides open space generally in accordance with the
Development Concept Plan, with allowance for
alternative locations provided
intended outcomes are met
a Public Open
Space and Landscape Masterplan
concept details
for the sports pavilion, community facility and playgrounds
consideration of
open space interface treatments
a condition and
requirement of permits that landowners enter a section 173 agreement for
development contributions.
Background technical reports
The Amendment was supported by a Public Open Space
Provision Needs Assessment which recommended the Precinct align with the PSP
targets and Clause 56 standards and provide:
2.2 hectares
(ha) of passive open space across three parks, located to meet walkability
metrics (and each to include a playground)
4.5 ha of active
open space including an oval and sports pavilion
unencumbered public open space.
The Public Open Space Provision
Needs Assessment recommended the active open space reserve be located near the
Werribee River corridor,
rather than the location options identified in the
Ballan Framework Plan. It considered the location by the river corridor
distribution of open space and the reserve’s capacity to serve
as a multifunctional, regionally significant recreation node.
It also noted
that the active open space reserve could be co-located with a multi-purpose
community facility, and include a playground.
Council tabled a Community Facilities and Educations Needs Assessment (D35)
that was lodged with the Amendment but did not form part
of the exhibited
material. The Assessment supported a medium-sized, multi-purpose community
facility in the Precinct based on provision
ratios typically applied in
metropolitan contexts (being 1 large centre per 3,000 dwellings) with:
metres of floorspace on a 0.8 ha site
two kindergarten
rooms, consulting suites and flexible meeting spaces
integration with
the sports pavilion.
No immediate need for a secondary or second
primary school was found.
The draft Shared Infrastructure Funding Plan exhibited with the Amendment
apportioned 100 percent of costs (land and works) for the
active open
space, sports pavilion and community facility to the Precinct. For local parks,
it listed embellishments but not the
associated land (as this would be secured
through Clause 53.01). While not referenced in the DPO9, Council and the
Proponent advised
the plan will form the basis of the section 173 agreement
securing development contributions.
5.3 Active and passive open space
(i) Evidence and submissions
expressed a desire to ensure the future community is well supported by
sufficient open space, including a full-sized sports
oval and usable
recreational areas.
The Proponent submitted the location of the active open space reserve broadly
(although not precisely) aligns with the indicative
active open space
investigation areas set out in the Ballan Framework Plan and that:
the extent of
both passive and active open space exceeds what was indicated in the Ballan
Strategic Directions
the proposed
variety of recreation facilities will cater to the needs of the future
population in the Precinct while provide benefits
to the wider Ballan
Council submitted the Public Open Space Provision Needs
Assessment confirmed the proposed quantum and distribution of open space is
adequate. It supported the location of the active open space alongside the
river corridor.
Mr Panozzo gave community infrastructure evidence for the Proponent. He
considered the proposed active open space provision is strategically
and consistent with the technical reports informing the Amendment. He:
supported the
proposed quantum of active and passive open space, which satisfies the targets
in the PSP Guidelines and is consistent
with the recommendations in the Public
Open Space Provision Needs Assessment
supported the
proposed locations of open space areas which generally met the walkable distance
targets in the PSP Guidelines
endorsed the
size of the active open space provision, which can accommodate multiple types of
playing fields to respond to local demand
reiterated the
findings of the Public Open Space Provision Needs Assessment that it is
preferable to co-locate the active open space
with the river corridor to serve
as a hub for recreation, social interaction and appreciation of the natural
environment.
Attached to Mr Panozzo’s written evidence was an
assessment he prepared earlier in the Amendment process regarding funding
apportionments
for open space infrastructure (also tabled by Council as D36).
The assessment recommended that the Precinct fund 30 to 33 percent
of the total
cost for the active open space reserve and sports pavilion. This was based on
the provision ratio of one sports reserve
per 3,000 dwellings as is typically
applied in metropolitan greenfield scenarios. In his evidence though, Mr
Panozzo supported the
100 percent apportionments listed in the draft Shared
Infrastructure Funding Plan and considered these represented a
contribution towards open space infrastructure
Regarding passive open space, Mr Panozzo expressed support for the
apportionments detailed in the draft Shared Infrastructure Funding
although he recommended including the costs for the four playgrounds. Under
cross-examination, he acknowledged that, given
the proportion of passive open
space that the Proponent will provide is less than the standard 5 percent
applied elsewhere in Moorabool,
it would be reasonable for the Proponent to fund
both the land and improvements required for passive open space.
Mr Barnes supported the proposed active and passive open space network. He
considered the provision of open space would offer social
and recreational
benefits for the local community and deliver environmental benefits such as
urban heat cooling. He supported the
location of active open space adjacent to
the Werribee River, reasoning it enabled accessible and visible community use in
a generally
central part of the Precinct, and allowed a degree of activation and
engagement with the environment.
(ii) Discussion
The Panel considers the
proposed provision of open space is sufficient, strategically located and
designed to deliver community benefits.
The location and distribution of passive open spaces are suitably planned
such that all residents across the Precinct will be within
a convenient walking
distance of at least one, and in some cases multiple, local parks. Both the
distribution and the overall quantum
of passive open space accord with metrics
in the Planning Scheme and the technical report that informed the Amendment.
The Panel accepts that the active open space is strategically located. The
evidence demonstrates that this location is preferred
for walking accessibility,
relative to the alternative location identified in the Ballan Framework Plan.
Accessibility is of central
importance to the effective planning of active open
space. Co-location with the Werribee River corridor is a positive outcome as
creates an integrated open space hub that can support a range of recreational
pursuits. The quantum of active open space is adequate
and will cater for a
diversity of sporting needs within Ballan.
The Panel observes that the northernmost area of passive open space is
positioned close to the Precinct’s northern boundary.
While this may not
maximise walkability to residential areas to the south, the Panel accepts that
its location is appropriate to
protect retained vegetation.
The DPO9 requirement for landscaping in open spaces addresses the retention
of significant vegetation, canopy cover and use of drought-tolerant
These measures will contribute to the creation of visually appealing and
comfortable environments for future residents
and will enable a range of
recreational opportunities. Landscaping will also contribute to the management
of the urban heat effect,
predominantly through the precinct-wide
30 percent tree canopy target as consistent with the PSP Guidelines. The
30 percent canopy
cover requirement should exclude active open space playing
fields and courts.
(iii) Conclusion and recommendation
Panel concludes:
Amendment appropriately plans for the provision of active and passive open
space, and appropriately guides suitable landscaping
of open spaces and other
public spaces.
The 30 percent
tree canopy cover requirement should not extend to active open space playing
fields and courts.
The Panel recommends:
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 9 as shown in
a) Amend the Public
Open Space and Landscape Masterplan requirements in Clause 4.0 to:
active open space playing fields and courts from the 30 percent canopy cover
requirements.
5.4 Schools
(i) Evidence and submissions
submissions raised concerns regarding the absence of high schools in Ballan, as
well as the potential impact of population
growth on the town’s existing
primary schools.
The Proponent maintained there was no justification to include a school
within the Precinct. It submitted the Department of Education
has been aware of
Ballan’s anticipated growth for several years, having contributed to the
Ballan Strategic Directions, and
at no point was the need for additional schools
identified anywhere in Ballan. The Department has had multiple opportunities to
engage on the matter of school provision in the Precinct, and has not indicated
the need for an additional school.
Mr Panozzo expressed the view that, by or after 2041, there may be a need for
a secondary school or a second primary school in Ballan.
He confirmed the
existing primary school site has capacity for additional enrolments, either
through internal reallocation or the
construction of portable classrooms. He
reiterated that development within the Precinct does not in itself create a
requirement
for further school provision.
While Mr Panozzo did not consider the Development Concept Plan should require
land to be set aside for a school, he suggested further
consultation with the
Department of Education would be beneficial to clarify its position on primary
and secondary school needs in
Ballan and to determine whether the Precinct is a
suitable location for future provision. He recommended a community
infrastructure
needs assessment be prepared to provide additional opportunities
for engagement with the Department. Mr Barnes also supported further
consultation with the Department.
Council submitted the development of the Precinct would not generate the need
for new schools. It noted a mismatch between the likely
timing for land supply
and the projected timing for additional school provision in 2041. Council
suggested that, should the need
arise earlier, the Department of Education
should be open to securing land within the Precinct through its normal process
of negotiation
or acquisition.
(ii) Discussion
In the absence of an
expressed need from the Department of Education, the Panel does not consider the
DPO9 should require land to
be set aside for a school. Mr Panozzo’s
evidence was that projected demand does not establish a requirement for a
or additional primary school within Ballan during the anticipated
development horizon of the Precinct. The Panel sees no reason
to find otherwise
and agrees with Council that should the need arise, the ability for the
Department of Education to pursue land
acquisition for school provision remains,
regardless of the Amendment.
The Panel accepts that the matter of school provision has been appropriately
addressed within the Amendment, and does not support
imposing additional
consultation requirements with the Department of Education as no immediate need
has been demonstrated. That
said, ongoing engagement between Council and the
Department of Education is desirable to ensure school provision projections
current as the Ballan population evolves.
(iii) Conclusion
The Panel concludes:
Amendment appropriately plans for the provision of schools.
5.5 Community facility
(i) Evidence and submissions
Submissions
emphasised the importance of ensuring adequate community infrastructure to
support the growing population, including community
facilities.
The Proponent maintained that the Amendment offered an appropriate framework
for community infrastructure, submitting that both the
size and location of the
community facility were suitable.
Council endorsed the community facility and indicated that, like other
infrastructure, it would be planned and delivered as part of
the development
process to ensure it meets the community’s evolving needs. It submitted
that the draft Shared Infrastructure
Funding Plan, together with the section 173
agreement required by the DPO9, would facilitate the delivery of the community
Mr Barnes supported the establishment of a community facility in the
Precinct. He saw the benefit of co-locating the centre with
the active open
space, but expressed a preference for a more central location within the
Precinct. This view was consistent with
his opinions regarding the location of
the local commercial centre, as discussed in Chapter
. If the two uses were positioned
further south, he considered they should remain co-located.
Mr Panozzo noted that the range of existing social infrastructure in Ballan
would play a vital role in fulfilling the early service
and social interaction
needs of future residents in the Precinct. He considered the Community
Facilities and Education Needs Assessment
was based on a thorough examination of
Council’s policy and guidance and that Council’s community
infrastructure framework
was thorough. Mr Panozzo’s support for the
facility was not predicated solely on provision ratios and he considered it was
an excellent opportunity to supplement current community infrastructure, albeit
on a modest scale.
Mr Panozzo supported reducing the land allocated for the proposed facility to
0.5 ha, which was less than the 0.8 ha recommended in
the background technical
report. He reasoned that co-locating the facility with the active open space
would allow for more efficient
land use and noted that the catchment for the
facility was relatively small. He observed that planning in regional areas
significantly from metropolitan contexts, which generally rely on
standard provision ratios.
Mr Panozzo suggested that the DPO9 should require the preparation of a
community needs assessment to guide the services and functions
to be included in
the proposed multipurpose community facility, including confirmation of funding
for early years services (such
as kindergarten and maternal and child health)
from the Department of Education. Neither Council nor the Proponent considered
an assessment was needed.
(ii) Discussion
Panel considers the size and location of the community facility appropriate.
Regional catchments, being more dispersed than those
in metropolitan areas,
shape different expectations for service delivery. Mr Panozzo’s evidence
supports applying context-specific
provision ratios rather than metropolitan
standards. Locating a new modest sized facility within the Precinct ensures
access for future residents, especially given the Precinct sits at
the edge of urban Ballan and not immediately proximate to existing
The Panel supports a land allocation of 0.5 ha for the community facility on
the basis of land use efficiencies gained from co-locating
it with the active
open space. The early delivery of the facility, as guided by the DPO9, will
address the needs of early residents
and facilitate the development of a
community identity from the earliest stages of growth.
The Panel considers the co-location of the community facility with the active
open space, the local commercial centre and the Werribee
River corridor to be a
positive outcome. Together, these uses will provide a focal point for the
Precinct, supporting social connections
among new residents and helping
establish a distinct community identity. Connection with the former Ballan
further embed local identity. If the local commercial
centre is ultimately moved further south as discussed in Chapter
, it should remain co-located with the
community facility and active open space to maintain the hub of active uses.
It is not necessary to prepare a new community infrastructure needs
assessment to determine the appropriate mix of services for the
facility. The
existing Assessment already offers an ‘extensive’ review of existing
Council policy and guidelines, which
are ‘thorough’, according to Mr
Panozzo. Combined with Council input, this should be sufficient to establish
service mix.
Any further engagement with the Department of Education in relation to
schools provision in Ballan can occur in the ordinary way.
The Committee does
not consider that a further community infrastructure needs assessment for the
Precinct is required to support
that ongoing engagement.
(iii) Conclusions
Panel concludes:
Amendment appropriately plans for the provision of community infrastructure.
is no need for the development plan to be informed by a community infrastructure
needs assessment.
5.6 Infrastructure contributions
indicated it was working with the Proponent to progress the section 173
agreement regarding development contributions for
various community
infrastructure items in line with the Shared Infrastructure Funding Plan.
Mr Black supported a section 173 agreement dealing with developer
contributions, rather than requiring the preparation of a complex
development
contributions plan, given that much of the land is under single ownership. He
considered the section 173 agreement would
provide a clear and enforceable
mechanism for the collection of funds necessary for infrastructure delivery
within the Precinct.
As noted in Chapter
, Mr Panozzo
initially recommended that the Precinct fund 30 to 33 percent of the community
facility, based on provision ratios of
one facility per 3,000 dwellings.
However in his evidence he supported a 100 percent allocation, noting it was
‘generous’.
The Panel supports the approach of using a section 173 agreement to secure
development contributions, and the use of a shared infrastructure
funding plan
to inform the agreement. However it makes no particular findings about the
appropriateness of the apportionments listed
in the draft Shared Infrastructure
Funding Plan. The Shared Infrastructure Funding Plan did not form part of the
exhibited Amendment
material, and nor is the document listed in the DPO9. No
final version was tabled as part of the Panel process.
6 Infrastructure
6.1 Drainage and flooding
(i) The issues
issues are whether:
the Amendment
appropriately considers flood risk
discharges will impact the environmental and aquatic values of the Werribee
discharges will cause erosion of the escarpment.
The interaction
between drainage assets and Aboriginal cultural heritage is discussed in
(ii) Background
As noted in Chapter
, the Amendment was supported by a SWMS
prepared by Spiire. The SWMS outlines how post development stormwater flows
through Precinct
5, including from sites to the west, will be managed.
The SWMS was based on Melbourne Water’s Ballan North Development
Services Scheme (DSS) prepared in 2017, which showed three
wetland retarding
basins in Precinct 5 located along the top of the escarpment. The SWMS
consolidates the three wetland retarding
basins into two. Melbourne Water has
provided in principle agreement to this change.
The SWMS includes a map showing the flood extent in a 1 percent Annual
Exceedance Probability event (a 1 in 100 year event). All
developable areas and
key infrastructure assets (such as the wetland retarding basins and the active
open space reserve) are proposed
to be located well above the 1 in 100 year
flood level.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Submitters raised concerns in relation to:
flooding risks
to the subject land and surrounding properties as a result of development in
heightened flood
risk from climate change effects
the impacts of
the proposed drainage assets (wetland and retarding basins and the drainage
outfalls) on the Werribee River ecology,
water quality and volumes
the management
of overland drainage flows across the escarpment and into the river, including
erosion effects.
Submitters provided several photographs which
showed heavy sediment loads in other parts of the river that had come off
surrounding
development sites. They were concerned construction waste and
pollutants would enter the river and impact its aquatic and environmental
The Proponent submitted the subject land can be appropriately drained in
accordance with Melbourne Water requirements, without adversely
impacting the
Werribee River, and in a way that responds to ecological values. It submitted
the Amendment is appropriate from a
drainage and hydrology perspective, and the
SWMS represents a carefully considered design of the stormwater management
Mr Wilkinson gave drainage evidence for the Proponent. He considered the
Amendment is appropriate from a drainage and hydrology perspective,
that appropriate development controls are applied.
Mr Wilkinson concluded “
flooding from the Werribee River provides no
flood risk to the precinct
”. He noted the ridge of the escarpment
sits 8 to 12 metres above the lower lying land along the Werribee River
corridor, and
the 1 percent Annual Exceedance Probability flood extent mapping
shows flood levels are confined to the lower lying land.
Mr Wilkinson’s evidence was that stormwater draining from Precinct 5
would contribute little to rising river levels, and he
did not consider
development of the Precinct would pose any additional flood risk to surrounding
properties. Stormwater from Precinct
5 runs off quickly and leaves the site
well before the Werribee River reaches its peak, reflected in the fact that
Melbourne Water
only requires the drainage assets in Precinct 5 to be designed
to retard rainfall events up to the 50 percent Annual Exceedance
Probability
(a 1 in 2 year storm event), rather than the more severe 1 in
100 year storm event.
Regarding increased flood risks from climate change, Mr Wilkinson explained
that the SWMS had been updated to reflect climate change
modelling in accordance
with updated Australian Rainfall Runoff Guidelines issued in August 2024. He
expected the updated rainfall
predictions as a result of climate change would be
adequately catered for within the current design configurations of the wetland
retarding basins, but the assets could be resized if necessary to deal with the
additional predicted rainfall and runoff. He stated:
I can categorically state that any increases in predicted flooding from the
Werribee River will not create a risk of flooding to the
Precinct 5 area.
Melbourne Water confirmed at the Hearing that the modelling in the SWMS had
been updated to reflect climate change to Melbourne Water’s
satisfaction,
but could not assist the Panel in relation to whether the proposed wetland
retarding basins were sufficiently sized
to accommodate increased climate
related rainfall and runoff.
Regarding water quality, Mr Wilkinson’s evidence was that outfalls will
be designed to ensure the protection of the Werribee
River and its environs. He
noted the SWMS provides a framework for the drainage system, which will be
further modelled and designed
through the development plan and permit processes.
He was confident the drainage assets could be designed and constructed to ensure
water draining into the river achieves appropriate water quality standards,
including in relation to sediment, and that outfall locations
will be further
considered at the detailed design stage.
Mr Wilkinson noted it is important to consider the current use of Precinct 5
(for agricultural and rural living purposes), with runoff
from farming and
cropping activities currently discharging to the Werribee River with relatively
few controls. His evidence was:
... often residential developments with adequate stormwater quality treatment
provide improved water quality discharge to receiving
environments.
He noted all residential developments must meet best practice water quality
treatment objectives to ensure receiving environments
are sufficiently protected
from the potential impacts of development to water quality. Further:
the drainage
system includes water quality treatment assets (the two constructed wetlands and
one standalone sediment basin)
modelling of
these assets has been undertaken that demonstrated adequate water quality
treatment can be achieved.
In relation to erosion risks, Mr
Wilkinson stated:
I agree with submitters that this needs to be addressed however it can and
will be addressed once the masterplan is resolved and engineering
design of the
estate progressed.
His evidence was that overland flows will be directed along protected flow
paths down the escarpment to the Werribee River corridor,
with the detailed
design to be finalised through subsequent stages in the planning process.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel is satisfied on the basis of Melbourne
Water’s submissions, Mr Wilkinson’s evidence and the flood extent
in the SWMS that the development of Precinct 5 poses no risk of flooding
of land in the Precinct or in surrounding areas. The SWMS
included modelling of
rainfall events with climate change factored in, which Melbourne Water confirmed
was done to its satisfaction.
The evidence confirmed the proposed drainage
assets can be designed to manage the anticipated rainfall and runoff from
5 to avoid any risk of flooding, even with the additional rainfall and
runoff anticipated as a result of climate change.
The Panel acknowledges the concerns of submitters in relation to maintaining
the environmental and aquatic values of the river. It
is confident the drainage
system can be designed to ensure appropriate water quality standards for
discharges to the river can be
achieved. As Mr Wilkinson pointed out, the
drainage system will need to be best practice and designed to achieve legislated
quality standards that should protect the aquatic and environmental values
of the river.
The DPO9 includes several provisions designed to ensure appropriate
environmental and water quality outcomes can be achieved, including:
a requirement
for a Biodiversity Management Plan that identifies risks to biodiversity values
during and after development of the
land, and makes recommendations for
management of the Werribee River reserve and wetland retarding basins,
- the protection
and enhancement of biodiversity values
- identification
of risks to environmental values from adjoining land uses and construction
- appropriate
risk mitigation measures and management regimes, including a platypus survey,
prior to stormwater outfall(s) design
and construction activity
a mandatory
permit condition requiring approval of a Construction Management Plan before any
works start that includes, among other
- actions to
address construction and environmental risks
- soil erosion
and sediment control provisions to protect drainage assets and the river,
however this should be amended to include
the escarpment
a requirement
that works be carried out in accordance with the approved Construction
Management Plan.
(v) Conclusions and recommendation
Panel concludes:
development of Precinct 5 will not present a flood risk to Precinct 5 or
surrounding properties, even with the additional rainfall
and runoff resulting
from climate change.
discharges can be appropriately managed to ensure:
- impacts to the
environmental and aquatic values of the Werribee River are acceptable
- erosion and
sediment risks are properly managed.
recommends:
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 9 as shown in
a) Amend the
conditions and
requirements for permits in Clause 3.0 relating to the
Construction Management Plan
require soil
erosion and sediment control measures to protect the escarpment (as well as
stormwater infrastructure and the Werribee
6.2 Servicing
(i) The issues
issues are whether:
the Precinct can
be adequately serviced
there are any
servicing implications for other precincts that arise from the
(ii) Background
19 seeks timely, efficient and cost-effective development infrastructure that
adequately serves the community, with strategies
to ensure services and new
developments are integrated.
The Amendment was supported by an Infrastructure Serving Report that
concluded the subject land can be adequately serviced. It noted
however that
most services will require developer-funded augmentation. Initial development
will be capped at 60 to 100 lots for
sewerage and up to 300 lots for water until
further augmentation is provided. The Report concluded that the rezoning could
but service connections would need to be staged.
The DPO9 requires an Infrastructure Servicing Plan which outlines the staging
of infrastructure. This provision was updated after
exhibition in response to a
request from Central Highlands Water (CHW) that the Infrastructure Servicing
Plan include details of
the staging of infrastructure, its funding and delivery
linked to stages of development.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions regarding
servicing primarily focussed on the broader servicing constraints for the Ballan
CHW did not oppose the Amendment and confirmed in its submission to the Panel
the Precinct could be serviced. It highlighted that
projected growth in Ballan
is significant, in contrast to previously steady and relatively low growth
rates. CHW confirmed the lot
caps identified in the Infrastructure Servicing
Report for sewerage and water connections before augmentation occurred.
While CHW agreed with the recommendations set out in the Infrastructure
Serving Report, its submission to the Amendment raised concerns
potential complications of planning and funding long term infrastructure if
multiple precincts are advanced concurrently.
It expressed concern about
multiple concurrent growth fronts competing for infrastructure funding,
recommending sequential growth
across precincts.
Mr Black observed that existing service capacity allows for some initial
development within the Precinct, and that careful planning
will be essential to
ensure timely infrastructure upgrades for the remaining land.
Regarding servicing other precincts in Ballan, Mr Black held the firm view
that strategic, rather than operational, planning is needed
to ensure sufficient
land supply for planned residential growth. He noted that CHW is not a
statutory authority for land use planning,
and its stance on the timing and
sequencing of growth is inappropriate. He argued that servicing authorities
should align infrastructure
planning and funding with both state and local
policies, and urged the Panel to provide clear commentary that servicing
authorities
like CHW must plan for the full extent of projected growth rather
than seek to restrict it.
Relying on Mr Black’s evidence, Ballan Dev Co opposed CHW’s
suggestion to sequence growth according to operational constraints,
emphasising
that planning should be strategically driven. It submitted CHW’s position
was unacceptable and “
frustratingly at odds
” with established
planning policy. It submitted that CHW should work collaboratively with
landowners to ensure timely and
cost effective delivery of water and sewerage
infrastructure for all Ballan precincts.
Ballan South echoed Ballan Dev Co’s position and submitted that
infrastructure staging should be based on real site conditions
to allow land to
come to market as soon as possible, with a strategic rather than operational
approach. It submitted a high level
infrastructure assessment should be
undertaken supporting a more holistic approach to servicing Ballan’s
growth areas. Ballan
South encouraged servicing authorities, especially CHW, to
work with landowners in all precincts to deliver timely and cost effective
services, enabling Ballan’s strategic growth ambitions to be realised
sooner rather than later.
On the issue of servicing other precincts, Council maintained that the
strategic exercise of the Amendment is focused on delivering
the Precinct, not
planning for other precincts. Nonetheless, Council stated:
opposed to planning for concurrent growth fronts in Ballan
other precincts
will be progressed through a joint process between landowners and Council and
involving strategic background work
the Amendment
does not preclude any conclusions about future amendments.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel is satisfied the Precinct can be serviced
and that all future lots will have access to essential servicing infrastructure,
subject to augmentation. CHW did not contend that servicing the Precinct was
unachievable but rather emphasised that funding and
works will be required to
enable servicing. This is not unusual in a context where land is transitioning
from rural to residential
In relation to water and sewerage, the Panel notes that capacity constraints
will necessitate augmentation relatively early in the
planning and development
of the Precinct. At this stage, it is enough to establish that the land can be
serviced, with the finer
detail to be resolved through subsequent planning
processes including the Infrastructure Servicing Plan required under the DPO9
future permit applications. The DPO9 is appropriately drafted to manage
sequencing of infrastructure alongside development and to
confirm funding
arrangements, to the satisfaction of CHW (and other relevant service
authorities).
The Panel agrees with Council that servicing constraints affecting land
outside the Precinct are beyond the scope of this Amendment.
That said, the
apparent housing supply challenges in Ballan and Council’s support for
concurrent planning for growth fronts
suggests the development of multiple
concurrent growth fronts may be justified. The Panel encourages ongoing
engagement between
CHW, Council and landowners and developers to advance
servicing plans consistent with strategic objectives for Ballan’s growth
and consistent with policy objectives for timely and cost effective
infrastructure.
(v) Conclusions
Panel concludes:
The subject land
can be adequately serviced.
The Amendment
ensures development will be coordinated with services infrastructure, and that
connections are provided in a timely
and staged manner.
There are no
servicing implications for other precincts that arise from the Amendment.
engagement between CHW and landowners across Ballan’s growth precincts
should continue to enable service connections
in a timely and cost-effective
7 Traffic and transport
7.1 Background
5 is located on the northeast corner of the four-leg staggered T intersection of
Geelong-Ballan Road and Old Melbourne Road
(IN-01). Both Geelong-Ballan Road
and Old Melbourne Road are declared arterial roads with a single lane of traffic
in each direction
within wide road reserves. Geelong-Ballan Road has a posted
speed limit of 80 kilometres per hour. Old Melbourne Road has a posted
limit of 60 kilometres per hour. Council’s Ballan Transport Study (May
2023) recommends IN-01 be upgraded in future
to a roundabout.
Clause 18 of the Planning Scheme states that
planning should ensure a safe, integrated and sustainable transport system that
facilitates
network-wide efficient, coordinated and reliable movements of people
and goods and supports health and wellbeing.
The Amendment
The Development Concept Plan identifies:
three access
points into Precinct 5 (two from Old Melbourne Road, and one from Geelong-Ballan
an internal
connector road that connects the access point on Geelong-Ballan Road with the
westernmost access point on Old Melbourne
active transport
paths along the Geelong-Ballan Road and Old Melbourne Road frontages, parts of
the internal road network and the
interface between the active open space
reserve and the river corridor.
The DPO9 requires an Integrated
Transport Management Plan to be prepared to the satisfaction of the Head,
Transport for Victoria that,
among other things:
identifies the
staging, design, land requirements and funding plan for interim and ultimate
upgrades to IN-01
details trigger
points for upgrades that are linked to stages of development or the number of
lots developed
network of walking and cycling paths that provides connectivity between key
destinations including along the Werribee River
corridor and the proposed active
open space reserve.
The DPO9 also includes a requirement (at the
request of DTP Transport) for a section 173 agreement providing for the
delivery, funding
and identification of land requirements for the IN-01
upgrades, with DTP Transport as a party.
Background technical reports
The Amendment was informed by a Traffic Engineering
Assessment prepared by Traffix Group that assessed whether the proposed internal
and existing external road and path networks (including IN-01) were suitable to
accommodate vehicle and active transport movements
expected to be generated by
the proposed development. Key conclusions were:
the level of
vehicle traffic likely to be generated by the proposed development will be
readily accommodated by the surrounding road
network without any adverse
IN-01 in its
current configuration would continue to operate at a satisfactory level
capacity-wise post development however it should
be upgraded with dedicated turn
lanes to ensure safer traffic movements through the intersection (interim
the proposed
intersection treatments at the three site access points will function well and
in some cases are more than required to
accommodate the expected traffic
generated by the proposed development
the internal
road network provides suitable reservations to accommodate carriageways, public
transport, on-street parking, pedestrian
and cycle provisions and services
there are no
traffic engineering reasons why the subject land should not rezoned.
7.2 Traffic congestion and safety
(i) The issue
issue is whether the proposed development will generate traffic that results in
unacceptable congestion or safety issues.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Several submitters were
concerned about the impacts of the proposed development on traffic congestion
and safety. The submissions
noted that at full development Precinct 5 would
almost double the population of Ballan. They were concerned this would put
significant
pressure on the existing road network, particularly during peaks and
asserted that:
precincts south
of the railway line should be developed in preference to Precinct 5 because they
had more options for accessing the
town centre and areas beyond the
Inglis Street is
already congested at busy times, and the section through the centre of town
could not be widened
the additional
traffic generated by the proposed development would cause unacceptable
congestion and impacts on the amenity of the
development traffic would place too much pressure on the existing bridges across
the Werribee River
school and public transport bus services were required.
Two traffic
experts presented evidence to the Panel – Mr Woolcock of Traffix Group
(for the Proponent) and Ms Garretty of Salt
(for Council). Mr Woolcock prepared
the Traffic Engineering Assessment that supported the Amendment. Ms
Garrety’s evidence
was in the nature of an independent peer review.
The Traffic Engineering Assessment did not factor in increased traffic due to
growth in other precincts. Mr Woolcock’s evidence
reassessed the
performance of the internal and external road networks assuming an additional
450 lots are developed in Precinct 6.
He concluded both the internal and
external networks would continue to operate satisfactorily post full development
of Precinct
5 without unacceptable congestion.
Ms Garretty’s evidence was confined to the appropriate treatments for
the intersections at the site access points and IN-01
(addressed below). Her
firm had undertaken a peer review of the Traffic Engineering Assessment’s
analysis of the performance
of these four intersections, and a draft peer review
report was appended to her evidence.
The draft peer review used a higher trip generation rate than that assumed by
Traffix Group. Both the peer review and Ms Garretty’s
evidence concluded
that the intersections at the site access points were appropriate, even with the
higher trip generation rate.
Ms Garretty identified no concerns in relation to
general network performance or congestion.
Council submitted the traffic implications of the Amendment were
appropriately considered by the two experts who formed a clear view
increased traffic associated with the Amendment can be accommodated in the road
network, and access to and from Precinct
5 is appropriate. It submitted:
This is not surprising. Ballan presently enjoys a location where through
traffic avoids the town proper for the large part by dent
of the Western Highway
and the fact that Geelong-Ballan Road is outside of the Amendment area. This
means that the predominant source
of traffic within the town represents
localised journeys within generous road reservations.
DTP Transport submitted it seeks to maintain the safety and efficiency of
Geelong-Ballan Road as a high speed (80 kilometres per hour)
and key movement
corridor for freight by limiting the number of new conflict points. DTP
Transport would need to approve the design
of intersections with arterial roads,
which was provided for in Council’s Day 1 version of the DPO9. It also
submitted the
draft Shared Infrastructure Funding Plan should fund the shared
path network proposed in the Traffic Engineering Assessment.
For completeness, the traffic experts agreed the boulevard connector
treatment proposed for the main connector road through the Precinct
required for traffic reasons. They agreed that all of the functions to be
performed by that road (including bus services,
active transport paths and
on-street parking) could be accommodated within a standard 25 metre connector
road cross section. Council
acknowledged this, but submitted it was seeking a
boulevard treatment for placemaking and sustainability reasons. This was not
by the Proponent.
(iii) Discussion
The Panel is satisfied
that the proposed development will not have unacceptable impacts in terms of
traffic congestion or safety either
within the Precinct or on the broader road
network. The methodology applied by Traffix Group in the Traffic Engineering
was appropriate and consistent with standard industry practice. The
Panel is satisfied on the basis of the Traffic Engineering Assessment
evidence of the two experts that the development of Precinct 5 will not result
in unacceptable congestion in Ballan.
The trip generation rates originally applied in the Traffic Engineering
Assessment were based on a residential subdivision in South
Morang in 2013. Mr
Kowarsky’s submission expressed concerns about whether this was
appropriate. Salt’s peer review
reassessed traffic impacts at the four
key intersections assuming a higher traffic generation rate of 10 vehicle
movements per day
per household (1 movement per household in the morning and
afternoon peaks)
and found the
intersections will perform appropriately. The Panel considers the revised trip
generation rate applied by Salt to
conservative.
In assessing the performance of the external network the Traffic Engineering
Assessment only considered natural network growth over
a 10 year period, plus
traffic generated by Precinct 5. It did not consider traffic generated by
future development in other precincts.
This was addressed in
Mr Woolcock’s evidence, which concluded IN-01 will continue to
operate satisfactorily with an additional
450 lots delivered in other precincts.
In any event, it is not usual to require a proponent of one development to make
assumptions
the impacts of its proposed development, unless the likely traffic
generated by
the other proposed development is known.
Some submitters raised concerns about the impact
of development traffic on the existing bridges across the Werribee River (at
Street and Blackwood Street). The Traffic Engineering Assessment did
not specifically consider these bridges. Both bridges are
relatively remote
from Precinct 5, and neither of the traffic experts identified any concerns in
relation to the safety or capacity
of these bridges, or that they might reach
capacity with the addition of development traffic. The Panel inspected both
its site visit and did not observe any features that would suggest
there is a capacity or safety issue associated with the bridges.
For completeness:
the need for
additional public transport or school bus services is a matter for Council
and/or DTP Transport, and is not directly
related to the Amendment
accepts the advice of the experts that the internal connector road within
Precinct 5 does not require a boulevard treatment
for traffic reasons.
(iv) Conclusion
is no evidence that the proposed development of Precinct 5 will result in
unacceptable traffic congestion.
7.3 Geelong-Ballan Road and Old Melbourne Road
intersection
(i) The issues
issues are:
whether the
interim design for the upgrade of IN-01 proposed in the Traffic Engineering
Assessment (with dedicated turn lanes) is
appropriate
whether the
intersection should be upgraded straight to the proposed ultimate treatment (a
roundabout)
whether the
Proponent should be responsible for interim and/or ultimate upgrades
when upgrades
should be triggered.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
The experts attended a
joint expert meeting on 11 July 2025 which was also attended by DTP Transport as
observers. The Joint Expert
Statement (D58) outlined the following key points
of agreement:
IN-01 does not
need to be upgraded for capacity reasons, but it should be upgraded to address
safety concerns
there may be
benefits in upgrading the intersection straight to its ultimate design
(roundabout) rather than the interim design
some development
should be allowed in Precinct 5 before IN-01 is required to be upgraded
triggers for the
interim and ultimate upgrades to IN-01 need to be agreed
the ultimate
roundabout treatment to IN-01 is not developer works, and the Proponent should
not be required to fully fund the ultimate
There was only
one point of departure in their views, which related to whether the interim
design in the Traffic Engineering Assessment
would result in a lower level of
service compared to the intersection’s current configuration (Ms Garretty
thought it would,
whereas Mr Woolcock did not).
Another matter considered by the experts (but not addressed at the joint
expert meeting) was whether the ultimate configuration (roundabout)
require land acquisition. Ms Garretty considered some land might be required,
whereas Mr Woolcock thought it might be possible
to fit the roundabout within
the existing road reserves.
The Proponent submitted that because IN-01 will continue to operate at a
satisfactory capacity level in both its existing and interim
configurations in
the short to medium term:
... the best option is for the Proponent to contribute towards the ultimate
intersection, with a condition requiring a further traffic
assessment prior to a
statement of compliance for a stage including something like the 750th or 800th
Early feedback from DTP Transport on the
Amendment (D10 and D19) indicated:
it supported the
interim upgrade
the timing of
the ultimate upgrade to IN-01 (the roundabout) will be difficult to
the interim and
ultimate upgrades are to be at no cost to DTP Transport, and Council should
explore a future contribution towards
the ultimate upgrade with the
DTP Transport’s submission to the Panel (D66)
considered IN-01 in detail. DTP Transport confirmed its view that the interim
upgrade to IN-01 proposed in the Traffic Engineering Assessment
provides an acceptable level of safety
”. It requested a
staging plan to clearly identify the timing of the interim treatment and confirm
the trigger for the ultimate
configuration. It maintained its position that any
upgrades to IN-01 should be at no cost to DTP Transport, and submitted there
significant risks
” to collecting a financial contribution
for a future upgrade of the intersection without a staging plan. It submitted
draft Shared Infrastructure Funding Plan should:
fund the interim
upgrade to IN-01
not commit DTP
Transport to delivering the ultimate upgrade
set aside land
required for the ultimate upgrade.
Council submitted it is unclear
when the interim solution is likely to be required and in what form. It noted
the intersection at
the access point in Geelong-Ballan Road is expected to take
some of the pressure off IN-01 and the potential contribution of this
intersection has not yet been modelled. Council submitted the proposed section
173 agreement is therefore the appropriate approach
to identify and secure the
IN-01 upgrade. Council further submitted:
appropriate to foreclose on DTP funding of the ultimate intersection (but
equally not possible to require it at this time)
all options
(interim or direct to ultimate with a contribution) should be on the table at
the time of the preparation of the development
plan and the section 173
(iii) Discussion
There are many uncertainties around IN-01,
including how long it is likely to perform at an acceptable level in its current
configuration,
when an upgrade might be required, whether the interim
configuration will reduce the capacity of the intersection, when the ultimate
upgrade will be delivered and how it will be funded. There is a high degree of
uncertainty around land requirements for the ultimate
upgrade, given only very
preliminary concept designs of the roundabout are available.
The Panel agrees a section 173 agreement is the best approach to manage these
uncertainties. Both the interim and ultimate upgrade
options should be kept on
the table at this stage.
In this context the section 173 agreement:
should identify
a trigger point at which further investigations are required into whether the
intersection needs to be upgraded, and
in what form
should include a
mechanism for determining an appropriate contribution from the Proponent toward
the upgrades (whether they are interim
or ultimate)
preclude the possibility of some state funding for the ultimate upgrade given
both Geelong-Ballan Road and Old Melbourne
Road are managed by the
The Panel is satisfied that the drafting of the section 173
agreement requirement in Council’s final preferred version of the
generally addresses what the section 173 agreement needs to cover. A staging
plan for the intersection upgrades may be of
assistance, and the section 173
agreement could deal with this if required.
The Panel makes no findings or conclusions in relation to how the draft
Shared Infrastructure Funding Plan should deal with funding
requirements for transport infrastructure. As already noted in Chapter
, the plan is not part of the
Amendment, and is not referenced in the DPO9.
(iv) Conclusions
the uncertainties associated with upgrades to the Geelong-Ballan Road and Old
Melbourne Road intersection, the requirement in
the DPO9 for a section 173
agreement dealing with the upgrades is the appropriate approach.
drafting of the section 173 agreement provision in Council’s final
preferred version of the DPO9 is generally appropriate,
subject to some minor
drafting changes to provide additional clarity.
7.4 Active transport
(i) The issues
issues are whether the Amendment should contemplate:
pedestrian and cycling bridge across the Werribee River
a shared path
along the disused aqueduct.
(ii) Background
The exhibited DPO9 did
not specifically require a shared path crossing of the Werribee River.
Council’s Day 1 version included
requirements for the Integrated Transport
Management Plan and the Biodiversity Management Plan to identify at least one
pedestrian/cyclist
crossing near the proposed active open space reserve:
comprehensive biodiversity assessment demonstrating that the biodiversity values
of the river corridor will not be impacted
approval from DEECA and Melbourne Water.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Several submitters said pedestrian and cycling
paths need to be provided to connect Precinct 5 to key destinations such as the
centre, railway station and schools, and to provide access along the
Werribee River corridor.
Mr Woolcock’s evidence was that active transport is proposed in order
to ensure safe and convenient walking and cycling options
are available for
existing and future users including:
footpaths on
both sides of all internal roads
(pedestrian and cyclist) paths along the Precinct’s frontages with
Geelong-Ballan Road and Old Melbourne Road
a designated
two-way off-road bicycle path along one side of the internal connector
shared paths
along key internal local streets providing connection with the public open space
paths within the
Werribee River corridor reserve
connection between Precinct 5 and the existing path network within the Ballan
Town Centre, immediately east of Bradshaw Street.
‘potential’ township connections are also identified along Old
Melbourne Road and across the Werribee River.
Mr Woolcock considered details
of required active transport provisions could be addressed and assessed by
Council as part of the
development plan and future permit applications.
Council submitted it was seeking to implement a
shared path crossing of the Werribee River which would provide for improved
transport options and connections to the existing township. It proposed
the Proponent would contribute to the funding of the crossing.
. It submitted
it had been working with Melbourne Water since exhibition of the Amendment to
identify potential locations for a
crossing. Any crossing point would need to
be in a relatively narrow section of the river.
Melbourne Water generally supported the provision of a river crossing, but
had no firm position on the location of the crossing other
than avoiding or
minimising impact to environmental and cultural heritage values.
The Proponent acknowledged that a potential
pedestrian pathway link
across the river was shown in one of the concept drawings provided in support of
the Amendment, but it opposed
any requirement in the DPO9 for such a crossing.
It submitted:
discussions with Melbourne Water and DEECA it was concluded that a bridge would
not be possible due to environmental impacts
on the river environs
there had been
no discussion between Council and the Proponent on the funding or cost of such a
the bridge would
require substantial earthworks, vegetation removal, footings and disturbance to
the river environs
importance of the river environs from a cultural heritage and ecological
perspective, it seemed unusual that Melbourne Water
and Council would push for a
The Proponent further submitted the strategic basis of the
bridge is unclear given it does not connect to any obvious destination
other side of the river, and the usual approach is for a linear pathway along
the river with crossings at the road bridges.
It submitted that there is no
proper basis for requiring the bridge as community infrastructure, as it does
not satisfy the ‘basic
and essential’ test that would apply if a
development contributions plan were to be applied.
Neither of the traffic experts considered the bridge in their evidence.
Mr Barnes’ written evidence noted that the background material had
included an indicative river crossing. While it was not
included in the
exhibited DPO9 he considered a crossing:
... would provide good opportunities for enhanced connections to existing
services and surrounding neighbourhoods in the future, if
feasible to establish
from an ecological and a financial perspective.
He was more qualified in his oral evidence, stating there may be some benefit
in a bridge, but only if it proves to be practical and
feasible. He noted the
link was not shown on any plans in the strategic documents, and there are
significant ecological constraints
that need to be carefully considered. He
considered a low level pathway crossing that could be done cheaply may be
appropriate,
although these can be unsafe. He considered that if the bridge had
to be constructed above the 1 in 100 year flood level, it may
appropriate, and if it was to be pursued it needs to be the subject of shared
MEG and BMPA did not support a river crossing and submitted the
notion that the crossing will connect residents to the east is
A shared path along the aqueduct
MEG and BMPA submitted the existing pathway along
the disused aqueduct provides an opportunity to create a linear conservation
for public use, with a shared path. Further::
significant heritage and conservation values along the aqueduct, including the
EPBC Act listed Matted Flax-lily, which
justify the area being protected and
repurposed as a linear conservation reserve with a shared path
Precinct 5 Concept Plan from the Ballan Strategic Directions and the Ballan
Framework Plan show a shared path in this location
a shared path in
this location would be safer than along Geelong-Ballan Road, which is an
arterial road with a posted speed limit
of 80 kilometres per hour
area along the aqueduct is currently in public ownership, making its conversion
to a public zone more practical.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel is satisfied the active transport network
shown on the Development Concept Plan is generally appropriate. It provides
options for connecting into the town centre from Geelong-Ballan Road,
Old Melbourne Road and internally within the Precinct. The
shared path along
the river corridor will provide activation along the river corridor interface,
and a pleasant and attractive option
for active transport movements through the
Precinct and towards the town centre.
The Panel does not consider the bridge is strategically justified. It is not
shown on any of the plans in the strategic documents,
and does not appear to
connect to any obvious destinations on the eastern side of the river. The
environmental and cultural heritage
values of the river corridor present
potentially significant challenges (including costs) for the construction of the
bridge, and
insufficient work has been done to demonstrate the strategic
justification for the bridge or its feasibility. Specific references
requirement for the crossing should be removed from the DPO9.
There may be some merit in showing a potential shared path along the aqueduct
alignment (or along the key local street that follows
that alignment), if the
further ecological surveys required to inform the Biodiversity Management Plan
and the EPBC Act assessment
demonstrate significant ecological values are
present along the corridor that should be protected. However:
Framework Plan showed the path positioned at the interface between the deeper
extent of lower-density lots and standard-density
lots, whereas a link in this
location would now cut through standard density lots
potentially cause land configuration issues and master planning challenges
at this stage
the extent of biodiversity values within the aqueduct corridor remains
Given these uncertainties, it would not be appropriate to
show an indicative link in this location at this stage. The option could,
however, be further explored through the preparation of the development
(v) Conclusions and recommendations
active transport network shown on the Development Concept Plan is
appropriate.
shared path river crossing has not been strategically justified and requirements
to include it should be removed from the DPO9.
recommends:
Amend the Development Plan Overlay Schedule 9
as shown in
a) Amend the Biodiversity Management Plan
requirements in Clause 4.0 to:
requirements relating to a shared path waterway crossing.
b) Amend the Integrated Transport Management Plan
requirements in Clause 4.0 to:
requirements relating to a shared path waterway crossing.
7.5 Car parking
(i) The issue
issue is whether Amendment appropriately considers car parking impacts in
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Submitters raised
concerns in relation to car parking, including:
Ballan railway station is currently nearing capacity on weekdays, and parking
capacity needs to be increased given Precinct
5 is not within walking distance
to the station
new streets
within the Precinct need to be wide enough to allow for on-street parking and
emergency vehicle access.
Mr Woolcock responded to these
submissions, noting the Traffic Engineering Assessment recommended future road
cross-sections that
accommodate on-street parking consistent with good current
practice including:
formal parking
lanes/bays clear of traffic lanes on both sides of the connector street and
higher order access streets
on-street parking on both sides of lower order access streets.
evidence was that the proposed on-street parking is consistent with CFA
requirements and will be appropriate to accommodate service
vehicles and other
emergency vehicles.
Mr Woolcock noted that a Car Parking Study undertaken by Council in 2022
suggests that parking within the township and around the
station is currently
underutilised and that:
Ballan is not
expected to experience a shortfall in parking availability before 2036
predicted to be significant on-street capacity of at least 195 spaces in the
vicinity of the station in 2041, so additional
parking is likely not
on any given day
someone can experience what they consider to be a lack of parking, even if there
are plenty of parking spaces available
more distant from their
destination.
Mr Woolcock was satisfied on the basis of the Car
Parking Study that there is no reason to suggest that the future development of
Precinct 5 will result in unreasonable detriment to car parking. Further:
I believe that it should be the responsibility of relevant authorities to
ensure that sufficient parking is available within key existing
facilitate the urban growth that is projected for Ballan and that the same
should be identified in the previously mentioned
'Ballan Integrated Transport
Strategy' that is currently being undertaken by Council.
(iii) Discussion
There is nothing before
the Panel to suggest that the Amendment will result in unacceptable impacts on
parking in Precinct 5 or in
Ballan more broadly. The Panel is satisfied on the
basis of Mr Woolcock’s evidence that the Amendment is appropriate
a parking perspective.
(iv) Conclusion
Amendment will not result in unacceptable impacts on carparking in
8 Other issues
8.1 Aboriginal cultural heritage
(i) The issue
issue is whether the proposed controls provide sufficient flexibility to allow
drainage assets (or other features) to be relocated
if needed to avoid or
minimise Aboriginal cultural heritage impacts.
(ii) Background
The Proponent has prepared a draft Cultural
Heritage Management Plan (CHMP) which details how Aboriginal cultural heritage
on Precinct
5 will be managed. The CHMP identified the escarpment as the area
of highest archaeological potential. The wetland retarding basins
active open space reserve are proposed to be located on the escarpment.
Melbourne Water’s submission (D70) presented a helpful map overlaying
the areas of known and suspected cultural heritage (the
red dots and areas
outlined in green in
proposed locations of the DSS assets (shown in khaki) and the wetland retarding
basins in the SWMS (shown in pink/purple).
Cultural heritage overlaid with proposed drainage
Source: D70
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Melbourne Water submitted:
... drainage assets may be suitable within [the 100 metre river] setback as
complementary to the waterway reserve function subject
to heritage and
geotechnical (and engineering design compliance). However, drainage asset
location was and is still subject to a
full and proper assessment of [cultural]
heritage values.
Melbourne Water provided examples of where the presence of cultural heritage
has resulted in significant delays and substantial cost
increases in delivering
the drainage assets. It submitted:
Indeed, there are examples, in the experience of Melbourne Water in other
precincts, where planned assets have been unable to be realised
due to the need
to avoid and protect Aboriginal Cultural Heritage.
Melbourne Water submitted the Development Concept Plan should be amended
identify the
area within 200 metres from the river as a Cultural Values Investigation Area,
to align with the heritage prediction
model in the work supporting the draft
relocate the
drainage assets out of the Cultural Values Investigation Area
indicating the assets could be moved into the Cultural Values Investigation Area
at the developer’s option if this
was acceptable from a cultural heritage
perspective.
This approach is similar to that taken in the Officer
South Precinct Structure Plan and the related implementing amendment.
Melbourne Water emphasised that salvage costs associated with constructing
drainage assets in areas containing artefact scatters could
be very substantial.
The DSS made no allowance for salvage costs, and if the developer opted to move
the drainage assets into the
Cultural Values Investigation Area it would have to
meet any salvage costs. It submitted the DPO9 should require a section 173
recording that the developer will be responsible for salvage
At the Hearing the Panel expressed concern about whether sufficient work had
been done to establish that the drainage assets could
be relocated outside the
river setback and still perform the necessary drainage function. Mr Wilkinson
was relatively confident
this could happen, subject to detailed design.
The Proponent explained the draft CHMP was undertaken to reduce any risks and
ensure that areas of cultural heritage are appropriately
identified and can be
managed appropriately. It tabled a letter from the Wadawurrung Traditional
Owners Aboriginal Corporation (WTOAC)
(D67) which indicated the WTOAC:
identified any concerns with the proposed development
was aware of and
consents to works occurring within the river setback subject to salvage of
The Proponent submitted ongoing consultation with the
WTOAC would focus on details of the conditions rather than substantive changes
or decision about the layout or viability of the proposed development. It
submitted the final drainage design will respond to the
outcome of the CHMP (as
well as any ecological constraints that emerge from the final flora and fauna
Ms Nicolson of Ecology and Heritage Partners gave cultural heritage evidence
for the Proponent. She outlined the cultural heritage
investigation work
undertaken to date and indicated it was relatively advanced for this stage of a
development process (noting that
a CHMP is not required before planning scheme
amendments are approved). She did not consider there is a need at this stage to
the Development Concept Plan or the SWMS on cultural heritage grounds,
although flexibility is needed to allow the drainage assets
to be relocated (if
required) once the CHMP is completed. She stated:
Melbourne Water did note that written acceptance of the current SWMS report
by the Registered Aboriginal Party (RAP) would be acceptable.
Even if the RAP
were to do this, the CHMP is the appropriate mechanism to ensure harm to known
Aboriginal Heritage Places is avoided
or minimised and is the most thorough way
to assess high impacts.
Mr Wilkinson said he understood the WTOAC supported disturbance of the
artefact areas provided salvage works occurred. Further, Spiire
has proposed an
alternative water quality treatment system of raingardens and rainwater tanks in
place of wetland retarding basins
which would significantly reduce the
extent of disturbance to identified artefact areas
”. An option
analysis report for these alternatives would be appended to the next version of
Melbourne Water indicated it would not support rainwater tanks. It submitted
that while they are a useful tool, they are not a treatment
strategy and are on
private land and therefore unable to be regulated as part of the DSS. Melbourne
Water requires nature-based
solutions for water treatment to meet best practice
environmental management requirements reflected in current Melbourne Water
guidelines.
While it had undertaken a cursory review of the Spiire alternative
options, it noted it had limited information and short timeframes,
modelling had been provided. It further noted the alternative options do not
address retardation requirements.
Council submitted it is critical, as a matter of orderly planning, that as
more information is known about the cultural values of
Precinct 5, the planning
controls provide sufficient flexibility to adapt if assets need to be relocated.
It noted other examples
where flexibility has been written into the controls to
ensure the deliverability of drainage assets, including Officer South. It
Council considers that an appropriate resolution in this matter could be
achieved by providing a note on Map 1 or elsewhere within
the DPO schedule that
makes it clear that the location of drainage, active open space and development
may need to change to accommodate
Aboriginal cultural heritage
considerations.
Council did not support Melbourne Water’s proposal to locate the
drainage assets outside the river setback with the possibility
of relocating
them back if supported by the approved CHMP. It considered this was unnecessary
given the work done to date on cultural
heritage and the letter from the WTOAC.
It submitted:
There is enough information to give the requisite confidence that the assets
will be where they presently are and if the drainage
assets (or the active open
space) need to be relocated then in the absence of a [development or
infrastructure contributions plan]
this will not upset land use budgets.
In its reply submission (D103) Melbourne Water confirmed its position that
the drainage assets should be relocated outside the Cultural
Investigation Area, and that the following note should be added to the
Development Concept Plan:
Stormwater assets and interface treatment may be relocated to within the
Cultural Heritage Investigation Area subject to Cultural
Heritage Management
Plan(s). Assets must not be diminished in their function (ie stormwater
treatment/retardation, community facilities).
(iv) Discussion
Dealing with the compatibility of Aboriginal
cultural heritage and drainage assets in a growth area context is not a novel
The approach does, however, depend on the context. The approach taken
in metropolitan Precinct Structure Plans (including the examples
South and Croskell presented by the parties) is not necessarily appropriate for
Precinct 5.
The Proponent has already undertaken a substantial amount of investigation
work on Precinct 5 in consultation with the WTOAC. Investigations
high likelihood of cultural heritage being present, including potentially dense
artefact scatters. Notwithstanding, the
Panel does not support the
identification of a 200 metre Cultural Heritage Investigation Area as proposed
by Melbourne Water. This
was not supported by either the WTOAC or Ms Nicholson,
is not contemplated in the draft CHMP, and could potentially have significant
impacts on the design and layout of the proposed development as shown on the
exhibited Development Concept Plan.
The WTOAC has indicated in principle support for the drainage assets (and
active open space reserve) to be located on the top of the
escarpment as shown
in the exhibited Development Concept Plan, provided salvage works are
undertaken. Further, in the Panel’s
view it would not be appropriate to
show the drainage assets in an alternative location in the absence of work
demonstrating a suitable
alternative location that would ensure the drainage
assets perform the required drainage and stormwater treatment functions.
Finally, Precinct Structure Plans (including Officer South) have detailed
land budgets which inform the calculation of development
or infrastructure
contributions and public land contributions provided for in a development or
infrastructure contributions plan
accompanying the Precinct Structure Plan. In
that context, having to relocate drainage assets into developable land presents
significant
complications that do not apply here.
The Panel considers the approach recommended by Council (and generally
supported by the Proponent) is the appropriate approach. The
drainage assets
should be retained in the exhibited location, and a note should be added to the
DPO9 to ensure sufficient flexibility
to relocate the drainage assets if
required to avoid or minimise cultural heritage impacts, while still being
‘generally in
accordance with’ the Development Concept Plan in Map 1
of the DPO9. The note proposed in Clause 4.0 in Council’s final
version of the DPO9 achieves this, and would benefit from specific reference to
cultural heritage considerations.
The Panel understands the concerns of Melbourne Water in relation to salvage
costs if large scale salvage works are required to accommodate
the drainage
assets in the currently proposed location. However the planning controls are
not the right mechanism to deal with salvage
costs. Salvage requirements will
be detailed in the CHMP. The Proponent has undertaken to meet salvage
Melbourne Water will be a
referral authority for any permit applications for Precinct 5, and could seek a
permit condition requiring
salvage costs to be met by the Proponent if
(v) Conclusions
is no justification for showing a 200 metre Cultural Heritage Investigation Area
on the Development Concept Plan.
is no justification for relocating the proposed drainage assets outside the
river setback.
minor drafting changes, the Panel supports Council’s addition to Clause
4.0 in the DPO9 and considers it provides flexibility
to relocate or resize the
drainage assets (and other features) if needed to avoid or minimise cultural
heritage impacts.
The Panel’s recommended version of the SPO9
relocates the note to
just above Map 1 rather than in Clause 4.0.
8.2 Post-contact heritage
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment appropriately considers and integrates
post-contact heritage.
(ii) Background
The site of the former Ballan Homestead is located
in the vicinity of the proposed community facility. The site is listed on the
Victorian Heritage Inventory (Heritage Inventory H7722-0059) and is associated
with Robert Steiglitz’ early days in Ballan.
The Statement of Significant
describes the site as having high local significance due to its relatively
undisturbed condition, which
may contain significant deposits of cultural
material and structural remains related to early European settlement in the
Ballan area.
DPO9 requires preparation of a Heritage and Archaeological Assessment
comprising an historical archaeological survey, an interpretation
of the site,
recommendations for retention of heritage elements including trees and
recommendation for meaningful interpretation
of heritage elements.
(iii) Submissions
Council referred the Amendment to Heritage
Victoria, which did not object to the Amendment. Its submission explained that
Heritage Act 2017
gives blanket protection to all historical
archaeological sites, and noted that both the Victorian Heritage Inventory site
broader area have the potential to contain unidentified historical
archaeological sites. Heritage Victoria:
noted it is
likely a program of archaeological investigations will be required if works are
planned within the area of the registered
recommended that
a historical archaeological survey be conducted by a qualified historical
archaeologist to identify any currently
unrecorded sites.
Proponent submitted:
... from a post contact heritage perspective, a high-level report has been
prepared acknowledging the former location of the homestead
and the commitment
from the Proponent to install an interpretative/wayfinding signage along the
Werribee River that designates the
location of the homestead.
Mr Barnes acknowledged the presence of the heritage place, and noted that no
planning permit would be required for works as a Heritage
Overlay does not
apply. He noted there may potential implications related to archaeological
investigations or monitoring as outlined
by Heritage Victoria.
Some submitters were not satisfied the Amendment appropriately responded to
the heritage values on the subject land. Mr Kowarsky
submitted the
apparently ignores the presence of two magnificent oak trees,
some fruit trees, a stone underground cistern and other evidence of
activity associated with early European settlement
”. Ms Robinson
noted the active open space reserve overlaps the former Ballan Homestead
(iv) Discussion
The Panel considers the Amendment appropriately
plans for the protection and integration of post-contact heritage. Heritage
submission provides guidance on managing the archaeological
site. The Heritage and Archaeological Assessment required under the
encompass survey work (as requested by Heritage Victoria), assessment of the
site and recommendations for retention and
interpretation. Any works will
require Heritage Victoria consent under the
Heritage Act 2017
Retention of heritage elements and interpretive representation is a positive
outcome that will allow community appreciation of the
heritage values,
particularly on the community facility site. In relation to the potential
historic trees identified by Mr Kowarsky,
the Heritage and Archaeological
Assessment required under the DPO9 requires an assessment of non-indigenous
trees and recommendations
for retention. The DPO9 also requires an
arboricultural assessment that identifies trees to be retained based on tree
health, biodiversity
and ecological values or landscape values.
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes:
Amendment responds appropriately to post-contact heritage values on Precinct
8.3 Social and affordable housing
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment appropriately plans for the provision of social
and affordable housing.
(ii) Background
The objectives of the DPO9 include to facilitate
housing diversity and opportunities for delivery of social and affordable
The exhibited DPO9 requires an Affordable and Social Housing
Assessment that includes:
an assessment of
the future demand for affordable and social housing in Precinct 5, proportionate
to the demand for such housing in
the existing township
recommendations
for facilitating appropriate provision of affordable and social housing, such
- quantifying
land area requirements
- identification
of potential locations
- mechanisms for
implementation, such as a
section 173
agreement or a restriction on the
The exhibited DPO9 included a mandatory permit
condition requiring a
section 173
agreement or a restriction on the title to
ensure that development and use of land is for affordable or social housing in
with the Affordable and Social Housing Assessment.
A condition of Amendment authorisation required Council to review the
Affordable and Social Housing Assessment requirements, and to
they would lead
to the effective delivery of social and affordable housing
reasonableness of requiring an assessment that covers the whole of
(iii) Submissions
The Proponent submitted that peri urban areas such
as Ballan provide a good opportunity to deliver affordable housing, particularly
through smaller lots. It submitted there is no legislative framework supporting
mandatory social and affordable housing contributions,
and drafting changes were
required to the DPO9 to clarify that:
the obligation
is to deliver an assessment, not to deliver social and affordable housing
any contribution
of affordable housing would be voluntary (and subject to a housing provider
being willing to deliver it).
Ballan South submitted there should be
no reference to the provision of affordable and social housing in the DPO9:
... Being a voluntary matter, it is really up to the individual developer to
consider whether it wants to make provision for affordable
and social housing
and if so, what that provision will be and the delivery mechanism ...
Ballan South submitted:
any provision
that is included should make it clear that a contribution is voluntary
a requirement
for an affordable housing assessment should only arise where the developer
voluntarily proposes to make a contribution
the current
language regarding the assessment is vague and overly broad.
(iv) Discussion
Council’s final preferred version of the DPO9
incorporated a number of changes to the social and affordable housing provisions
that reflect the voluntary nature of social and affordable housing
contributions. The Panel considers the revised provisions are
appropriate subject to:
some further
refinement to improve the clarity of the provisions requiring an Affordable and
Social Housing Assessment in Clause 4.0
deleting the
mandatory permit condition for a
section 173
agreement relating to
‘any’ social and affordable housing provision from Clause
On the latter point, even though the requirement is now
qualified by ‘any’, it remains inappropriate as a mandatory permit
condition, and to the extent that any contribution is proposed, the Affordable
and Social Housing Assessment requirements in Clause
4.0 address mechanisms to
secure the contribution. A separate mandatory permit condition is neither
appropriate nor necessary.
(v) Conclusions and recommendation
The Panel concludes:
social and affordable housing provisions in Council’s final preferred
version of the DPO9 appropriately reflect the voluntary
nature of social and
affordable housing contributions, apart from the mandatory permit
further refinements are required to the provisions relating to an Affordable and
Social Housing Assessment to improve
Panel recommends:
Amend the Development Plan Overlay Schedule 9 as shown in
a) Amend the conditions and requirements for permits in Clause 3.0
condition requiring a
section 173
agreement or restriction on title to secure
any social and affordable housing contribution.
8.4 Noise impacts
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment appropriately plans for noise impact
mitigation.
(ii) Background
The Western Freeway
borders the northern edge of the Precinct. The existing DDO3 aims to minimise
the adverse effect of traffic noise
on sensitive uses by setting permit
requirements and specific noise level standards for land within 50 metres of the
Freeway reserve.
The Amendment
Before the Amendment was exhibited, consultation
took place with both DTP Transport and the Environment Protection Authority
DTP Transport
(D19) encouraged future development to achieve acoustic performance beyond the
minimum requirements, aiming for durable
long-term outcomes. DTP Transport
did not support the removal of the DDO3 from the land.
The EPA (D7 and
D8) observed that the DDO3 noise mitigation requirements are no longer suitable
for land rezoned for residential use
as the related noise levels are too high.
However, EPA accepted the DDO3 noise levels would continue to apply, and
recommended lowering
the noise levels to suit residential contexts on other
requires the
development plan to include an Acoustic Design Response Report that prioritises
measures that benefit both outdoor and
indoor areas of sensitive uses
applies separate
noise standards to those in the DDO3, one for land within 50 metres of the
Freeway reserve and another for land beyond
this distance
internal noise level criteria, which vary for habitable and non-habitable rooms,
as well as for daytime and nighttime periods
section 173
agreement or title restriction mandating that future developments
are designed and constructed with suitable noise attenuation measures.
Background technical reports
A Noise Impact Assessment supported the Amendment
and modelled the impacts from the Western Freeway. It deemed the VicRoads noise
were appropriate to apply
to the Precinct for external noise and were comparable to the noise levels
stipulated in the DDO3. The
assessment concluded that compliance with the
criteria is achievable through installation of noise barriers (walls or
Australian standards
applied to internal noise and the assessment concluded façade treatments
to affected dwellings may be required to achieve
compliance with the noise
standards. The assessment noted detailed assessment and further refinement of
designs will be required
during subsequent project stages.
(iii) Submissions
submitted the DPO9 framework for consideration of noise impacts from the Western
Freeway is consistent with the advice from
the EPA and DTP Transport. It
submitted it is appropriate to not specify the form of treatment required along
the northern boundary,
as more than one option exists (bund or noise wall). The
DPO9 provides guidance at the development plan and permit stage on noise
mitigation, which Council submitted was a logical approach.
In response to questions from the Panel, Council clarified that noise
mitigation measures will be funded and delivered by the Proponent
developer. It expected delivery of precinct-scale measures to occur at the
subdivision stage and lot-scale measures at the
building construction stage.
This reinforced the appropriateness of a
section 173
agreement to ensure
requirements run with the title on relevant lots.
The Proponent explained the Acoustic Design Response Report supporting the
Amendment had been updated in response to feedback from
both Council and the
EPA. It submitted any acoustic impacts can be effectively mitigated by
installing noise walls or landscape
bunds during later stages of development,
which will occur through consultation with Council and DTP Transport.
Mr Barnes was of the opinion the DDO3 could be removed as the DPO9 provides a
more contemporary and tailored approach for noise mitigation
for residential
development. This is not proposed as part of the Amendment.
(iv) Discussion
Based on the advice of the EPA and DTP Transport,
the Panel accepts that noise impacts can be adequately managed and that the DPO9
provides an appropriate framework to assess and mitigate noise impacts.
The noise levels specified in the DPO9 accord with the EPA’s
recommendations and no submissions or evidence were presented (including
agencies) advocating for an alternative treatment or stricter requirements.
The DPO9 provides a tailored and considered approach to noise impacts,
providing two key mitigations – a noise barrier and façade
The Head, Transport for Victoria will remain a determining referral authority
under the DDO3 to maintain oversight of noise
mitigation and ensure accurate
traffic volume data is adopted in any noise modelling. These provisions can
guide the consideration
of noise impacts to both dwellings and outdoor areas as
appropriate.
The Panel accepts it is appropriate that the costs of delivering the noise
mitigation measures should be borne by developers or future
appropriate. The Panel supports a minor change to the DPO9 provisions to
reflect this.
The DDO3 should remain on the land until the
relevant agencies and the planning authority endorse otherwise.
(v) Conclusions and recommendation
The Panel concludes:
Amendment appropriately plans for noise impact mitigation.
DPO9 should specify that the cost of noise mitigation measures should be borne
by developers or future home builders as appropriate.
recommends:
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 9 as shown in
a) Amend the Acoustic
Design Response Plan requirements in Clause 4.0 to:
make it clear
that either the developer or future home builders, as appropriate, will bear the
costs of mitigation measures.
noted in Chapter
, the Panel was
presented with many versions of the DPO9. It has considered all those versions
in preparing its recommended version
, along with submissions to the
effect that the exhibited DPO9 was overly complex, unnecessarily repetitive of
other provisions in
the Planning Scheme, and required simplification to focus on
site-specific guidance.
Ballan South provided examples of other DPO schedules in the Planning Scheme
to demonstrate the relative complexity of the DPO9.
These were not overly
particular circumstances including
the site constraints of the relevant land,
and the development outcomes sought to be achieved. These varied significantly
to Precinct
5, and did not compare ‘apples with apples’.
In preparing its preferred version, the Panel has recommended changes to
address drafting issues, primarily to improve clarity and
consistency and remove
requirements that are unreasonable or impractical for the developer(s) of
Precinct 5 to meet. These changes,
marked up in
, are self-explanatory and do
not require commentary from the Panel.
Ms Robinson’s preferred version of the DPO9 and her accompanying email
(D109) included an extensive number of changes that were
substantive in nature
(not limited to drafting as directed by the Panel), and that had not been
previously raised and explained in
her submission. Ms Robinson has not provided
any strategic justification for the changes. Further, putting these changes so
in the process raises procedural fairness concerns. Accordingly the Panel
does not support any of Ms Robinson’s changes.
Where the Panel has moved text, it has not shown this as a change. Only text
changes are shown in track changes. Minor drafting
changes such as
capitalisations and punctuation have not been tracked.
A Parties to the Panel Hearing
Represented by
Moorabool Shire Council
Greg Tobin and Aaron Shrimpton of Harwood Andrews, who called expert
evidence on:
- Traffic from
Jo Garretty of Salt3
Whiteman Property & Associates / OMRB Developments
Mark Bartley of Russell Kennedy, who called expert evidence on:
- Aboriginal
cultural heritage from Oona Nicholson of Ecology and Heritage Partners
- Ecology from
Steve Mueck of Steve Mueck Biodiversity Pty Ltd
- Drainage and
hydrology from Kerry Wilkinson of Spiire
- Planning from
David Barnes of Hansen Partnership
- Social and
community infrastructure from Robert Panozzo of ASR Research
- Traffic from
Nathan Woolcock of Traffix Group
Department of Transport and Planning (Transport)
Central Highlands Water
Steven Healy and Stephen Carter
Melbourne Water
Louise Hicks of counsel
Bacchus Marsh Platypus Alliance
David Bergin of Eighth Street Planning
Ballan Dev Co Pty Ltd
Briana Eastaugh of Maddocks, who called expert evidence on:
- Planning from
Jason Black of Insight Planning
Ballan South Pty Ltd
John Cicero of Best Hooper
Moorabool Environment Group
David Bergin of Eighth Street Planning
Danielle Anzai
Concetta McFall
Jennie Tabone
John Kowarsky
Renee Robinson
Appendix B Document
Description
Presented by
Directions Hearing notice letter
Planning Panels Victoria (PPV)
Further written submission
Department of Environment, Energy and Climate Adaptation (DEECA)
Ballan Strategic Directions (June 2018)
Moorabool Shire Council (Council)
List of agencies consulted
Panel Directions and Hearing Timetable (v1)
Submitter maps (provided to the Panel only):
a) Map 1 (wider area)
b) Map 2 (Ballan town centre)
[CONFIDENTIAL]
Environment Protection Authority Victoria MD19 response (1 December
Environment Protection Authority Victoria email regarding MD19 response (10
February 2025)
APA Group response (24 November 2022)
Barwon Water response (20 October 2022)
Country Fire Authority response (29 November 2022)
Central Highlands Water response (17 November 2022)
Central Highlands Water letter (22 September 2023)
Corangamite Catchment Management Authority response (9 December 2022)
DEECA Earth Resources Regulation response (16 January 2023)
DEECA Planning and Approvals response (5 April 2023)
DELWP Regional Planning Services (Grampians) response (30 November 2022),
a) Covering email (1 December 2022)
DTP Transport response (10 November 2022), with covering email
Department of Transport and Planning (Transport) further response (3
October 2023)
Environment Protection Authority Victoria response - Part A (11 November
Environment Protection Authority Victoria response - Part B (9 January
Heritage Victoria response (2 December 2022)
Melbourne Water response (26 April 2023)
Melbourne Water response to additional information (6 November 2023)
Melbourne Water response to Stormwater Management Strategy (25 June
Site inspection location requests and documents provided
Whiteman Property & Associates / OMRB Developments (Proponent)
Viewshed Analysis - The Cedars Landscape Vision (Spiire, September
Viewshed Analysis - The Cedars Ballan, Landscape Section (Spiire, 6 June
Viewshed Analysis - The Cedars Ballan, Landscape Section (Spiire, 23 June
Viewshed Analysis - Existing & Proposed Vegetation Management Plan
(Spiire, 5 December 2023)
Viewshed Analysis - Existing & Proposed Vegetation Management Plan
(Spiire, 15 December 2023)
Cultural Heritage Management Plan (Unearthed Heritage, 2 September
Infrastructure Servicing Report, The Cedars, Old Melbourne Road, Ballan
(Spiire, 29 June 2023)
The Cedars Vision - Landscape Sections Map (Spiire)
Precinct 5 Ballan Framework Plan Review of Community Facilities and
Education Needs (ASR Research, 30 June 2023)
Apportioning Community Infrastructure Costs for the Precinct 5 Development
Plan, Explanatory Report v2 (ASR Research, 30 June 2023)
Biodiversity Land Management Plan (Nature Advisory, June 2023)
Response to Council and EPA feedback (Marshall Day, 15 June 2023)
Panels Directions regarding site inspection
Background and Context Submission
Part A Submission
Appendix A and B to Part A Submission (D42)
Letter – Update on progress of Cultural Heritage Management Plan
(Unearthed, 29 March 2025)
Site inspection documents:
b) Site list
c) List of additional requested sites
Further Panel Directions and Hearing Timetable (v2)
Letter from the Panel advising DTP Transport was granted leave to attend
traffic conclave
Expert report of Jason Black in planning
Ballan Dev Co Pty Ltd (Ballan Dev Co)
Expert report of David Barnes in planning
Expert report of Kerry Wilkinson in drainage / hydrology
Expert report of Nathan Woolcock in traffic
Expert report of Oona Nicholson in Aboriginal cultural heritage
Expert report of Robert Panozzo in social / community infrastructure
Expert report of Steve Mueck in ecology
Department of Transport and Planning (Transport) further changes requested
of the proposed Schedule 9 to Clause 43.04 Development
Plan Overlay
Department of Transport and Planning (Transport) further response (2 July
Expert report of Jo Garretty in traffic
Expert meeting joint statement – traffic
Jo Garretty
Part B submission
Day 1 - Schedule 9 to Clause 43.04 Development Plan Overlay (Document 55
Email – regarding revised ultimate roundabout plan, with
attachment:
a) Traffix Group revised ultimate roundabout plan
Expert report addendum of Nathan Woolcock in traffic
Nathan Woolcock - Definitions for classifying accidents chart
Nathan Woolcock - Level of service criteria and gaps chart
Department of Transport and Planning (DTP Transport)
Wadawurrung Traditional Owners Aboriginal Corporation letter to
Central Highlands Water
Submission Part 1
Melbourne Water
Submission Part 2
Melbourne Water
Appendix 6 to Submission Part 2 (in Excel format)
Melbourne Water
Development Plan Concept
Melbourne Water
Tracked changes to Council’s Day 1 - Schedule 9 to Clause 43.04
Development Plan Overlay (Document 55 base)
Melbourne Water
Addendum submission
Melbourne Water
Hearing Timetable (v3)
Email – regarding Werribee River in flow, with attachment:
a) Photo of Werribee River
John Kowarsky
Renee Robinson
John Kowarsky
Danielle Anzai
Attachment to submission
Danielle Anzai
Ballan South Pty Ltd (Ballan South)
Attachment A to submission (D81) , comprised of:
a) Ballan Framework Plan
b) Land Ownership
c) Existing Title Plan
Ballan South
Attachment B to submission (D81), comprised of:
a) Schedule 9 to Clause 43.04 Development Plan Overlay (clean)
b) Schedule 9 to Clause 43.04 Development Plan Overlay (marked up)
Ballan South
Attachment C to submission (D81) – Proposed DPO Schedule: Ballan
South Growth Area
Ballan South
Attachment D to submission (D81), comprised of:
a) Moorabool C103moor proposed DPO Schedule 7: Hopetoun Park North Growth
b) Moorabool C103moor Exhibited Planning Scheme Maps 38 & 47
Ballan South
Attachment E to submission (D81) – Letter from SMEC regarding Jacobs
Ballan Sewer Modelling and Master Planning Report
Ballan South
Submission, including attachments:
a) Presentation of member Jodie Valpied
b) Tracked changes to Day 1 DPO9
c) Healthy Waterways Strategy (Melbourne Water 2018)
d) Guide to Sports Field Lighting (DPCD 2012)
e) National light pollution guidelines
f) Community Engagement & Benefit Sharing guidelines
Bacchus Marsh Platypus Alliance (BMPA)
Email – further objection
Jennie Tabone
Questions for the Panel and parties
Jennie Tabone
Submission, including attachments:
a) Presentation of Ben Courtice
b) Tracked changes to Day 1 DPO9
c) Healthy Waterways Strategy (Melbourne Water 2018)
d) Guide to Sports Field Lighting (DPCD 2012)
e) Community Engagement & Benefit Sharing guidelines
f) Barwon Water Aqueduct Historical Plan
Moorabool Environment Group (MEG)
Concetta McFall
Statement of BMPA member Jodie Valpied
Ballan Dev Co
Email - Request for reply to be made on the papers
Melbourne Water
Hearing presentation
Danielle Anzai
Hearing presentation notes
Renee Robinson
Submission: Protecting The Werribee River Valley Ecological Values
John Kowarsky
Email from Panel granting Melbourne Water approval to reply on the
Closing submission, with attachment:
a) Letter from ecology expert Steve Mueck - regarding mapping for VPO2
Victorian Biodiversity Atlas - Platypus recordings at Ballan
BMPA and MEG
Hearing presentation notes
Concetta McFall
Part C submission
Reply to submissions
Melbourne Water
Response to Melbourne Water reply to submissions
Response to Melbourne Water reply to submissions
Final preferred version of DPO9 (clean)
Final preferred version of DPO9 (tracked changes)
Tracked changes to Council final preferred version of DPO9
Comments on Council final preferred version of DPO9, with attachment:
a) Edits to Council final preferred version of DPO9
Renee Robinson
Edits to Council final preferred version of DPO9, with attachments:
a) Alternate Map 1
b) Comments on Council final preferred version
BMPA and MEG
Tracked changes to Council final preferred version of DPO9
DTP Transport
Comments on Council final preferred version of DPO9, with attachment:
a) Tracked changes to Council final preferred version of DPO9 (same as document
DTP Transport
Tracked changes to Council final preferred version of DPO9
Ballan South
Tracked changes to Council final preferred version of DPO9:
a) Word version
b) PDF version
Melbourne Water
Reply to comments on Council final preferred version of DPO9
C Panel recommended version of Development Plan Overlay Schedule 9
The Panel recommended changes are based on the Council final preferred
version (Document 106) and are shown as:
Tracked Added
Tracked Deleted
SCHEDULE 9 TO CLAUSE 43.04 DEVELOPMENT PLAN OVERLAY
Shown on the planning scheme map as DPO9.
BALLAN PRECINCT 5
1.0 Objectives
To guide and facilitate the staged, master-planned development that responds
to the environmental, cultural, heritage and landscape
significance of the
To reflect the country town character of wide, tree lined streets and open,
spacious development.
To ensure the coordinated, efficient, and timely provision of physical and
community infrastructure and public open space that enhances
the amenity, safety
and liveability of the precinct and surrounds.
To ensure a diverse mix of lot sizes, including appropriate interfaces with
adjoining rural land, Western Freeway, Geelong-Ballan
Road, Old Melbourne Road
and Werribee River.
To facilitate an appropriate supply of housing diversity and encourage the
provision of social and affordable housing.
2.0 Requirement before a permit is granted
A permit may be granted for the following before a development plan has been
prepared to the satisfaction of the responsible authority:
variation or creation of easements or restrictions.
Advertising
Rehabilitation
works to the creek corridor.
required to undertake or satisfy a Statement of Environmental Audit under the
Environment Protection Act 2017
Subdivision:
If it is the
re-subdivision of existing lots and the number of lots is not increased; or
If it is by a
public authority or utility service provider to create a lot for a utility
installation.
Any application for a permit lodged before
the development plan has been prepared must be accompanied by a report
demonstrating that
approval will not prejudice the long-term future development
of the land as set out in this schedule.
3.0 Conditions and requirements for
Except for a permit granted in accordance with Clause 2.0, the following
conditions apply to permits to subdivide land, construct
a building or construct
or carry out works, as appropriate:
implementation of development contribution obligations, in accordance with a
relevant agreement.
section 173
agreement or restriction on the title to ensure that:
buildings, as identified in the Acoustic Design Response Plan, are designed and
constructed with appropriate noise attenuation
social or affordable housing is proposed, the future development and use of the
relevant land is for that purpose.
Construction
Management Plan
Prior to the
commencement of development
the certification of a plan of subdivision
and/or prior to any
development
(whichever occurs first)
a Construction Management
and/or Environmental Management Plan
must be submitted to
and approved by the responsible authority. The plan must include:
address construction and environmental risks identified in the
development plan (including each of the relevant supporting reports).
Details relating
to the containment, collection and disposal of construction waste, fuels, oils
and chemicals during the construction
period and the management of fencing,
sediment or
silt barriers, flags, corflute signs and other temporary
Soil erosion and
sediment control provisions to protect
the escarpment,
stormwater infrastructure and Werribee River.
The location,
height and direction of any temporary lighting to be installed generally in
accordance with the
National Light Pollution Guidelines for Wildlife
(Dept. of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water – May
All works conducted on the land must be in accordance
with the approved Construction Management Plan
and/or environmental
management plan
Development
Contributions
Unless otherwise agreed by the
responsible authority, prior to the commencement of development or the issue of
a Statement of Compliance
(whichever occurs first) the landowner must enter into
an agreement under
section 173
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(section 173
agreement), providing for development contributions to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority. The costs of preparation and
registration of the
section 173
agreement are to be borne by the landowner.
Development
Contributions – Intersection upgrade
Unless otherwise agreed
by the responsible authority, prior to the commencement of development or the
issue of a Statement of Compliance
(whichever occurs first), the landowner must
an agreement under
Planning and Environment Act 1987
with the responsible authority and the Head, Transport for Victoria.
section 173
must provide for
the delivery, funding
and identification of land requirements for
upgrades to
the intersection of Geelong-Ballan Road and Old Melbourne
Road, Ballan
. The agreement
and the agreement will be prepared
at no cost to Head, Transport for Victoria and/or the responsible authority,
unless agreed in
writing. The Agreement
must require a Transport
Impact Assessment to be carried out prior to the statement of compliance for the
stage which produces the
600th lot to identify the triggers for the
interim upgrade by the owner or the contribution to and timing of
construction of the ultimate roundabout.
The agreement will be prepared at no cost to Head, Transport for Victoria
and/or the responsible authority, unless agreed in writing.
Unless otherwise agreed by the responsible
authority, prior to the commencement of development or the issue of a Statement
of Compliance
(whichever occurs first) the landowner must enter into a section
173 agreement or place a restriction on the titles to the relevant
ensure that future buildings are designed and constructed with appropriate noise
attenuation measures in accordance with
any recommendations in the Acoustic
Design Response Plan.
Requirements for development plan
A development plan must be generally in accordance with Map 1 to this
Schedule and include the following requirements
to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority
Context Analysis.
Masterplan.
An Affordable
and Social Housing Assessment.
A Public Open
Space and Landscape Masterplan.
Arboricultural Assessment.
A Biodiversity
Management Plan.
An Acoustic
Design Response Plan.
An Integrated
Transport Management Plan.
An Integrated
Water Management Plan.
Infrastructure Servicing Plan.
Assessment.
Management Plan.
SITE AND CONTEXT ANALYSIS
Site and Context Analysis
that identifies the key attributes of the
and its surrounds (including the existing Ballan township and
future growth precincts)
Contours of the
land at 1.0 metre intervals and shading of 5 degree slope class intervals.
Identification
of areas of potential geotechnical instability.
Land affected by
the 1% annual exceedance probability (AEP) flood extent.
Any areas of
cultural, historic, social or environmental significance within the site.
The location of
proposed community infrastructure.
The location of
proposed public open space.
The location of
proposed transport infrastructure and systems, including public transport.
The location of
proposed cycling and pedestrian networks.
Any key view
lines and corridors to the surrounding landscape.
The Site and
Context Analysis should also identify the key attributes of surrounding land
(including the existing Ballan township
and future growth precincts) including
the locations of existing and (where known) proposed:
Land uses and
developments on adjoining land.
infrastructure and public open space.
infrastructure including public transport and active transport
generally in accordance with Map 1 to this schedule, that
A subdivision
layout that responds to the natural topography of the land and integrates with
the established Ballan township and the
surrounding rural landscape.
Implementation
of any relevant requirements of each plan or assessment approved under this
A response to
key view lines and corridors to the surrounding landscape.
treatments between proposed development areas and waterways and public open
space, including provision of road frontages
and appropriate orientation of
development, to ensure passive surveillance opportunities.
Setbacks to the
Werribee River in accordance with the requirements of Melbourne Water.
The intersection
design and locations for access into and out of the precinct from Geelong-Ballan
Road and Old Melbourne Road identified
within the Integrated Transport
Management Plan.
Annotations or
colour-coding to identify:
A variety of lot
sizes across the development area including potential medium density
), conventional density (350-799m
an average of at least 600m2
) and interface residential lots
locations for any affordable or social housing
proposed to be provided
in accordance with the recommendations of the Affordable and Social
Housing Assessment
indicative staging plan and associated table showing the overall land use budget
for each category.
Buffer areas and
other measures to protect any sites of Aboriginal cultural heritage
required in accordance with the approved Cultural Heritage Management
Retention of
patches of remnant native vegetation and scattered trees in accordance with the
recommendations of the Biodiversity Management
Plan and Arboricultural
Assessment. Any patches of remnant native vegetation or scattered trees
identified for retention should be
contained within Public Open Spaces or
widened road reserves.
Identification
of areas where noise attenuation measures are required, in accordance with the
recommendations of the Acoustic Design
Response Plan.
An indicative
staging plan which indicates the
development
which provides for the early provision of the active open
space reserve, sports pavilion/community facility, district playground
associated infrastructure,
pedestrian and cycling infrastructure
land use budget for each type of
infrastructure
development
and size of the proposed
commercial area
1,000 square metres of net floor
AFFORDABLE AND SOCIAL HOUSING
Affordable and Social Housing Assessment
that includes:
An assessment of
the demand for affordable and social housing in Ballan Precinct 5, proportionate
to the demand for such housing in
the existing township
Recommendations
an appropriate diversity of housing type, tenure and cost to meet the
needs of households
increasing choice in housing type (including
alternative housing models, such as co-housing and eco-villages), tenure and
meet the needs of households as they move through life cycle
and to support diverse communities.
If any social
or affordable housing is to be provided, identification of the potential
locations and types of housing.
Recommendations
for facilitating any proposed provision of affordable and social housing, such
Identification
of a community housing provider willing to manage any proposed social
Quantification
of the land area requirements including how social housing could be delivered
across different medium density and conventional
residential categories.
Identification
of potential locations.
Mechanisms for
implementing any
social and affordable housing
contribution
, such as a section 173 agreement or a restriction on the
title to ensure
affordable or social housing is used
that future
development and use of the land is
for the intended purpose
longer term
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE AND
LANDSCAPING
Panel note: requirements of the Biodiversity Management Plan relating to
landscaping have been relocated to the Public Open Space
and Landscape
Masterplan. Relocated text is not shown as tracked.
Public Open Space and Landscape Masterplan
is consistent the
Biodiversity Management Plan and the Masterplan and that
significant vegetation to be protected and retained.
Provides details
public open space network
consistent with the
agreements and obligations of any section 173 Agreement,
Provision for a
range of active and passive recreational opportunities for future residents,
either onsite or offsite.
Local parks
located generally in accordance with Map 1 to this schedule.
Land encumbered
by waterways, drainage infrastructure, overland flow paths, 1% AEP flood
extents, steep slopes, heritage values or
remnant vegetation, as required by
Melbourne Water or the responsible authority.
Details of the
onsite active open space reserve and associated playing fields.
Details of a
connected network of shared paths for walking and cycling.
consistent the Biodiversity Management Plan.
Provides concept
details of community infrastructure, such as sports pavilion / community
facility, recreation facilities, district
playground, local playgrounds, picnic
areas and toilets.
concept design (including cross sections) for the active open space reserve, to
demonstrate:
That the reserve
dimensions and configuration will be adequate to provide for cut/fill batters,
retaining walls, sports fields, multi-purpose
courts, pavilion, community
facility, district playground, carparking and landscaping.
How cut and fill
will be managed to avoid/mitigate erosion and to avoid or manage
amenity impacts and
any encroachment into the Werribee River corridor.
cut/fill batters and retaining walls will be managed to minimize visual amenity
Provides for
wildlife sensitive lighting design for streets/trails and sporting facilities
interfacing with the Werribee River corridor
where consistent with the
Biodiversity Management Plan
, as guided by the
National Light
Pollution Guidelines for Wildlife
landscape treatments for public open space and road reserves, including planting
themes, species and planting densities
and establishes a requirement to provide
at least 30% tree canopy coverage across public realm and open spaces (excluding
areas dedicated
to biodiversity
native vegetation
conservation
and active open space playing fields and courts
landscape treatments for Geelong–Ballan Road and Old Melbourne Road,
appropriate for the role of these roads as gateways
to the Ballan township.
landscape treatments for the Werribee River corridor and streetscapes that
buffer this area.
preference to
that include extensive use, where possible,
local indigenous species and drought tolerant native vegetation to
enhance local habitat values, and respond to water sensitive urban
objectives.
statement explaining how the landscape design complements the Werribee River
corridor and provides for the protection and
enhancement of native flora and
fauna values including consideration of species and communities listed under the
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988
Provides urban
design concepts
, public art, community flexible spaces
interpretive information that will provide a sense of place, drawing on themes
such as cultural heritage, environment or landscape
Provides details
of any fencing treatments proposed for land abutting public open space.
Provides details
of staging and timing of all landscape works.
ENVIRONMENT
Arboricultural Assessment
Assesses all
remnant trees on the subject land and adjoining road reserves, in accordance
with Australian Standard AS4970-2009
Protection of Trees on Development
Identifies trees
to be retained, based on tree health,
ecological and/or
biodiversity
values (consistent with the Biodiversity Management Plan)
or landscape values.
Biodiversity
Management Plan
, prepared in consultation with of the Department of Energy,
Environment and Climate Action and Melbourne Water, that:
Identifies risks
to biodiversity values, during and post development of the land.
targeted field surveys of flora and fauna species listed under the EPBC Act and
the FFG Act
including a platypus survey to inform the design and location of
stormwater outfalls
the preferred location for a shared path crossing over the Werribee River
proximate to the proposed active open space reserve,
based on the assessment of
biodiversity values on either side the Werribee River corridor.
recommendations for:
Avoiding and
minimising native vegetation removal (e.g. protection within public open space
or widened road reserves where possible).
The retention of
patches of remnant native vegetation and scattered native trees (including
roadside vegetation) including species
and communities listed under the EPBC Act
and the FFG Act.
protection zones and buffers around scattered trees and native vegetation
patches to be retained.
maintenance and management of remnant native vegetation and scattered native
trees to be retained.
Offsetting any
native vegetation removal that cannot be avoided.
Management of
the Werribee River reserve and wetlands/retarding basins, including:
protection and enhancement of biodiversity values.
Revegetation
of the reserve with species derived from appropriate Ecological Vegetation
Classes (EVCs).
Identification
of key pest plant and animal species.
Identification
of risks to environmental values from adjoining land uses and construction
activities.
Appropriate
risk mitigation measures and management regimes, including
survey prior to stormwater outfall(s) design and construction activity
measures to prevent pollution, sediment or waste entering the
sensitive lighting design interfacing with the waterway corridor, as guided by
National Light Pollution Guidelines for
Wildlife, to be incorporated
into the Public Open Space and Landscape
Masterplan.
maintenance
schedule for the
maintenance and management of
remnant native vegetation and scattered native trees to be retained and the
eradication and control of pest plants, weeds and vermin.
Acoustic Design Response Plan
to the satisfaction of the Head, Transport for Victoria, by a qualified acoustic
engineer or other suitably skilled person,
in accordance with the
Environment
Protection Act 2017
VicRoads Requirements of Developers – Noise
Sensitive Uses Guidelines
and other relevant policies that:
Identifies lots
where combined noise levels from the surrounding roads (Western Freeway,
Geelong-Ballan Road and Old Melbourne Road)
exceed the objectives for ambient
sound defined in the Environment Reference Standard for:
Category 1 for lots within 50 metres of the Western Freeway road reserve and its
category 3 for lots more than 50m from the Western Freeway road reserve and all
other lots.
Recommends a
suite of mitigation measures, to be delivered at the cost of the developer
future home builders as appropriate
for the identified
Prioritises the
use of a built form that has a more natural environmental design where feasible,
rather than walls.
presentation to the Western Freeway that is visually cohesive along the Precinct
edge and consistent with treatments along
other precinct edges (if
Achieves the
following internal noise levels, when considering the combined noise from all
relevant external sources.
greater than 35 dB(A) for bedrooms, assessed as an LAeq,8h from 10pm and 6am.
Not greater than 40 dB(A) for living areas, assessed
as an LAeq,16h from 6am and
greater than the median value of the range of recommended design sound levels of
Australian Standard AS/NZ 2107:2016 for internal
areas, other than sleeping and
living areas, assessed as a (LAeq,16h) from 6am and 10pm or an 8 hour equivalent
continuous daily
noise exposure level (LAeq,8h) from 10pm and 6am, as relevant
to the normal period of occupancy of the area
considered.
Demonstrates how
noise mitigation infrastructure and associated maintenance vehicle access will
be contained within the subject land.
MOVEMENT AND
Integrated Transport Management Plan
, prepared to the satisfaction
of the responsible authority and the Head, Transport for Victoria
appropriate)
(and Melbourne Water in respect of
shared trails within the
waterway corridors)
the waterway crossings)
accordance with the Infrastructure Design Manual (IDM)
VicRoads Road Design Note 04-01 that:
Provides for an
integrated transport network including roads, public transport and pedestrian
and bicycle paths.
Provides for
multi-modal transport network connectivity within the site, and to the balance
of the Ballan township.
network of walking and cycling paths, including shared paths (including along
the Werribee River corridor), that provides
connectivity between key
destinations including along the Werribee River corridor
and a shared
path crossing proximate to
the proposed active open
space reserve.
reserve widths
and cross sections
to create differentiation and neighbourhood character responsive to the
site’s country town context and the
connector road shown as a bus capable,
boulevard road.
Identifies the
location and design of intersections within the Transport 2 Zone network.
traffic management controls for the internal road network.
Provides details
of necessary upgrades to the road, pedestrian and bicycle path infrastructure
beyond the site and the trigger points
for implementation of such works (linked
to stages of development or the number of lots developed).
Identifies the
staging, design (including land requirements) and funding plan for the delivery
of the interim and ultimate intersection
of Geelong-Ballan Road and Old
Melbourne Road.
Discourages
cul-de-sacs and ensures that any street will be connected through to other
streets by a wide reserve and shared path for
safe pedestrian and bicycle
path waterway crossings are to be provided, identifies the location of the
crossing and
includes concept details
of any shared path waterway
prepared in accordance with ‘Constructing Waterway
Crossings’ (Melbourne Water, 2011).
Provides for the
integration of land use with transport provision.
UTILITIES AND
Integrated Water Management Plan
prepared to the satisfaction of
Melbourne Water and in accordance with the Urban Stormwater Best Practice
Environmental Guidelines
(CSIRO) and the Infrastructure Design Manual (IDM)
as appropriate,
that includes:
Concept plans
showing the location
and details of the proposed stormwater drainage
Protection of
natural systems and water quality.
Reduction of
run-off and peak flows, including the removal of sediment, litter and other
urban wastes from stormwater prior to discharge.
conservation, harvesting, and re-use of stormwater particularly for open space
irrigation.
Integration of
stormwater treatment into the landscape including the provision of retarding
basins, water quality wetlands and enhanced
stormwater management facilities
within drainage and public open space reserves, and other water sensitive urban
design treatments
as appropriate.
Modelling and
response to flood risk, including climate change scenarios in accordance with
Australian Rainfall and Runoff 2019 (Version
Overland flow
paths that provide for storm events up to and including 1% AEP including flow
paths demonstrated in road network design.
A functional
design of stormwater drainage assets to ensure that:
drainage assets are feasible in their proposed locations and sizes,
drainage assets are feasible in their proposed locations and sizes including
ensuring assets can be safely accessed and
maintained and achieve safe stable
outfalls to the Werribee River without negatively impacting the escarpment.
locations and details of outfalls to the Werribee River, which avoid/minimise
impacts on environmental
values including
biodiversity
drainage assets will meet the required flow regime and water quality
requirements at the outfall into the Werribee River.
Geotechnical
advice to confirm site and soil suitability for asset construction and outfall
The staging of
stormwater drainage works (linked to stages of development), both internal and
external to the site.
Stormwater drainage assets may be located
within the Werribee River reserve if feasible with other constraints and
Infrastructure Servicing Plan
, prepared to the satisfaction of the
relevant agencies, that includes:
Concept plans
and details of proposed utility infrastructure (e.g. reticulated water and
The staging of
infrastructure, its funding and delivery linked to stages of
development.
Any advice from the Wadawurrung Traditional Owners Aboriginal
Corporation or if available an approved Cultural Heritage Management
Non-indigenous
Heritage and Archaeological Assessment
includes the following:
A response to
the results of a historical archaeological survey/investigation conducted by a
qualified historical archaeologist.
interpretation of the history of the site.
An assessment of
non-indigenous trees and recommendations for retention.
Recommendations
for the recording and retention of heritage elements of the site.
Recommendations
for meaningful interpretation of heritage elements and archaeological survey
records within an appropriate setting
(e.g. interpretive signage within public
open space).
BUSHFIRE MANAGEMENT
Bushfire Management Plan
, prepared to the satisfaction of the
Country Fire Authority (CFA) and including:
A description of
the fire risk and management for the area.
Bushfire Hazard Site Assessment including consideration of the ultimate
revegetated state of the Werribee River corridor
and wetlands/retarding basins,
as required by Melbourne Water. The revegetated waterway corridor must be
classified as “forest”
or “woodland”, other than
stormwater treatment assets which will have lower bushfire threat.
identification of setbacks for the purposes of defendable space between
classified vegetation and future development to ensure
that radiant heat
exposure is less than 12.5kW/m2 under AS3959 for new dwellings and lower
exposure for vulnerable uses.
Requirements for
land identified as defendable space to ensure that vegetation is managed and
maintained to the standard specified
by the CFA.
Future open
space, or landscaping areas within the subject land to be managed and maintained
to a low threat state in perpetuity to
ensure a bushfire risk doesn’t
increase overtime.
Recommendations
for appropriate land uses to avoid positioning vulnerable and hazardous uses
where there is a direct interface with
unmanaged vegetation.
Notation that
planting, landscape and vegetation management within landscape buffers,
easements and areas of open space do not increase
the risk of fire, including
allowing for appropriate emergency service vehicle access.
Recommendations
for bushfire risk mitigation at the various stages of subdivision
development.
MAP 1 TO SCHEDULE 9 TO CLAUSE 43.04
Make the following changes to Map 1:
Include ‘Potential Shared Path Crossing
Amend dashed blue line to be labelled ‘Werribee River Offset’.
Move hard infrastructure (roads and the community facility) outside the
Werribee River Offset.
On the legend, update lot size ranges to incorporate existing gaps of
300-400m2 and 700-800m2, making conventional residential 350-799m2
an average of at least 500m2)
, medium density residential of 150-349m2,
and interface residential lots (800-1000m2)
Departures from Map 1
Incorporated Development
Any change to the size, type, staging or location of drainage assets, active
open space, community facilities and commercial facilities
as shown on Map 1,
including where needed in response to cultural heritage considerations and any
related approvals,
regarded as being
‘generally in
accordance’ with Map 1
and capable of approval within a
development plan prepared under this clause
if they will achieve the
intended purpose and performance standards and are approved by Council or
Melbourne Water as appropriate
This is the rate recommended in
the Infrastructure Design Manual and is commonly adopted as an appropriate trip
generation rate for
traffic impact assessments.
Salt conducted tube counts in
Ballan in 2025 which indicated an average weekday traffic generation of 5.9
vehicle movements per day
per household.
Refer to the Proponent’s
closing submission (D99) and its response to Melbourne Water’s reply
Requirements
Developers – Noise
Sensitive Uses
Australian Standard 2107-2016
Acoustics – Recommended design sound levels and reverberation times for
building interiors
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (8.28 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter