URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2024/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Owners Corporation v Buckley [2024] VMC 12 (3 October 2024)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
AT MELBOURNE
MAG-CI-230180998
OWNERS CORPORATION PLAN NO. 000675
HELEN JOY BUCKLEY
Magistrate T. W. GREENWAY
Melbourne Magistrates’ Court
DATE OF HEARING
24 September 2024
DATE OF DECISION
3 October 2024
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Owners Corporation v Buckley
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2024] VMC 12
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION –
Owners Corporation Act
– Final fee notice and s 32 – Jurisdiction of the Magistrates’
Court – Operation of ss 30(1) and
(2) – Part 11 and Jurisdiction of
the Victorian Administrative Tribunal.
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr. O. Chan
LFS Lawyers
For the Respondent
Ms. Buckley
Self-represented
Introduction
1 In this proceeding, the plaintiff is an
owners corporation
managing the
property situate at 13 The Esplanade, St Kilda, Victoria (
defendant, Ms Buckley (
), is the registered proprietor of Lot 63,
otherwise known as Flat 63 in the Property.
Owners Corporation claims
fees and levies against Buckley by reason of a final fee
made under s 32 of the
Owners Corporation Act
). In July 2024, Buckley settled
the unpaid amounts. Consequently, the Owners Corporation seeks its costs of the
proceeding.
3 Buckley disputes any liability for
costs, contending that proceedings for the “recovery of money owed to an
owners corporation
by a lot owner” must be brought before the Victorian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal. To support this conclusion, Buckley
an interpretation of the Act, whereby s 30(1) must be read subject to s
4 The Owners Corporation submits that this
Court has jurisdiction, either by operation of s 30 of the Act, or
Magistrates’ Court Act
dispute involves an issue of statutory construction, it is necessary to set out
the applicable provisions of the Act and
the brief facts of the
Facts and Legislative Framework
6 The main purposes of the Act are:
(a) to provide for the
management, powers and functions of owners corporations;
(b) to provide for appropriate mechanisms for the
resolution of disputes relating to owners corporations;
(c) to amend the
Subdivision Act
relation to the creation of owners
corporations.
7 One of the key responsibilities of an
owners corporation is the management and administration of common property. This
encompasses
tasks such as providing maintenance and undertaking repairs. To
fulfill these duties, an owners corporation may levy annual fees,
calculated based on the lot liability of individual lot owners. In turn, lot
owners are responsible for paying any outstanding
fees or charges associated
with their specific
a general meeting in September 2022, the Owners Corporation resolved to strike
levies, fees and charges in respect of the
9 The Act expressly states that an owners
corporation may commence legal proceedings to recover outstanding monies.
Section 30 of
the Act provides as
(1) Subject to subsection (2), an owners
corporation may recover any money owed to the owners corporation in any court of
corporation.
(2) Sections 31 and 32 and Division 1 of
Part 11 apply to the recovery of money owed to the owners corporation by a lot
10 The power of an owners corporation to
commence legal proceedings is outlined in s 18 of the
(1) Subject to subsection (2), an owners
corporation must not commence any legal proceeding unless it is authorised by
special resolution
(2) If a matter is
within the civil jurisdictional limit of the Magistrates’ Court and an
owners corporation is authorised to
do so by ordinary resolution, the owners
corporation may commence any legal proceeding in
a. the Magistrates’ Court;
b. VCAT or any other tribunal;
c. a court of another State or a Territory that
corresponds to the Magistrates’ Court.
definition of a ‘fee notice’ is provided by s 31 of the
(1) The owners corporation must give notice to a
lot owner in the approved form of any fees and charges due and payable by the
owner to the owners corporation (the
(2) The fee notice must
a. state that the lot owner has an
obligation to pay the fees and charges within 28 days after the date of the
notice; and
b. (if applicable) state that interest
at the rate specified in the notice will be payable in respect of any overdue
fees and charges;
c. Includes details of the
dispute resolution process that applies under the rules in respect of disputed
fees and charges.
12 Section 32 of the Act then
deals with final notices as follows:
money owing is not paid within 28 after the date of the fee notice, the owners
corporation may give a final notice in the
approved form to the lot
(2) The final notice must
a. state that the lot owner has an
obligation to pay the overdue fees and charges and interest immediately;
b. (if applicable) state
i. the interest that is payable in respect
of the overdue fees and charges at the date of the final notice;
ii. the amount of interest that will accrue
daily until the payment of the overdue fees and charges;
c. state that the owners corporation intends to
take action under Part 11 to recover the amount due if the overdue fees and
and interest owing are not paid within 28 days after the date the final
163(2) provides that an application to VCAT by the owners corporation for an
order requiring a lot owner to pay an amount
payable by the lot owner to the
owners corporation can only be made if the amount is not paid within 28 days
after the final notice
is given under section
13 On 15 June 2023, the Owners Corporation sent
a Final Fee Notice to Buckley. The Final Fee Notice said the
Notice is hereby given by the Owners
Corporation Plan of Subdivision 675 pursuant to
Owners Corporations Act 2006
, that the following overdue fees, charges and
interest are due and payable immediately.
If payment is not received within
28 days of the date of this Notice
the Owners Corporation intends to take
action under
Owners Corporations Act 2006
to recover the amount
due. This includes applying to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(VCAT) or a court of competent
pay. [emphasis in original]
14 The Final Fee Notice
contained a table of outstanding fees and charges totalling
15 Part 11 Division 1 of the Act is
entitled “Applications to VCAT – Division 1 – Owners
corporation disputes”.
Section 162 of the Act relevantly
162 VCAT may hear and determine
VCAT may hear and determine a dispute
or other matter arising under this Act or the regulations or the rules of an
owners corporation
that affects an owners corporation (an owners corporation
dispute) including a dispute or matter relating to –
alleged breach by a lot owner or an occupier of a lot of an obligation imposed
on that person by this Act or the regulations
or the rules of the owners
corporation; or
16 Section 163 of the Act outlines the
parties granted standing to apply to VCAT for the resolution of an owners
corporation dispute,
including a lot owner and the owners corporation. Notably,
s 163(2) of the Act specifies a time period that must elapse before an
corporation can initiate recovery proceedings against a lot owner. It
An application to VCAT by the owners
corporation for an order requiring a lot owner to pay an amount payable by the
lot owner to the
owners corporation can only be made if the amount is not paid
within 28 days after the final notice is given under section
17 Relevant to this dispute, VCAT may make any
order it considers fair, including:
order for the payment of a sum of money –
(i) found to be
owing by one party to another party;
(ii) by way of
damages (including exemplary damages and damages in the nature of
(iii) by way of restitution;
18 VCAT’s power to award costs
under section 109 of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
unaffected.
factors that the Tribunal must take into account when making an order are set
out in section 167 of the Act:
(a) the conduct of the
(b) an act or omission or proposed act or
omission by a party;
(c) the impact of a resolution
or proposed resolution on the lot owners as a
(d) whether a resolution or proposed
resolution is oppressive to, unfairly prejudicial to or unfairly discriminates
against, a lot
owner or lot owners;
(e) any other
matter VCAT thinks relevant.
20 On 1 August 2023, the Owners
Corporation filed its Complaint against Buckley claiming the sum of $4,475.58,
interest, and costs.
Following a re-hearing application, Buckley filed her
defence in which she stated:
The Court does not have
Corporations Act 2006
are conclusive.
Buckley’s Submissions
21 In relation to jurisdiction, Buckley
argued that the jurisdiction under s 30(1) of the Act is general, while s 30(2)
is more specific. When an owners corporation claims monies owed by a
lot owner, s 30(2) of the Act explicitly provides that ss 31
and 32, along with
Division 1 of Part 11, apply.
22 Buckley further
referred to the operation of s 32(2)(c) of the Act, submitting that a final
notice must state that the owners corporation
intends to take action under Part
11 to recover the amount due.
23 Since Division 1 of
Part 11 explicitly refers to VCAT, it is evident that the Act intended for
owners corporation disputes concerning
fees to be heard by VCAT as a specialist
tribunal. Additionally, any fee recovery proceedings in VCAT would be subject to
presumption outlined in
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Submissions on behalf of the Owners Corporation
24 The Owners Corporation acknowledged
that disputes may be heard by the VCAT, but this was not an exclusive
construction was that s 30(1) of the Act permits an
owners corporation to bring a proceeding for the recovery of debts in any court
of competent jurisdiction. Section 30(2) of the Act only imposes its specific
requirement where the proceeding is brought in the
25 Further, it was argued that, If Parliament
intended VCAT to have exclusive jurisdiction over fee recovery matters, it would
have first stated in s 30(1) of the Act that an owners corporation may
initiate proceedings in any court, only to then limit that
to VCAT under s 30(2) of the Act. The structure of the provision indicates that
VCAT is not the exclusive forum.
26 In addition,
Magistrates’ Court Act
confers jurisdiction
to hear and determine any cause of action for a debt, if the amount claimed is
within the jurisdictional limit.
Applicable Legal Principles
27 The starting point for determining the
meaning of a statutory provision is its text, considered in light of its context
primary aim of statutory interpretation is to construe the relevant provision(s)
in a way that aligns with both the language
and purpose of the statute as a
the words of a statute are plain and unambiguous, they should be given their
ordinary and grammatical
hierarchy of provisions may also be important. For example, the phrase "subject
to" is a standard means of establishing which
provisions are dominant and which
are subservient. The subservient provisions, therefore, operate only to the
extent that they are
not inconsistent with the dominant
provisions.
further relevant principle is that when a statute confers a power subject to
qualifications and conditions, general expressions
in the statute are to be read
as subject to those qualifications and
conditions.
32 The maxim
generalia specialibus non
(general provisions do not override specific ones) applies in
situations where the application of a general provision would undermine
nullify a specific provision. While this principle is typically applied to
provisions within the same statute, it may also be
applied by analogy to
provisions in separate
33 Finally,
where two statutes are the product of the one legislature, there is a general
presumption that there is no contradiction
completeness, I note no assistance is able to be derived from either the
explanatory memorandum or the second reading speech.
Determination as to
35 Applying these principles,
the interpretation advanced by Buckley should be
36 First, I consider the meaning of s 30
is plain and unambiguous. By s 30(1), it confers a general jurisdiction on the
Magistrates’
Court to hear proceedings where ‘any monies are owed to
an owners corporation’. This would include any general commercial
involving an owners corporation and a third-party debtor. However, where a
proceeding relates to the ‘recovery of money
owed to the owners
corporation by a lot owner’, the conditions in s 30(2) apply.
37 An overview of the s 30(2) conditions was set
out by Senior Member Vassie in
Owners Corporation No 1 PS507443P v
Owners corporation fees, and interest
upon them, become present debts upon which the owners corporation may sue once
the following
sequence of events occurs:
(a) The owners corporation
sets annual fees. If they are set in accordance with lot liability, as
Owners Corporations Act
requires, they are validly set and
become due;
(b) The owners corporation gives a lot
owner a fee notice that complies with the Act. Once it does, the fee
becomes payable within
28 days after the date of the notice. The notice may
state that interest at a specified rate will be payable in respect of any
(c) The owners corporation gives the
lot owner a final fee notice that complies with the Act. Once it does, any
interest to the date
of the notice properly stated to be payable becomes due and
continues to accrue;
(d) An elapse of 28 days after
the giving of the final fee notice, without there having been payment of the
overdue fees and interest,
gives rise to a right in the owners corporation to
commence proceedings in VCAT under Part 11 of the Act to recover the fees and
the interest.
38 The effect of s 32(2)(c) and s 163(2)
is that fee recovery proceedings against lot owners may only be commenced in
VCAT if the
amount remains outstanding 28 days after the notice has been given.
As Division 1 of Part 11 refers exclusively to VCAT and the orders
it may make,
it simply cannot follow that the Magistrates' Court has concurrent jurisdiction.
39 To my mind, that submission is only open if the
phrase ‘subject to sub-section (2)’ in s 30(2) is disregarded
to principles of statutory interpretation set out previously. Moreover,
it is not that s 30(2) imposes requirements when the proceeding
before VCAT. Rather, when the Owners Corporation is recovering money owed by a
lot owner (as opposed to any other debtor)
s 31, 32, and Division 1 of Part 11
40 Accordingly, I must reject the Owners
Corporation’s submission that s 30(2), only imposes specific requirements
proceeding is brought before VCAT.
now turn to the alternate reliance on
s 100(1)(c)
Magistrates’
. That does not take the matter further. I consider the jurisdiction
conferred by this section is broadly equivalent to s 30(1) of
the Act. Applying
the ‘specific over general’ rule of construction, s 30(2) should
prevail of both s 30(1) and
s 100(1)(c)
Magistrates’ Court
42 For these reasons, I conclude that the
Magistrates’ Court does not have jurisdiction where an owners corporation
relies upon
a final fee notice to recover a debt owing by a lot owner to the
owners corporation.
MAGISTRATE GREENWAY
3 October 2024
created by registered plan of
subdivision 000675 and
Subdivision Act
by complaint dated 1 August
dated 15 June 2023.
section 1 of the Act.
section 28 of the Act.
s 165 of the Act.
s 165(4) of the Act.
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Gummow, Kirby, and Hayne JJ).
Cooper Brookes
(Wollongong) Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1981) 147 CLR 297
[1981] HCA 26
Medical Council of New
South Wales v Lee
[2017] NSWCA 282
(Sackville AJA) citing
Newcrest Mining (WA) Ltd v Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 38
(1997) 190 CLR 513
at 580 (McHugh
Adrenaline Pty Ltd v
Bathurst Regional Council
(2015) NSWLR
Statutory Interpretation in
Australia 10ed 2024, [4.70] and [7.26] citing
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation
[2007] NSWCA 190
(2007) 242 ALR 152
Ferdinands v Commissioner
for Public Employment
(2006) 225 CLR 130
at [48] (Gummow and Hayne JJ),
Saraswati v R
[1991] HCA 21
(1991) 172 CLR 1
[2015] VCAT 558
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (254 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter