URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fornito v Graham Andrews Builders Pty Ltd [2025] VMC 1 (14 February 2025)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
DIVISION OF COURT
No. MAG-CI-230242813
Tommy FORNITO
GRAHAM ANDREWS BUILDERS PTY LTD (ACN 006 105
Magistrate M A Hoare
DATE OF HEARING
05 February 2025
DATE OF DECISION
14 February 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Fornito v Graham Andrews Builders Pty Ltd
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VMC 1
WORKERS COMPENSATION – Hearing Loss - Whether ‘exposed to
conditions by reason of which the injury was due to the nature
worker’s employment or arose out of or in the course of the worker's
employment...’ –
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Velos Lawyers
For the Defendant
TG Legal +Technology
Introduction
1 On 5 April 2023, Mr Fornito lodged
WorkCover claims for hearing loss injuries for impairment benefits and medical
and like expenses
on a former employer, Graham Andrews Builders Pty Ltd
2 GAB denied liability for the claims (x2)
which were rejected by notices (x2) dated 26 April 2023. The stated grounds were
plaintiff had not sustained an injury arising out of or in the course
of his employment with GAB.
3 In essence, at
hearing, GAB contended that it was not the last employer with which Mr Fornito
was exposed to industrial noise. In
other words, it was said that Mr
Fornito’s claim against GAB must fail because he worked for an employer
currently where he
was exposed to industrial
4 The only witness to give oral evidence was
Mr Fornito and documents including medical reports were tendered into evidence.
Matters not in dispute
5 It is useful to set out matters agreed or not
disputed before setting out contentious matters:
(a) Mr Fornito, aged 64 years,
is currently employed (the current employment) as a valet driver with Equity
Valet Parking Pty Ltd
(EVP). EVP provides valet services for customers of Qantas
at Melbourne Airport.
(b) By way of prior work
history, Mr Fornito was employed as follows:
• From 1978 to 1989, as a baggage handler at
Melbourne Airport with TAA;
• From 1989 to
1995, with Telecom on pipe & pit construction;
• From 1995 to 2003, self-employment as a
truck driver including about three years supervising other drivers.
(c) Then, from about 2003 to about 2 February 2020,
he was employed as a builder by GAB which was a period of about 17 years (the
GAB employment).
(d) It was not disputed by GAB that
he was exposed to industrial noise in the course of that employment.
(e) In March or April 2023, he commenced the current
employment, his only employment since ceasing with
(f) On 26 July 2016, he had seen his GP
complaining of hearing loss and tinnitus and of having worked in a noisy
environment for 16
years. His GP referred him to an audiologist and subsequent
testing confirmed noise-induced hearing loss.
(g) The current employment was part-time and Mr
Fornito worked 4 days a week, generally 4-5 hours a day.
Mr Fornito’s evidence
6 I turn now to Mr Fornito’s evidence on
disputed matters.
7 A typical day as a valet driver
in the current employment was to drive customers to and from the EVP reception
counter and the short-term
and long-term multi-storey car parks. The cars he
generally drove for EVP were not noisy as they were luxury or high-end vehicles
such as Mercedes-Benzs or Teslas and were frequently electric or hybrid. He
drove the cars with the windows rolled up and at low
speed.. EVP had an office
outside the airport perimeter. He reported for work at the short-term car park
in the valet parking area.
8 Ear-muffs were not
required in the current employment and he did not wear them. Some areas of the
airport had signs regarding wearing
of ear-muffs; but that was not the case in
areas where he worked. Under cross-examination, he denied he relied on signs.
he knew noisy environments when he was in them and would wear ear-muffs
if he was so exposed. For example, the TAA employment was
on or adjacent to the
9 Under cross-examination, Mr Fornito denied
the airport environment was noisy, saying it was not noisy ‘to any great
Aeroplanes could be heard taking off and landing on the runways
which were about a kilometre away from the carparks; but he could
aeroplanes from a distance as far away as his home in Bulla. At a later point in
cross-examination, he said the runways
were between two and four kilometres away
from the short-term car park. At another point, when pressed as to whether
working at airport
with aeroplanes coming and going in the background was noisy,
he said Flinders Street in central Melbourne was noisy because of background
traffic, but he did not consider that was a noisy environment.
10 As for the ‘worker questionnaire hearing
services’ dated 27 March 2023 bearing his signature and submitted upon
the claims, he noted various errors in his answers. He agreed he
always wear hearing protection with GAB and he
have to shout
to be heard. His answer that he had 4-6 hours a day of noise exposure with EVS
was incorrect, rather he mis-read the
question and that referred simply to his
actual working hours.
11 As for the GAB employment,
he was always using power-tools including jack-hammers and nail-guns.
12 As for noisy activities outside work, until two
months ago he lived on an acre and used a ride-on mower regularly, however he
wore-ear-muffs.
13 As he found his constant
tinnitus to be distressing, he was routinely very conscious of noise and always
wore ear protection when
around noise.
, ENT surgeon, assessed Mr Fornito on 19 August 2024 at the
request of GAB’s lawyers. A history of employment was obtained including
of noisy work environments with: TAA at the airport; with Telecom; his
truck-driving work; and with GAB. As for the current employment
which was at the
Qantas Domestic Terminal at Melbourne Airport, that was not a noisy job. Based
on the audiology reports, Dr Baxter
confirmed there was occupational
noise-induced hearing loss and tinnitus with some degenerative factor and
unexplained asymmetry.
As for causation, Dr Baxter opined the hearing loss was
partly attributable to his employment with GAB and GAB must be considered
last noisy employer. He further opined that the current employment as a valet
driver did not seem to be noisy.
Consideration
Fornito’s claims were governed by s. 60 of the
Workplace Injury
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
(the WIRCA).
16 The burden of proof rested with the plaintiff to
establish, on the balance of probabilities, that he sustained his industrial
loss with GAB, being the last employer with which he was performing
duties in noisy conditions. In other words, should the Court
find that the
current employment constituted work which exposed him to noise capable of
causing hearing loss, then Mr Fornito’s
claim against GAB must fail.
Sullivan v Toll Holdings
, his Honour Magistrate
Garnett was tasked with deciding whether the defendant in that case was the last
employer with which the plaintiff
worked where he was exposed to industrial
, in dismissing the worker’s case based on an
evaluation of the factual evidence, Magistrate Garnet had regard to the
observations
of his Honour Judge Bowman in
Simiele v Redmond Repetition
Engineering Pty Ltd & Ors
18 Both cases were decided under the predecessor
provisions of the
Accident Compensation Act
are mirrored by the
WIRCA provisions.
Bowman put it this way:
“It seems to me that
any exposure in an employment to noise capable of causing industrial deafness,
however brief that exposure
might be, is sufficient to attract the operation of
the Act and to implicate such employment. If it is the last such employment in
time, the employer becomes the party against which the claim is
20 Later, Judge Bowman also said this:
“... arguably, there may be even no need for exposure as such, provided
that the particular
worker suffers from industrial deafness and the employment
in which he is engaged is of a nature or type that has the characteristic
producing or being associated with industrial
for GAB submitted that the nature of Mr Fortino’s current employment at
Melbourne Airport was of such a nature or
long-established legislative regime, Mr Fornito had failed to discharge the
burden of proof
and any hearing loss claim ought to have been brought against
EVP as the current and therefore last employer.
22 It was conceded by Counsel for GAB that while Dr
Baxter gave support to the plaintiff’s case against GAB, his opinion had
to be viewed in the light of being based entirely on Mr Fornito’s own
history which was self-serving.
23 On the other
hand, Counsel for Mr Fornito submitted the Court was entitled to accept and
adopt Dr Baxter’s opinion. Moreover,
considering the entirety of Mr
Fornito’s evidence about the nature of the working conditions with EVP,
the weight of the evidence
pointed overwhelmingly to a conclusion that GAB was
the last employer for the purposes of s.60.
formed the impression that Mr Fornito was an honest witness who gave a largely
credible account of the circumstances of the current
employment. It is true
that, under pressure of cross-examination, he gave at times contradictory
evidence such as estimating the
distance of the runways from the short-term car
park. I also found his evidence somewhat confusing as to his workplace (the EVP
being located outside the airport perimeter, yet it was clear that he
worked predominantly from the valet area at the short-term
25 On the other hand, Mr Fornito made concessions
against interest such as that he always wore hearing protection with GAB and
that aeroplanes were heard landing and taking off in the current
employment. It seemed to me that his evidence had a ring of truth
regarding his
distressing tinnitus symptoms. I found it plausible and likely that this caused
him to be vigilant about avoiding exposure
to noise and, if he was, to wear
hearing protection. I also found persuasive his contrasting account of his prior
noisy work on the
runways at the airport (with TAA) and his awareness of when
ear-muffs might be required and so on.
matter I take into account was Mr Fornito’s unchallenged evidence as to
the nature of the employment which was generally
being inside luxury or high-end
cars (frequently electric and thus quiet) with the windows rolled up.
27 Next, I also accept and adopt as highly
persuasive the expert opinion of Dr Baxter that the current employment did not
be noisy. Whilst it is true that he had relied upon Mr Fornito’s
history, in referring to the current employment, Dr Baxter
made reference
specifically to that fact that the duties were performed ‘at the Qantas
Domestic Terminal at Tullamarine Airport’.
To my mind, it is implicit that
Dr Baxter has, as the expert, had cognisance of the conditions in the context of
where the duties
were performed, in arriving at his conclusion that the current
employment was not noisy.
28 I am not persuaded on
the whole of the evidence, particularly Mr Fornito’s evidence about how
and whereabouts he worked at
the Airport as well as Dr Baxter’s expert
opinion, that such conditions, objectively considered, are such as to attract
operation of s.60(2) of the Act with respect to
29 Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude
that Mr Fornito, on the balance of probabilities, sustained industrial hearing
in the course of his employment with GAB with a deemed date of injury of
the last day of employment with GAB. I find, therefore,
that he is entitled to
compensation in accordance with the WIRCA and as claimed in his prayer for
relief including reasonable medical
and like expenses and to have liability
accepted by GAB for his impairment benefits
30 I will hear from parties as to proposed
final orders.
MAGISTRATE M
14 February 2025
[2008] VCC 1463
Ibid at [26]
Ibid at [35]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (230 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter