URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/49.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:24:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Moorabool C85moor (PSA) [2025] PPV 49 (20 October 2025)
Moorabool Planning Scheme Amendment C85moor
West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage 2A Review 2021
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
20 October 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue, you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
Moorabool Planning Scheme Amendment C85moor
West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage 2A Review 2021
20 October 2025
David Merrett, Chair
List of Figures
Glossary and abbreviations
the Amendment
Moorabool Planning Scheme Amendment C85moor
the Bridge Hotel
190 Bungaree-Wallace Road Bungaree
Moorabool Shire Council
the National Heritage Convention in Canberra in August 1988
Heritage Strategy
Moorabool Shire Heritage Strategy 2024-2028
Incorporated Document
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
Exemptions May 2021
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning Scheme
Moorabool Planning Scheme
Planning Practice Note 01: Applying the Heritage Overlay
Stage 2A Review
West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage 2A Review May 2021
Amendment summary
The Amendment
Moorabool Planning Scheme Amendment C85moor
Common name
West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage 2A Review 2021
Brief description
The Amendment proposes to:
- apply the
Heritage Overlay to 106 individual heritage places and 7 heritage precincts
(Ballan x 2, Blackwood x 4, Lal Lal x 1)
individual Heritage Overlay listings for the Railway Station (Ballan), All
Saints Anglican Church (Blackwood) and Railway
Station (Lal Lal) and describe
their significance in the relevant heritage precincts
Subject land
Applies to specific land in Ballan, Blackwood, Bungaree, Gordon, Lal Lal,
Millbrook, Mount Egerton and Wallace
Planning Authority
Moorabool Shire Council
Authorisation
28 February 2024
13 March to 20 April 2025
Submissions
Number of Submissions: 13 Opposed: 4
- Elizabeth
MacGiolla and Greg D’Cruz
- Agriculture
- Wurundjeri
Woi-wurrung Cultural Heritage Aboriginal Corporation
- Department of
Transport and Planning
- West Moorabool
Anglican Parish
Returned Services League
Theresia Sullivan
- David and Lyn
Panel process
David Merrett
Directions Hearing
Online, 11 August 2025
Panel Hearing
Council offices (Ballan), 22 September 2025
Site inspections
Unaccompanied (14 September 2025) and accompanied (22 September 2025)
Parties to the Hearing
Moorabool Shire Council represented by Briana Eastaugh of Maddocks, who
called expert evidence on:
Heritage from
Natica Schmeder of Landmark Heritage
Jonathon Halls
Tom Sullivan
Moorabool PSA C85moor [2025] PPV
Date of this report
20 October 2025
Executive summary
Planning Scheme Amendment C85moor (the Amendment) seeks to implement the
recommendations of the West Moorabool Heritage
Study Stage 2A Review May 2021
(Stage 2A Review). This reviewed the Stage 2A Heritage Study from 2016.
The Amendment applies heritage controls to 106 individual places of
significance and seven heritage precincts in Ballan, Blackwood,
Gordon, Lal Lal, Millbrook, Mount Egerton and Wallace. The
Moorabool Shire
Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit Exemptions May 2021
(Incorporated Document) contain permit exemptions for heritage precincts and
individual places.
Of the 13 submissions received, four opposed the application of heritage
Key issues raised in submissions include:
objections to
the application of the Heritage Overlay to particular properties
applying the Heritage Overlay to specific properties based on factual
inaccuracies or changed circumstances
objections to
the contents of Amendment documentation related to history, elements of
significance, and additional controls within
the Statement of Significance for
the Heritage Overlay.
The Wurundjeri Woi-Wurrung Cultural Heritage
Aboriginal Corporation highlighted the cultural sensitivity of waterways within
Moorabool and recommended that the Amendment provide greater
acknowledgement of Aboriginal cultural heritage and sensitivity. While
critically important issue, the Panel considers there are processes in place to
protect Aboriginal cultural heritage under
separate legislation. The
Council’s Heritage Strategy 2024-2028 contains specific actions for
further engagement and action
in relation to Aboriginal cultural heritage.
The Panel is satisfied the methodology used, including a review of the 2016
Stage 2A heritage study, forms a sound basis for the application
of heritage
controls and is consistent with
Planning Practice Note 01: Applying the
Heritage Overlay
(PPN01). Ms Schmeder provided expert peer review of the
Stage 2A Review and endorsed application of heritage controls on all places,
with some minor detailed recommendations not supported by Council.
The Panel’s role is to review submissions received. This has resulted
in many places in the Amendment not subject to submission,
not being reviewed
further. The Panel accepts the exhibited form of the Amendment for these
There were relatively few submissions for such a large application of
heritage controls. The places reviewed are:
Steiglitz Street
Heritage Precinct, Ballan
49 Edols Street,
146 and 146A
Inglis Street, Ballan
Street, Ballan
Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree
67 Main Street,
179 Donnellans
Road, Millbrook
52 Sullivans
Road, Millbrook.
Administrative corrections (addressing errors or
updates due to demolished buildings) are supported for:
the Steiglitz
Street Heritage Precinct, Ballan
49 Edols Street,
146 and 146A
Inglis Street, Ballan.
The Panel accepts the bell tower at the
church at 56 Simpson Street, Ballan has local heritage significance and supports
Heritage Overlay polygon for the place.
The former Bridge Hotel at 190 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree was impacted
by a fire in 1992, but this did not significantly affect
the original form of
the Hotel. The Panel accepts the threshold has been met for local heritage
significance for Criteria A and
Submissions for 67 Main Street, Gordon and 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook
) did not object to the Heritage Overlay and requested either
clarification on the ability to provide disabled access to the post
suggested further detail for the Statement of Significance, respectively. The
Panel finds:
that disabled
access to the post office can be achieved without the need for a planning
the additional
from the submitters and a further heritage review was
appropriate.
The dwelling at 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook has
historical (Criterion A) and representative significance (Criterion D), despite
alterations
that have been made. The dwelling is relatively intact, and the
remaining trees are those that have local heritage significance.
supports the application of the Heritage Overlay to the place and the use of an
aerial photo in the Statement of Significance
to identify the trees of
significance.
Recommendations
Based on the reasons set out in this Report, the
Panel recommends that Moorabool Planning Scheme Amendment C85moor be adopted as
subject to the following:
1 Introduction
1.1 The Amendment
purpose of Moorabool Planning Scheme Amendment C85moor (the Amendment) is to
implement the recommendations of the West Moorabool
Heritage Study Stage 2A
Review May 2021 (Stage 2A Review).
Specifically, the Amendment, as exhibited, proposes to amend the Moorabool
Planning Scheme (Planning Scheme):
Heritage Overlay to 106 individual heritage places
Heritage Overlay to seven heritage precincts in Ballan (two precincts), in
Blackwood (four precincts) and Lal Lal (one precinct)
Heritage Overlay from 3 individual listings for the Railway Station (Ballan),
All Saints Anglican Church (Blackwood) and
Railway Station (Lal Lal) and
describe significance in the relevant heritage precincts
statements of significance and the
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and
Places Incorporated Plan Permit Exemptions May 2021
(Incorporated Document)
as incorporated documents in the planning scheme.
The Amendment
applies to land in Ballan, Blackwood, Bungaree, Gordon, Lal Lal, Millbrook,
Mount Egerton and Wallace, as broadly shown
in Figure 1.
Location of
towns the subject of the Amendment
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 1 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Source: Council Part A submission, page 5
The Incorporated Document contains permit exemptions for:
non-contributory
places within a heritage precinct
contributory or
significant places within a heritage precinct
places in residential and commercial areas
places within rural areas.
1.2 Background
Council provided a
useful summary of the background to the Amendment and the relationship to its
heritage program and preceding studies.
Council advised:
In 2010, the
Moorabool Shire Stage 1 Heritage Study 2010
) was prepared by Dr David Rowe & Wendy Jacobs to identify places
of potential heritage significance in West Moorabool. The study
area included
all areas outside of the
Bacchus Marsh Heritage Study 1995
predominantly the western region of the Moorabool Shire, taking in the former
Ballan Shire and parts of the former Bungaree
and Buninyong Shires, and
including an area in the south-eastern part of the Shire (formerly Werribee
In 2016 the
West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage 2A
) was prepared by Dr David Rowe & Wendy Jacobs to review and assess
a list of priority places identified in the Stage 1 Study.
It recommended that
the Heritage Overlay be applied to the places in the study via a planning scheme
amendment. The Stage 2A Study
was adopted by Council in 2017 and Council
resolved to request authorisation to prepare a planning scheme amendment.
The completion of the Stage 1 and Stage 2A studies were important steps in
compiling an extensive list of potential heritage sites
for further
investigation, identifying key themes of development in West Moorabool, and
completing assessments and citations for
the priority places.
Due to the lapse of time since the Stage 2A Study had been adopted, in 2021
Plan Heritage was engaged to prepare the
West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage
Stage 2A Review
) to review the recommendations of the
Stage 2A Study and to determine whether a Heritage Overlay should be applied,
and a planning
scheme amendment could be
supported0F
Volume 2 of the Stage 2A Study, contained West Moorabool’s Thematic
Environmental History which was titled “Forest, Farmland
Council adopted the Stage 2A Review on 6 December 2023.
1.3 Versions of the Amendment
Panel directed Council to prepare and circulate a ‘Day 1’ version of
the Amendment documentation before starting the
Hearing (Document 9). This
implements:
exhibition changes from the Council’s consideration of submissions on 2
most of the
recommendations of Council’s heritage expert witness, Natica Schmeder,
from Landmark Heritage.
This included changes to the Heritage
Overlay schedule, Statements of Significance and Citations.
The Day 1 version incorporated changes in response to evidence, legal review
and submissions.
Except where stated otherwise in this Report, the Panel supports the changes
in the Day 1 version, which makes corrections and provides
greater clarity and
improves the operation of the controls.
The Panel’s recommended Heritage Overlay schedule, Statements of
Significance and Citations in Appendix C uses Council’s
Day 1 version as
the starting point.
The post exhibition changes are detailed in the following place-specific
chapters. If a place is not part of the Day 1 documents,
then the Panel relies
on the exhibited version of documents for that place.
1.4 The Panel’s approach
issues raised in submissions were:
objections to
the application of the Heritage Overlay to particular properties
concerns about
application of the Heritage Overlay to specific properties based on factual
inaccuracies or changed circumstances
objections to
the contents of Amendment documentation related to history, elements of
significance, and additional controls within
the Statement of Significance for
the Heritage Overlay.
The Panel has assessed the Amendment against
the principles of net community benefit and sustainable development, as set out
71.02-3 (Integrated decision making) of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment, observations from site visits, and
submissions,
evidence and other material presented to it during the Hearing. The
Panel’s role is to review the submissions
to it, and it is noted not all
places or precincts were the subject of submissions. It has reviewed a large
volume of material and
restricts it consideration to those places or precincts
that were the subject of submissions. All submissions and materials have
considered by the Panel in reaching its conclusions, regardless of whether they
are specifically mentioned in the Report.
This Report deals with the issues under the following headings:
cultural heritage
Steiglitz Street
heritage precinct, Ballan (HO207)
49 Edols Street,
Ballan (HO215)
146 and 146A
Inglis Street, Ballan (HO242)
Street, Ballan (HO252)
Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree (HO272)
67 Main Street,
Gordon (HO293)
179 Donnellans
Road, Millbrook (HO307)
52 Sullivans
Road, Millbrook (HO310)
The Incorporated
2 Strategic issues
2.1 Planning context
chapter identifies planning context relevant to the Amendment.
B highlights key imperatives of
relevant provisions and policies.
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
4(1)(d) of the PE Act
Municipal Planning Strategy
- Clause 02.03-1
(Settlement)
- Clause 02.03-5
(Bilt Environment and Heritage)
- Clause 02.03-7
(Economic Development)
Planning Policy Framework
11.01-1L-03 (Ballan)
11.03-3S (Peri-urban areas), 11.03-6S Regional and local places)
15.01-5S (Neighbourhood character), 15.01-5L (Landscape and neighbourhood
character), 15.03-1S (Heritage conservation),
15.03-1L (Heritage)
Other planning strategies and policies
Victoria Pillar 3, Enabling Heritage Protection
- Moorabool
Heritage Strategy 2024-2028
Planning scheme overlay provisions
Ministerial directions
- Ministerial
Direction 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments)
Planning practice notes
Practice Note 1 (Applying the Heritage Overlay), August 2018
2.2 Strategic justification
(i) Submissions
submitted the Amendment was supported by relevant parts of the Municipal
Planning Strategy and Planning Policy Framework as
supports the
sustainable development of small towns and settlements and protects and enhances
Ballan’s character and sense of
place (Clause 02.03-1 Settlement)
protects and
reinforces the Shire’s built and natural heritage (Clause 02.03-5 Built
environment and heritage)
facilitates
tourism that is consistent with protecting and enhancing the Shire’s
heritage and town character (Clause 02.03-7
Economic development)
development in minimal growth area of Ballan to protect heritage values and
preferred character of precincts (Clause 11.01-1L-03
ensures new
development will complement the character of the town centre (Clause 11.03-1L
Activity centres – Ballan)
development that protects and enhances existing character (Clause 15.01-1L
Landscape and neighbourhood character)
ensures that new
development will be sympathetic to and make a positive contribution to heritage
places (Clause 15.03-1L Heritage).
Council referred to the Moorabool
Shire Heritage Strategy 2024-2028 (Heritage Strategy) which was adopted by
Council on 4 September
2024. Under the theme of “Protecting”, the
Heritage Strategy identifies “
progressing the Amendment to implement
the recommendations of the Stage 2A Review as a short-term priority
Council submitted “
no submitters questioned the broader strategic
basis for the application of the Heritage Overlay or the implementation of the
” Of the four objections to the Amendment, concerns
were entirely directed towards heritage issues specific to individual
properties.
Council submitted that once local heritage significance was established, the
application of the Heritage Overlay was the appropriate
statutory tool
as a permit will be required for buildings and works, including
demolition, that could affect the heritage significance of those
Council advised:
To satisfy the requirements of PPN1, Council’s heritage consultants and
experts have:
recognised HERCON criteria to assess the heritage value of places and
comparative analyses to substantiate the significance of places and
statements of significance using the three-part format of ‘What is
Significant?, ‘How is it Significant?’
and ‘Why is it
Significant?’.
(ii) Discussion
The Panel is satisfied that application of the
Heritage Overlay and the process used to inform this, was appropriate. The
methodology
is consistent with that outlined in PPN01. Give the flux of time
Council did not choose to implement the Stage 2A Study 2016 and
proceeded to
conduct a full review which has provided a strong strategic basis for the
The Amendment is consistent with Council’s Heritage Strategy, the
staging of heritage reviews and strategies (described in Chapter
Report) and policies contained in the Municipal Planning Strategy and Planning
Policy Framework.
The Panel considers the receipt of four objections for an Amendment that
included 106 individual places, and seven precincts indicates
acceptance of the Amendment and perhaps reflects the initial consultation as
part of the Stage 2A Study in 2016 and continued
engagement as part of its Stage
2A Review in 2020/21.
The Panel agrees with Council there were no objections that broadly
criticised the basis of the Amendment. The Panel considers the
delivers net community benefit as required by Clause 71.02-3.
(iii) Conclusions
For the reasons set out in this report, the Panel
concludes that the Amendment:
is supported by,
and implements, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy Framework
is consistent
with the relevant Ministerial Directions and Practice Notes
is well founded
and strategically justified
should proceed
subject to addressing the more specific issues raised in submissions as
discussed in the following chapters.
3 Aboriginal cultural heritage
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment acknowledges Aboriginal cultural heritage
appropriately.
(ii) Submissions
The Wurundjeri Woi-Wurrung Cultural Heritage
Aboriginal Corporation (Submission 5) highlighted the cultural sensitivity of
within West Moorabool and recommended the Amendment provide greater
acknowledgement of Aboriginal cultural heritage and sensitivity.
Council submitted:
Council’s adopted Heritage Strategy 2024–2028 (Heritage
Strategy), which includes a number of actions aimed at improving
recognition and protection of Aboriginal cultural heritage. These include:
Internal capacity building to increase knowledge of Aboriginal cultural heritage
among Council staff.
Maintaining links on Council’s website to resources from First Peoples
State Relations to assist landowners in understanding
their obligations to
protect Aboriginal heritage sites, such as under the
Aboriginal Heritage Act
Supporting Aboriginal cultural heritage storytelling by Traditional Owners, as
an important part of heritage interpretation,
such as in arts, tourism, and
public space activations.
Developing an information kit for heritage property owners, including resources
for owners of properties with Aboriginal
cultural heritage significance.
Supporting and promoting Aboriginal cultural heritage through events such as
NAIDOC Week and National Reconciliation Week.
Heritage Strategy identifies the need to “
understand and respect that
the relationship Aboriginal people have to their heritage, does not always fit
within traditional western
ideas of heritage and heritage management
Council considered the Amendment was consistent with the
Aboriginal Heritage
(iii) Discussion and conclusion
The Amendment is focussed on post-contact heritage.
While just as important, there are other opportunities and mechanisms for
cultural heritage to be reviewed, which is primarily administered by
Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006
. Council’s Heritage Strategy has
specific actions for further engagement.
The Panel considers the Amendment is not inconsistent with Aboriginal
cultural heritage values.
4 Steiglitz Street heritage precinct, Ballan (HO207)
Exhibited Statement
of Significance
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
What is significant?
The Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct, Ballan is significant.
The following features contribute to the significance of the
The four dwellings at 91-97 Steiglitz Street, constructed between
c.1874-c1890 as shown on the precinct map.
The consistent overall single storey residential form (hipped roofs, front
post -supported verandahs, brick and rendered chimneys,
symmetrical
composition), materials (weatherboard wall cladding, brick and rendered
chimneys, galvanised corrugated steel roof cladding)
and detailing (narrow
eaves, central four panelled front doors flanked by double hung windows,
surviving cast iron verandah decoration,
moulded timber architraves and timber
window sills).
Features that do not contribute to the significance of the precinct include
non-original alterations and additions to the buildings
at 91-97 Steiglitz
Contributory places:
Steiglitz Street: 91, 93, 95, 97.
How is it significant?
The Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct at 91-97 Steiglitz Street is of
local historical and aesthetic significance to the Moorabool
Why is it significant?
Historically, the Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct is significant as it
contains the only known speculative development of detached
timber dwellings
remaining in the town (93-97 Steiglitz Street). Further strengthening the
historical cohesion of this small group
is the association with the original
owner, Bernard Hirsch, a German draper, colonial wine dealer and manufacturer
who constructed
the cottage at 97 Steiglitz Street in 1874, and a large timber
structure housing a general store and stocking-weaving factory, located
land at 93-97 Steiglitz Street. The three cottages at 93-97 Steiglitz Street
were built by James Alford as rental properties
in the 1890s after
Hirsch’s death, from materials salvaged from the former general store and
manufactory. (Criterion A)
Aesthetically, the Steiglitz Street Precinct is significant as a small
group of representative examples of the vernacular style of
late-Victorian dwellings typical to Ballan. The design qualities are especially
borne out in the hipped roof forms, front
verandahs, symmetrical compositions
defined by the front central doorways and flanking windows, narrow eaves,
chimneys and surviving
verandah detailing, in addition to the weatherboard wall
construction and timber framing (having been recycled from Hirsch’s
manufactory building now demolished) and the galvanised corrugated steel roof
cladding. (Criterion E)
(i) The issue
The issue is whether there is a street addressing
error in the Statement of Significance for the precinct.
(ii) The exhibited Amendment
The exhibited Amendment proposes to include the
properties at 91 – 97 Steiglitz Street, Ballan in the new HO207 –
Street Precinct, and to apply solar energy system controls to the
precinct. All properties within the precinct are proposed to be
‘Contributory’.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
A submitter considered there was an addressing error
in the Statement of Significance for Criterion A that should read 91-95
Street, not 93-97. This makes a reference to the speculative
development of detached timber dwellings in the precinct.
Council and Ms Schmeder agreed with the submitter and included this change in
the Day 1 documents.
(iv) Conclusion
This is a clear error that should be corrected. The
Panel supports the correction to the Statement of Significance.
(v) Recommendation
The Panel recommends:
the Statement of Significance for the Steiglitz Street, Ballan Heritage Precinct
(HO207) to correct an addressing error as shown
in Appendix
5 49 Edols Street, Ballan (HO215)
Statement of Significance
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
What is significant?
The State Savings Bank dwelling at 49 Edols Street, Ballan, constructed
1929, is significant.
Non-original alterations and additions are not significant
How is it significant?
The State Savings Bank dwelling at 49 Edols Street, Ballan, is of local
historical and aesthetic significance to the Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
The State Savings Bank dwelling at 49 Edols Street has historical
significance as an example of the modest, working class residential
developments
in Ballan township in the late 1920s. Built in c.1929 for Dennis Wheelahan,
blacksmith, the dwelling has particular
associations with the State Savings
Bank’s finance, design and construction scheme that was established to
assist low income
earners build their own homes following standard Bungalow
The State Savings Bank dwelling at 49 Edols Street is aesthetically
significant as one of four known Interwar timber Bungalow styled
dwellings in
Ballan based on the State Saving Bank’s standard designs of 1929. The
dwelling is a locally unusual example with
its jerkinhead roof form, being a
‘Type T42’ design which is largely intact, although missing the
original chimneys,
and has had the roof cladding replaced. (Criterion E)
(i) The issue
The issue is whether the property has been
incorrectly identified and should be removed from the Amendment.
(ii) The exhibited Amendment
The Amendment proposes to apply HO215 ‘State
Savings Bank Dwelling’ to the property at 49 Edols Street, Ballan, with
solar energy system controls.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
A submitter provided aerial photographic evidence
that the dwelling had been relocated to the property from Melbourne in the
which confirmed the current dwelling was not in place in 1965 or
Ms Schmeder provided evidence that supported the submitters
The other State Savings Bank Dwellings recommended for inclusion in the
Moorabool Heritage Overlay by this heritage study –
at 45 Atlkinson Street
& 9 Fisken Street – are both designs designated “For Country
Selection Only”. In contrast,
the house at 49 Edols Street is a State
Savings Bank design that was common in the Melbourne metropolitan area and not
for use in regional Victoria. Furthermore, the chimneys of 49 Edols
Street have been removed, which is almost always the case for
buildings (or the chimneys are rebuilt in a non- original form).
As the house at 49 Edols Street does not have a long historic connection with
Ballan or Moorabool, I agree that it is not of local
heritage significance.
Council supported the submitter and the evidence of Ms Schmeder and deleted
the place in the Day 1 documents.
(iv) Conclusion
Based on the aerial photography evidence and its
review by Council and Ms Schmeder, the Panel accepts the dwelling is a recent
to Ballan and should be removed from the Amendment.
(v) Recommendation
The Panel recommends:
48 Edols Street, Ballan (HO215) from the Heritage Overlay schedule, the Clause
72.04 schedule and the Moorabool Shire Heritage
precincts and Places
Incorporated Plan Permit Exemptions as shown in Appendix
6 146 and 146A Inglis Street, Ballan (HO242)
Statement of Significance
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
What is significant?
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery building, at 146 & 146A Inglis
Street, constructed c.1925-26, is significant.
The timber outbuilding at the rear of the site and the Honour Roll affixed
to the external wall contribute to the significance of
How is it significant?
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery building at 146 & 146A Inglis
Street, Ballan is of local historical, aesthetic and social
significance to the
Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery building at 146 & 146A Inglis
Street is of historical significance as one of the few surviving
commercial buildings within Ballan, a period of social and economic growth
within the town. The building has associations
with commercial development in
Ballan during the Interwar period, and particularly with Vivian Cullen and his
establishment of the
Kookaburra café and billiard room in c.1925-26. Of
further historical significance is the use of the building from 1958 to
present as the clubrooms of the local branch of the Returned and Services League
of Australia (Victoria). (Criterion A)
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery is of aesthetic significance for the
unusual composition of typical Interwar shopfront with
dwelling which appears to
be a very late example of the Edwardian vernacular, apparently constructed at
the same time. The single
storey, timber weatherboard building exhibits design,
composition and detailing typical of the Edwardian period, including the main
hipped roof form and projecting minor hipped and gabled wings, turned timber
verandah posts and timber brackets. There are no other
examples of R.S.L.
buildings within the study area. (Criterion E)
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery building at 146 & 146A Inglis
Street has social significance for its long and continuing
association with and
use by the Ballan branch of the Returned and Services League of Australia as
their clubrooms since 1958. (Criterion
(i) The issue
The issue is whether the Statement of Significance
should be amended to delete reference to a demolished outbuilding.
(ii) The exhibited Amendment
The exhibited Amendment proposes to apply the
Heritage Overlay (HO242) to the Ballan RSL Sub-Branch and former bakery at 146 /
Inglis Street, Ballan. The Amendment identifies the site as having local
historical, aesthetic and social significance (Criteria
A, E and G) and proposes
to apply solar energy system controls.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
A submitter advised that the timber outbuilding
referenced in the Statement of Significance had been demolished in 2021, with
brick chimney remaining.
Council confirmed this was the case following a site inspection and viewing
aerial photography and agreed with the submitter the Statement
of Significance
and Citation should be corrected.
Ms Schmeder confirmed
It is possible that a chimney remains from this outbuilding, but in my expert
opinion this is not sufficient to warrant its protection.
... as the timber outbuilding to the rear of the RSL Clubrooms has been
demolished, it can no longer be protected in the Heritage
(iv) Discussion and conclusion
The Panel confirmed during the site inspection that
the outbuilding had been demolished and agrees with Council, the submitter and
Ms Schmeder the Statement of Significance and Citation should be corrected to
reflect this.
(v) Recommendation
the Statement of Significance for 146 and 146A Inglis Street, Ballan (HO246) by
deleting the reference to an outbuilding as
shown in Appendix
7 56 Simpson Street, Ballan (HO252)
Statement of Significance
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
What is significant?
St. John’s Anglican Church, at 56 Simpson Street, Ballan, constructed
1861-1862, is significant. Elements of the place which
contribute to the
significance are the c.1861-2 church, the mature Cupressus macrocarpa Monterey
Cypress, headstones located to the
east of the chancel (relocated to the site),
stone gate piers and memorial gates, metal plaque fixed to the reveal of the
bell and bell tower in the front garden.
Elements which do not contribute to the significance of the place include
the timber garage and outbuilding to the north east of the
site, landscaping,
modern buildings including the Parish Hall and Mena Prior Memorial Parish
Centre, front and side fencing, concrete
gate piers and orbs.
How is it significant?
The St. John’s Anglican Church, 56 Simpson Street, is of local
historical, aesthetic and social significance to the Moorabool
Why is it significant?
St. John’s Anglican Church, 56 Simpson Street, is historically
significant for its associations with the earliest years of Anglicanism
fledgling township of Ballan from 1849, and particularly with the life and
development of the Church of England at Ballan
throughout the 19th and 20th
Built in c. 1861-62 St. John’s Church was built to the design of the
Diocesan Architect, Leonard Terry, and has been in continuous
Anglican congregation for over 150 years. Of further historical significance
are the headstones relocated from the Old
Ballan Cemetery in 1964, and represent
the Anglican community’s commemoration of Robert Steiglitz, considered to
be the ‘founder’
of Ballan. The significance is embodied in
headstones, which have been removed from their original location in an attempt
to celebrate
Robert Steiglitz through the ‘conservation’ via
relocation of his family grave headstones. (Criterion A)
St. John’s Anglican Church, 56 Simpson Street, is aesthetically
significant as a local landmark at Ballan, being the earliest
of the three
surviving 19th century church buildings in the town. Although altered, St.
John’s Church is also one of the earliest
known rural church designs of
the Diocesan Architect, Leonard Terry, being one of just two surviving church
buildings of this particular
stylistic type (the other being St. James’
Anglican Church, Mortlake) by the architect. The Early English Gothic Revival
design remains clearly discernible, having been inspired by the highly
influential work of the Gothic Revival English Architect,
A.W.N. Pugin. This is
particularly defined in the composition of the steeply pitched, gabled nave with
minor gabled chancel and
the projecting side vestry (the hipped roof form being
distinctive of Terry’s work). Originally intended to be crowned by a
bellcote (identical to that at St. James’ Church, Mortlake), this was also
a feature borrowed from the earlier designs of Pugin,
including his design of
St. Paul’s Roman Catholic Church, Oatlands, Tasmania, built in 1850. The
mature plantings of Monterey
Cypress provide an attractive and traditional
setting for the place, and are a later, but contributory planting. (Criterion
St. John’s Anglican Church, 56 Simpson Street, is socially
significant for its long and continuous use as a place of worship
and meeting to
the Anglican and broader Ballan community for over 150 years. Past parishioners
have been memorialised throughout
the complex in the form of decorative
stained-glass windows in the church itself (the most notable being the Ferguson
stained glass chancel window in in memory of Juliet Vivian Lyon who
died in 1874 and that of the nave, in memory of Rebecca Ocock).
Other examples
including tablets, fixtures and fittings and the stone gate piers commemorate
the pioneers of the Ballan district.
The relocated headstones are also an
interesting expression of community celebration/conservation of early pioneering
history. (Criterion
(i) The issues
The issues are whether the:
timber bell
tower has heritage significance
extent of the
Heritage Overlay should be amended in response to a recently issued permit to
subdivide the land.
(ii) The exhibited Amendment
The exhibited Amendment proposes to apply the
Heritage Overlay (HO252) to St John’s Anglican Church, located at 56
Simpson Street,
Ballan. The Amendment proposes the application of tree controls
to a mature Monterey Cypress on the property, and the application
of outbuilding
(bell tower) and fence controls to the stone gate piers and associated metal
(iii) Evidence and submissions
A submitter questioned the heritage significance of
the bell tower and submitted:
The bell was originally in a bellcote mounted on the western end of the
original church roof in 1865. The church also had a vestry
on the southern side
of the chancel.
Due to church works over a period of time, the bell cote and vestry were
removed many years ago.
The bell tower standing today is of timber construction and certainly not
built to stand the test of time. The structure is already
rotting, and the roof
portion has already started falling apart (falling to the ground). Due to this,
the bell is not rung anymore
because of serious safety concerns. The matter was
raised at Parish Council in 2024 and to preserve the bell, the decision was made
to remove the historical bell, dismantle the rotting bell tower, and relocate
the bell to the church courtyard, where it can be preserved
and used for its
purpose – as a call to
The submitter supported the heritage significance of other elements of the
Ms Schmeder confirmed that while the bell tower was not original to the
church it is likely to have been constructed between 1874
and 1909, making it an
early element of the heritage place. Figure 2 contains a photo of the bell
tower. Ms Schmeder’s evidence
It is a finely crafted structure with a high level of detail as all members
are decoratively stop-chamfered. This type of stop-chamfering
was used for many
19th-century built elements, among them decorative trusswork on the exterior of
Carpenter Gothic buildings and
for internal ceiling trusses of timber and stone
Gothic Revival buildings.5F
None of the surviving timber bell towers identified in Victoria have anything
comparable to the level of detail seen on the St John’s
Anglican Church bell tower
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 2 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Source: Ms Schmeder evidence statement
Ms Schmeder supported changing the Citation to:
insert more
detail about the bell tower
correct the date
of the memorial gates to 1937
note that the
works in 1909 may have been the addition of a roof on an existing bell
correct several
typos, without changes to meaning.
Ms Schmeder supported changing
the Statement of Significance to:
clarify that the
bell tower was completed in 1909 with a roof, but the structure may date from as
early as 1874-1900
include the bell
tower in the discussion of the place’s aesthetic
significance.
Ms Schmeder referred to a recently issued planning permit (PA2023048) to
subdivide the land and recommended the Heritage Overlay polygon
match the shape
of Lot 1 which contains the church and outbuildings, but not the dwelling to the
west, and provide an appropriate
curtilage. Figure 3 contains the approved plan
of subdivision and Figure 4 contains the proposed Heritage Overlay polygon.
Approved plan
of subdivision for St Johns Anglican Church
Source: Council Part B submission, page 20
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figures 3 and 4 has been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
Heritage Overlay polygon for St Johns Anglican Church
Source: Ms Schmeder evidence statement, page 8, paragraph 21
Ms Schmeder agreed with the Panel’s question that the bell tower would
also meet Criterion B for its rarity.
Council supported the evidence of Ms Schmeder but did not support the
addition of Criterion B as “
changes to date provide a strong level of
protection.
The proposed changes have been included in the Day 1 documentation.
(iv) Discussion and conclusion
While the bell was initially located on the church,
the bell tower was constructed around 1900 to house the bell. The Panel agrees
with Council and Ms Schmeder the bell tower contributes to the heritage
significance of the place even though it was not an original
feature of the
church. Its construction around 1900 demonstrates this.
The Panel acknowledges Council’s position on Criterion B (rarity) and
does not support the addition of this criterion as it
was an issue not addressed
in the Stage 2A Review.
The subdivision of the land has created a new lot boundary that should, as
best as possible, inform the Heritage Overlay polygon.
The Panel supports the
polygon outlined in Figure 4 as a basis for the amended Heritage Overlay for the
heritage place. Even if
separate title is not issued the polygon supported by
Ms Schmeder provides an effective curtilage the items of significance.
(v) Recommendations
The Panel recommends:
the Citation and Statement of Significance for 56 Simpson Street, Ballan (HO252)
to provide additional detail as shown in Appendix
the Heritage Overlay map for 56 Simpson Street, Ballan (HO252) to show the
polygon contained in the Figure 4.
8 190 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree (HO272)
Exhibited Statement
of Significance
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
What is significant?
The Bridge Hotel at 190 Bungaree Wallace Road, Bungaree, constructed
c.1930, is significant.
Only the brick section of the hotel fronting the Bungaree Wallace Road is
significant. The non-original alterations and additions
in brick and timber
(post 1990) are not significant.
How is it significant?
The Bridge Hotel, 109 Bungaree Wallace Road, Bungaree is of local
historical and aesthetic significance to the Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
Historically, the c.1930 brick portion of the Bridge Hotel is significant
for its enduring associations with a hotel business on this
site since c.1870,
and particularly from 1930 when the front portion of this hotel building was
re-built following a cyclone for
the Ballarat Brewing Company, who owned the
hotel from 1902-1960. (Criterion A)
The hotel has aesthetic significance as an unusual example of an interwar
era brick hotel in the western region of the Moorabool Shire.
Only one of five
surviving examples of its type, and one of two surviving examples in Bungaree,
the building is distinct from other
comparable examples for its distinctive
design, particularly the composition of the roof forms, jerkin-head roofed front
wings projecting
from the main hipped roof, with broken back verandah between.
The original (or reconstructed) fabric such as the terra cotta tiled
cladding, face brick and roughcast wall construction, broad eaves, brick
chimneys, window openings, verandah piers, columns
and balustrade, and the
signage lettering also contribute to the aesthetic significance. Situated on
higher ground at the western
end of Bungaree, the hotel is a local historic
landmark. (Criterion E)
(i) The issues
The issues are whether:
the Citation and
Statement of Significance accurately reflect changes to the building and its
destruction because of a fire in 1992
changes to the
building impacts the heritage significance of the place.
(ii) The exhibited Amendment
The exhibited Amendment proposes to include the
property at 190 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree (the Bridge Hotel) as an
place in the Heritage Overlay as HO272, with solar energy system
controls and prohibited uses permitted.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
A submitter stated:
the entire hotel
was destroyed by fire in 1992 and rebuilt, with only the front brick
façade retained
the fire brigade
caused extensive damage to all external doors, doorframes, and window frames
while extinguishing the fire, and that
all external doors and frames were
replaced in a style suited to business operations, on the basis that
original-style doors could
not be located by the owners
the original
windows remaining after the fire were replaced with recycled aluminium framed
windows, one of which has since been replaced
with a modern aluminium frame.
The windows now include modern safety glass and no longer contain the original
dimpled glass
all roof bearers
and terracotta tiles were replaced after the fire, using a mix of new and
reclaimed tiles sourced from local demolition
yards, and the new dwelling at the
rear of the property is noted to have a Colourbond roof
all the external
facades, eaves, and guttering were replaced due to smoke and fire damage
the building has
been repainted multiple times since the 1990s in non-heritage colours, including
recent repainting of all external
timbers, render, and porch
The submitter considered the cost of repair after the fire
was greater than the $150,000 referred to and it was
” to include photos of the fire damage.
The submitter was also concerned the retention of the raised ‘Bridge
Hotel’ signage lettering on the front façade
would conflict with
liquor licensing requirements if it was delicensed that would require the
signage to be removed.
The submitter considered the Bridge Hotel should not be identified for its
social significance as the redevelopment of the local football
club and club
rooms has shifted the focus of away from the hotel.
Ms Schmeder provided evidence that the 1930 brick hotel building survived the
1992 fire in the form of a press photo after the fire
that shows the hotel
building intact (Figure 5) and an endorsed plan for the rebuild that shows the
existing hotel building and the
proposed residence to its rear (Figure 6).
Photo of fire
damage to Bridge Hotel
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 5 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Source: Ms Schmeder evidence statement page 24, paragraph 98
Endorsed plan
for Planning Permit 92/277
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 6 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Source: Ms Schmeder evidence statement page 25, paragraph 101
Ms Schmeder recommended the following changes to the Statement of
Significance and Citation:
timber outbuilding to the rear of the hotel be recognised in the Statement of
Significance as a contributory element to
the heritage place
correct the roof
tile material (concrete, not terracotta)
remove reference
to the Bungaree History Walk website from footnote 35 of the heritage Citation
on the basis that it no longer exists
information, as documented in historical newspaper articles, about the tornado
that damaged other buildings in Bungaree in
1927, to footnote 22 of the heritage
suggestion that the 1927 tornado was the direct cause of the rebuilding of the
Bridge Hotel in 1930 from the Statement
of Significance and heritage
add the original
raised lettering to the “What is significant” section of the
Statement of Significance.
Council supported most of the evidence of
Ms Schmeder but did not support the addition of the timber outbuilding as a
contributory
element as only a roadside inspection has taken place to date by
Council, the author of the Stage 2A Review and Ms Schmeder. The
changes proposed by Ms Schmeder are included in the Day 1 documentation.
(iv) Discussion and conclusion
While the Panel appreciates the input of the
submitter to the Amendment it is clear the brick hotel building survived the
1992 and therefore contributes to the heritage significance of the
place. Figures 5 and 6 confirm this.
The Morning Star Hotel in Bungaree (the subject of HO276 in this Amendment)
is now not operating as a hotel but has retained its original
signage. The
Panel agrees with Council that, if required, painting over the raised lettering
will ensure there is sufficient significance
retained for the signage that
relates to its original use.
The reference to “
following a cyclone
” should be deleted
as these do not occur in Victoria and was most likely a tornado.
The Panel notes the Bridge Hotel has not been identified for its social
significance (Criterion G). Notwithstanding this, its operation
as a local pub
for the community is recognised in the Statement of Significance and Citation.
The Panel does not agree that other
facilities established nearby has decreased
the heritage significance.
The Panel finds that the threshold for local heritage significance has been
established for Criteria A and E and notes the concurrent
application of
heritage controls to the former Morning Star Hotel in Bungaree as part of this
Amendment as a comparative example
that establishes significance.
(v) Recommendation
The Panel recommends:
the Citation and Statement of Significance for 190 Bungaree-Wallace Road,
Bungaree to provide additional detail and correct
references as shown in
Appendix C and delete reference to “
following a
9 67 Main Street, Gordon (HO293)
Exhibited Statement
of Significance
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
What is significant?
The Gordon Post Office, 67 Main Street, Gordon, constructed 1890, is
significant.
Features which do not contribute to the significance of the place include
the post 1890 alterations and additions, including the modern
outbuildings.
How is it significant?
The Gordon Post Office, 67 Main Street, Gordon, is of local historical,
aesthetic and social significance to the Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
The Gordon Post Office, 67 Main Street, Gordon, has historical significance
for its long-term associations with the local post service
and telegraph
communications in the town from 1890 (having been originally established in
1858). Continuing its original function
today, the building was constructed in
1890 by a local pioneer and former postmaster, Cheri Mars, a French immigrant.
The building
had been designed under the leadership of Samuel Edward Bindley,
Public Works Architect in charge of the North-West Division in the
Works Department. His office was responsible for the designs of several post
offices, police stations and court houses
in the north-west district of
Victoria. (Criterion A)
The Gordon Post Office, 67 Main Street, Gordon, has aesthetic significance
as the only example of a timber weatherboard Late Victorian
Queen Anne styled
Post Office designed by the North-West Division of the Public Works Department.
Although altered, the original
design characteristics are clearly discernible in
the composition of the gabled and hipped roof forms, return post-supported
chimneys, windows and the clock featuring in the front gable end.
Similar details are identified in a small number of other surviving
post offices
of the type, the most comparable being those at Carisbrook and Wycheproof, both
of brick construction. (Criterion E)
The Gordon Post Office, 67 Main Street, Gordon, has social significance as
it is recognised and valued by the local community as an
enduring, ongoing and
integral part of the infrastructure of the town. (Criterion G)
(i) The issues
The issues are whether:
access can be provided to the building
internal or
external alterations to increase storage are possible.
(ii) The exhibited Amendment
The Amendment proposes to apply the Heritage Overlay
(HO293) to the Gordon Post Office building at 67 Main Street, Gordon, with
solar energy system controls.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
A submitter was concerned the proposed controls
would restrict necessary future upgrades to the building, particularly those
for accessibility and operational efficiency.
Regarding the installation of a disability access ramp, Ms Schmeder noted
that Clause 62.02-2 of the Moorabool Planning Scheme permits
the construction of
a ramp without permit. For other building changes Ms Schmeder noted internal
controls are not proposed and there
are opportunities to increase storage with
external alterations towards the rear of the building.
Council noted “
the Heritage Overlay does not override other
legislation, including the
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
, and upgrades for
equitable access in heritage buildings are common and often
achievable.
” Council supported the evidence of Ms Schmeder and did
not propose and changes to the Citation or Statement of Significance.
(iv) Discussion and conclusion
The Gordon Post Office has continuously operated
from this building since 1890. It has an intact façade despite
to its rear. These are sympathetic to its original form. It has
long been a feature in the main street, and the Panel accepts the
threshold for
local significance has been reached for Criteria A, E and G.
The Gordon Post Office is located on a corner lot which provides
opportunities for extensions and alterations that otherwise might
possible. Current access is via two steps form the footpath pavement and it
seems a ramp would be a quite simple solution
to ensure access is provided for
all abilities. Alternatively, the secondary street could provide access.
Disability access can
easily be provided without the need for a planning
The issues raised by the submitter on disabled access and the ability to add
to the building is not a relevant consideration in the
HERCON criteria.
10 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook (HO307)
Exhibited Statement
of Significance
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
What is significant?
Oakvale, at 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook, constructed c.1869, is
significant.
How is it significant?
Oakvale at 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook is of local historical and
aesthetic significance to the Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
Oakvale, 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook has historical significance for its
associations with early private farming developments in
the Millbrook area which
became highly successful and enduring after the unlocking of the land in the
early 1860s. Built in c.1869
for Robert Luke McDowell and his wife, Mercy (nee
Bridges), Oakvale was also the home of their ten children. Throughout the 19th
century, Robert McDowell farmed the land. After his death in 1904, the property
was owned by his son, Herbert, until 1910 when it
was sold to William and Mary
Clifford. With his brother, Herbert, on a neighbouring property, William
Clifford cultivated potatoes
at Oakvale through the first half of the 20th
century. The Clifford family continued to own the property until 1997.
Oakvale, 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook, is aesthetically significant as
the earliest, substantial two storey brick farm dwelling
in the western region
of the Moorabool Shire. Other homesteads of equivalent or larger scale were
built in the 1880s and 1890s to
different designs. Oakvale demonstrates
original design qualities of a Victorian Georgian style in its rectangular,
symmetrical
face brick facades, hipped roof and narrow eaves. Stylistically, it
is comparable to only the former Commercial Bank and the former
Telegraph Office, Ballan, built in 1857 and 1874 respectively. In particular,
the features which contribute to the aesthetic
significance include the
symmetrical, two storey, rectangular facades surmounted by hipped roof forms
with narrow eaves, three-bayed
composition on the main (east) façade with
a centrally located, segmentally-arched ground floor door opening (timber framed
transom above) and flanking segmentally-arched timber framed, 12 paned double
hung windows, three window openings on the first floor,
stone ground floor
window sills and brick first floor window sills, rear segmentally-arched ground
floor door opening at the west
end, with a four panelled timber door and
transom, two rear timber framed segmentally-arched window openings with timber
framed twelve
paned double hung windows and brick sills, timber framed 12 paned
double hung windows on the north and south elevations, three face
brick chimneys
with simple corbelled tops, face brick wall construction and the corrugated
sheet metal profile roof cladding. (Criterion
(i) The issue
The issue is whether the Statement of Significance
adequately reflects the full heritage significance of the place.
(ii) The exhibited Amendment
The exhibited Amendment proposes to apply the
Heritage Overlay (HO307) to
, located at 179 Donnellans Road,
Millbrook. The Amendment identifies the property as being of local historical
and aesthetic significance
(Criteria A and E). It proposes to apply solar
energy system controls and includes the dwelling and its setting as the primary
of significance.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
The submitter supported application of the Heritage
Overlay but raised concerns that the Statement of Significance does not
reflect the heritage significance of the place. Specifically, the
submitter considered:
there should be
a stronger reference to the dwelling in its broader farming context
the site was
selected for its fertile volcanic soils and high-water table which influenced
the farm’s viability
the dwelling was
designed to accommodate live-in servants with a basement, ground and first
passive drainage system that lowers the water table and keeps the basement dry
that is of technical and scientific significance.
there are other
farm buildings on the property that contribute to the broader farming
The submitter recommended the following elements should be
included the Heritage Overlay:
finishes, including remnants of limewash layers on external brick walls
internal wall
and joinery surfaces in ground floor hall and rooms, reportedly painted in a
tinted limewash and traditional oil paint
on the associated joinery
graffiti on walls of upstairs rooms by children of the Clifford family (circa
basement wall
and ceiling treatments (reportedly lime render and lath and plaster)
the earthenware
drainage system keeping water levels down in the raised basement
mature trees,
including a row of four mature Oak trees
history implications of the presence of servants’ quarters in the raised
basement with a separate staircase, and
their role in illustrating the domestic
hierarchy of the period.
In response to this submission, Council
commissioned the
Review which was completed by Ms Schmeder and
Annabel Lyon. This included a site inspection, comparative analysis and
of the internal finishes, layout, construction techniques and
landscape features. Based on this review, Council considered
retained a rare level of intactness and integrity and that additional
controls were warranted.
Council supported the following changes to the Citation and Statement of
Significance for
description of the terracotta pipeline and basement drainage system to the
heritage citation.
Apply internal
alteration controls to the layout on all three levels, window and door joinery,
masonry skirtings, fireplace mantles,
pencilled graffiti on the wall of the
first- floor central north room, and in the two-ground floor front rooms also
plaster cornices,
papier mâché ceiling centres, oil paint on
joinery and skirtings and paint on walls and ceilings.
description of the internal features in regard to Criterion E and add Criterion
B (rarity) to the “why” and “how”
in the statement of
significance.
Apply external
paint controls to the limewash on the external brickwork of the building. Add a
description of the external limewash
in regard to Criterion E and add Criterion
B (rarity) to the “why” and “how” in the statement of
significance.
No change in
relation to the associated outbuildings noting that the property (where these
outbuildings are now located) did not form
part of the exhibited Amendment and
is therefore out of scope.
Tree controls be
applied to the mature Oak trees and the mature pear, apple and plum trees, with
a description of the early fruit
trees and row of English Oak trees to be added
in regard to Criterion A in the statement of significance.
changes are shown in the Day 1 documentation in Appendix C.
(iv) Discussion and conclusion
is an impressive building, and the
Panel acknowledges the steps the submitter has taken to ensure its ongoing
protection. The heritage
significance of this place is not a contested matter.
The further detail provided by the submitter and that prepared by Council
enabled a more thorough assessment to be completed through the Oakvale
The Panel supports the updates to citation, Statement of Significance and
Heritage Overlay schedule.
(v) Recommendations
The Panel recommends:
the Citation and Statement of Significance for 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook
(HO307) to provide additional detail as shown
in Appendix C.
the Heritage Overlay schedule for 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook (HO307), as
shown in Appendix C to:
a) add external paint controls for the remnant
external limewash on brickwork.
b) add internal alteration controls for the
layout on all three levels, window and door joinery, masonry skirtings,
fireplace mantles,
pencilled graffiti on the wall of the first floor central
north room, and in the two ground-floor front rooms also plaster cornices,
papier mâché ceiling centres, oil paint on joinery and skirtings,
and paint on walls and ceilings.
c) add tree controls for the row of four mature
English Oak Trees and mature pear, apple and plum trees.
11 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook (HO310)
Exhibited Statement
of Significance
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
What is significant?
The Pines, 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook constructed c.1896 is
significant.
Elements that contribute to the significance of the place include: single
storey hipped roof forms, return post-supported verandah,
projecting early rear
gabled addition on the north side, corrugated sheet metal roof cladding, timber
weatherboard wall cladding,
three face brick chimneys, modest eaves with paired
timber brackets and roundels and panelling between, front timber framed doorway
with a panelled timber door and sidelights and highlights, paired and single
timber framed double hung windows with moulded timber
architraves and timber
window sills, stop chamfered verandah posts, timber bargeboards to the gable end
and the gable infill (panelling
and timber battening) to the early gabled
addition. The mature Cypress and other exotic trees at the front of the property
also contribute
to the setting.
How is it significant?
The Pines, 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook, is of local historical and
representative significance to the Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
The Pines, 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook, has historical significance for
its associations with second generation Irish Catholic farmers
who resided and
cultivated the land from the late 19th century, following on from their
forebears who had seen the potential in the
rich soil for agricultural and
grazing farms at Millbrook in the early 1860s. The Pines appears to have been
built in 1896 as the
family home of Thomas James and Minnie Sullivan, the
property having originally been part of a larger farming estate of Thomas’
father, Edmund Sullivan. It continued under the ownership of the Sullivan
family until at least the late 20th century, having been
farmed by three
generations of the one family. (Criterion A)
The Pines, 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook, is a representative, moderately
intact example of a small number of surviving Late Victorian
styled farm
dwellings in the Millbrook and Gordon area constructed in the late 19th and very
early 20th centuries. Although altered
and extended at the rear, the original
Late Victorian design qualities are clearly discernible when viewed from the
front, including
the hipped roof forms, return verandah, brick chimneys,
construction, windows and front door, and detailing. The mature Cypress
other exotic trees contribute to the front setting of the place. (Criterion
(i) The issue
The issue is whether the Heritage Overlay should be
applied to the property.
(ii) The exhibited Amendment
The exhibited Amendment proposes to apply the
Heritage Overlay (HO310) to the property known as ‘The Pines’,
52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook. The Amendment identifies the place as
being of local historical and representative significance (Criteria
A and D) and
proposes to apply solar energy system controls and tree controls (for mature
exotic trees adjacent to the main dwelling
(iii) Evidence and submissions
A submitter objected to application of the Heritage
Overlay as it had been in the family since the 1880’s and had been
thoughtfully
renovated and extended several times. The submitter questioned
whether the property retains sufficient heritage value given the
changes made
over the years.
The submitter referred to a wrap-around verandah that had been removed in the
1950’s, removal of several rooms to the south
of the dwelling as examples
of changes that diminished its heritage significance. The submitter was
concerned that the “
family cannot be trusted to look after the
could not see any upside for ourselves in the
imposition of a Heritage Overlay on our property.
Ms Schmeder confirmed “
that the dwelling retains sufficient external
intactness to warrant inclusion in the Heritage Overlay, even though it has
some additions.
” She noted:
the original
circa 1896 dwelling is clearly identifiable, with its hipped roof and convex
return verandah
the projecting
gabled bay on the north side appears to be an early addition, consistent with
Edwardian or early interwar design
photographs from 1976 and current mapping confirm the survival of the original
footprint and several outbuildings.
Ms Schmeder gave evidence that
at least two outbuildings on site were constructed prior to 1976 that may
correspond to the early farm
outbuildings recorded in 1913. She recommended the
early outbuildings be added to the Statement of Significance.
Council did not support the reference to the outbuildings as this had not
been confirmed by an onsite inspection.
Council acknowledged the “
longstanding ownership of the property by
the family and the care taken in maintaining and upgrading the home.
Council considered sufficient evidence had been gathered from a public realm
inspection to demonstrate the place has local
heritage significance as a Late
Victorian farmhouse. Contributory elements are:
single-storey
hipped roof forms
post-supported verandah
projecting early
rear gabled addition
corrugated sheet
metal roof cladding
weatherboard wall cladding
three face brick
timber elements including brackets, roundels, bargeboards, and infill
As some tree removal had occurred on site and the three
Himalayan Pines and trees in the front setback have been retained Council
supported the use of an aerial photo in the Statement of Significance to confirm
the location of these important trees.
(iv) Discussion and conclusion
The Panel accepts that there has been a long family
association with the place and that changes over the years seem to have been
sympathetic
to the original form. Trust or good stewardship of the place is not
relevant to whether the Heritage Overlay should be applied.
PPN01 sets out the
relevant criteria upon which threshold must be judged and the need for at least
one criteria to be met for local
heritage significance to be established.
Heritage significance has only been established by an inspection from the
public realm primarily before but also during the Hearing
inspection. However,
the lack of access to the place is not a justification to not apply heritage
controls. The Panel considers
the desk top research, forms a reasonable basis
to conclude the place meets threshold for local significance for Criteria A and
Council, Ms Schmeder and the author of the Stage 2A Review did not have the
opportunity to confirm the potential removal of the wrap-around
verandah and
other changes that have been made to the dwelling that may have impacted
heritage significance. At this stage none
of the alleged alterations or level
of change could be confirmed.
The Panel supports the use of an aerial photo in the Statement of
Significance to accurately identify the trees that have heritage
significance.
(v) Recommendation
The Panel recommends:
the Statement of Significance for 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook (HO310) to
include an aerial photo to identify the trees that
have heritage
significance.
12 The Incorporated Document
(i) The issue
issue is whether the
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places
Incorporated Plan Permit Exemptions
(May 2021) should be amended.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
There were no submissions received in relation to
the Incorporated Document. However, Ms Schmeder provided evidence that the
demolition, removal or alteration of a building that is
not identified as a Significant feature of the heritage place
result in the unintended loss of early buildings such as cottages and farm
outbuildings that were not subject to onsite
inspection during the Stage 2A
While she acknowledged exemptions were similar to other municipal examples,
Ms Schmeder recommended the exemption be revised to apply
only to buildings
identified as a non-contributory feature
” of the heritage
place. This would ensure that unassessed elements are not inadvertently
Council did not support this change to the Amendment and would consider this
as part of a future change to the document, noting that it could have
further-reaching consequences for properties specified within
tables 1, 2 and 3
within the document, which were not the subject of submissions in response to
the exhibited Amendment.
(iii) Discussion and conclusion
The Panel supports the approach of Council to this
suggested change. It was not part of the exhibited Amendment, and its inclusion
may result in other unintended consequences for those landowners that did not
make a submission to the Amendment.
Appendix A Document list
Description
Provided by
DEECA late submission
Minister’s authorisation letter
West Moorabool Shire Heritage Study Stage 1
Moorabool Shire Council (Council)
Panel Directions and Hearing Timetable (version 1)
Planning Panels Victoria (PPV)
Draft site inspection map and schedule
Panel Directions and Hearing Timetable (version 2)
Council Part A submission and appendices
Expert witness statement of Natica Schmeder
Late request by submitter to present at Hearing
Tom Sullivan
Panel Directions and Hearing Timetable (version 3)
Day 1 version of documents
Site inspection map and schedule
Jonathon Halls
Tom Sullivan
Council Part B Submission
Appendix B Planning context
B:1 Planning
policy framework
Council submitted that the Amendment is
supported by various clauses in the Planning Policy Framework, which the Panel
has summarised
Victorian planning objectives
The Amendment will implement section 4(1)(d) of the
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(the Act) to:
conserve and
enhance those buildings, areas or other places which are of scientific,
aesthetic, architectural or historical interest,
or otherwise of special
cultural value
balance the
present and future interests of all Victorians.
Planning Policy Framework
The Amendment supports:
(Neighbourhood character) which seeks to recognise, support and
protect neighbourhood character, cultural identity, and sense of
(Heritage conservation) which seeks to ensure the conservation of
places of heritage significance. Relevant strategies are:
Identify, assess
and document places of natural and cultural heritage significance as a basis for
their inclusion in the planning
Provide for the
protection of natural heritage sites and man-made resources and the maintenance
of ecological processes and biological
Provide for the
conservation and enhancement of those places which are of, aesthetic,
archaeological, architectural, cultural, scientific,
significance.
appropriate development that respects places with identified heritage
Retain those
elements that contribute to the importance of the heritage place.
Encourage the
conservation and restoration of contributory elements.
appropriate setting and context for heritage places is maintained or
relevant planning strategies and policies
for Victoria
Plan for Victoria
contains several
“pillars”, one of which is Pillar 3 – Great Places, Suburbs
and Towns. Under the enabling statement
for heritage protection it states:
We’ll preserve Victoria’s rich and diverse cultural heritage by
protecting significant sites and precincts.
heritage strategy
Council’s Heritage Strategy seeks to
promote the identification and protection of heritage values by providing
direction within
four themes:
(identifying, assessing and documenting heritage places)
(securing statutory protection for significant places, developing
policy/guidelines to assist decision making, appropriate
management)
(incentives, advisory services, financial assistance)
Communicating
and promoting (measures to raise awareness and appreciation of local
The Heritage Strategy also identifies further actions
broadly relevant to the Amendment, including:
undertaking a
gaps analysis of heritage places without heritage protection to identify
geographic and thematic gaps, as well as anomalies
within existing Heritage
Overlays, such as missing citations or incorrect curtilages (short term)
developing a
program to protect places of heritage significance identified through the gaps
analysis and implementation through further
planning scheme amendments (medium
completing a
Thematic Environmental History for the Shire (medium term)
seeking funding
to progress further heritage studies on a staged basis for the balance of sites
identified in the Stage 1 and 2 studies
B:3 Planning
scheme provisions
The Heritage Overlay purposes are:
To implement the
State Planning Policy Framework and the Local Planning Policy Framework,
including the Municipal Strategic Statement
and local planning policies.
To conserve and
enhance heritage places of natural or cultural significance.
To conserve and
enhance those elements which contribute to the significance of heritage
To ensure that
development does not adversely affect the significance of heritage places.
To conserve
specifically identified heritage places by allowing a use that would otherwise
be prohibited if this will demonstrably
assist with the conservation of the
significance of the heritage place.
The Heritage Overlay requires a
planning permit to demolish, subdivide, build or carry out works. The Heritage
Overlay enables its
Schedule to specify additional controls for specific trees,
painting previously unpainted surfaces, internal alterations and an incorporated
plan (which may exempt buildings and works and other changes from requiring a
planning permit). The Schedule may also identify if
a place can be considered
for uses that are otherwise prohibited, subject to a planning permit.
B:4 Ministerial
Directions, Planning Practice Notes and guides
Ministerial Directions
The Explanatory Report discusses how the Amendment
meets the relevant requirements of:
Ministerial
Direction 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments)
Ministerial
Direction (The Form and Content of Planning Schemes pursuant to section 7(5) of
The Act) – referred to as Ministerial
Directions 7(5) in this
That discussion is not repeated here.
Planning Practice Note 1 (Applying the Heritage Overlay),
August 2018
Planning Practice Note 1 provides guidance about
using the Heritage Overlay. It states that the Heritage Overlay should be
to, among other places:
Places identified in a local heritage study, provided the significance of the
place can be shown to justify the application of the
Planning Practice Note 1 specifies that documentation for each heritage place
needs to include a Statement of Significance that clearly
establishes the
importance of the place and addresses the heritage criteria. It recognises the
following model criteria (the Hercon
criteria) that have been adopted for
assessing the value of a heritage place:
Criterion A:
Importance to the course or pattern of our cultural or
natural history (historical significance).
Criterion B:
Possession of uncommon, rare or endangered aspects of our
cultural or natural history (rarity).
Criterion C:
Potential to yield information that will contribute to an
understanding of our cultural or natural history (research potential).
Criterion D:
Importance in demonstrating the principal characteristics
of a class of cultural or natural places or environments
(representativeness).
Criterion E:
Importance in exhibiting particular aesthetic
characteristics (aesthetic significance).
Criterion F:
Importance in demonstrating a high degree of creative or
technical achievement at a particular period (technical significance).
Criterion G:
Strong or special association with a particular community
or cultural group for social, cultural or spiritual reasons. This includes
significance of a place to Indigenous peoples as part of their continuing and
developing cultural traditions (social significance).
Criterion H:
Special association with the life or works of a person,
or group of persons, of importance in our history (associative
significance).
Practitioner’s Guide
A Practitioner’s Guide to Victorian
Planning Schemes
(Practitioner’s Guide) sets out key guidance to
assist practitioners when preparing planning scheme provisions. The guidance
seeks to ensure:
the intended
outcome is within scope of the objectives and power of the PE Act and has a
sound basis in strategic planning policy
a provision is
necessary and proportional to the intended outcome and applies the Victoria
Planning Provisions in a proper manner
a provision is
clear, unambiguous and effective in achieving the intended
Appendix C Panel
preferred version of the Day 1 documentation
Proposed C085moor
SCHEDULE TO CLAUSE 43.01 HERITAGE OVERLAY
Proposed C085moor
Application requirements
The following application requirements apply to an application under Clause
43.01, in addition to those specified elsewhere in the
planning scheme and must
accompany an application, as appropriate, to the satisfaction of the responsible
statement assessing the impact of the proposal on the heritage place. The
statement should identify the contributory elements
of the heritage place and
how the proposal impacts on these elements.
For applications
where demolition is proposed on the basis of the condition of a building, a
written statement by a suitably qualified
consultant assessing the structural
condition of the building and whether or not any defects can be repaired or
Plans prepared
to scale including the following:
- Site plan
showing all structures affected by the proposal.
- Demolition
plan which shows any building or tree proposed for full or partial
demolition.
- Elevation
plans prepared to an appropriate scale.
schedule of finishes, materials and colours for the proposed
development.
ground to be excavated or disturbed.
Proposed C085moor
Heritage places
The requirements of this overlay apply to both the heritage place and its
associated land.
Heritage place
External paint controls apply?
Internal alteration controls apply?
Tree controls apply?
Solar energy system controls apply?
Outbuildings or fences not exempt
under Clause
Included on the Victorian Heritage Register under the
Heritage Act
Prohibited uses permitted?
Aboriginal heritage place?
Bacchus Marsh
Avenue of Honour
Bacchus Marsh Road
Elm Trees along Bacchus Marsh Road
Outside Avenue of Honour Bacchus Marsh Road
375 Bacchus Marsh Road (Avenue of Honour)
Saint Patrick’s House Broadlands Estate
437 (Part Lot A TP6085), Bacchus Marsh Road (Avenue of Honour)
Dwelling “Stone Villa”
4 Bennett Street
12 Boyd Street
22 Candeloro Street
Dwelling “Carisbrook”
18 Crook Street
Dwelling “Lorraine”
4 Dugdale Street
12 Ellerslie Court
Yes Ref No H592
6 Gisborne Road
Yes Ref No H503
Bacchus Marsh Express Office and Printing Works
8 Gisborne Road and 8 Church Street
Yes Ref No H504
10 Church Street
Yes Ref No H505
Saint Andrew’s Uniting Church and Parish Centre halls
12 Gisborne Road and 9 Lerderderg Street
Yes (church only)
Holy Trinity Anglican Church, Parish Hall, Memorial Lawn and
21 Gisborne Road
Yes (church only)
Dwelling, Webster Brothers Yard and the “Iron
14 Graham Street
21 Graham Street
22 Graham Street
Former P.S. Carey Motors
4 – 6 Grant Street
Former Theatre
5 Grant Street
House and Shop
8 and 8A Grant Street
Shop and Dwelling
10 and 10A Grant Street
Former Hospital and Surgery “Ashley”
18 Grant Street
Bacchus Marsh & Melton Memorial Hospital
29 – 35 Grant Street
37 Grant Street
Yes Ref No H263
Former Shop and Dwelling
48 and 48A Grant Street
Shop and Office
60 and 62 Grant Street
Lerderderg River Engineering Works
Holts Lane to Whelans Road
14 and 16 Lerderderg Street
Caroline Chisholm Society (former dwelling)
15 Lerderderg Street
29 Lerderderg Street
42 Lerderderg Street
48 Lerderderg Street
Former Shire of Bacchus Marsh Community Services Centre (former
54 Lerderderg Street
Bacchus Marsh Primary School No. 28
56 Lerderderg Street
Saint Bernard’s Church, Presbytery and Parish Centre
63 Lerderderg Street
Yes (Church only)
69 Lerderderg Street
80 Lerderderg Street
Lot 2 TP328565 Lerderderg Street
Former AMF Officers Shed
89 Lerderderg Street
Pioneer Women’s Avenue (Part of road reserve)
Main Street (between Clarinda Street and Water Tank reserve)
Dwelling “Banool”
51 Main Street
Dwelling, Garden and Former Office (Theo van Alkemade, Estate
70 – 72 Main Street
Dwelling “Pentland” and Garden
85 and 87 Main Street
Dwelling and Garden
88 – 90 Main Street
Shop (Former Motor Garage)
97 Main Street
Former Blacksmith’s Cottage and Shop
100 – 102 Main Street
Yes Ref No H462
Shop and Dwelling (above)
105 – 105A Main Street and 2 Grant Street (Lot 1 and 2
112 and 114 Main Street
Hotel (Court House Hotel)
116 Main Street
Police Station and Old Lock Up
119 Main Street
Yes Ref No H1546
Court House
123 Main Street
Yes Ref No H1461
Former National Australia Bank and Dwelling
127 Main Street
Hotel (Flanagans Border Inn)
139 Main Street
144 Main Street
Former A.N.A Hall Branch 99
154 Main Street
South Africa War Memorial and Drinking Fountain
Outside 156 Main Street
Hotel (Young & Main) and stables
200 Main Street and 3 Young Street
Soldiers Memorial Hall and Former Mechanics Institute
203 and 207 Main Street
Bacchus Marsh Adult Education Centre “Dunglass”
229 Main Street
Dwelling “Ivison”
239 Main Street
Conifer Hedge and Windbreak
263 Main Street (Avenue of Honour)
Dwelling “Waratah”
267 Main Street (Avenue of Honour)
Dwelling “Sunnyside”
271 – 273 Main Street (Avenue of Honour)
The Manor House
28 – 32 Manor Street
Yes Ref No H264
Former Kelvin Grove Private Hospital
5B Millbank Street
Saint Bernard’s Parish Primary School, Chapel, Convent and
9 Patterson Street
Dwelling “Baronscourt”
5 Pilmer Street
13 Sydney Street
Former “Woolpack Inn” including former Stables and
sign-writing
6 Woolpack Road
sign-writing only)
Dwelling “The White Cottage”
16 Young Street
28 Young Street
Fisken Street Heritage Precinct
78, 80 & 81-85 Atkinson Street and 1-29 & 2-24 Fisken Street and 70
Steiglitz Street
Incorporated Plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Fisken Street Heritage Precinct, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – Street trees (Fisken Street), Aleppo Pine in McLean Reserve and
Memorial Pin Oak (outside 25 Fisken Street)
Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct
91-97 Steiglitz Street
Incorporated Plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
31 Atkinson Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
31 Atkinson Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
45 Atkinson Street
ncorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and
Places Incorporated Plan Permit Exemptions
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
45 Atkinson Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
55 Atkinson Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
55 Atkinson Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
“Ballanee” Homestead
Ballanee Road
360 Ballan-Egerton Road
Statement of Significance:
Hunterston, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Yes – stone outhouse
“Carween” Homestead
Carween Lane
Ballan Recreation Reserve
1-5 Cowie Street
Statement of Significance:
Ballan Recreation Reserve, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Yes – mature Cypress
18 Duncan Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
18 Duncan Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
35 Edols Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated
Permit Exemptions
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
35 Edols Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Dwelling & Former Bake House
30 Fisken Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Dwelling & Former Bake House, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – former stone bake house only
Yes – former stone bake house only
Old Ballan Cemetery
5112 Geelong-Ballan Road
Statement of Significance:
Old Ballan Cemetery, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Ballan New Cemetery
, TOWNSHIP OF BALLAN,
Gosling Street
Statement of Significance:
Ballan New Cemetery, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Yes – former octagonal robing room and gabled sexton’s building
34 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
34 Inglis Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
36 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
36 Inglis Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
White Thorn
42 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
White Thorn, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
47 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Girraween, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
56 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
56 Inglis Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
63 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
63 Inglis Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
65 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
65 Inglis Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
St. Paul's Uniting Church Complex
73 Inglis Street
Statement of Significance:
St. Paul's Uniting Church Complex, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
77 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Everleigh, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
78 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
78 Inglis Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Former Dr Salter's Medical Rooms
81 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Former Dr Salter's Medical Rooms, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
88 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Lucerne, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
90 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Lea Hurst, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Former Masonic Hall
92 Inglis Street
Statement of Significance:
Former Masonic Hall, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
The Mill Cottage
96 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
The Mill Cottage, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
St. Brigid's Roman Catholic Church and Gates
98-100 Inglis Street
Statement of Significance:
St. Brigid's Roman Catholic Church and Gates, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – metal entrance gates fronting Inglis Street
Invergowrie, fence and hedge
101 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Invergowrie, fence and hedge, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – front timber picket fence along western boundary portion
122 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
The Avenue, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Former Saddlery Store
123 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Former Saddlery Store, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
War Memorial Fountain
Outside of 125 Inglis Street
Statement of
Significance:
War Memorial Fountain, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Post Office
125 Inglis Street
Former Chambers' Red House Drapery Store
1/130 and 2/130 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Former Chambers' Red House Drapery Store, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Ballan Hotel
136 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Ballan Hotel, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
140 Inglis Street
Ballan Mechanics’ Institute & Free Library
143 Inglis Street
Statement of Significance:
Ballan Mechanics' Institute & Free Library, Statement of
Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – front wing and main hall only
Yes – front wing and main hall only
Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms & Bakery
146 and 146a Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms & Bakery, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Former Ballan Times Printing Office
150 Inglis Street
Statement of Significance:
Former Ballan Times Printing Office, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Commercial Hotel
151 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Commercial Hotel, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Daly’s Tea Rooms
157 Inglis Street
Ballan Health Care (formerly “Annean”)
164 Inglis Street
Statement of Significance:
Ballan Health Care (formerly “Annean”), Statement of
Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
1/169 and 2/169 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Mossfield, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Former Police Residence, Stables & Lock Ups
172 & 174-176 Inglis Street
Statement of Significance:
Former Police Residence, Stables & Lock Ups, 172 & 174-176
Inglis Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Yes – stables, timber lockup and brick lockup
Westcott, Stables and Trees
188 Inglis Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Westcott, Stables and Trees, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – English Oaks and English Elms
Yes – timber stables only
437 Old Melbourne Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Hadham, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
1001 Old Melbourne Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Llandeilo, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – all timber and stone outbuildings
Stirling Park
27 Shaws Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Stirling Park, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Yes – Redwood and Cypress and Privet hedge
St. John's Anglican Church
56 Simpson Street
Statement of Significance:
St. John's Anglican Church, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – mature Monterey Cypress
Yes – bell tower,
stone gate piers and associated
metal gates
39 Steiglitz Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Mayfield, 39 Steiglitz Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Former Court House
47 Steiglitz Street
59 Steiglitz Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Ramsgate, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
63 Steiglitz Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Longley, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – outbuildings attached to the rear
“Ballark” Homestead
Ballan-Meredith Road
Former Balliang Primary School
1272 Bacchus Marsh-Balliang Road
Saint George’s Balliang Anglican Church
1281 Bacchus Marsh-Balliang Road
“The Gables” Farmhouse
1419 Bacchus Marsh-Balliang Road
51 Dukelows Road
99 McMahons Road
Balliang East
3105 Geelong-Bacchus Marsh Road
Dry Stone Wall
Geelong-Bacchus Marsh Road
Barry’s Reef
Guggenheimer Historical Cottage
Greendale-Trentham Road
Martin Street Heritage Precinct
1 Golden Point Road and Allot. 2 Sec. C, PARISH OF BLACKWOOD & 11, 13,
24, 23, 25, 26-28, 29-31 Martin Street
Incorporated Plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Martin Street Heritage Precinct, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Yes - Algerian Oak at Allot. 2 Sec. C, PARISH OF BLACKWOOD
Prayer Hill Heritage Precinct
54, 60, 72-74, 80 Byers Road and 24,
28, Allot. 27B, 27C & 27F Sec. A, PARISH OF
BLACKWOOD & Lot 1 TP902461 Golden Point Road and 2, 8 Martin Street and
3, 5, 10 Prayer Hill Lane and War Memorial and Stamper
Battery (intersection of
Byres Road & Martin Street)
Incorporated Plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Prayer Hill Heritage Precinct, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – Bunya Bunya x 2 at 10 Prayer Hill Lane, exotic trees, 28 Golden
Simmons Reef Road Heritage Precinct
1069, 1071, 1077 Greendale-Trentham Road and Allot. 35B Sec. B, PARISH
BLACKWOOD & 4 Recreation Reserve Road and Allot. 25F Sec. B, PARISH
BLACKWOOD & 6, 7-11 Simmons Reef Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Simmons Reef Road Heritage Precinct, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – Street trees only (Pin Oak and Golden Elm)
Whalebone Road Heritage Precinct
3, 10 Richards Road and 11, 20, 21, 22, 26-30,
32, 40 Whalebone Road
Statement of Significance:
Whalebone Road Heritage Precinct, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
4 Albert Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
4 Albert Street, Blackwood, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Rock Cut Tunnel, ford and water race
Break Neck Gully, via Ambler Lane Track
Blackwood Cemetery
35 Byres Road
Statement of Significance:
Blackwood Cemetery, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Former Police Quarters & Court House
14 Clarendon Street
Statement of Significance:
Former Police Quarters & Court House, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Former Royal Mail Hotel
Golden Point Road
Dwelling and Water Race
15 Golden Point Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Dwelling and Water Race, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Blackwood Mineral Springs
41 Golden Point Road
Statement of Significance:
Blackwood Mineral Springs, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Yes – rendered masonry walls to springs pavilions only
Yes – Monterey Pine x 2
111 Golden Point Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
111 Golden Point Road, Blackwood, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Blackwood & District Historical Society (former Police
Allot. 2001, PARISH OF BLACKWOOD, Martin
Statement of Significance:
Blackwood & District Historical Society (former Police Stables),
Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Broken Back Mine, via O'Briens Crossing
O'Briens Road
Black Snake Mine, via O'Briens Crossing
O'Briens Road
5 Old Golden Point Road East
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Hillside, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Garden of Saint Erth
Simmons Reef Road
Mine Managers House
Simmons Reef Road
Blackwood Cricket & Recreation Reserve
Recreation Reserve Road
Statement of Significance:
Blackwood Cricket & Recreation Reserve, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – Monterey Pine trees
Yes – stone gate piers
6 Terrill Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
6 Terrill Street, Blackwood, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Wheeler’s Tramway
Wombat State Forest Lerderderg Road
Yes Ref No H2015
“Bungeel Tap” Homestead
Egerton-Bungeel Tap Road
“Emily Park” Homestead
Hawthorn Farm
145 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Hawthorn Farm, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – Hawthorn hedges
St. Michael's Catholic Church Complex
186 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Statement of Significance:
St. Michael's Catholic Church Complex, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – Italian Cypress trees adjacent to the grotto only
Bridge Hotel
190 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Bridge Hotel, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Bungaree Mechanics’ Institute & Free Library
Lot 3 TP163133 and 221 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Statement of Significance:
Bungaree Mechanics’ Institute & Free Library, Statement of
Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
231 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
231 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
243 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
243 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Former Morning Star Hotel
248 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Incorporated
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Former Morning Star Hotel, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Former Police Residence & Lock Up
255 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Former Police Residence & Lock Up, 255 Bungaree-Wallace Road,
Bungaree, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Yes - Lock Up
St. John's Anglican Church Complex
309 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Statement of Significance:
St. John's Anglican Church Complex, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – Parish Hall
Former Bungaree State School No. 1960
323 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Statement of Significance:
Former Bungaree State School No.1960, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Former London Bank of Australia
323 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Statement of Significance:
Former London Bank of Australia, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Bungaree State Primary School No. 1960
348 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Statement of Significance:
Bungaree State Primary School No.1960, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
447 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Sunny Rise, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Yes – mature Golden Cypress trees and mature exotic trees near main
Yes – original dwelling & associated gabled outbuildings, dry
stone walls
Dwelling and Canary Island Palm
519 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Dwelling and Canary Island Palm, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – Canary Island Palm
196 Lesters Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Mayfield, 196 Lesters Road, Bungaree, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – mature exotic trees in front garden and along driveway
100 Murphys Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
100 Murphys Road, Bungaree, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Clare Place
64 Torpys Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Clare Place, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Yes – hedges to front and side boundaries to Clare Place
Yes – original timber homestead ruin further south of Clare Place,
fronting Torpys Road
Antimony Mines
Antimony Mine Road
Goodmans Creek gold sites and Darley Quarry
Bacchus Marsh-Gisborne Road
Coimadai Primary School No 716
86 Bennetts Lane
Lime Kilns- Merrimu Reservoir
CA 75, 76, 76A 76B and 80, Parish Coimadai, Gisborne Road
Darley Refractories Pty Ltd
58 Grey Street
70 Lerderderg Gorge Road
Farmhouse “Morven” including garden and driveway avenue of
325 Lerderderg Gorge Road
377 Lerderderg Gorge Road
Former Presbytery
2 Wellington Street
Former Brind’s Distillery
2830 Old Melbourne Road
Yes Ref No H1013
Former Australian Beam Wireless Transmitting Station
4549 Geelong-Ballan Road
Yes Ref No H2277
Lady Northcote Recreation Camp
1273-1327 Glenmore Road
Yes Ref No H2167
St. Patrick's Catholic Church & Presbytery
10 Careys Road & 5 Boundary Road
Statement of Significance:
St. Patrick's Catholic Church & Presbytery, Statement of
Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – Bhutan Cypress hedges and mature specimens of Cypress
Gordon Primary School
1 Dicker Street
Statement of Significance:
Gordon Primary School, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Gordon Railway Station
Gordon-Egerton Road
Yes Ref No H1564
35 Main Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
35 Main Street, Gordon, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
46 Main Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
46 Main Street, Gordon, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
56-60 Main Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
56-60 Main Street, Gordon, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Former London Chartered Bank
64 Main Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Former London Chartered Bank, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Gordon Post Office
67 Main Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Gordon Post Office, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Gordon Public Hall and former Mechanics’ Institute
68 Main Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Gordon Public Hall and former Mechanics’ Institute, Statement of
Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Former Hotel
69 Main Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Former Hotel, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Dwelling & Outbuilding
71 Main Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Dwelling & Outbuilding, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – gabled outbuilding east of the dwelling
Dwelling & Former Store & Bakery
82 Main Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Dwelling & Former Store & Bakery, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
General Store
90 Main Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
General Store, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Gordon Hotel
92 Main Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Gordon Hotel, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
New Gordon Cemetery
, PARISH OF MOORABOOL
WEST, Old Melbourne Road
Statement of Significance:
New Gordon Cemetery, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Former St. Mark's Anglican Church
Lot 1 TP838171, Old Melbourne Road
Statement of Significance:
Former St. Mark's Anglican Church, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – mature Monterey Cypress tree in the south-east corner of the
St. Patrick's Catholic School & Convent
1558 and 1564 Old Melbourne Road
Statement of Significance:
St. Patrick's Catholic School & Convent, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Kerrit Bareet Cemetery (Gordons Burial Ground)
, PARISH OF KERRIT
BAREET, Old Western Highway
Statement of Significance:
Kerrit Bareet Cemetery (Gordons Burial Ground), Statement of
Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Portland Flat Road Bridge
Portland Flat Road
Yes Ref No H2054
31-33 Russell Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
31-33 Russell Street, Gordon, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Dwelling & Former Store
32 Russell Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Dwelling & Former Store, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Shuters Cottage
LaCote Road
“Glen Pedder” Homestead
Myrniong-Greendale Road
Former State School No 918
Napoleon Street
Anglican Church
Prince Street
“Ingliston” Homestead
Ingliston Road
Railway Viaduct, Bridge and Embankment
Ingliston Road
Ingliston Bank railway cutting and piles of remnant railway cutting
construction basalt
Iron Bark Road
Our Lady Help of Christians Church
309 Myrniong-Korobeit Road
Lal Lal Heritage Precinct
Allot. 5 Sec.11, TOWNSHIP OF LAL LAL, 391,
410, 412, 421, 424 Clarendon-Lal Lal Road and 5 Eaglesons Road and 10 Lal
Lal Falls Road and Allot. 4 Sec. 10A, TOWNSHIP OF LAL LAL,
Parkers Road and 8
&12 Vaughan Street
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Lal Lal Heritage Precinct, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Yes – Avenue of Honour and Memorial Trees (424 Clarendon-Lal Lal
Lal Lal Iron Mine and Smelting Works
Iron Mine Road
Yes Ref No H1759
389 Yendon-Lal Lal Road
Yes Ref No H1697
Long Forest
Baker House
305 – 307 Long Forest Road
Yes Ref No H2118
Bridge over Djerriwarrh Creek
Western Highway (Disused section)
Yes Ref No H1658
Anthonys Cutting (surrounds of Djerriwarrh Bridge)
Western Highway
Maddingley General Cemetery
Cemetery Road off Griffith Street
Dethridge Irrigation Wheel and Water Channel
20, 22 and 24 Fisken Street
Dwelling “Naheehs”
40 Fisken Street
Brick Cottages
13 – 17 Franklin Street
Stoney’s Bridge Inn Hotel
59 Grant Street
Bacchus Marsh Secondary College
73 Grant Street
Maddingley Park and Memorial Gates
Corner of Grant and Station Streets
Yes (fence)
Former Maddingley No 1 Open Cut
37 South Maddingley Road
Bacchus Marsh Railway Station
Station Street
Dwelling and Cowan Cottage
18 Taverner Street
Osage Orange Avenue
22 Taverner Street
Bacchus Marsh Lawn Tennis Club Inc
(Former Maddingley Courthouse) Taverner Street
Chicory Kiln
30 Taverner Street
Yes Ref No H2326
Farmhouse “Blinkbonnie” and Dethridge Irrigation
176 Werribee Vale Road
Farmhouse “Vallence’s Farm”
289 Werribee Vale Road
360 Werribee Vale Road
Farmhouse “Errindale”
520 Werribee Vale Road
Former Market Pavilion Building
144 Woolpack Road
Hopetoun Cemetery
Bacchus Marsh Road
Yes Ref No H2059
Former W Symington House and Symington’s Brewery Industrial
Archaeological Site
705 Bacchus Marsh Road
Former Leahy’s Residence
735 Bacchus Marsh Road
Yes Ref No H907
Bacchus Marsh-Gisborne Road Bridge
Bacchus Marsh-Gisborne Road
Farmhouse “Lerderderg Park”, concrete silo and concrete
20 Lerderderg Park Road
Dwelling (former Djerriwarrh State School/ Djerriwarrh Creek
21 Lerderderg Park Road
179 Donnellans Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Yes – remnant external limewash on brickwork
Yes – layout on all three levels, original window and door joinery,
masonry skirtings, fireplace mantles, pencilled graffiti
on the wall of the
first floor central north room, and in the two ground-floor front rooms also
plaster cornices, papier mâché
ceiling centres, oil paint on
joinery and skirtings, and paint on walls and ceilings.
Yes – row of four (4) mature Oak trees and mature Pear, Apple and
Plum trees.
1787 Old Melbourne Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Woodlawn, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – outbuilding adjoining the south-west corner of the
Former Ryan Family Farm
91 Ryans Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Former Ryan Family Farm, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Yes – Atlas Cedar, Monkey Puzzle and Tulip tree
Yes – chimney stack only
52 Sullivans Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
The Pines, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – mature exotic trees adjacent to main dwelling only
Mount Doran
Rail Bridge and Embankment
Blue Bridge Road
Yes Ref No H1693
Mount Egerton
Former “The Pines” Dairy
Allot. H, PARISH OF BUNGAL, Ballan-Egerton Road
Statement of Significance:
Former “The Pines” Dairy, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – Canary Island Palm only
Christ Church Anglican Church
CA 12/14 Sec B, Parish Myrniong Hardy Street
Farmhouse “Woodlands”, windmills and landscape
229 Long Point Road
Incorporated plan:
HO182 Woodlands 229 Long Point Road, Myrniong Incorporated Plan (July
Avenue of Honour (WWI and WWII sections)
Main Road (Old Western Highway)
Myrniong Road Bridge
Main Road (Old Western Highway)
Plough Inn Hotel
17 Main Road
Dwelling (Former Police Station and Gaol)
29 Main Street
Dwelling “Girraween”
45 Main Street
Former Myrniong Hotel
55 Main Street
Milk Factory and Dwelling- Dairymen's Cooperative
61 Main Street
Dwelling “Millside”
90 Mt Blackwood Road
Mt Blackwood Hotel Ruins (Drury's Hotel)
Parish Blackwood, Mt Blackwood Road
Myrniong Primary School
13 Muddy Lane
Farmhouse “Clifton”
61 Muddy Lane
Uniting Church
Old Western Highway
Slab Hut Rosehill
Pentland Hills Rd
Former Hotel
Pykes Creek Road
Navigators Railway Bridge
Geelong-Ballarat Line
81 Browns Lane
Statement of significance:
Hill Farm, Statement of Significance, September 2022
Yes - brick and weatherboard outbuildings
“Nerowie” Outbuildings
52 Bucklers Road
Former Parwan South (Nerowie) State School No 4175 &
Mechanics’ Institute
Northeast corner of Parwan South and Nerowie Roads
Former Thelma Ross Memorial Church
70 Nerowie Road
Pentland Hills
Farmhouse “Hilton”
81 Condons Lane
Werribee Gorge Quarry
Bald Hill Quarry
Tramway Lane
Melbourne – Ballarat Railway Bridge
Balliang-Bacchus Marsh Road
565 Glenmore Road
Yes Ref No H265
Balance Greystones
565 Glenmore Road
Farmhouse “Willowbank”
44 Paces Lane
Former “Maryville” Stables
4 Erin Court
Statement of Significance:
Former “Maryville” Stables, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Farmhouse and tree
634 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Farmhouse and tree, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Yes – Monterey Cypress at front gate only
Former Holden's Chaff Mill Dwelling & Store
720 Bungaree-Wallace Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Former Holden's Chaff Mill Dwelling & Store, Statement of
Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Former Wallace Millbrook & District Factory & Creamery
10-24 Old Western Highway
Statement of Significance:
Former Wallace Millbrook & District Factory & Creamery Complex,
Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Wallace Masonic Temple
12 Westcotts Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Wallace Masonic Temple, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Former Wallace Methodist Church
30 Westcotts Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Former Wallace Methodist Church, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
97 Westcotts Road
Incorporated plan:
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Statement of Significance:
Wellwood, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
“Killarney”
Old Melbourne Road
Stables at Lal Lal House
Yendon-Egerton Road
Yaloak Estate Homestead
Ballan-Geelong Road
SCHEDULE TO CLAUSE 72.04 INCORPORATED DOCUMENTS
Incorporated documents
Proposed C085moor
Name of document
Introduced by:
4 Albert Street, Blackwood, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
31 Atkinson Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
45 Atkinson Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
55 Atkinson Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Australian Standard AS2021-2015, Acoustics – Aircraft Noise Intrusion
– Building Siting and Construction, Standards Australia
Bacchus Marsh Heritage Study, Statements of Significance (February
Ballan Health Care (formerly “Annean”), Statement of
Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Ballan Hotel, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Ballan Mechanics' Institute & Free Library, Statement of
Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Ballan New Cemetery, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms & Bakery, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Ballan Recreation Reserve, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Ballarat Line Upgrade Incorporated Document, August 2018
Blackwood & District Historical Society (former Police Stables),
Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Blackwood Cemetery, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Blackwood Cricket & Recreation Reserve, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Blackwood Mineral Springs, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Bridge Hotel, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Bungaree Mechanics’ Institute & Free Library, Statement of
Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Bungaree State Primary School No.1960, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
231 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
243 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Clare Place, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Commercial Hotel, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
18 Duncan Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Dwelling & Former Bake House, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Dwelling & Former Store & Bakery, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Name of document
Introduced by:
Dwelling & Former Store, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Dwelling & Outbuilding, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Dwelling and Canary Island Palm, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Dwelling and Water Race, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
35 Edols Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Everleigh, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Farmhouse and tree, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Fisken Street Heritage Precinct, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Former Ballan Times Printing Office, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Former Bungaree State School No.1960, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Former Chambers' Red House Drapery Store, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Former Dr Salter's Medical Rooms, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Former Holden's Chaff Mill Dwelling & Store, Statement of
Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Former Hotel, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Former London Bank of Australia, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Former London Chartered Bank, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Former “Maryville” Stables, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Former Masonic Hall, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Former Morning Star Hotel, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Former Police Quarters & Court House, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Former Police Residence, Stables & Lock Ups, 172 & 174-176
Inglis Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Former Police Residence & Lock Up, 255 Bungaree-Wallace Road,
Bungaree, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Former Ryan Family Farm, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Former Saddlery Store, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Former St. Mark's Anglican Church, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Former “The Pines” Dairy, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Former Wallace Methodist Church, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Former Wallace Millbrook & District Factory & Creamery Complex,
Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Name of document
Introduced by:
General Store, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Girraween, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May 2021)
111 Golden Point Road, Blackwood, Statement of Significance (Plan
Heritage, May 2021)
Gordon Hotel, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
Gordon Post Office, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
Gordon Primary School, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
Gordon Public Hall and former Mechanics’ Institute, Statement of
Significance (Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Hadham, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Hawthorn Farm, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
Hill Farm, Statement of Significance, September 2022
Hillside, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May 2021)
HO182 Woodlands 229 Long Point Road, Myrniong Incorporated Plan (July
Hospital Emergency Medical Services - Helicopter Flight Path Protection
Areas Incorporated Document, June 2017
Hunterston, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
34 Inglis Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
36 Inglis Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
56 Inglis Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
63 Inglis Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
65 Inglis Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
78 Inglis Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
Invergowrie, fence and hedge, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage,
Bareet Cemetery (Gordons Burial Ground), Statement of
Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Lal Lal Heritage Precinct, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
Lea Hurst, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Llandeilo, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Longley, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Lucerne, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Maddingley Spoil Processing Facility, October 2020
35 Main Street, Gordon, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
46 Main Street, Gordon, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
56-60 Main Street, Gordon, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage,
Name of document
Introduced by:
Martin Street Heritage Precinct, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Mayfield, 196 Lesters Road, Bungaree, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Mayfield, 39 Steiglitz Street, Ballan, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan Permit
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Mossfield, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
100 Murphys Road, Bungaree, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
New Gordon Cemetery, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Oakvale, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Old Ballan Cemetery, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May
Plans for the future development of the Western Freeway – titled
“Proposed Works Area” and dated 26/7/ 2000
Powerline Bushfire Safety Program - Native Vegetation Removal Code of
Practice, August 2016
Prayer Hill Heritage Precinct, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage,
Rail Gauge Standardisation Project, Integrated Approval Requirements,
December 2002
Rail Infrastructure Projects Ballarat Rail Corridor Deviation: Fibre
Optic Project, Integrated Approval Requirements (August 2003)
Ramsgate, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Restructure Plans – Blakeville, Old Wallace, Elaine North and
Rowsley (June 2000)
31-33 Russell Street, Gordon, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage,
Simmons Reef Road Heritage Precinct, Statement of Significance (Plan
Heritage, May 2021)
Sir Jack Brabham Park Stage 1 Concept Plan February 1998, Kinhill Pty
St. Brigid's Roman Catholic Church and Gates, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
St. John's Anglican Church Complex, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
St. John's Anglican Church, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
St. Michael's Catholic Church Complex, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
St. Patrick's Catholic Church & Presbytery, Statement of
Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
St. Patrick's Catholic School & Convent, Statement of Significance
(Plan Heritage, May 2021)
St. Paul's Uniting Church Complex, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Name of document
Introduced by:
Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct, Statement of Significance
Heritage, May 2021)
Stirling Park, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
Sunny Rise, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
6 Terrill Street, Blackwood, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage,
The Avenue, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
The Mill Cottage, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
The Pines, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Wallace Masonic Temple, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
War Memorial Fountain, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
Wellwood, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May 2021)
Westcott, Stables and Trees, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage,
Western Highway Realignment (Melton to Bacchus Marsh) Incorporated
Document, December 2009
Whalebone Road Heritage Precinct, Statement of Significance (Plan
Heritage, May 2021)
White Thorn, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May
Woodlawn, Statement of Significance (Plan Heritage, May 2021)
MOORABOOL SHIRE HERITAGE PRECINCTS AND PLACES INCORPORATED
PLAN PERMIT EXEMPTIONS
UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF CLAUSE 43.01 HERITAGE OVERLAY
Incorporated Document pursuant to
section 6(2)(j)
Planning and
Environment Act
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.0 INTRODUCTION 107
What is a permit exemption? 107
Places and Precincts to which the permit
exemption applies 107
How this document is set out 107
2.0 PERMIT EXEMPTIONS FOR HERITAGE
PRECINCTS 108
2.1 Permit exemptions for Non –
Contributory places within a heritage precinct 108
2.2 Permit exemptions for Contributory
or Significant Places within a heritage precinct 110
3.0 PERMIT EXEMPTIONS FOR INDIVIDUAL
HERITAGE PLACES 112
3.1 Individual heritage places in
residential/commercial areas 112
3.2 Individual heritage places in rural
DEFINITIONS 118
APPENDIX A – Precinct Maps
Fisken Street Heritage Precinct
Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct
Martin Street Heritage Precinct
Prayer Hill Heritage Precinct
Simmons Reef Road Heritage Precinct
Lal Lal Heritage Precinct
1.0 INTRODUCTION
This document establishes planning permit exemptions, under the provisions of
Clause 43.01 Heritage
, for specific
heritage precincts
individual heritage places
included in the Moorabool Shire Heritage
Overlay. The subject
heritage precincts
are identified at Table 1 and the
subject heritage places are identified at Tables 2 and 3.
The works which are permit exempt are generally of a minor nature which do
not impact the heritage significance of the
individual heritage place
heritage precinct
In accordance with Clause 43.01-3, no permit is required for permit exempt
works identified in this Incorporated Plan.
People using this document should contact Council to confirm that there are
no planning permit requirements triggered under other
parts of the
provisions or Planning Scheme. A building permit may also be
What is a permit exemption?
A permit exemption allows for specific works to be undertaken without
requiring a planning permit from Moorabool Shire Council under
the provisions of
Heritage Overlay
. Regardless of exemptions, applicants are advised
to contact Council to discuss any proposal for works to a place included in the
Heritage Overlay.
This plan does not provide exemptions for permits under any other provisions
of the Moorabool Planning Scheme, such as zone or other
overlay provisions.
Precincts to which the permit exemption applies
This Incorporated Plan applies
listed in Table 1 of this document and the
individual heritage
listed in Tables 2 and 3 of this document. The Schedule to the
Heritage Overlay
also specifies whether this permit exemption document
How this document is set out
sets out permit exemptions for the
Heritage Precincts
list of the
heritage precincts
to which the exemptions apply is included
at the beginning of
as Table 1.
Each place within a precinct has been graded as ‘Significant’,
‘Contributory’ or ‘Non-Contributory’.
Depending on this
grading, there are various levels of permit exemptions. It is important to
check the precinct map (located in
Appendix A) to identify what grading a place
within a precinct has in order to understand what works are exempt from permit
requirement
Heritage Overlay
provides permit exemptions for
. The location of individual places has been considered when
determining appropriate permit exemptions for
Section 3.1
provides permit exemptions for township places and
Section 3.2
sets out permit exemptions for rural places.
EXEMPTIONS FOR HERITAGE PRECINCTS
The following table identifies the
Heritage precincts
which are the
subject of this Incorporated Plan. A copy of the precinct map showing the
gradings for each place within the precinct
is included at Appendix A. The
gradings are ‘Significant’, ‘Contributory’ and
‘Non-contributory’.
The works which are permit exempt (do not
require a planning permit) may vary depending on the grading. This set of
permit exemptions
applies consistently across the precincts listed in Table
Table 1: Heritage precincts
Precinct Name
Fisken Street Heritage Precinct Ballan
Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct Ballan
Martin Street Heritage Precinct Blackwood
Prayer Hill Heritage Precinct Blackwood
Simmons Reef Road Heritage Precinct Blackwood
Lal Lal Heritage Precinct Lal Lal
Under Clause 43.01-3
the following works within the
set out in Table 1 are exempt from the requirement for a planning
2.1 Permit exemptions for
Non – Contributory
places within a heritage
No permit is required to undertake the following on a site identified as
Non-contributory.
- Demolition or
removal of a building, or part of a building, an
outbuilding
- Construction
of side and rear fences, where the fences are:
Timber paling,
No higher than
1800mm at the highest point, and
the height of the front fence in the front
Alterations
to the rear walls or rear parts of a building.
Alterations
to the side
of the main building which are set back from
major wall line
of the existing building by no less than 50% of the
depth of the existing building (see Figure
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Figure 1: No permit is required for Alterations to, Additions to or
construction of New Buildings that are not a dwelling with an
eave height no
greater than the existing located within the orange shaded area if the places is
identified as Non-contributory.
to the building which project beyond the rear
of the building
and which have an
height no greater than the
the existing building, and/or;
to the building which are set back from the
major wall line
no less than 50% of the total depth of the existing
building and which have an
height no greater than the
height of the existing building (See figures 1 & 2), and are not visible
from a street or public park.
and routine
maintenance
to a building that would change the
appearance of that building.
- Construction
New building
that is not a dwelling which has an
of no greater than the
height of the existing building, and is:
set to the rear
of the building, or
Set back from
major wall line
no less than 50% of the
total depth of the building.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Figure 2: Example of how eaves height is
Minor works
which are located beyond the rear
of the building and are
from a street or side street (other than a lane) or public
- Installation
domestic services normal to dwelling
on any property, not located on
the front roof and wall planes of the building, or located within the front
- Construction
of a garage or carport which is of single storey scale, detached from the
building and set back a minimum of 3.0 metres
major front wall
of the building.
exemptions for
Contributory or Significant
Places within a
heritage precinct
No permit is required to undertake the following on a site identified as
‘Contributory’ or ‘Significant’.
- Demolition of
side or rear fences unless they are specified in the Schedule to the Heritage
Overlay or identified as a
Significant feature
in a Statement of
Significance.
- Construction
of side and rear fences, where the fences are:
Timber paling,
No higher than
1800mm at the highest point, and
the height of the front fence in the front
- Construction
outbuilding
where all of the following apply:
is located to
the rear of the
rear major wall line
of the building;
is not located
on a corner property or a property with two street frontages;
is of an area
less than 10 square metres in total;
is of no greater
height than 3.0 metres from natural ground level at the highest point;
height at natural ground level no greater than the
height of the existing building;
is detached from
the existing building;
is set back from
the existing building a minimum distance of 3.0 metres at its closest
- Construction
or extension of an open-sided pergola, verandah, deck or other similar
structure, including those attached to an existing
building, where all of the
following apply:
the construction
does not require the removal or concealment of a
Significant feature
identified in a Statement of Significance;
the construction
does not require the demolition or removal of any
outbuildings
structures which are separate to the main building;
it is located to
the rear of the existing building as shown in figure 3;
the highest
point of the structure does not exceed 3.0 metres from natural ground level or
height of the existing building, whichever is lesser;
the finished
floor level of the structure is no greater than 800mm above ground level;
located on a corner property or a property with two street
- Installation
domestic services normal to a dwelling
located to the rear of the main
building (see figure 3), or where all of the following apply:
is not located
on the front wall of the building;
is not located
on the front or side roof planes of the building;
is set back from
major wall line
no less than 4.0 metres;
does not project
above the ridgeline of the building;
is not visible
from the street.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Figure 3: Area in orange defined as the rear of
existing building
3.0 PERMIT EXEMPTIONS FOR INDIVIDUAL HERITAGE
Permit exemptions for individual places have been divided into two categories
recognising the different permit exemptions which are
appropriate for those
places located within residential and commercial areas and those in rural
3.1 Individual heritage places in
residential/commercial areas
following permit exemptions apply
heritage places
in Table 2.
Individual heritage places
in residential/commercial areas to
which this permit exemption applies.
Heritage Place
31 Atkinson St, Ballan
45 Atkinson St, Ballan
55 Atkinson St, Ballan
18 Duncan Street, Ballan
35 Edols Street, Ballan
Dwelling & Former Bake House
30 Fisken Street, Ballan
34 Inglis Street, Ballan
36 Inglis Street, Ballan
White Thorn
42 Inglis Street, Ballan
47 Inglis Street, Ballan
56 Inglis Street, Ballan
63 Inglis Street, Ballan
65 Inglis Street, Ballan
77 Inglis Street, Ballan
78 Inglis Street, Ballan
Former Dr Salter's Medical Rooms
81 Inglis Street, Ballan
88 Inglis Street, Ballan
90 Inglis Street, Ballan
The Mill Cottage
96 Inglis Street, Ballan
Invergowrie, fence and hedge
101 Inglis Street, Ballan
122 Inglis Street, Ballan
Former Saddlery Store
123 Inglis Street, Ballan
Former Chambers Red House Drapers Store
1/130 and 2/130 Inglis Street, Ballan
Ballan Hotel
136 Inglis Street, Ballan
Ballan R.S.L Clubrooms & Bakery
146 and 146a Inglis Street, Ballan
Commercial Hotel
151 Inglis Street, Ballan
1/169 and 2/169 Inglis Street, Ballan
Westcott, Stables and Trees
188 Inglis Street, Ballan
437 Old Melbourne Road, Ballan
39 Steiglitz Street, Ballan
59 Steiglitz Street, Ballan
63 Steiglitz Street, Ballan
4 Albert Street, Blackwood
Dwelling and Water Race
15 Golden Point Road, Blackwood
111 Golden Point Road, Blackwood
5 Old Golden Point Road East, Blackwood
6 Terrill Street, Blackwood
231 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree
243 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree
Former Morning Star Hotel
248 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree
Former Police Residence & Lock Up
255 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree
35 Main Street, Gordon
46 Main Street, Gordon
56-60 Main Street, Gordon
Former London Chartered Bank
64 Main Street, Gordon
Gordon Post Office
67 Main Street, Gordon
Gordon Public Hall and former Mechanics’ Institute
68 Main Street, Gordon
Former Hotel
69 Main Street, Gordon
Dwelling & Outbuilding
71 Main Street, Gordon
Dwelling & Former Store & Bakery
82 Main Street, Gordon
General Store
90 Main Street, Gordon
Gordon Hotel
92 Main Street, Gordon
31-33 Russell Street, Gordon
Dwelling & Former Store
32 Russell Street, Gordon
Former Holden's Chaff Mill Dwelling & Store
720 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Wallace
Wallace Masonic Temple
12 Westcotts Road, Wallace
Former Wallace Methodist Church
30 Westcotts Road, Wallace
Under Clause 43.01-3 the following works to
individual heritage places
in residential/commercial areas set out in Table 2 are exempt from the
requirement for a planning permit:
- Demolition of
side and rear fences, unless they are specified in the Schedule to the Heritage
Overlay or identified as a
Significant feature
in a Statement of
Significance.
- Construction
of side and rear fences, where the fences are:
Timber paling,
No higher than
1800mm at the highest point, and
the height of the front fence in the front
- Construction
outbuilding
where all of the following apply:
is located to
the rear of the
rear major wall line
of the building;
is not located
on a corner property or on a property with two street frontages;
is of an area
less than 10 square metres in total;
is constructed
of non-reflective material;
is of no greater
height than 3.0 metres from natural ground level at the highest point;
height at natural ground level no greater than the
height of the
existing building;
is detached from
the existing building;
is set back from
the existing building a minimum distance of 3.0 metres at its closest
- Construction
or extension of an open-sided pergola, verandah, deck or other similar
structure, including those attached to an existing
building, where all of the
following apply:
the construction
does not require the removal or concealment of a
Significant feature
identified in a Statement of Significance, and
the construction
does not require the demolition or removal of any
outbuildings
structures which are separate to the main building;
it is located to
the rear of the existing building as shown in figure 3;
the highest
point of the structure does not exceed 3.0 metres from natural ground level or
height of the existing building, whichever is lesser;
the finished
floor level of the structure is no greater than 800mm above ground level;
it is not on a
corner property or a property with two street frontages.
- Installation
domestic services normal to a dwelling
located to the rear of the main
building (see figure 3), or where all of the following apply:
is not located
on the front or side wall of the building;
is not located
on the front or side roof planes of the building;
is set back from
major wall line
no less than 4.0 metres;
does not project
above the ridgeline of the building;
is not visible
from the street.
Individual heritage places in rural areas
The following permit exemptions apply
heritage places
set out in Table 3.
Individual heritage places
in rural areas to which this
permit exemption applies
Heritage Place
1001 Old Melbourne Road, Ballan
Stirling Park
27 Shaws Road, Ballan
Hawthorn Farm
145 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree
Bridge Hotel
190 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree
447 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree
Dwelling and Canary Island Palm
519 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Bungaree
100 Murphys Road, Bungaree
196 Lesters Road, Bungaree
Clare Place
64 Torpys Road, Bungaree
179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook
1787 Old Melbourne Road, Millbrook
Former Ryan Family Farm
91 Ryans Road, Millbrook
52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook
Farmhouse and tree
634 Bungaree-Wallace Road, Wallace
97 Westcotts Road, Wallace
Under Clause 43.01-3 the following works to
individual heritage places
in rural areas set out in Table 3 are exempt from the requirement for a planning
- Demolition,
of any fence which is not identified as a
Significant feature
heritage place
- Demolition,
of a building that is not identified as a
Significant feature
heritage place
- Construction
new building
that is not a dwelling provided that the building
not located in
where the property addresses a road or public
no closer to the
street frontage than a
Significant feature
a minimum of 10
metres from any
Significant feature
located within the
heritage place
non-reflective material.
- Carrying out
works associated with a
use (other than the removal of a tree
specified in Schedule to Clause 43.01) under the provisions of the Rural Living
Zone or the
Farming Zone as set out in the Planning Scheme.
- Installation
of plant and/or equipment associated with a
use. This does not apply
if it would require the removal, demolition or
Significant feature
heritage place.
- Installation
domestic services normal to a dwelling
located to the rear of the main
building (see figure 3), or where all of the following apply:
- is not located
on the front or side wall of the building;
- is not located
on the front or side roof planes of the building;
- is set back
major wall line
no less than 4.0 metres;
project above the ridgeline of the building;
- is not visible
from the street.
- Construction
of a pool or associated fencing located to the rear of the main building This
does not apply if it would require the
removal, demolition or
Significant feature
DEFINITIONS
The following definitions apply regarding levels of significance used in this
Incorporated Plan.
Significance
Significant
Significant
place is a single
heritage place
cultural heritage significance independent of its context. These places might
also contribute to the significance of a
heritage precinct
Contributory
Contributory
place contributes to the significance of a
heritage precinct
, but would not be
significant
on its own.
Non-contributory
Non-contributory
place does not contribute to the significance of
heritage precinct
. In some instances, a
Significant
be considered
Non-contributory
. For example, an important Modernist house
within a Victorian era precinct.)
Significant feature
Significant feature
is any feature (building, tree, fence,
structure etc.) that is identified in the
Statement of Significance
contributing to the significance of a
heritage place.
Significant,
Contributory
Non-contributory
heritage precinct
are shown on the precinct maps that form part of
this Incorporated Plan (Appendix A).
The following definitions apply to terms used in this Incorporated Plan.
are new works that are attached to a building.
is to modify the
without undertaking building works such as an
include a new opening for a window or door.
All of the land surrounding the
heritage place
is known as a
’ and will be shown as a polygon on the
map. In many cases, particularly in urban areas and townships, the
extent of the
will be the whole of the property (for example, a
suburban dwelling and its allotment). In rural areas, or on large lots, a
of the land around the significant place/s may be identified as the
Domestic services normal to a dwelling
A domestic appliance or apparatus that is normal to and services a
dwelling. It includes disabled access ramps and handrails, an air
conditioner,
cooling or heating system, a hot water service, security systems and cameras,
shade sails, a barbeque, downpipes and
flues, a skylight, security screens, and
are at the bottom edge of a roof, and usually project or
extend over the side of the building, protecting the wall beneath.
is a particular side, including an external wall, of a
means all the physical material of the
heritage place
including external fixtures.
Façade/principal facade
generally refers to the front or principal
and external face of a building, as is typically viewed from
the street.
Heritage Overlay
Heritage Overlay
is a town planning control contained within the
Moorabool Planning Scheme (Clause 43.01). The control is applied to either
individual heritage places
heritage precincts
. The purpose of
Heritage Overlay
is to conserve and enhance
heritage places
and to ensure that any development does not adversely affect the significance of
heritage place
Heritage place
heritage place
has identified heritage value and can include a
site, area or space, building or other works, structure, group of buildings,
moveable object, archaeological site, landscape, garden or tree. A
heritage precinct
, under the
Heritage Overlay
, is also known as a
heritage place
Heritage precinct
heritage precinct
is a precinct or geographical area of cultural
heritage significance, which contains a collection or high proportion of
and elements of heritage significance.
Individual heritage place
individual heritage place
is a single or stand-alone
with identified heritage value that is significant in its own right,
to which an individual
Heritage Overlay
and number is
Maintenance
Maintenance
means the continuous protective care of a
and its setting, and is distinguished from
which involves
restoration or reconstruction.
Maintenance
involves regular inspection
and cleaning of a place.
Major wall line and Rear major wall line
major wall line
is the main
distant from the street frontage.
rear major wall line
, when there are multiple and parallel rear
walls, is defined as the rear facing wall most distant from the street
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
Minor works
Where the wall height at natural ground level does not exceed the wall
height of the existing main building on the site; or any of
the following:
- A water tank
and associated structures;
services normal to a dwelling
- A swimming
pool or spa and associated mechanical equipment and safety fencing with a wall
height at natural ground level that does
not exceed the wall height of the
existing main building on the site
New building
Any newly constructed freestanding structure.
Outbuilding
outbuilding
is a structure which is not part of a main building
(i.e. is detached from the main building) but which supports the function of
main building. It can be a carport, garage, shed, stand-alone conservatory,
stables, cabana, studio or children’s cubby
house or similar
Raked fence
A fence which is sloped to transition between two different fence heights
(i.e. boundary fence and front fence).
section shown in green
are ‘protective care’ actions which do not
change the appearance of a
heritage place
, and are undertaken to the same
details, specifications and materials.
is the minimum distance from any allotment boundary to a
building. The
can include the front, side or rear property
boundaries.
’ includes all of the land between the
street boundary and the
major wall line
. The ‘rear
’ includes all of the land between the
rear major wall
and the rear boundary.
Statement of Significance
statement of significance
is a written record of why a place or
precinct is important and identifies the values which contribute to that
importance. The
Statement of Significance
generally identifies 'what' is
important, 'why' it is important, and `how' it is significant.
Streetscape
streetscape
is a collection of buildings along a street frontage.
When referred to in relation to a precinct, a
streetscape
contains a majority of buildings which are of heritage value.
means anything that can be seen from a street (other than a
lane) or public park.
APPENDIX A – Precinct Maps
Fisken Street Heritage Precinct
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Steiglitz Street Heritage
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Martin Street Heritage Precinct
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Prayer Hill Heritage
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Simmons Reef Road Heritage
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Lal Lal Heritage Precinct
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
West Moorabool Heritage Study (Stage 2a) Review, 2021
Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct
91-97 Steiglitz Street, Ballan Assessment Date:
Feb 2016, updated May 2021
Historic Themes:
Theme 6.1: Building Towns
Theme 6.2: Building
Fair - Good
Photograph Date:
CURRENT HERITAGE STATUS ON STATUTORY REGISTERS
Victorian Heritage Register:
Victorian Heritage Inventory:
Local Planning Scheme:
CURRENT HERITAGE STATUS ON OTHER REGISTERS:
National Trust (Victoria) Register:
RECOMMENDED LEVEL OF SIGNIFICANCE:
Local Significance
RECOMMENDATIONS:
Recommended for inclusion in the Victorian Heritage Register:
Recommended for inclusion in the Victorian Heritage Inventory:
Recommended for inclusion as a Heritage Overlay in the Planning
Schedule to the Heritage Overlay
External Paint Controls Should Apply?
Internal Alteration Controls Should Apply?
Tree Controls Should Apply?
Fences &/or Outbuildings of Note?
Prohibited Uses May be Permitted?
Incorporated Plan
- Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan
Permit Exemptions, May 2021
STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE:
What is Significant?
The Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct, Ballan is significant.
The following features contribute to the significance of the precinct:
The four dwellings at 91-97 Steiglitz Street, constructed between
c.1874-c.1890 as shown on the precinct map.
The consistent overall single storey residential form (hipped roofs, front
post -supported verandahs, brick and rendered chimneys,
symmetrical
composition), materials (weatherboard wall cladding, brick and rendered
chimneys, galvanised corrugated steel roof cladding)
and detailing (narrow
eaves, central four panelled front doors flanked by double hung windows,
surviving cast iron verandah decoration,
moulded timber architraves and timber
window sills).
Features that do not contribute to the significance of the precinct include
non-original alterations and additions to the buildings
at 91-97 Steiglitz
Contributory places:
Steiglitz Street: 91, 93, 95, 97.
How is it significant?
The Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct at 91-97 Steiglitz Street is of local
historical and aesthetic significance to the Moorabool
Why is it significant?
Historically, the Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct is significant as it
contains the only known speculative development of detached
timber dwellings
remaining in the town (91-95 Steiglitz Street). Further strengthening the
historical cohesion of this small group
is the association with the original
owner, Bernard Hirsch, a German draper, colonial wine dealer and manufacturer
who constructed
the cottage at 97 Steiglitz Street in 1874, and a large timber
structure housing a general store and stocking-weaving factory, located
land at 93-97 Steiglitz Street. The three cottages at 91-95 Steiglitz Street
were built by James Alford as rental properties
in the 1890s after
Hirsch’s death, from materials salvaged from the former general store and
manufactory. (Criterion A)
Aesthetically, the Steiglitz Street Precinct is significant as a small group
of representative examples of the vernacular style of
mid and late-Victorian
dwellings typical to Ballan. The design qualities are especially borne out in
the hipped roof forms, front
verandahs, symmetrical compositions defined by the
front central doorways and flanking windows, narrow eaves, chimneys and
verandah detailing, in addition to the weatherboard wall construction
and timber framing (having been recycled from Hirsch’s
manufactory
building now demolished) and the galvanised corrugated steel roof cladding.
(Criterion E)
Heritage Overlay Map
It is recommended that the heritage overlay is applied to the properties at
91-97 Steiglitz Street, as shown on the following map
(Figure 1):
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct
DESCRIPTION:
The precinct includes the four dwellings fronting Steiglitz Street at
numbers 91-97.
General Overview
The dwellings at 91-97 Steiglitz Street, Ballan, are set on regular,
rectangular allotments and have modest frontages to Steiglitz
Street, narrow
side setbacks and large rear yards with open grassed areas, mature trees and
introduced gabled and skillion single
storey outbuildings.
The relatively homogenous character of this part of the Steiglitz Street
streetscape is due to the similar Late Victorian appearance
of these dwellings,
with their single storey heights, hipped roof forms and front verandahs. Details
on each dwelling are as follows:
91 Steiglitz Street (Photos 1 and 2)
The single storey, timber
weatherboard, Late Victorian styled dwelling has a hipped roof form that
traverses the site, rear double
hipped roof forms and rear skillion wings, and a
front hipped roofed verandah. These roof forms are clad in red painted
corrugated steel. There are narrow eaves and an early brick chimney
with a dentillated capping (now overpainted). The symmetry of
the design is
accentuated by the central front timber framed doorway with a four panelled
timber door, and the flanking timber framed
double hung windows.
An early feature of the design is the front verandah. It is supported by
square timber posts (which appear to have replaced original
stop chamfered
square timber posts) and has early decorative cast iron valances and brackets. A
skillion glazed conservatory projects
from the west end of the verandah, into
the front yard.
Other early features include the moulded timber architraves and the timber
window skills. A gabled carport has been added on the east
side after 2009.
Solar panels have also been installed on the front roof face.
There is an introduced hollow steel post and rail and cyclone wire front
fence (approximately 1100 mm high) with vegetation growing
through it. At the
east end are steel vehicular gates.
Overall, the dwelling appears to be in good condition (when viewed from the
front) and of moderate integrity. Although there have
been some alterations at
the front, they are modest and the overall Late Victorian character is clearly
discernible.
91 Steiglitz Street, 2009
91 Steiglitz Street 2014
93 Steiglitz Street (Photos 3 and 4)
The Late Victorian styled,
timber weatherboard dwelling has a main hipped roof form at the front that
traverses the site, rear double
hipped roof form and skillion wings, and a
hipped concave front verandah. These roof forms are clad in corrugated
galvanised steel.
There are early narrow eaves and on the east side a prominent
face brick chimney with corbelled top.
Other early features of the design include the central timber framed front
doorway with a four panelled timber door and transom, flanking
timber framed
double hung windows (as well as timber framed windows on the sides of the
dwelling), moulded timber architraves, timber
window sills and the
stop-chamfered square timber verandah posts with cast iron brackets.
The verandah extends to the front boundary which is defined by an early
flat timber picket fence approximately 1 m high.
The dwelling appears to be fair condition when viewed from the front, with
deterioration noted in the rusting roof cladding, weathered
wall cladding and
missing pickets to the front fence. The dwelling has moderate-high integrity.
93 Steiglitz Street, 2009
93 Steiglitz Street, 2014
95 Steiglitz Street (Photos 5 and 6)
A single storey, Late
Victorian styled dwelling, it has a front hipped roof form with rear modest
double hipped roofed wings and skillion
addition, and a front skillion verandah.
The dwelling has experienced a number of alterations including the introduced
cladding, aluminium wall cladding, timber posts and concrete floor to
the verandah and the aluminium framed windows. Apart from the
overall form and
composition, other surviving early fabric includes the rendered brick chimneys
with a corbelled top, symmetrical
arrangement of the central front doorway and
flanking window openings.
At the front is a post and rail and cyclone wire fence, approximately 1100
mm high, together with a scrolled metal and wire pedestrian
Overall, the dwelling appears to be in fair condition and of altered
integrity. While the dwelling has experienced a number of alterations
reversible, the original Late Victorian design is clearly discernible.
95 Steiglitz Street, 2009
95 Steiglitz Street,
97 Steiglitz Street (Photos 7 and 8)
A modest, symmetrical,
single storey, timber weatherboard Victorian styled dwelling, it has a main
hipped roof form with an elongated
skillion wing at the rear, and a front
skillion verandah. The roof forms are clad in galvanised corrugated steel. There
eaves and a brick chimney (altered) at the rear on the east side. The
dwelling is especially characterised by the front elevation,
with the central
timber framed doorway having a four panelled timber door and transom, and
flanking timber framed 12 paned double
hung windows. There are moulded timber
architraves and timber window sills. The verandah is supported by early
stop-chambered timber
posts with moulded timber capitals. The verandah floor
boards are missing.
Overall, the dwelling appears to be in poor condition when viewed from the
front, with rotted timber weatherboards and missing verandah
floor boards. The
roof cladding is in good condition, suggesting that the dwelling may be
watertight. It has moderate integrity.
97 Steiglitz Street, 2009
97 Steiglitz Street, 2014
The Early History of Ballan
While the Werribee Hunt Hotel was built in 1848 at Ballan, it was to be
another two years before the northern portion of the village
was surveyed by
Assistant Surveyor Malcolm in
Comprising a grid layout
to the south of the Werribee River, the township was named “Ballan”
after Robert von Stieglitz’s
nearby Run. Von Stieglitz had bestowed this
name to his Run after his birthplace in County Tyrone, Northern
Ireland.10F
In these fledgling
years, the township was centred on Simpson Street, given that the Werribee Hunt
Hotel was the only substantial
building and it was on the route to Portland
From these early years,
Ballan was destined to become an important service town in the Western Moorabool
Shire region.
The original Town Plan only included township allotments to the north of
Steiglitz Street. It appears that it was not until 1872 when
the remainder of
the township was laid out and allotments created. By the early 1860s, Ballan
progressed as a small service town
for the surrounding farming and agricultural
industries, and as a stopping place along the mail and gold escort route to
It boasted a flour mill (where Anglican Church services were first
held until 1853), an Anglican Vicarage (built in 1849), Anglican
Church (built
in 1862), hotels, a small number of stores and dwellings, and a court house.
Importantly, it was the location of the
Ballan Road District proclaimed in 1862,
becoming the centre of local government from this time, including the home of
Shire from 1864 and the Moorabool Shire from 1994 until
recently.12F
By 1872, the
township had made further progress, with the main commercial centre having
relocated to Inglis Street, but Ballan was
still recognised as a rural outpost
rather than a thriving
township.13F
By 1890, the population of Ballan had reached
It accommodated a bank,
numerous stores and shops, four churches, State School, Mechanics Institute and
Free Library, Shire Hall,
Court House, racecourse, cricket and recreation
reserve, flour mill, wind mill, rifle, cricket and football clubs and ‘six
good hotels.’15F
longer term potential of Ballan as a successful service town was realised in
1889 with the opening of the railway line. This
gave impetus for the operation
of a monthly cattle market and more broadly, the township as a transport hub for
agricultural produce.
In 1893, 6268 acres of land were under cultivation in the
Ballan area.16F
From the 1890s
until the early 1920s, Ballan – and particularly its railway transport of
produce and livestock – was
a hive of industry. There were four goods
trains per day, six days a week, trucking chaff, oaten hay, bales of straw,
oats, wheat
potatoes, onions, pigs, cattle, and particularly
History of the Dwellings at 91-97 Steiglitz Street
Initial Development by Bernard Hirsch
The dwellings at 91-97 Steiglitz Street are situated on allotments 7-9 of
in the Township of Ballan first owned by Bernhardt Hirsch from 1
September 1874.18F
Germany in c.1833, the son of Anselm and Johanna Hirsch, he married Catherina
Broders.19F
They settled in
Alphington, Melbourne, where in 1871 Hirsch advertised as a
By July 1874, Bernard
(as he became known) and Catherina had settled at Ballan, where Hirsch continued
his drapery business in addition
to becoming a dealer in colonial
By the end of 1874,
Hirsch had constructed at small dwelling and a large store, which were described
Bacchus Marsh Express
in January 1875:
Mr. Hirsch's exceedingly well-appointed although small residence, which is so
tastefully designed, with its pagoda summer house, and
neat garden, has to be an
ornament to Ballan, and well worth visiting during the summer season, which is
the time when Ballan looks
at its best. Mr. Hirsch has recently added to his
drapery business that of colonial wine selling, and has already acquired a local
reputation for selling an article of a quality much superior to what is
ordinarily obtainable, and worthy of the good name all colonists
who are natives
of wine-making countries have acquired of being intuitively excellent judges of
the quality of wine, just as Englishmen
are supposed to be the best judges of
beer, or Scotchmen or Irishmen of the quality of whiskey. Mr. Hirsch has two
acres of land
all enclosed with a close picket fence, neatly capped with a
painted moulding, which fence of itself has a very pleasing effect upon
whose ideas of the beautiful take the same practical turn as did those of the
renowned Samuel Johnson. These two acres have
been levelled at considerable
expense, .and the same process is going on with four acres adjoining which Mr.
Hirsch has lately purchased.
His original intention was to build a large store
near his dwelling, but the quietness now prevailing in the district has induced
him to forego that step for the present. A colonial wine depot will be expected
to have a cellar of some sort, but Mr. Hirsch has
come to the conclusion that a
cellar is objectionable owing to the difficulty of keeping out the surface
water. Accordingly he has
had a room built with double walls and provided with a
large water tank, from which, by turning a tap, the earth floor can be flooded
and the barrels and racks of bottles of wine kept cool by
evaporation.22F
The small residence ‘with its neat garden’ described in the
Bacchus Marsh Express
appears to have been the dwelling at 97 Steiglitz
Street, built in 1874.
By April 1876, Hirsch commenced the manufactory of woollen hosiery for L.
Stevenson and Sons, warehousemen,
Melbourne.23F
He designed an
impressive factory at his Steiglitz Street premises, which he built by day
labour. The
Bacchus Marsh Express
reported on Hirsch’s progress in
The premises at Ballan now being erected by Mr. B. Hirsch present an imposing
appearance, and can be seen from all parts of the township.
The centre portion
of the building is about 30 feet high, and the space covered by the foundations
(which are of bluestone) is 48
feet by 36 feet. The building is constructed
principally of hardwood from Mr. Blake's mills, and the moulded weatherboards
his mills are famed show to great advantage in the building. A great
quantity of soft wood will be used for the inside linings and
floors. The
building is formed of a centre portion 36 feet in depth by a width of 18 feet,
and containing two floors, with a commodious
loft or attic forming a third
floor. On each side of this centre portion two wings are erected, the roofs of
which are carried up
to about half the height of the sides of the first floor of
the centre building, consequently they support or buttress the main building,
and at the same time afford space for two large spaces 15 feet wide, and36 feet
deep, on each side of the centre building. Above
these spaces, and level with
the first floor, there are narrow rooms intended for storage purposes. The
ground floor plan presents
a centre shop 36 feet by 18 feet, flanked by the
aforesaid wings, which are divided into four rooms, the two front ones being 16
feet by 15 feet, and the two rear ones 20 feet by 15 feet. Viewed from the
exterior the building resembles a large quartz battery
house, but is much more
substantially built in respect to the supports for the upper floors, and shows a
better finish. Mr. Hirsch
is his own architect and builder, and employs day
labour. One novelty he has introduced to- the notice of his neighbours-and his
whole proceedings are a novelty-is the coating of all the wood used with what is
known' as water glass, a liquid wash which has hitherto
been used for stone or
cement work only. He believes it will protect his building greatly against the
severe climate of Ballan, and
also render it less liable to destruction by fire.
Perhaps he has applied it rather soon before the sap is out of the wood, but if
not there is no doubt that the silicate will be of considerable value to the
building. The business which Mr. Hirsch intends carrying
on is that of the
manufacture of worsted socks, with machines which produce an article equal to
the Scotch and German handmade socks,
which are seamless, and much more
comfortable to wear and more durable than other machine-made socks. ... Mr.
Hirsch will stock his
premises with sewing machines, furniture, and wholesale
groceries. Moreover he contemplates making his own gas, both for lighting
warming purposes, and his ambitious ideas do not even stop there, for he hints
at making his own worsted, as the machinery in
the colony for the purpose does
not give a sufficiently strong staple for his
purposes.24F
Hirsch’s business at Ballan was to be short-lived as he died in January
Bacchus Marsh Express
reported his death:
Last Sunday a large procession followed to their last resting-place the
remains of Mr. B. Hirsch, who died very suddenly last Saturday.
The deceased
gentleman, some two or three weeks ago meet with a heavy fall in getting out of
his wagon, and though attended by Dr.
Marr it was felt that, owing to his
enormous weight, very little hopes could be entertained of his recovery. At the
time of the accident
he was 20st. 12lbs. weight, although a short man. He
determined last week to go to Melbourne to purchase good for his store in
and appeared quite hearty to within a few hours of his death, which took
place near Myrniong on Saturday night, in his own wagonette,
while on the
journey home; - and his last home, as it proved. Mrs. Hirsch was with
In March 1882, Hirsch’s property was auctioned, including the land,
dwelling and the store which was claimed to be ‘the
largest building in
Ballan, excepting perhaps Flack’s
Having cost
£2,000, the auction passed in with the highest bid amounting to only
Hirsch’s property had passed to his creditor, James Dodgshun, and later to
Mrs Catherine Moran, wife of John Moran,
contractor.28F
Residential Development by James Alford
On 18 August 1888, the
Bacchus Marsh Express
announced that ‘the
land and building known as Hirsch’s, in Steiglitz Street, has been sold by
the recent owner, Mr.
J. Moran, to Mr. J. Alford, of Maddingley, for
January 1832 in Devon, England, he emigrated to South Australia with his
brother, William, in February
James Alford married
Honora Fallon on 26 October 1855 at Encounter Bay, South
Australia.31F
Having been
agricultural labourers in England, James and William were successful in
ploughing competitions in South Australia and
Victoria.32F
In 1873, James
Alford purchased 171 acres at Parwan for
In 1880, the year
his wife, Honora, died,34F
Alford sold his farm35F
to establish a grocery and parcel delivery business at
Maddingley.36F
He built a new
stone store there in 1883,37F
year after he married Elizabeth
The first of their five
children was also born in 1883 at Bacchus Marsh: Ethel Agnes (later known as
Elizabeth Agnew).39F
Three other
children were also born at Bacchus Marsh: Thomas (born 1885), Christina (born
1887) and Annie Jane (born
Enterprising and entrepreneurial, Alford built ‘another wooden house
near the railway station’ at Maddingley in August
1888 at the same time as
acquiring Hirsch’s property in
The Alford family
relocated to Ballan in 1890, where he erected two dwellings with front shops in
Inglis Street. The
Bacchus Marsh Express
described the design as
‘ingenious, as the shops can be altered to dwellings without making the
change observable.’42F
Another two shops and dwelling followed as reported in the
Bacchus Marsh
on 19 July 1890:
The four new shops and dwellings erected by Mr. James Alford at Ballan are
now nearly completed and are all of them let, one being
occupied by the owner.
They are of excellent design, two shops being built together, with a brick
dividing wall between, and the
two dwellings are recessed at either side, after
the manner of wings to a main building. This gives prominence to the shops and
to the dwellings, also assists lighting arrangement very
materially.43F
A few months later in October 1890, Alford had built the three dwellings at
91-95 Steiglitz Street, using material from Hirsch’s
former manufactory
(that was demolished).44F
Although erroneously described as being located in Edols Street, the
Marsh Express
reported on the impending construction of the dwellings:
The tender for the erection of three four-roomed cottages recently called for
by Mr. Alford has been let to Messrs. Mehrens &
Sawyer. These dwellings,
when completed, will enliven Edols Street, wherein at present very few houses
are erected and those few
scattered.45F
In 1891, Alford’s shops and dwellings (including the dwellings at 91-97
Steiglitz Street) were leased William Bosemke, printer;
Ostle Casson, police
constable; William Horder, plumber; James Lay, labourer; William Norman,
stationmaster; and Frank Johnstone,
labourer.46F
A Miss Kennedy,
dressmaker, took over the lease of the dwelling occupied by William Bosemke in
Tragically, she died in
the following year.48F
It was also in 1892 when James Alford took ill with enlargement of the
He died in September
1895 as reported in the
Bacchus Marsh Express
Mr. James Alford, a prominent townsman here, and well known in Bacchus Marsh
and Maddingley, died on Sunday night, about 8 o’clock.
The deceased, who
was 62 years of age, had been ailing for many months past, and he recently
undertook to go through a heavy task
at stock-taking at his grocery store here,
which he had disposed of to Mr. J.D. Evans, intending to relinquish business for
retired life. While thus engaged he had the misfortune to break a blood
vessel internally, which, from his already weakened state,
culminated in his
death. Mr. Alford, since his residence here, showed himself a man of extreme
energy by his endeavours to advance
the interest of the town by building several
commodious business establishments and various handsome villa residences. The
are likewise indebted to him for more evenly gauging the prices of
general groceries.50F
At the time his death, the properties at 91-97 Steiglitz Street were valued
at £750, being described in the Statement of Assets
in Alford’s
Estate as follows:
Crown allotments one to nine inclusively of
Township and Parish of
Ballan County of Grant, containing 4-2-0, and on which are built 2 four-roomed
and 2 five-roomed cottages
partly of wood and partly of iron which at the time
of the death of the said deceased yielded a gross weekly rent of £1:2:0
Ownership of the dwellings at 91-97 Steiglitz Street was taken up by
Alford’s wife, Elizabeth Alford and James
Atkinson.52F
William Henderson,
hotelkeeper of Ballan, acquired Atkinson’s share of the properties in
The dwellings continued
to be leased.54F
In 1925, the dwelling at 91 Steiglitz Street was sold to Patrick John Thyne,
a farmer of Egerton.55F
appears to have leased the property to Charles Fuller, a labourer, until 1946
when it passed to Miss Annie Margaret Fuller, daughter
The properties at 93-97 Steiglitz Street (Photo 9) remained under the
ownership of Elizabeth Alford until her death in
Ownership was taken up
by her daughter, Mrs Elizabeth Agnew Lyle, in
She sold the properties
at 95 and 97 Steiglitz Street to Stewart Alexander Cowell, a machinist, and Mrs
Edith Moysey, respectively,
in 1945, while the dwelling at 93 Steiglitz Street
was purchased by Henry Joseph Lavery, a railway employee, in
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Aerial image showing dwellings at 91-97
Steiglitz Street (right), 1936.
A Pictorial History of the Shire
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS:
Note: places which were identified in the West Moorabool Heritage Study
Stage 2A have been referenced with their unique study identifier
(i.e. BLA01).
Places which are already included in the Heritage Overlay are referenced by HO
number. Places which are not included
in the Heritage Overlay nor identified in
the West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage 2A have no reference or identifier
Other comparable Heritage Precincts in the western region of the Moorabool
There is currently no heritage precincts identified in the Schedule to the
Heritage Overlay of the Moorabool Planning Scheme. The
Steiglitz Street
Heritage Precinct is one of seven new precincts proposed by the West Moorabool
Heritage Study Stage 2.
Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct and Fisken Street Heritage Precinct are
comparable in the predominately late Victorian residential
built form, although
Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct is significantly smaller with a strong
historical and aesthetic cohesion
due to the relationship between the buildings
within the precinct, and its history.
While there are several comparable individual vernacular timber residential
buildings in Ballan from this period and proposed by this
study for inclusion in
the Schedule to the Heritage Overlay, these are generally unrelated examples,
which standalone rather than
in a cohesive aesthetic and historical group.
Other Victorian timber dwellings in Ballan
The dwellings at 91-97 Steiglitz Street are comparable stylistically to a
number of Victorian timber dwellings in Ballan proposed
for inclusion in the
Heritage Overlay by this study. They include the following:
BA017 Everleigh,
77 Inglis Street:
the symmetrical, timber
weatherboard dwelling has a hipped roof form at the front and a projecting front
convex verandah supported
by cast iron columns with decorative cast iron bracket
and balances. The symmetry is emphasised by the red brick chimneys and the
central front door opening with flanking timber framed tripartite double hung
windows. The dwelling has high integrity when viewed
from the front, and has a
timber picket front fence. The hipped roofed composition and front verandah of
Everleigh is directly comparable
to the dwellings in Steiglitz Street, although
Everleigh is a more elaborate example.
BA018 Dwelling,
78 Inglis Street:61F
c.1894, this dwelling has a similar hipped roof form, central timber door
openings and flanking windows at the front, and
symmetrically composed chimneys.
However, the return verandah and scale of the dwelling is not directly
comparable to most of the
dwellings at 91-97 Steiglitz Street (the scale appears
to be comparable to the dwelling at 93 Steiglitz Street).
BA020 Former
Doctor Salter’s Medical Rooms 81 Inglis
built in c.1890, the
residence is a symmetrical timber weatherboard Victorian styled dwelling has a
hipped roof form and a front
hipped verandah. The verandah is supported by
turned timber posts with cast iron brackets and valances. There are original
brick chimneys with multi-corbelled tops and terra cotta pots, and a
central doorway flanked by timber framed double hung windows.
The design of this
dwelling is directly compared to the dwellings in Steiglitz Street, and
particularly with the dwelling at 91 Steiglitz
Street. It is more elaborate
example compared to the dwellings at 93-97 Steiglitz Street.
BA022 Lea Hurst,
90 Inglis Street: built in 1902-03, the single storey, hipped roofed,
weatherboard dwelling has an introduced hipped
bullnosed verandah (being
appropriate for the design and era of the dwelling) with original cast iron
verandah valances and brackets.
There are original paired timber framed double
hung windows at the front, with a central front panelled timber door with
and highlights. The design of Lea Hurst is directly comparable to the
dwelling in Steiglitz Street, and particularly with the dwelling
at 91 Steiglitz
Invergowrie, 101 Inglis
built c.1895, the
single storey, hipped roofed, weatherboard dwelling has a return convex verandah
supported by timber posts (which
may have replaced the original posts). There
are paired timber eaves brackets and a rendered chimney. The main doorway
timber framed double hung windows faces onto the eastern portion of
the site. The dwelling appears to be predominantly intact.
BA048 Ballan
Health Care (formerly “Annean”), 164 Inglis
built in 1897 for
Jules Gascard junior, horse dealer, the asymmetrical, single storey,
weatherboard, Late Victorian Italianate styled
dwelling has a hipped roof form
that traverses the front of the site, with minor hipped wings at the rear and
side and a return bullnosed
verandah supported by cast iron columns with
decorative capitals, and cast iron verandah valances and brackets. There are
framed double hung tripartite windows under the verandah and a projecting
faceted bay. The composition, scale and elaboration of
Annean are not comparable
to the dwellings in Steiglitz Street.
BA102 Mayfield,
39 Steiglitz Street: built
1886-87:65F
the symmetrical,
single storey, weatherboard, Victorian Picturesque styled dwelling has a double
hipped roof form that traverses
the site and a central projecting minor gable
and return verandah with a central gabled portico. The composition and detailing
unusual which is continued in the projecting faceted bay window to the west
of the front door, elaborate remnant timber bargeboard
in the gable end of the
verandah portico, elongated timber verandah brackets and in the detailing of the
surviving brick chimney.
Apart from the main hipped roof forms, the composition
and detailing of Mayfield is not directly comparable to the dwellings in
BA098 Longley,
63 Steiglitz Street:66F
1895 for Harry Blake, the asymmetrical single storey, weatherboard, hipped
roofed dwelling has a return verandah supported
by timber posts. There are
prominent red brick chimneys with multi-corbelled tops. On the front
façade is a central front
doorway flanked by timber framed double hung
windows. The dwelling appears to be of moderate integrity, having been
substantially
repaired. The hipped roof forms are similar to the designs of the
dwellings in Steiglitz Street, although ‘Longley’ is
substantial example and has a return verandah.
BA099 Ramsgate,
59 Steiglitz Street, built in
this hipped roofed
building has a projecting hipped roofed return verandah supported by stop
chamfered timber posts with decorative
cast iron brackets and valances. The
composition of the hipped roof form and projecting verandah is similar to the
dwellings at 91-97
Steiglitz Street (as is also the verandah treatment),
although the return verandah is not comparable to the more standard projecting
front verandahs on the Steiglitz Street dwellings.
Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct, Statement of Significance, May
Heritage Place:
Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct,
91-97 Steiglitz Street, Ballan
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
What is Significant?
The Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct, Ballan is significant.
The following features contribute to the significance of the precinct:
The four dwellings at 91-97 Steiglitz Street, constructed between
c.1874-c1890 as shown on the precinct map.
The consistent overall single storey residential form (hipped roofs, front
post -supported verandahs, brick and rendered chimneys,
symmetrical
composition), materials (weatherboard wall cladding, brick and rendered
chimneys, galvanised corrugated steel roof cladding)
and detailing (narrow
eaves, central four panelled front doors flanked by double hung windows,
surviving cast iron verandah decoration,
moulded timber architraves and timber
window sills).
Features that do not contribute to the significance of the precinct include
non-original alterations and additions to the buildings
at 91-97 Steiglitz
Contributory places:
Steiglitz Street: 91, 93, 95, 97.
How is it significant?
The Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct at 91-97 Steiglitz Street is of local
historical and aesthetic significance to the Moorabool
Why is it significant?
Historically, the Steiglitz Street Heritage Precinct is significant as it
contains the only known speculative development of detached
timber dwellings
remaining in the town (91-95 Steiglitz Street). Further strengthening the
historical cohesion of this small group
is the association with the original
owner, Bernard Hirsch, a German draper, colonial wine dealer and manufacturer
who constructed
the cottage at 97 Steiglitz Street in 1874, and a large timber
structure housing a general store and stocking-weaving factory, located
land at 93-97 Steiglitz Street. The three cottages at 91-95 Steiglitz Street
were built by James Alford as rental properties
in the 1890s after
Hirsch’s death, from materials salvaged from the former general store and
manufactory. (Criterion A)
Aesthetically, the Steiglitz Street Precinct is significant as a small group
of representative examples of the vernacular style of
mid and late-Victorian
dwellings typical to Ballan. The design qualities are especially borne out in
the hipped roof forms, front
verandahs, symmetrical compositions defined by the
front central doorways and flanking windows, narrow eaves, chimneys and
verandah detailing, in addition to the weatherboard wall construction
and timber framing (having been recycled from Hirsch’s
manufactory
building now demolished) and the galvanised corrugated steel roof cladding.
(Criterion E)
Primary source
West Moorabool Heritage Study (Stage 2a) Review, 2021
West Moorabool Heritage Study (Stage 2a) Review, 2021
Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms & Bakery
146 & 146A Inglis Street, Ballan Assessment Date:
Feb 2016, updated May 2021
Historic Themes:
Other Businesses
Building Towns
Community Organisations
Commemoration
Moderate-High
Photograph Date:
CURRENT HERITAGE STATUS ON STATUTORY REGISTERS
Victorian Heritage Register:
Victorian Heritage Inventory:
Local Planning Scheme:
CURRENT HERITAGE STATUS ON OTHER REGISTERS:
National Trust (Victoria) Register:
RECOMMENDED LEVEL OF SIGNIFICANCE:
Local Significance
RECOMMENDATIONS:
Recommended for inclusion in the Victorian Heritage Register:
Recommended for inclusion in the Victorian Heritage Inventory:
Recommended for inclusion as a Heritage Overlay in the Planning
Schedule to the Heritage Overlay
External Paint Controls Should Apply?
Internal Alteration Controls Should Apply?
Tree Controls Should Apply?
Fences &/or Outbuildings of Note?
Prohibited Uses May be Permitted?
Incorporated Document
- Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan
Permit Exemptions, May 2021
STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE:
What is significant?
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery building, at 146 & 146A Inglis
Street, constructed c.1925-26, is significant.
The Honour Roll affixed to the external wall contribute to the significance
of the place.
How is it significant?
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery building at 146 & 146A Inglis
Street, Ballan is of local historical, aesthetic and social
significance to the
Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery building at 146 & 146A Inglis
Street is of historical significance as one of the few surviving
commercial buildings within Ballan, a period of social and economic growth
within the town. The building has associations
with commercial development in
Ballan during the interwar period, and particularly with Vivian Cullen and his
establishment of the
Kookaburra café and billiard room in c.1925-26. Of
further historical significance is the use of the building from 1958 to
present as the clubrooms of the local branch of the Returned and Services League
of Australia (Victoria). (Criterion A)
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery is of aesthetic significance for the
unusual composition of typical Interwar shopfront with
dwelling which appears to
be a very late example of the Edwardian vernacular, apparently constructed at
the same time. The single
storey, timber weatherboard building exhibits design,
composition and detailing typical of the Edwardian period, including the main
hipped roof form and projecting minor hipped and gabled wings, turned timber
verandah posts and timber brackets. There are no other
examples of R.S.L.
buildings within the study area. (Criterion E)
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery building at 146 & 146A Inglis
Street has social significance for its long and continuing
association with and
use by the Ballan branch of the Returned and Services League of Australia as
their clubrooms since 1958. (Criterion
Heritage Overlay Map
It is recommended that the heritage overlay is applied to the site at 146
& 146A Inglis Street, and the front verandah outside
the Title boundary as
shown on the following map (Photo1).
Please note that the curtilage extends
to the street to include the projecting verandah on 146a Inglis Street.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Aerial map.
Source of base Map:
Moorabool Shire Council, 2020.
DESCRIPTION:
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and bakery building, 146 & 146A Inglis
Street, Ballan, is located on a modest rectangular allotment
on the street
boundary. There are side setbacks, with a gravelled and grassed driveway on the
east side and a grassed area on the
west side. The yard is grassed and
gravelled. The west setback at the front is a formal, paved area with a central
flagpole. Affixed
to the east wall of the neighbouring building at 148A Inglis
Street and facing onto the paved area is a metal Roll of Honour.
The single storey, timber weatherboard, conservative interwar era building
has a main hipped roof form, together with minor hipped
and gabled wings that
project towards the front. These roof forms are clad in corrugated sheet metal
and there are modest eaves with
exposed timber rafters. The hipped wing
represents part of the R.S.L. building and extends to form a return verandah
supported by
turned timber posts with decorative timber brackets. This verandah
detailing is more common on Edwardian dwellings and is therefore
a very late
example. There is a hipped roofed verandah (also supported by turned timber
posts with decorative timber brackets) towards
the rear on the west side (an
early identical verandah on the east side has been infilled with timber
weatherboards). Under the return
verandah of the front hipped wing is an early
faceted bay window with timber framed casement windows and leadlighted
highlights above.
There is an early vertically boarded timber door with upper
glazed panel at the northern end of the verandah, beyond which is an
segmentally-arched timber framed window (with introduced frosted glazing) and
other timber framed double hung windows. The
external red brick chimneys are
early and they have corbelled tops with terra cotta pots.
The front projecting gabled wing has an original timber framed two-paned
shopfront with ingo to an original timber framed door opening.
There are early
highlights above the shopfront windows and base walls of brick construction (now
overpainted). The early timber bargeboards
to the gable end survive, as do the
timber framed double hung windows on the east elevation. The projecting
post-supported verandah
has been introduced, having replaced an original
cantilevered verandah.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms, 2014.
Metal Roll of Honour attached to east wall
of the neighbouring building at 148A Inglis Street, 2009.
The Early History of Ballan
While the Werribee Hunt Hotel was built in 1848 at Ballan, it was to be
another two years before the northern portion of the village
was surveyed by
Assistant Surveyor Malcolm in
Comprising a grid
layout to the south of the Werribee River, the township was named
“Ballan” after Robert von Stieglitz’s
nearby Run. von
Stieglitz had bestowed this name to his Run after his birthplace in County
Tyrone, Northern Ireland.70F
these fledgling years, the township was centred on Simpson Street, given that
the Werribee Hunt Hotel was the only substantial
building and it was on the
route to Portland Bay.71F
these early years, Ballan was destined to become an important service town in
the Western Moorabool Shire region.
The original Town Plan only included township allotments to the north of
Steiglitz Street. It appears that it was not until 1872 when
the remainder of
the township was laid out and allotments created. By the early 1860s, Ballan
progressed as a small service town
for the surrounding farming and agricultural
industries, and as a stopping place along the mail and gold escort route to
It boasted a flour mill (where Anglican Church services were first
held until 1853), an Anglican Vicarage (built in 1849), Anglican
Church (built
in 1862), hotels, a small number of stores and dwellings, and a court house.
Importantly, it was the location of the
Ballan Road District proclaimed in 1862,
becoming the centre of local government from this time, including the home of
Shire from 1864 and the Moorabool Shire from 1994 until
recently.72F
By 1872, the
township had made further progress, with the main commercial centre having
relocated to Inglis Street, but Ballan was
still recognised as a rural outpost
rather than a thriving
township.73F
By 1890, the population of Ballan had reached
It accommodated a bank,
numerous stores and shops, four churches, State School, Mechanics Institute and
Free Library, Shire Hall,
Court House, racecourse, cricket and recreation
reserve, flour mill, wind mill, rifle, cricket and football clubs and ‘six
good hotels.’75F
longer term potential of Ballan as a successful service town was realised in
1889 with the opening of the railway line. This
gave impetus for the operation
of a monthly cattle market and more broadly, the township as a transport hub for
agricultural produce.
In 1893, 6268 acres of land were under cultivation in the
Ballan area.76F
From the 1890s
until the early 1920s, Ballan – and particularly its railway transport of
produce and livestock – was
a hive of industry. There were four goods
trains per day, six days a week, trucking chaff, oaten hay, bales of straw,
oats, wheat
potatoes, onions, pigs, cattle, and particularly
History of the Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms & Bakery Building
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery building at 146 & 146A Inglis
Street is situated on part of allotment 7 of
in the Township of Ballan
first purchased by George Flack in the early
Flack was a draper
from England who, with his wife, Catherine, and children, emigrated to Melbourne
in 1851 and established a drapery
Collingwood.79F
In late 1854 he
had established a store in Inglis Street and by 1860 he had opened the Ballan
The site at 146 Inglis
Street remained vacant land and after George Flack’s death in 1900, the
land had still not been sold
It appears that the
land was acquired by Mrs Minnie Windsor in 1915, at the time her husband,
Edward, took up the lease of Flack’s
Ballan Hotel (Edward Windsor
purchased the hotel in 1921).82F
The land remained unimproved in 1920-21 and again in 1925-26 when it had been
sold in part to Vivian Cullen and Gilbert Cowan (and
occupied by
Cullen).83F
It would appear that the existing former dwelling and shop were constructed
in 1925-26 for Vivian Cullen, and possibly financed by
Architecturally, the
hipped roofed dwelling which formed a front return verandah supported on turned
timer posts with decorative
timber brackets and timber balustrades was a very
late example of Edwardian (as opposed to interwar) design, which might suggest
that the building was relocated from elsewhere (Photo 4). A front projecting
gabled wing on the east side represented Cullen’s
Kookaburra Café
and the building also accommodated a billiard
and private dwelling.
There was a projecting cantilevered verandah over the footpath.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Cullen’s Kookaburra Café,
Billiard Room and Dwelling, n.d., c.1930s.
Source: Ballan Shire Historical
In 1930-31, the dwelling and café had a net annual value of
Cullen continued to
operate the café in the ensuing years, although by 1940-41 Donald Arthur
Cameron was the occupier.87F
1945, Cullen leased the property to the United Felt Hat Company Pty Ltd (known
as Fayrefield Hats factory) and Thomas
The hat factory
employed several local women (Photo 5).
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Female employees outside the Fayrefield Hats
factory, 1946.
Source: Ballan Shire Historical Society.
Vivian George Valentine Cullen was born at Ballan in 1889, the son of Charles
and Elizabeth Cullen (nee
Morgan).89F
By the early 1900s,
Vivian Cullen was employed as a station manager at
He married Daisy
Myrtle Lillian Watson and they had two children: Charles Kitchener Cullen in
1915 and Vivian Jasper Anzac Cullen
Cullen’s second
son, Vivian, was born months after Vivian senior embarked on the HMAT
for enlistment in World War
It appears that Vivian
and Daisy Cullen had a troubled marriage as on Vivian’s return from the
war he divorced Daisy in 1919
on account of having ‘left her little ones
and gone with the travelling Maori
Cullen married
Gilbertine May Naylor in
Kookaburra Café and billiard room was built at 146 & 146A Inglis
Street. Tragically, Cullen’s
son, Vivian, took his own life at the age of
19 years in 1935.95F
Vivian Cullen senior had ‘branched out and became a carrier in the
Ballan in 1955 at the age of 66
Cullen’s café and billiard room did not form part of his real
estate at the time of his
It was acquired by the
Returned and Services League of Australia (Victorian Branch) and converted into
clubrooms that were officially
opened on 11 November
The local branch of
the R.S.L. had formed in
Later, on 25 April
1972, an Honour Board listing local R.S.L. Office Bearers was unveiled (Figure
A metal honour board
listing the members of the Australian Defence Forces who settled on the soldier
settlement farmland of the Beremboke
Estate (1949) and Ingliston Estate (1957)
was unveiled in later years.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Mr Dudley Erwin, M.P., unveiling the Honour
Board at the R.S.L. Clubrooms on Anzac Day, 1972. On the left is Mr R.G.
Lindsell (President)
and centre is Mr H.R. Chambers, who was the inaugural
President in 1919.
A Pictorial History of the Shire of Ballan
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
Note: places which were identified in the
West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage 2A have been referenced with their unique
study identifier
(i.e: BLA01). Places which are already included in the Heritage
Overlay are referenced by HO number. Places which are not included
Heritage Overlay nor identified in the West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage 2A
have no reference or identifier included.
Commercial Buildings
The development of service towns like Ballan, mining towns (Blackwood, Gordon
and Egerton), and agricultural townships such as Bungaree
from the mid-19th
century included the establishment of general stores, grocers, drapers and other
commercial buildings to service
the surrounding gold mining, or farm or timber
industries. Some of the general and produce stores were associated and/or
to other businesses, such as chaff mills the at Bungaree.
Today, less than 20 purpose-built shops and stores survive in the western
region of the Moorabool Shire. One reason for the loss of
commercial buildings
has been fluctuations in populations (particularly for gold mining towns) and
natural disasters, such as the
bushfire of 1916 that destroyed much of
Gordon’s main street.
There are no other examples of R.S.L. buildings within the study area.
Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms & Bakery, Statement of Significance, May
Heritage Place:
Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms & Bakery
146 & 146A Inglis Street, Ballan
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
What is significant?
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery building, at 146 & 146A Inglis
Street, constructed c.1925-26, is significant.
The Honour Roll affixed to the external wall contributes to the significance
of the place.
How is it significant?
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery building at 146 & 146A Inglis
Street, Ballan is of local historical, aesthetic and social
significance to the
Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery building at 146 & 146A Inglis
Street is of historical significance as one of the few surviving
commercial buildings within Ballan, a period of social and economic growth
within the town. The building has associations
with commercial development in
Ballan during the Interwar period, and particularly with Vivian Cullen and his
establishment of the
Kookaburra café and billiard room in c.1925-26. Of
further historical significance is the use of the building from 1958 to
present as the clubrooms of the local branch of the Returned and Services League
of Australia (Victoria). (Criterion A)
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery is of aesthetic significance for the
unusual composition of typical Interwar shopfront with
dwelling which appears to
be a very late example of the Edwardian vernacular, apparently constructed at
the same time. The single
storey, timber weatherboard building exhibits design,
composition and detailing typical of the Edwardian period, including the main
hipped roof form and projecting minor hipped and gabled wings, turned timber
verandah posts and timber brackets. There are no other
examples of R.S.L.
buildings within the study area. (Criterion E)
The Ballan R.S.L. Clubrooms and Bakery building at 146 & 146A Inglis
Street has social significance for its long and continuing
association with and
use by the Ballan branch of the Returned and Services League of Australia as
their clubrooms since 1958. (Criterion
Primary source
West Moorabool Heritage Study (Stage 2a) Review, 2021
West Moorabool Heritage Study (Stage 2a) Review, 2021
St. John’s Anglican Church
56 Simpson Street, Ballan Assessment Date: Feb 2016,
updated May 2021 & Aug. 2025
Historic Themes:
Theme 6.1: Building Towns
Theme 8.1: Spiritual Life
Photograph Date:
CURRENT HERITAGE STATUS ON STATUTORY REGISTERS
Victorian Heritage Register:
Victorian Heritage Inventory:
Local Planning Scheme:
CURRENT HERITAGE STATUS ON OTHER REGISTERS:
National Trust (Victoria) Register:
RECOMMENDED LEVEL OF SIGNIFICANCE:
Local Significance
RECOMMENDATIONS:
Recommended for inclusion in the Victorian Heritage Register:
Recommended for inclusion in the Victorian Heritage Inventory:
Recommended for inclusion as a Heritage Overlay in the Planning
Schedule to the Heritage Overlay
External Paint Controls Should Apply?
Internal Alteration Controls Should Apply?
Tree Controls Should Apply?
mature Monterey Cypress
Fences &/or Outbuildings of Note?
bell tower, stone gate piers and associated metal
Prohibited Uses May be Permitted?
Incorporated Document
STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE:
What is Significant?
St. John’s Anglican Church, at 56
Simpson Street, Ballan, constructed 1861-1862, is significant. Elements of the
place which
contribute to the significance are the c.1861-2 church, the mature
Cupressus macrocarpa
Monterey Cypress trees, headstones located to the
east of the chancel (relocated to the site), stone gate piers and memorial
metal plaque fixed to the reveal of the main door, bell and bell tower in
the front garden.
Elements which do not contribute to the significance of the place include the
timber garage and outbuilding to the north east of the
site, landscaping, modern
buildings including the Parish Hall and Mena Prior Memorial Parish Centre, front
and side fencing, concrete
gate piers and orbs.
How is it significant?
Anglican Church, 56 Simpson Street, is of local historical, aesthetic and social
significance to the Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
St. John’s Anglican Church, 56 Simpson
Street, is historically significant for its associations with the earliest years
of Anglicanism
in the fledgling township of Ballan from 1849, and particularly
with the life and development of the Church of England at Ballan
throughout the
centuries. Built in c. 1861-62 St.
John’s Church was built to the design of the Diocesan Architect, Leonard
Terry, and has
been in continuous use by the Anglican congregation for over 150
years. A church bell has been located on the site since 1874, and
a roof added
to the existing bell tower in c.1909. Of further historical significance are the
headstones relocated from the Old Ballan
Cemetery in 1964, and represent the
Anglican community’s commemoration of Robert Steiglitz, considered to be
the ‘founder’
of Ballan. The significance is in embodied headstones,
which have been removed from their original location in an attempt to celebrate
Robert Steiglitz through the ‘conservation’ via relocation of his
family grave headstones. (Criterion A)
St. John’s Anglican Church, 56 Simpson Street, is aesthetically
significant as a local landmark at Ballan, being the earliest
of the three
surviving 19
century church buildings in the town. Although
altered, St. John’s Church is also one of the earliest known rural church
of the Diocesan Architect, Leonard Terry, being one of just two
surviving church buildings of this particular stylistic type (the
other being
St. James’ Anglican Church, Mortlake) by the architect. The Early English
Gothic Revival styled design remains
clearly discernible, having been inspired
by the highly influential work of the Gothic Revival English Architect, A.W.N.
Pugin. This
is particularly defined in the composition of the steeply pitched,
gabled nave with minor gabled chancel and the projecting side
vestry (the hipped
roof form being distinctive of Terry’s work). Originally intended to be
crowned by a bellcote (identical
to that at St. James’ Church, Mortlake),
this was also a feature borrowed from the earlier designs of Pugin, including
design of St. Paul’s Roman Catholic Church, Oatlands, Tasmania, built
in 1850. The well-detailed timber bell tower is a complementary
element to the
church and contributes to the aesthetic significance of the complex. The mature
plantings of Monterey Cypress provide
an attractive and traditional setting for
the place, and are a later, but contributory planting. (Criterion E)
St. John’s Anglican Church, 56 Simpson Street, is socially significant
for its long and continuous use as a place of worship
and meeting to the
Anglican and broader Ballan community for over 150 years. Past parishioners have
been memorialised throughout
the complex in the form of decorative stained-glass
windows in the church itself (the most notable being the Ferguson & Urie
stained glass chancel window in in memory of Juliet Vivian Lyon who died in 1874
and that of the nave, in memory of Rebecca Ocock).
Other examples including
tablets, fixtures and fittings and the stone gate piers commemorate the pioneers
of the Ballan district.
The relocated headstones are also an interesting
expression of community celebration/conservation of early pioneering history.
SIGNIFICANCE OF COMPONENTS
Local Significance
St. John’s Anglican Church is considered
to have sufficient integrity and historical, architectural and social heritage
to meet the local significance threshold.
Contributory Significance
The mature Monterey Cypress trees,
surviving headstones to the east of the chancel, stone gate piers and gates,
metal plaque fixed
to the reveal of the main door, and the bell tower in the
front yard make a significant contribution to the historical and aesthetic
values of the church site.
Contributory
The following fabric has either been
greatly altered or has been introduced after the significant period of
development for the site
(between the 1840s and 1940s) and therefore has no
significance (this does not suggest that this fabric may not be
valued by members of St. John’s Church):
Gabled Garage to
the north-east of the Church.
Hollow steel
post and rail and cyclone wire front fence, and siding fencing.
Concrete gate
piers crowned by orbs on the front boundary (west end).
Memorial Parish Centre.
Heritage Overlay Map
It is recommended that the heritage overlay is applied to the portion of the
site containing
St. John’s Church and front and side
settings, as shown on the following map (Photo 1).
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
Aerial map.
Source of base Map:
VicPlan, 2025.
DESCRIPTION:
The Setting
St. John’s Anglican Church, 56 Simpson Street,
Ballan, is situated on a large rectangular allotment on the north side of the
street, and on sloping ground that leads to the Werribee River. The church
building has a large setback from the front boundary,
comprising an open,
grassed area having perimeter garden beds as well as a variety of trees. There
are also mature Monterey Cypress
trees in the wide eastern side setback and
mature Monterey Pine and other trees to the north-west of the church building.
the western end of the front setback is a trussed timber bell tower
constructed of stop-chamfered members. It is surmounted by a
bell enclosed with
a gabled bellcote. Also in the western portion of the site is a gravelled
driveway that provides access from Simpson
Street to the rear of the site. There
is a smaller driveway immediately adjacent the main driveway (comprising the
traditional driveway)
that provides direct access to the western end of the
church. The entrance to this driveway from Simpson Street is defined by two
stone gate piers (with concrete cappings) surmounted by an arched iron rod
supporting a suspended lantern light. There are also open
steel trussed
vehicular gates. Similar stone gate piers with metal framed and cyclone wire
gates are located at the east end of the
front boundary, giving access to a
grassed driveway that leads to a recessive garage. At the west end are
introduced masonry piers
crowned by orbs. The front is also bound by a hollow
steel post and rail and cyclone wire fence, approximately 1200 mm high.
Adjacent to the base wall of the chancel (the east elevation of the church
building) are three headstones, having been relocated from
the old Ballan
Cemetery. The first (southern-most) headstone reads: “In Memory of Walter
Francis, son of Henry Lewis Stieglitz
Esq., of Rosemount Van Diemens Land, who
died 11 Jul 1852, Aged 2 Years”; the second headstone reads: “Sacred
Memory of Charlotte, Widow of the late Henry Lewis Stieglitz, of
Cookstown, Ireland, who died the 22 Nov 1852, Aged 68 Years”
also a plaque at the base of the headstone that reads: “These stones were
removed in 1964 from a family grave in
the old Ballan Cementary [sic.] Charlotte
was the mother of Robert von Stieglitz, founder of Ballan”); and the third
most) headstone reads: “In Memory of Francis Atkinson Esqr., of
Beramboke, late of Killiney [?] Ireland, who departed this
life the 11 Jul 1850
aged 67 years, also Charlotte, his daughter, who died 20 Mar 1850, aged 19
years, also Francis, his son, who
died 9 Sept 1852, aged 12 years.”
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
St. John’s Church, front yard, fence
and stone gate piers (east end), looking to mature Cypress trees to the east of
the church,
St. John’s Church, front yard, looking
west, 2014.
St. John’s Church, front
memorial gates, 2009.
St. John’s Church, west vehicular
gates, looking north-east to bell tower in front yard, 2009.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
von Stieglitz and Atkinson family
headstones, 2014.
St. John’s Church Building
The bluestone, Early English
Victorian Gothic Revival styled, church building is characterised by a
steeply-pitched, gabled roof form
that traverses the site, together with a
gabled chancel to the east end. These roof forms are clad in introduced terra
cotta tiles.
The six-bayed nave (comprising the main gabled form) is defined by
the projecting raked, rendered buttresses with bays of paired
pointed-arched,
stained glass lancet windows set in quoined, rectangular freestone surrounds. At
the east end of the south façade
of the nave is an original door opening
with freestone surrounds, and an introduced timber framed and multi-paned door.
and south elevations of the chancel feature identical windows as the
nave, while on the east elevation is a more substantial Decorated
pointed arched
chancel window. The principal, west end of the nave features a central
pointed-arched door opening accentuated by
freestone dressings and quoinwork,
and a freestone stringcourse that frames the doorway. There are early
pointed-arched vertically
boarded doors with decorative iron hinges. Above the
doorway are paired pointed-arched lancet windows with quoined, freestone
and diamond leadlighted glazing. Above the lancets is a blind
freestone oculus. Within the reveal of the main doorway is a metal
plaque that
reads: “1861-1961: To commemorate the first hundred years of Saint
John’s Church of England, Ballan, and
the establishment at Ballan of the
first inland Parish in Victoria in 1849.”
On the north side of the church building is an original, tiled, hipped roofed
vestry, while at the west end is the shallow-pitched
roofed, late
century, Mena Prior Memorial Centre wing that links the church
building to the postwar era, brick Parish Hall, which has a shallow
roof form set on an east-west axis.
Internally, the church has a central axis flanked by Victorian Gothic Revival
styled timber pews. The walls are hard plastered. A
focus of the interior is the
chancel, with the timber altar lit by the stained glass tracery window, and
which also features timber
altar rails. The ambience of the interior is also
created by the decorative stained glass windows. Other early features of the
include the eagle lectern, altar lectern, timber World War One Honour
Board, memorial marble tablet to William Charles Musgrave (died
1875), memorial
brass tablet to Elizabeth Foster (died 1922), clergy prayer desk and chair,
sanctuary lamp and a tapestry.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
St. John’s Church, west & south
elevations, 2014.
St. John’s Church, east & south
elevations, 2014.
The Early History of Ballan
While the Werribee Hunt Hotel was built in 1848 at Ballan, it was to be
another two years before the northern portion of the village
was surveyed by
Assistant Surveyor Malcolm in
Comprising a grid
layout to the south of the Werribee River, the township was named
“Ballan” after Robert von Stieglitz’s
nearby Run. von
Stieglitz had bestowed this name to his Run after his birthplace in County
Tyrone, Northern Ireland.103F
In these fledgling years, the township was centred on Simpson Street, given that
the Werribee Hunt Hotel was the only substantial
building and it was on the
route to Portland Bay.104F
From these early years, Ballan was destined to become an important service town
in the Western Moorabool Shire region.
The original Town Plan only included township allotments to the north of
Steiglitz Street. It appears that it was not until 1872 when
the remainder of
the township was laid out and allotments created. By the early 1860s, Ballan
progressed as a small service town
for the surrounding farming and agricultural
industries, and as a stopping place along the mail and gold escort route to
It boasted a flour mill (where Anglican Church services were first
held until 1853), and Anglican Church, hotels, a small number
of stores and
dwellings, and a courthouse. Importantly, it was the location of the Ballan Road
District proclaimed in 1862, becoming
the centre of local government from this
time, including the home of the Ballan Shire from 1864 and the Moorabool Shire
until recently.105F
By 1872, the township had made further progress, with the main commercial centre
having relocated to Inglis Street, but Ballan was
still recognised as a rural
outpost rather than a thriving
township.106F
By 1890, the population of Ballan had reached
It accommodated a
bank, numerous stores and shops, four churches, State School, Mechanics
Institute and Free Library, Shire Hall,
Court House, racecourse, cricket and
recreation reserve, flour mill, wind mill, rifle, cricket and football clubs and
hotels.’108F
term potential of Ballan as a successful service town was realised in 1889 with
the opening of the railway line. This
gave impetus for the operation of a
monthly cattle market and more broadly, the township as a transport hub for
agricultural produce.
In 1893, 6268 acres of land were under cultivation in the
Ballan area.109F
1890s until the early 1920s, Ballan – and particularly its railway
transport of produce and livestock – was
a hive of industry. There were
four goods trains per day, six days a week, trucking chaff, oaten hay, bales of
straw, oats, wheat
potatoes, onions, pigs, cattle, and particularly
History of the St. John’s Church
The Beginnings of the Anglican Church at Ballan
The beginnings of the Church of England at Ballan were from January 1849,
when the Reverend William Hall and his wife, Elizabeth arrived
at Ballan to
become the district’s first resident
Ballan was the
first inland parish to have a resident Anglican
clergyman.112F
The Rev. and
Mrs Hall took up temporary residence at John von Steiglitz’s station
Ballanee. Worship, baptisms and other services
were initially held in the nearby
Beremboke, Ballark and Bungeeltap stations, as well as private
properties.113F
Appointed by the Bishop of Melbourne, Charles Perry, the Rev. Hall was
instructed to build a parsonage at ‘some central spot’
in the Ballan
village so that he could ‘itinerate’ among the ’13 or so
stations.’114F
1849, steady progress was made on its construction. The completed parsonage was
reported in
in September 1849:
At Ballan, there is now a resident clergyman, (The Rev. W. Hall,) who
itinerates though a district of about 30 miles in diameter,
holding services on
Sundays at the different stations in rotation. A parsonage house has been built,
towards which the Bishop granted
£150 from his English fund, on the
understanding that the settlers should endeavour to raise the whole stipend of
the clergyman,
£200, among themselves. Of this £110 have been already
paid for the present
The parsonage, together with two outbuildings, was constructed in the
north-west corner of the church site, overlooking the Werribee
River (Figure 1).
The timber weatherboard parsonage building had a hipped roof form, as did the
larger of the two outbuildings (Photo
9). Services were subsequently held in the
large drawing room of the parsonage in the ensuing years. Sunday School classes
accommodated at Thomas Spice’s slab hut near the Werribee
After the arrival
of the Rev. J. Potter in 1854, Sunday School classes were held in an outbuilding
belonging to the parsonage until
a brick schoolhouse was built in 1855 on land
designated as early as 1850 for a school building in the south-west corner of
1). It served as a Denominational School during the week and it was also used as
a Church for worship
services118F
(Photo 10 and
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
W. Malcolm, Assistant Surveyor, Ballan Town
Plan, February 1850, lithographed 24 August 1856, showing Church of England
site, Denomination
School Site and Parsonage, with Parsonage buildings outlined.
Source: State Library of Victoria.
Young’s Flour Mill with hipped roofed
Parsonage in the background (right) and hipped roofed outbuilding behind, 1863.
St. John’s Church, with the base of the belfry constructed on
the west gable.
Source: Ballan Shire Historical Society collection.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
St. John’s Church Schoolhouse,
Source: Ballan Shire Historical Society.
St. John’s Church schoolhouse, n.d.
Source: June Huggins, Ballan.
Building of the Church
The arrival of the Rev. Henry Windle in November 1859 brought about the
building of a Church on the Simpson Street
Designed by the
Diocesan Architect, Leonard Terry, tenders were called for its construction in
March 1860.120F
subsequently ensued and it was not until 10 March 1861 when the foundation stone
was laid by Mrs. C.H. Lyon of Ballanee
Bishop Charles
Perry officiated. Construction continued throughout 1861 by the contractor, Mr
Taylor of Bacchus Marsh. The carpentering
work was carried out by Mr Reichman
with his foster son, Mr. Lemcke as
assistant.122F
By the end of
January 1862, buildings works were almost
complete.123F
On 30 March
1862, St. John’s Church was opened and dedicated by Bishop Perry (owing to
the insolvency of the contractor, St.
John’s took a heavy debt which was
not relieved until 1879, when the building could be
consecrated).124F
Constructed of bluestone with freestone dressings, the Victorian Gothic
Revival styled, steeply-pitched and parapeted gabled building
was characterised
by a nave and chancel, and side hipped-roofed vestry. The newly-completed
building featured in
The Australian News for Home Readers
in 1865 which,
in addition to an engraving (Photo 12), gave the following description:
The neat little building, shown in the engraving, is the newly erected
Episcopal Chapel, at Ballan, a distance of about sixty miles
from Melbourne. The
building has been raised solely by the exertions of the congregation, and is a
pleasing instance of the progress
of Christianity in the provincial districts of
Vitoria. The chapel belongs to the Gothic order of architecture, and is
enough to meet the requirements of the Episcopalians of Ballan. The
nave is 57 feet by 25 feet in extent, and the chancel 10 feet
3 inches by 21
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
L. Terry, Engraving of the Episcopal
Chapel, Ballan, 1865
The Australian News for Home Readers
March 1865, p.5.
A crowning feature of the Church was to be a bellcote surmounted by a Celtic
cross. Apart from the stone base (shown in Photo 9),
the bellcote was never
constructed. At some later stage, possibly in the 19
century, the
bellcote base was removed as it was not shown in a 19
photograph of the building (Photo 13). The hipped roofed vestry that was planned
for the east end of the south elevation
was also built on the north side (Photo
15), while only two bays of ventilator gables in the nave roof faces were
constructed, as
opposed to the original five bays.
St. John’s Anglican Church, n.d.
[c.1870], without belfry base.
Source: June Huggins, Ballan
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
St. John’s Church, main west gable
Source: J.T. Collins, La Trobe Picture collection, State Library of
Victoria, image jc000664.
St. John’s Church showing west
elevation of hipped roofed vestry and north elevation of nave, 1974.
Source: J.T. Collins, La Trobe Picture collection, State
Library of Victoria, image jc000663.
Later Alterations & Additions to the Church Building
With the death of Mrs Juliet Vivian Lyon (nee Anderson) in March 1874, a
memorial stained glass window was erected to her memory in
the chancel of St.
John’s Church.126F
work of the colonial stained glass craftsmen, Ferguson and Urie, the two-lighted
stained glass window depicted ‘Faith and
installed in late 1874. Mrs Lyon was the wife of Charles Lyon (1826-1905) of
Ballanee, where they settled after their marriage
in 1859 and where they had
five children: Clara, Lily Mary, Violet Mary, Vivian Hugh and Charles
Gordon.128F
Just thirteen
years before her passing, Mrs Lyon had laid the foundation stone to St.
John’s Church.129F
It was also in late 1874 when the
Bacchus Marsh Express
reported on
the making of a ‘very tolerable sized church bell’ at Mr
Blake’s.130F
steel, it weighted 1 cwt. and cost
It is unclear
when and where the bell was installed at St. John’s, given that the
bellcote was never built. It seems to have
been in operation soon after
completion and certainly by 1900 when the bell was rung to warn of an
approaching bushfire.132F
Another stained glass window was installed at St. John’s in 1883 in
memory of Mrs Rebecca Ocock, wife of the pioneer solicitor
of Ballan, Richard
Ocock and mother-in-law of Dugald Macpherson, pioneer grazier of Bungeeltap
station.133F
Marsh Express
reported on the installation of the window in March 1883:
The stained glass window in memory of the late Mrs Ocock has been put in St
John’s church. It is small but very handsome. It
represents on one side
the figure of the Good Shepherd, holding a lamb in his arms, and on the other,
the figure of St John the Evangelist.
The inscription under the former is
‘I am the Good Shepherd’ and under the latter ‘Little children
love one another’
and below these ‘In memoriam, Rebecca Ocock died
August 1882’. The whole is most tasteful and handsome, and
is executed in Ferguson and Urie’s well-known style. The window
presented by the relations and connections of the deceased
Further changes were made to the interior in 1888. They involved the
varnishing of the furniture and ceiling, and distempering the
walls and chancel
at a cost of £30. The chancel was also
decorated.135F
Considerably more substantial alterations were made in the 20
century. The crumbling interior hardplaster on the walls of the chancel (which
had painted decorations) were removed and replaced
by Mr Williams of Ballarat in
Six years later in
1927, electric light was installed in the church and
vicarage.137F
Ten years later
in 1937 much-needed repairs were made to the masonry and stained glass chancel
window.138F
In August 1953, a
Fabric Fund under the title of ‘Queen Elizabeth II Thanksgiving
Fund’ was established for raising funds
for the repairs and alterations of
the church.139F
Some of the
damage to the walls had been caused by thick ivy growth over a number of
In 1954, the works
included the replacement of the slate roof with terra cotta tiles (which also
involved the removal of the freestone
parapets in the gable ends), unpinning of
the west wall with
concrete.141F
later in 1958, the interior was replastered and finished in ‘cream
colourtex’.142F
windows were installed in the west and the ceiling and pews were revarnished.
According to Backhouse, et.al., in
Our Journey: The Anglican Parochial
District of Ballan and Bungaree
The concrete floor of the church, in a poor state of repair and covered with
coir matting, was levelled and boarded over with polished
Tasmanian hardwood.
The cost of the new floor was £500, which was provided by the Ladies’
It was also in 1958 when new carpet was laid in the sanctuary, chancel, aisle
and baptistery and a porch, ‘donated by Mr and
Mrs Les Hook graced the
entrance to the church’, which was also constructed by Mr
Fittings & Fixtures in the Church Interior
In addition to the stained glass windows in memory of Juliet Lyon and Rebecca
Ocock, Backhouse, et.al. provides a list of fittings
and fixtures that have been
important to the life of the Church and/or are memorials to past
parishioners.145F
stained glass windows in the nave were installed in memory of Mrs Sarah Lidget
and her son Robert Larence Lidgett, Georgiana
Blake, Edward Blake, Thomas
William Fagg, Elizabeth Fagg, and Ellen Adelaide
Parker.146F
Other Building Developments at St. John’s Church
The Vicarage
In 1870, the old parsonage was in such a dilapidated state that it required
demolition. A new Vicarage was proposed for the incoming
Vicar, the Rev. Louis
Alexander Baker. The
Bacchus Marsh Express
reported that the new building
was in progress in December
Constructed of
bluestone and handmade bricks, it was situated on the same site as the earlier
residence.148F
This parsonage
was to last 70-80 years. In the mid 1940s, the Diocesan Architect, Mr. Richards,
advised that ‘it was unwise
in every way to repair the present
Vicarage.’149F
replaced in 1947-48 by a Mr Mason. Located at the east end of the church
fronting Simpson Street, the new Vicarage was opened
The Parish Hall
Until 1967, the old schoolroom built in 1855 (and extended in
) functioned as both
the Parish Hall and Sunday School. As early as 1961, a new hall was proposed but
it was not until 1966-67 that
construction commenced on the existing hall to the
north of the church.152F
was designed by Mr Strickland (Figure 2) and constructed of Bessa brick by Mr E.
Kovacs.153F
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
R.L. Strickland & Associates, Elevation
& Section Drawings of proposed Sunday School at Ballan, 13 May
Source: Public Building file, VPRS 7882 Unit 4161 PROV.
The original schoolroom was subsequently demolished in early 1971 by members
of the Vestry. The bricks were transported to Sovereign
Hill, Ballarat for
recycling.154F
In 1985, the Mena Prior Memorial Parish Centre was built between the church
and the Parish Hall.155F
doorway was installed in the north-west corner of the church. Built in memory of
Mrs Mena Prior who died in 1985 and bequeathed
the sale of her house to St.
John’s Church, the Parish Centre incorporated a foyer, meeting room,
kitchen and Rector’s
office.156F
Landscape Features
Mr A. Blake in 1909 requested that the Vestry
‘arrange for some shelter at the bell, cost not to exceed
Considering the small sum (equivalent to less than $200 in 2025), and the
documented previous use of the bell in 1900, it appears
that referred to the
addition of the small roof at the top of an existing bell tower. In 1983, the
structure ‘required strengthening
of the foundations and re-roofing as
well as stabilising [of] the timber
frame.’158F
were carried out by Joe Smallman, Stan Young, Jack Ranke and his son, Nick,
while Mrs Prior donated the shingles and her
sister, Mrs Molly Reaby, donated
Memorial Front Fence and Gate Piers
In 1937, a fence fund was organised by the St. John’s Ladies Guild so
that the old fence could be replaced. Work commenced in
April 1937 with the
construction of stone gate piers at the entrance to the church fronting Simpson
Street.160F
An iron arch was
built over the main gates by Mr Cowell, and a lamp was hung from its
A second set of
stone gate piers were also built at the eastern end of the front boundary,
giving access to the previous driveway
of the Vicarage. A front fence was built
in memory of the Rev.W.E. Kaneen at a cost of £50/5/9 and it was dedicated
Ballarat162F
. The stone gate
piers and metal gates were dedicated in memory of the pioneers of the Ballan
district.163F
The existing
hollow steel post and rail and cyclone wire was constructed to mark the
centenary of the Ballan Shire in 1962, the costs
having been borne by the Ladies
It would appear
that the concrete gate piers at the western end were built after the
construction of the Parish Hall in 1967.
von Stieglitz and Atkinson Family Headstones
In April 1963 to mark the centenary of St. John’s Anglican Church at
Ballan, the Vestry sought to relocate the headstones of
members of the von
Stieglitz and Atkinson families, pioneers of the Ballan district and inaugural
members of St. John’s Church,
to the church grounds (Photo 16). As
outlined by Backhouse et.al.:
The tombstones of Charlotte, Francis and Francis Atkinson, and Charlotte and
Walter Francis Stieglitz are situated next to the east
wall of the church. They
were fixed in place by Messrs. J. Ranken, H. Hume, H. Lidgett, P. Lidgett and L.
Dellar.165F
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
von Stieglitz and Atkinson family
headstones, 1975.
Source: J.T. Collins, La Trobe Picture collection, State
Library of Victoria, image 000665.
Early Incumbents of St. John’s Church
The incumbent at St. John’s Church was the Rev. William Hall, who, with
his wife, Elizabeth, emigrated from England to Melbourne
in November
They relocated to
Ballan in January 1849. The Rev. Hall was responsible for the construction of
the first parsonage and the reservation
of the old Ballan Cemetery, in addition
to his role of establishing the first inland Anglican Parish in
Victoria.167F
In April 1853,
the Rev. Hall resigned from his charge at Ballan. He was replaced by the Rev.
J.W. Schoales who in turn was replaced
by the Rev. J. Potter in November
He was responsible
for establishing the Denomination School at
Ballan.169F
The Rev. J.T.
Schleicher was appointed to Ballan in
In November 1859, the Rev. Henry Windle became the Vicar at
Ballan.171F
incumbency, St. John’s Church was constructed. The Rev. Windle remained at
St. John’s for six years, during
which time he conducted Sunday workshop
twice daily at Ballan and also at Gordon and Egerton. He also conducted a
monthly service
Blackwood.172F
Windle Street
was named in his honour in later years.
Other incumbents at St. John’s in the 19
century included
Mr. H.F. Scott (1865-1868); Rev. H.I. Edwards (1868—1870); Rev. L.A. Baker
(1870-1874); Rev. G.F. Cross (1974-1877);
Rev. Julius Lewis (1878-1879); Rev. C.
Campbell (1879); Rev. J.F. May (1879-1884); Rev. W.H. Geer (1884-1889); Rev.
J.C. Atkinson
(1889-1899); and the Rev. J.H. Chaseling
(1899-1903).173F
Other Early Key Figures in the Development of St. Paul’s
Several pioneer figures were influential in the development and progress of
St. John’s Church of England in the early years.
They included John von
Stieglitz of ‘Ballanee’ who greatly assisted in the building of the
parsonage, amongst other tasks
Messrs. Richard
Ocock and Arthur T. Musgrave, solicitors of Ballan, were Lay
A.T. Musgrave
was also Honorary Secretary of St. John’s Vestry and Superintendent of the
Sunday School until 1881.176F
Another Lay Helper was C.H. Lyon, later of ‘Ballanee’, who was
Honorary Treasurer of the Ballan Church of England School
Board in the
In latter part of
century, Edward Blake, sawmiller of Blakeville and Marcus
Mason Mogg, grazier of Yallock Vale served as Church Wardens for 30 years
well as Lay Representatives at Church Assembly. Edward Blake was also Treasurer
of the Vestry at the time of his death in
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
Note: places which were identified in the
West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage 2A have been referenced with their unique
study identifier
(i.e: BLA01). Places which are already included in the Heritage
Overlay are referenced by HO number. Places which are not included
Heritage Overlay nor identified in the West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage 2A
have no reference or identifier included.
Other Churches in Ballan
St. John’s Anglican Church is one of four churches established in
Ballan in the 19
century, and the earliest of the three surviving
today. The other churches are:
Uniting Church Complex, 73 Inglis Street
(BA014):179F
1865-66, the Victorian Gothic Revival styled building is the most intact church
in Ballan. The bluestone building has a
steeply pitched gabled roof form and
rear gabled and parapeted vestry, together with a landmark octagonal tower
having a splayed
bluestone tower based with blind oculus windows, octagonal
blind arcade of lancet openings with blind oculus windows above, and an
elongated spire clad in corrugated sheet metal and crowned by an iron Celtic
cross finial. There is a triple pointed arched window
in the main gable end
(with decorative stained glass, being the work of the well-known stained glass
artists and manufacturers, Ferguson
Brigid’s Roman Catholic Church, 98-100 Inglis Street
(BA025):180F
built in 1912,
the Federation Gothic styled face red brick building with rendered dressings has
a parapeted gabled roof form clad
in introduced slate, pointed arched windows
and projecting buttresses which extend above the eaves line to form octagonal
There is a side porch towards the rear on east side. In 2009, the
building was almost completely destroyed by fire and in recent
years it has been
substantially reconstructed. A flat-roofed, steel and timber framed and glazed
addition at the front formed part
of the refurbishment. The integrity of the
original building has therefore been compromised by the fire damage and the
front additions,
although the Federation Gothic character and detail remain the
prominent feature.
Leonard Terry and Other Similar Churches to
St. John’s,
Leonard Terry was born in Yorkshire, England in 1825, the son of a timber
merchant. In 1853 he emigrated to Melbourne and six months
later he was employed
by the architect and surveyor, Charles Laing.
By 1856, Terry had established his own architectural practice in Collins
Street West. From 1857, he was the principal designer of
banks in Victoria and
from 1860 for buildings for the Anglican Church, having been appointed Diocesan
Architect. Indeed, Bruce Trethowan
claims that Terry was the ‘most
prolific architect’ from 1860 until
. Terry’s first
known design came in late 1856 when he designed Sands and Kenny’s printing
house in Collins Street West.
His first bank commission was for additions to the
Union Bank in Melbourne in 1857. In all of his bank work, Terry favoured a
Renaissance
palazzo approach. This stylistic mode is epitomized in his design of
the Bank of Australasia building, corner of Sturt and Lydiard
Streets, Ballarat,
constructed in 1863.183F
As Anglican Diocesan Architect, Terry designed many Anglican churches. He
also vetted the designs of other churches. Along with extensions
Paul’s Anglican Church, Ballarat East (which was later dismantled and
rebuilt), St. John’s Church, Ballan, appears
to be one of his
earliest-recorded commissions, as both building were constructed in 1862.
According to Miles Lewis, ‘Terry
churches were generally of bluestone, and
in fairly austere Early English or Decorated Gothic and, with the exception of
[the church
at] Birregurra, well composed and satisfying.’
Terry also carried out designs for the Roman Catholic Church in 1870,
probably in association William Wilkinson Wardell. This work
appears to have
occurred during a lull in Terry’s practice from the late 1860s. Business
improved after taking into partnership
the former Ballarat architect, Percy
Oakden, who brought in numerous Nonconformist church and school commissions.
Married in 1855 to Theodosia Mary Welch, he fathered six children. After the
death of Theodosia, he married Esther Hardwick Aspinall
in 1866, who bore him
three children. Terry died on 23 June 1884 of a thoracic tumor at his home in
Collingwood. In 1900, the late
Leonard Terry was described as ‘a man of
much more than ordinary ability, and ... [had a] modest, unassuming and
gentlemanly
Of the numerous Victorian Gothic Revival styled Anglican Church designs by
Leonard Terry, the most comparable with St. John’s,
Ballan, is St.
James’ Anglican Church, Shaw Street, Mortlake. It was built two years
after St. John’s in
1864-65.184F
Church features the same steeply-pitched, gabled nave with rear minor gabled
vestry, crowning bellcote above the
main gable end and a recessive side hipped
roofed vestry. It has experienced some alterations and additions, including the
replacement
of the slate roof with galvanised corrugated steel, and particularly
the parapeted masonry porch that projects from the main gable
end. Constructed
of bluestone, St. James’ Church is a slightly more rudimentary and smaller
example, having a four-bayed nave
with paired pointed-arched windows. The
location of the side hipped roofed vestry and the crowning bellcote reflect
Leonard Terry’s
original design intentions for St. John’s.
Inspiration for the designs of both St. John’s and St. James’
Anglican Churches by Leonard Terry appears to have emanated
from the highly
influential work of the Gothic Revivalist and staunch Roman Catholic English
Architect, A.W.N. Pugin (1812-1852).
In particular, Terry’s St.
John’s and St. James’ designs have a direct affinity to
Pugin’s design of St.
Paul’s Roman Catholic Church, Oatlands,
Tasmania, built in 1850.185F
The composition of the steeply-pitched gabled nave and minor gabled chancel and
especially the crowning bellcote at the west end
are those familiar design
traits found in Terry’s work. He also transposed the side gabled porch of
Pugin’s designs for
the hipped roofed vestries at St. John’s and St.
St. John's Anglican Church, Statement of Significance, May 2021
Heritage Place:
St. John’s Anglican Church
56 Simpson Street, Ballan
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
What is Significant?
St. John’s Anglican Church, at 56 Simpson Street, Ballan, constructed
1861-1862, is significant. Elements of the place which
contribute to the
significance are the c.1861-2 church, the mature Cupressus macrocarpa Monterey
Cypress trees, headstones located
to the east of the chancel (relocated to the
site), stone gate piers and memorial gates, metal plaque fixed to the reveal of
main door, bell and bell tower in the front garden.
Elements which do not contribute to the significance of the place include the
timber garage and outbuilding to the north east of the
site, landscaping, modern
buildings including the Parish Hall and Mena Prior Memorial Parish Centre, front
and side fencing, concrete
gate piers and orbs.
How is it significant?
St. John’s Anglican Church, 56 Simpson Street, is of local historical,
aesthetic and social significance to the Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
St. John’s Anglican Church, 56 Simpson Street, is historically
significant for its associations with the earliest years of Anglicanism
fledgling township of Ballan from 1849, and particularly with the life and
development of the Church of England at Ballan
throughout the 19th and 20th
Built in c. 1861-62 St. John’s Church was built to the design of the
Diocesan Architect, Leonard Terry, and has been in continuous
Anglican congregation for over 150 years. A church bell has been located on the
site since 1874, and a roof added to the
existing bell tower in c.1909. Of
further historical significance are the headstones relocated from the Old Ballan
Cemetery in 1964,
and represent the Anglican community’s commemoration of
Robert Steiglitz, considered to be the ‘founder’ of Ballan.
significance is embodied in headstones, which have been removed from their
original location in an attempt to celebrate Robert
Steiglitz through the
‘conservation’ via relocation of his family grave headstones.
(Criterion A)
St. John’s Anglican Church, 56 Simpson Street, is aesthetically
significant as a local landmark at Ballan, being the earliest
of the three
surviving 19th century church buildings in the town. Although altered, St.
John’s Church is also one of the earliest
known rural church designs of
the Diocesan Architect, Leonard Terry, being one of just two surviving church
buildings of this particular
stylistic type (the other being St. James’
Anglican Church, Mortlake) by the architect. The Early English Gothic Revival
design remains clearly discernible, having been inspired by the highly
influential work of the Gothic Revival English Architect,
A.W.N. Pugin. This is
particularly defined in the composition of the steeply pitched, gabled nave with
minor gabled chancel and the
projecting side vestry (the hipped roof form being
distinctive of Terry’s work). Originally intended to be crowned by a
(identical to that at St. James’ Church, Mortlake), this was also
a feature borrowed from the earlier designs of Pugin, including
his design of
St. Paul’s Roman Catholic Church, Oatlands, Tasmania, built in 1850. The
well-detailed timber bell tower is a
complementary element to the church and
contributes to the aesthetic significance of the complex. The mature plantings
of Monterey
Cypress provide an attractive and traditional setting for the place,
and are a later, but contributory planting. (Criterion E)
St. John’s Anglican Church, 56 Simpson Street, is socially significant
for its long and continuous use as a place of worship
and meeting to the
Anglican and broader Ballan community for over 150 years. Past parishioners have
been memorialised throughout
the complex in the form of decorative stained-glass
windows in the church itself (the most notable being the Ferguson & Urie
stained glass chancel window in in memory of Juliet Vivian Lyon who died in 1874
and that of the nave, in memory of Rebecca Ocock).
Other examples including
tablets, fixtures and fittings and the stone gate piers commemorate the pioneers
of the Ballan district.
The relocated headstones are also an interesting
expression of community celebration/conservation of early pioneering history.
Primary source
West Moorabool Heritage Study (Stage 2a) Review, 2021
West Moorabool Heritage Study (Stage 2a) Review, 2021
Bridge Hotel
Place No. BRE009
190 Bungaree
Wallace Road, Bungaree
Assessment Date: Feb 2016, updated Oct 16, updated May
2021 and July 2025
Historic Themes:
Theme 5.5: Entertaining &
Socialising
Theme 6.1: Building Towns
Moderate (front)
Photograph Date:
CURRENT HERITAGE STATUS ON STATUTORY REGISTERS
Victorian Heritage Register:
Victorian Heritage Inventory:
Local Planning Scheme:
CURRENT HERITAGE STATUS ON OTHER REGISTERS:
National Trust (Victoria) Register:
RECOMMENDED LEVEL OF SIGNIFICANCE:
Local Significance
RECOMMENDATIONS:
Recommended for inclusion in the Victorian Heritage Register:
Recommended for inclusion in the Victorian Heritage Inventory:
Recommended for inclusion as a Heritage Overlay in the Planning
Schedule to the Heritage Overlay
External Paint Controls Should Apply?
Internal Alteration Controls Should Apply?
Tree Controls Should Apply?
Fences &/or Outbuildings of Note?
Prohibited Uses May be Permitted?
Incorporated Document
- Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan
Permit Exemptions, May 2021
STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE:
What is Significant?
The Bridge Hotel at 190 Bungaree Wallace Road, Bungaree, constructed c.1930,
is significant, including the raised lettering in the
two gable ends reading
“BRIDGE HOTEL”.
Only the brick section of the hotel fronting the Bungaree Wallace Road is
significant. The non-original alterations and additions
in brick and timber
(post 1990) are not significant.
How is it significant?
The Bridge Hotel, 190 Bungaree Wallace Road, Bungaree is of local historical
and aesthetic significance to the Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
Historically, the c.1930 brick portion of the Bridge Hotel is significant for
its enduring associations with a hotel business on this
site since c.1870, and
particularly from 1930 when the front portion of this hotel building was
following a cyclone
for the Ballarat Brewing Company,
who owned the hotel from 1902-1960. (Criterion A)
The hotel has aesthetic significance as an unusual example of an interwar era
brick hotel in the western region of the Moorabool Shire.
Only one of five
surviving examples of its type, and one of two surviving examples in Bungaree,
the building is distinct from other
comparable examples for its distinctive
design, particularly the composition of the roof forms, jerkin-head roofed front
wings projecting
from the main hipped roof, with broken back verandah between.
The original (or reconstructed) fabric such as the tiled roof cladding,
brick and roughcast wall construction, broad eaves, brick chimneys, window
openings, verandah piers, columns and balustrade,
and the signage lettering also
contribute to the aesthetic significance. Situated on higher ground at the
western end of Bungaree,
the hotel is a local historic landmark. (Criterion E)
Heritage Overlay Map
It is recommended that the heritage overlay is applied to part of the site at
109 Bungaree Wallace Road as shown on the following
map (Photo 1).
this takes in approximately 12m of the Road Reserve, as measured from the
northern title boundary, on which the majority
of the brick section of the hotel
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Aerial map.
Source of base Map:
Moorabool Shire Council, 2020.
DESCRIPTION:
The Bridge Hotel, 190 Bungaree Wallace Road, is located on a large,
contextually shallow allotment on high ground nearby the west
bank of the Gong
Gong Creek. There are wide side setbacks and rear fenced yards which are
characterised by open grassed areas and
some trees. The hotel building is
situated on the front boundary with high corrugated sheet metal fencing on each
side. At the rear
are an early gabled timber outbuilding and other
outbuildings.
The symmetrical, single storey, face brick, interwar era hotel building has a
main hipped roof form that traverses the site, together
with projecting minor
front wings with jerkin head roofs and a central broken back verandah. At the
rear are hipped roofed wings.
There are broad eaves and face brick chimneys with
rendered tops. The entire roof is currently clad in concrete tiles. Other
of the design include the roughcast wall finish under the eaves and in
the gable ends of the front wings, paired window openings
(including the timber
framed double hung windows under the front verandah, the other paired aluminium
framed windows having been
introduced), brick and roughcast verandah piers and
balustrade (with concrete cappings) that supported squat round Doric concrete
columns, eaves brackets to the projecting front wings and the “BRIDGE
HOTEL” signage lettering in the gable ends to the
front wings.
At the rear is a late
century shallow hipped roofed brick addition with a corrugated
sheet metal roof.
Bridge Hotel, 2009.
Bridge Hotel, 2016.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
Bridge Hotel showing front & east
elevations, 2016.
The Early History of the
The rush to Ballarat, Blackwood, Gordon and other goldfields in the 1850s,
and the subsequent political uprising of the Eureka stockade
in Ballarat brought
social reforms and measures to alleviate the land crisis. The reduction of the
mining industry in the late 1850s
instigated a call to ‘unlock the
land’ for closer settlement. The Nicholson Land Act of 1860, Duffy Act of
1862 and the
Grant Land Act of 1865 (refined in 1869) sought to open land
selection for the small farmer, giving rise to the land settlement in
Moorabool Shire.
The small agricultural settlement of Bungaree developed as both a service
town for the surrounding farming community and as a result
of passing trade.
Following the construction of the ‘north’ road of the Melbourne to
Ballarat Road, Bungaree was soon
strategically situated at the intersection of
this major roadway and the road to Creswick. The earliest farm lots were taken
Before 1858,
R. Benham, farmer and storekeeper, had a commercial store south of “The
Junction” near the southern bank
of Two Mile Creek (fronting what is now
Lesters Road).188F
been successful in obtaining a rural store
licence.189F
This seems to
have been the earliest commercial enterprise at what became known as Warrenheip
Junction and then Bungaree Junction.
It appears that the opening of the Junction
Hotel soon followed, along with another three
hotels.190F
By 1863, parcels
of land ranging from 40 acres to 184 acres were taken up by farmers, sawmillers
and other selectors.191F
was at this time when the Bungaree District Road Board was proclaimed on 16
January 1863 and Bungaree became the headquarters
of the fledgling Board. A
pressing need was the opening up of surveyed roads and ‘an influential
meeting of saw mill proprietors,
farmers and others interested in the opening up
of the district (the former of whom were well represented)’ was held at
local hotel to consider a way of achieving
A Post Office was
established near the south-west corner of the road junction on 1 August 1863 and
two years later in 1865 a meeting
was held to establish an Anglican Church and
in 1867 a school room was built that initially served as a church and
The progress of the settlement was however based on the influx of farmers and
saw millers. Bungaree was never officially surveyed
or proclaimed a town. The
arrival of the railway in 1879 brought the settlement closer to the Melbourne
and Ballarat markets for
the transport of potatoes, other crops and timber. By
1890, the population reached 450 and there was a savings bank, post and money
order office, three hotels, State and denominational schools, two churches,
insurance company, steam flour mill, sawmill and railway
History of the Bridge Hotel
On 10 July 1866, Peter Martin of Ballarat purchased 28 acres and 36 perches
comprising allotment 5 of Section 2A in the Parish of
Warrenheip, with a
frontage to the Melbourne
He appears to have
established a premises on the site prior to taking up the freehold, as the
Ballarat Star
reported on the construction of a culvert over the Gong
Gong Creek ‘near Martin’s, Bungaree’, on 24 July
The property passed
to John Livingston, a storekeeper of Melbourne Road, Ballarat East, on 26 August
1867 (Martin having previously
taken out a mortgage for the property from
Livingston).195F
documentary evidence has uncovered an application for a publican’s licence
by either Martin or
Livingston.196F
Livingston’s ownership of the property was short-lived as he sold it to
James James, a carter of Warrenheip, on 11 February
By 1870, James had
established the Bridge Inn as it was shown on the Ballaarat & Ballaarat East
Water Supply Geological Survey
of Country in the Parishes of Bungaree &
Warrenheip at this time (Figure 1).
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
The Ballaarat & Ballaarat East Water
Supply Geological Survey of Country in the Parishes of Bungaree &
Warrenheip, 1870, showing
the location of the Bridge Inn (far left) the Morning
Star Hotel, Post Office, Grand Junction Hotel and Police Station shown on the
right at the road junction. Source: Bungaree & District Historical
James appears to have continued to operate the Bridge Inn until he sold the
property to James McGuan, a farmer of Warrenheip on 8
He leased the Inn
(which had then taken the name Bridge Hotel) to John and Mary Sanders in the
ensuing years.199F
death of James McGuan in 1900, the property was bequeathed to his nieces, Mrs
Mary Embleton and Mrs Annie Coghlan, both of
Bolwarrah.200F
The property
was briefly described as ‘Land, Warrenheip, 28 ac 36 pc and Hotel thereon,
valued for Probate at £900’
at the time of McGuan’s
In 1901, the hotel
property was advertised for sale in the
Gordon Advertiser
October, 1901, at 3 o’clock, on the ground. The
Bridge Hotel, Bungaree, and 28 acres, 39 perches splendid Agricultural land,
the Estate of James McGuan, deceased. To Hotelkeeper, Farmers, Capitalists, etc.
Instructed by the Ballarat Trustees Executors
and Agency Co. Ltd., Mrs. Coghlan
and Mrs. Embleton will sell by auction as above. This excellent Hotel property
at Bungaree Junction,
known as the Bridge Hotel, consisting of bar and eight
other rooms, with necessary outbuildings. The freehold is allotment 5 of section
2, parish of Warrenheip, and consists of 28 acres 39 perches of first class
agricultural land in the heart of Bungaree. The soil
is the best volcanic
chocolate. The position is good, on the main Melbourne road, close the Bungaree
township and railway station.
The hotel with two acres of land is let at 17/6 a
week for five years from 1
The northern portion of McGuan’s property including the Bridge Hotel
was sold on 13 February 1902 to Coghlan and Tulloch’s
Ballarat Brewing
Company Limited.203F
hotel continued to be operated by Mrs Sanders, and in late 1913 additions were
carried out to the hotel, possibly at the
In 1918, Mrs
Sanders was fined ‘for having had her bar door open at 9.45 on
December.’205F
similar charge was made against the publican of the hotel in 1923, Vera
Saunders, who admitted to having the bar door unlocked
’13 minutes’
past the legislated closing time of 6
A year earlier in
1922, ‘a cyclonic storm’ had caused substantial damage to the hotel
building including ‘two chimneys
blown down, and windows
smashed.’207F
On 20 September 1930, the
Construction and Real Estate Journal
reported that £1300 worth of improvements were ‘to be made to the
Bridge Hotel in Bungaree
(Vic.).’208F
suggests that the new brick hotel was built at the front of the site this time,
possibly replacing the original timber structure.
The rear timber additions
constructed in 1913 appear to have been incorporated in the new
building.209F
No documentary
evidence has been uncovered giving the designers of the new building. It may
have been the work of the well-known
Ballarat architectural firm of Clegg and
Morrow, as their design of the Toddlers’ Block for the Ballarat Orphanage,
East (built in 1929 with additions of identical design in 1939) being
strikingly similar (Photo
In particular, the
broad hipped roof form, projecting jerkin-head wings, tile roof cladding, face
red brick wall construction with
a roughcast finish under the eaves and the
front verandah piers and columns were those design features of the Bridge Hotel
been employed by these architects for the Toddlers’ Block.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
James Kerslake Wing (built 1939) of the
former Toddlers’ Block, Ballarat Orphanage, Ballarat East (HO177 Ballarat
City Council),
showing similar, contextually unusual projecting wings with
jerkin head roof forms with terra cotta tile roof cladding and face brick
construction and roughcast render in the gable ends.
Source: David Rowe,
The redevelopment of the Bridge Hotel at Bungaree in the interwar period came
at a time of business expansion of the Ballarat Brewing
Company. First
established by the Irish goldminer, James Coghlan in 1857, he had soon gone into
partnership with James Tulloch ‘and
together they outlasted many competing
breweries which had mushroomed up during the gold-rush
registered company in 1895, the business name changed to The Ballarat Brewing
Co. Pty Ltd. in 1910.212F
Throughout the early 20
century, the company continued to expand.
In 1937, the
Portland Guardian
reported that ‘The Ballarat Brewing
Co. Ltd. has been extending its operations in recent months by purchasing or
securing interests
in additional hotels in country districts in various parts of
the State.’213F
years later in 1939, the company purchased additional hotels and ‘a
substantial amount was spent in rebuilding and improving
other hotel
properties.’214F
Throughout the first half of the 20
century, Ballarat Brewing
retained ownership of the Bridge Hotel and in the 1950s a Mr Ryan was the
publican.215F
On 1 June 1962,
the Ballarat Brewing Company sold the hotel to William John and Mary Agnes
Mangles, hotelkeepers of
Bungaree.216F
They retained
ownership for seven years until
In 1992, the hotel
was substantially damaged by
The rear wings of
the building, including the original timber
residence219F
addition of 1913, were ‘burnt to the ground but the front brickwork was
still standing.’220F
The damaged rear portion was later replaced with a new rear hipped addition and
the main brick portion was retained and repaired.
The damaged rear walls of the
front portion of the building were rebuilt using new and reclaimed
bricks.221F
Roof bearers,
roof tiles, eaves and guttering were also replaced, as were the windows and
doors, the front window openings in the
flanking wings having aluminium framed
windows introduced.222F
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
Note: places which were identified in the West Moorabool Heritage Study
Stage 2A have been referenced with their unique study identifier
(i.e: BLA01).
Places which are already included in the Heritage Overlay are referenced by HO
number. Places which are not included
in the Heritage Overlay nor identified in
the West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage 2A have no reference or identifier
Interwar hotels
During the interwar years, new hotels were constructed, either as
replacements of earlier buildings, as a consequence of changing
populations and
licensing regulations, or as a result of natural disasters. The latter was the
reason for construction of The Morning
Star Hotels at Bungaree as the earlier
hotel building had been substantially damaged by a tornado in 1927.
Other Hotels in Bungaree
Several hotels were established at Bungaree Junction in the early years, the
first being the Grand Junction Hotel in c.1863 on the
south-east corner of the
junction of Melbourne and Creswick
It closed in 1885
when Robert McClymont commenced business at the former Morning Star Hotel at 248
Bungaree Wallace Road (BRE016),this
hotel having been established in c.1864, the
building being replaced in c.1880s and again in 1928 with the existing brick
structure).224F
there were five applications for publican’s licenses at Bungaree by Isaac
Ross of Melbourne Road (who had The Harrow
Hotel), James McGrath (who had
McGrath’s Hotel), Simon Bentley (who had Bentley’s Hotel), James
Peet (who had the Bush
Inn), and Seth Persse (who had the Junction
Hotel).225F
Further north
from Bungaree Junction at the intersection of Creswick and Blackswamp Roads was
the Race Course Hotel (built in
–now the site
of a dam) and the Emerald Isle Hotel (built by 1870, the year the Bridge Inn
appears to have been established
near the west bank of the Gong Gong
Creek).227F
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Former Morning Star Hotel, 248 Bungaree
Wallace Road, Bungaree, 2009.
Source: David Rowe.
Other Hotels by Clegg and Morrow Architects
George William Clegg was born in Ballarat in 1870, the son of Thomas Clegg a
merchant who came to Ballarat in the 1850s. Clegg was
educated at Ballarat being
trained by the architectural firm of Tappin, Gilbert and Dennehy from
1885-89.228F
They had offices
in Melbourne and Sydney as well as a Ballarat office run by Charles Gilbert.
Clegg joined the firm in 1889 and in
1890 he entered into partnership with C.N.
Gilbert, his former
employer.229F
partnership was subsequently dissolved and Clegg joined the Ballarat-based firm
of Kell and Miller (with whom he had already
done some work). In 1895, the firm
was known as Clegg and
Miller.230F
From 1898 the
partnership of Clegg and Miller designed a wide range of buildings throughout
central and western
Victoria.231F
These included
churches, shops, grandstands, warehouses, hotels, houses, hospitals, banks and
public buildings such as halls and
institutes.232F
formally became Clegg and Morrow from
Clegg was also an
instructor in architecture and building construction at the Ballarat School of
Mines, and a Fellow of the Royal
Victorian Institute of
Architects.234F
He died on 9
May 1958.235F
William Clarke Morrow was born in Ballarat in 1874, the son of Henry Morrow,
a pioneer mining investor of the
He was educated at
the Macarthur Street State School, University College and the Ballarat School of
At the School of
Mines, Morrow as a pupil in architecture of G.W.
For some years,
Morrow was a building contractor before joining the architectural firm of Clegg
and Miller which by 1916 became Clegg
Morrow.239F
For a short
period between 1928 and 1929, the firm was known as Clegg, Morrow and
Cameron.240F
William Morrow
died on 4 July 1945.241F
Throughout the various personnel changes Clegg was the designer and he was
also an accomplished
draftsperson.242F
Morrow appears to have been first appointed as a Clerk of Works, assisting with
the dialogue between client and
builder.243F
He later took up
design work in the office. The practice of Clegg and Morrow were responsible for
a large number of hotel designs
(mainly in Ballarat) from 1914 until the 1930s.
They included the Cattleyards Hotel, Ballarat (c.1922-30); alterations to the
Hotel, Ballarat; The Hotel Central, Ballarat; alterations to the Unicorn
Hotel, Ballarat (HO115 Ballarat City Council, H1911); Brewery
Warrenheip; Hotel, Newlyn; and alterations and additions to Gracedale House,
Healesville; (1927).244F
Stylistically, none of these other hotel designs appear to be directly
comparable to the design of the Bridge Hotel, the most comparable
example of the
firm’s work with the hotel being the former Toddlers’ Block at the
Ballarat Orphanage (HO177 Ballarat
City Council) (as previously outlined).
Other Brick Interwar Hotels in the western region of the Moorabool
It appears that hotel licensing regulations forced several hotel
establishments to be either upgraded or replaced. Today, the Bridge
Bungaree Wallace Road, Bungaree, is one of five single storey brick hotels built
in the western region of the Moorabool
Shire during the interwar (1920s-1940s)
The other hotels
are: the former Morning Star Hotel, 248 Bungaree Wallace Road, Bungaree
(1928)(BRE016); Gordon Hotel, 92 Main Street,
Gordon (GOR037); Mineral Springs
Hotel, Ballan Daylesford Road, Korweinguboora; and the Lal Lal Falls Hotel, Lal
Lal (recommended
for inclusion in the Lal Lal Heritage Precinct proposed
in the West Moorabool Heritage Study). These single storey buildings have
gabled and/or hipped roof forms clad in tiles, face red brick construction and
modest porches, following a similar design and appearance
as the Bridge Hotel.
They all appear to be predominantly intact.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Gordon Hotel, 92 Main Street, Gordon,
Source: David Rowe.
Overall, the Bridge Hotel is an unusual example of one of the surviving
interwar era brick hotel buildings in the western region of
the Moorabool Shire,
one of two surviving hotel buildings in Bungaree and the only licensed hotel in
Bridge Hotel, Statement of Significance, May 2021
Heritage Place:
Bridge Hotel
190 Bungaree Wallace Road, Bungaree
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
What is Significant?
The Bridge Hotel at 190 Bungaree Wallace Road, Bungaree, constructed c.1930,
is significant
including the raised lettering in the two gable ends
reading “BRIDGE HOTEL”.
Only the brick section of the hotel fronting the Bungaree Wallace Road is
significant. The non-original alterations and additions
in brick and timber
(post 1990) are not significant.
How is it significant?
The Bridge Hotel, 190 Bungaree Wallace Road, Bungaree is of local historical
and aesthetic significance to the Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
Historically, the c.1930 brick portion of the Bridge Hotel is significant for
its enduring associations with a hotel business on this
site since c.1870, and
particularly from 1930 when the front portion of this hotel building was
re-built for the Ballarat Brewing
Company, who owned the hotel from 1902-1960.
(Criterion A)
The hotel has aesthetic significance as an unusual example of an interwar era
brick hotel in the western region of the Moorabool Shire.
Only one of five
surviving examples of its type, and one of two surviving examples in Bungaree,
the building is distinct from other
comparable examples for its distinctive
design, particularly the composition of the roof forms, jerkin-head roofed front
wings projecting
from the main hipped roof, with broken back verandah between.
The original (or reconstructed) fabric such as the tiled roof cladding,
brick and roughcast wall construction, broad eaves, brick chimneys, window
openings, verandah piers, columns and balustrade,
and the signage lettering also
contribute to the aesthetic significance. Situated on higher ground at the
western end of Bungaree,
the hotel is a local historic landmark. (Criterion E)
Primary source
West Moorabool Heritage Study (Stage 2a) Review, 2021
West Moorabool Heritage Study (Stage 2a) Review, 2021
Place No. GOR016
179 Donnellans
Road, Millbrook Assessment Date: Feb 2016, updated May 2021
Historic Themes:
Theme 2.3: Promoting Settlement
Farming & Agriculture
Theme 6.2: Building Homes in the Shire
Photograph Date:
CURRENT HERITAGE STATUS ON STATUTORY REGISTERS
Victorian Heritage Register:
Victorian Heritage Inventory:
Local Planning Scheme:
CURRENT HERITAGE STATUS ON OTHER REGISTERS:
National Trust (Victoria) Register:
RECOMMENDED LEVEL OF SIGNIFICANCE:
Local Significance
RECOMMENDATIONS:
Recommended for inclusion in the Victorian Heritage Register:
Recommended for inclusion in the Victorian Heritage Inventory:
Recommended for inclusion as a Heritage Overlay in the Planning
Schedule to the Heritage Overlay
External Paint Controls Should Apply?
Yes – remnant external limewash on brickwork
Internal Alteration Controls Should Apply?
Yes- layout on all three levels, original window and door joinery, masonry
skirtings, fireplace mantles, pencilled graffiti on the
wall of the first-floor
central north room, and in the two ground-floor front rooms also plaster
cornices, papier mâché
ceiling centres, oil paint on joinery and
skirtings, and paint on walls and ceilings.
Tree Controls Should Apply?
Yes – row of four (4) mature Oak trees and mature Pear, Apple and
Plum trees.
Fences &/or Outbuildings of Note?
Prohibited Uses May be Permitted?
Incorporated Document
- Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan
Permit Exemptions, May 2021
STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE:
What is Significant?
Oakvale, at 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook, constructed in 1875, is
significant. This includes remnants of limewash on the external
brickwork and
internally: the internal layout on all three levels (excluding new closet
partition), original window and door joinery,
masonry skirtings, fireplace
mantles, and pencilled graffiti on the wall of the first-floor central north
room: also, in the two
ground-floor front rooms, plaster cornices, papier
mâché ceiling centres, oil paint on joinery and skirtings, and
on walls and ceilings.
The row of four English Oak trees to the south-east of the dwelling and
mature specimens of Pear, Apple and Plum to the north contribute
significance of the place.
How is it significant?
Oakvale at 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook is of local historical and
aesthetic significance and rarity value to the Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
Oakvale, 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook has historical significance for its
associations with early private farming developments in
the Millbrook area which
became highly successful and enduring after the unlocking of the land in the
early 1860s. Built in 1875
for Robert Luke McDowell and his wife, Mercy (nee
Bridges), Oakvale was also the home of their ten children. Their financial
is illustrated both by the substantial size of the dwelling and the
inclusion of servants’ quarters in the raised basement.
specimens of fruit trees (Apple, Plum, Pear) to the rear of the house are
remnants of a substantial early orchard which
contributes to an understanding of
a former way of life associated with pastoral properties which were largely
self-sufficient in
the 19th and early 20th century. The row of four English Oak
trees to the south-east of the residence date from a similar period
house. Their original design function is now lost, but the row provides evidence
of a deliberately designed landscape element
associated with substantial
century, Robert McDowell farmed the land. After his death in
1904, the property was owned by his son, Herbert, until 1910 when it
was sold to
William and Mary Clifford. With his brother, Herbert, on a neighbouring
property, William Clifford cultivated potatoes
at Oakvale through the first half
century. His children left pencilled graffiti in an
upstairs bedroom. The Clifford family continued to own the property until 1997.
(Criterion A)
Oakvale, 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook, is aesthetically significant as the
earliest, substantial two storey brick farm dwelling
in the western region of
the Moorabool Shire. Other homesteads of equivalent or larger scale were built
in the 1880s and 1890s to
different designs. Oakvale demonstrates original
design qualities of a Victorian Georgian style in its rectangular, symmetrical
brick facades, hipped roof and narrow eaves. Stylistically, it is
comparable to only the former Commercial Bank and the former Post
and Telegraph
Office, Ballan, built in 1857 and 1874 respectively. In particular, the features
which contribute to the aesthetic
significance include the symmetrical, two
storey, rectangular facades surmounted by hipped roof forms with narrow eaves,
three-bayed
composition on the main (east) façade with a centrally
located, segmentally-arched ground floor door opening (timber framed
above) and flanking segmentally-arched timber framed, 12 paned double hung
windows, three window openings on the first floor,
stone ground floor window
sills and brick first floor window sills, rear segmentally-arched ground floor
door opening at the west
end, with a four panelled timber door and transom, two
rear timber framed segmentally-arched window openings with timber framed twelve
paned double hung windows and brick sills, timber framed 12 paned double hung
windows on the north and south elevations, three face
brick chimneys with simple
corbelled tops, face brick wall construction and the corrugated sheet metal
profile roof cladding. Internally,
the two front rooms of the ground floor
retain their original decorative features, including plaster cornices, papier
ceiling centres, timber architraves to doors and windows, and
masonry skirtings, illustrating mid-Victorian fashions, such as the
picking out
of cornices in multiple colours. (Criterion E)
Oakvale, 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook, is of rarity value, thanks to the
survival of original and early finishes externally and
internally to the house.
Externally, the well-burnt brickwork was embellished by the use of limewash, and
has never been overpainted
with modern paints. Internally, the house retains all
original partitions, features such as mantelpieces and skirtings, as well as
original and very early (2nd generation) oil and distemper paint finishes in the
two ground-floor front rooms, which are a rare survival
both in Moorabool and in
the State of Victoria more widely. (Criterion B)
Heritage Overlay Map
It is recommended that the heritage overlay is applied to the Oakvale
property as shown in the following aerial image:
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Source of base Map:
Moorabool Shire Council, 2020.
DESCRIPTION:
Oakvale at 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook, is located on a rural allotment
surrounded by grassed and cropped paddocks, on an elevated
rise. The house
garden is largely characterised by open grassed areas, with Pear, Plum and Apple
trees to the north east, a row of
English Oak to the south east and a range of
much later plantings of Eucalypt and ornamental trees and shrubs generally to
There are a number of gabled outbuildings to the north-west of the
dwelling that are now excised from the Oakvale property.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Photo 2: Trees at Oakvale. Row of four English Oak Trees
located to the south east of the residence (in pink) and fruit trees to its
north. (Nearmap, annotated by Plan Heritage, 2025).
The row of four mature English Oak (Quercus robur) planted to the south-east
of the residence are a deliberately planted row, although
their function in the
larger design of the garden is not known. As this row of trees is in line with
the south side of the house’s
front façade (which faces east), it
is possible that they indicate the location of an earlier carriage drive.
However, the
earliest aerial photograph obtained of this side, from 1976, show
the current southern driveway alignment, so this remains theoretical.
eastern-most trees of the row and the two trees at the western end of the row
are planted at similar intervals (approximately
5 metres apart). A
‘gap’ between the two pairs of trees of approximately 10m indicates
the loss of a tree at the centre
of this row.
These Oaks have a consistent range of Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) between
0.95m and 1.1m and a similar canopy spread. One tree
(tree 3) has a slightly
smaller DBH and canopy spread than the other trees. This is due to an early
mechanical wound to the trunk
which has likely caused significant stress to the
tree in the past.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Photo 3: Row of trees, looking north-east (note gap
between the eastern and western pair indicating the loss of a tree), 2025.
To the north and east of the house are a number of mature fruit trees. The
trees are not laid out in rows or an ordered formation.
Their locations are
visible on the aerial above (Photo 2).
A large Pear (Pyrus comminus) and Apple (Malus domestica) are located to the
north of the residence (trees 5 and 6). Both trees are
substantial examples of
their species, having large DBH and extensive canopies, and based on their size
date from the late nineteenth
century. A smaller Pear (tree 11) is also located
in this area, and although not as substantial is likely to date from a similar
period to the other Pear.
To the north-east of the residence is a very mature Plum tree (Prunus
domestica) which has decayed and failed structurally, split
and continues to
grow (tree 7). This is the earliest of the Plum trees in this location, and
appears to date from the nineteenth
century, based on its size and canopy
spread. Numerous mature specimens of Plum surround the earliest plum, and are
likely to be
self-seeded in the early to mid-twentieth century.
Photo 4: Mature apple tree (tree 6) to the north of the residence –
note substantial girth of trunk, 2025.
Photo 5: Mature pear tree to the north of the residence – note
substantial girth of trunk, 2025.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
Photo 6: Over-mature Plum tree to the north-east of
residence (tree 7), 2025.
House exterior
The symmetrical, two storey, face brick, Victorian Georgian styled dwelling
is characterised by a hipped roof form with a traversing
ridgeline to the front
(east) elevation, together with double hipped roof forms that project at the
rear (west). These roofs are
clad in corrugated sheet metal. There are narrow
eaves and three early face brick chimneys with simple corbelled cappings adorn
roofline. The symmetry of the design is defined by the three-bayed
composition on the main (east) façade, which has a centrally
segmentally-arched door opening (with what appears to be an introduced three
panelled timber door with original timber framed
transom above) on the ground
floor, with flanking original, segmentally-arched timber framed, 12 paned double
hung windows. On the
first floor are three original window openings (the central
window being boarded over). The ground floor windows have stone sills,
brick sills to the first floor windows. The rear (west) elevation has an
original segmentally-arched ground floor door opening
with a four panelled
timber door and transom at the west end and two original timber framed
segmentally-arched window openings with
timber framed twelve paned double hung
windows and brick sills. Similar windows are located on the north and south
elevations. There
is evidence of a previous single storey skillion wing on the
west wall, as well as what appear to be an introduced door opening with
panelled timber door and transom.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
7: Oakvale front
(east) elevation, viewed from Boundary Road, 2009.
There have been at least three applications of limewash to the external
brickwork of the house. Over time, the limewash has weathered
away, remaining in
sheltered areas beneath eaves and windowsills. The front (east) elevation of the
house retains the most extensive
areas of limewash. The first limewash finish
was white (untinted), and this was followed by a traditional ochre (yellowish)
which may have been tinted with mineral pigments or with the use of
copperas (iron sulphate). The front (east) elevation was given
a further (later)
coat of limewash which is tinted brick-red, with picking out of the window
arches and “quoins” using
white limewash. Considering the good
quality and hardness of the bricks, the limewash was applied for aesthetic
reasons and was not
essential to shed moisture.
Overall, the dwelling is in fair condition and predominantly intact. The
house sat empty for some years, leading to falling damp and
flooding of the
basement. Some of the windows have deteriorated, with temporary patching or
removal, with the central first floor
window being boarded over.
House interior
Raised basement: The raised basement formed the
service areas of the house, including the kitchen. This division of service and
areas is indicative of the relative wealth of the first owners of
The finishes, including wall, floor and ceiling materials, are only in fair
to poor condition, due to past flooding. The servants’
originally located at the west end, has been removed. The kitchen fireplace
hearth remains in the south-west room, with
a hot water tank installed at its
back. This is one of the rivetted iron ship’s tanks of a type that was
used from the 1850s
onwards to transport goods from Great Britain to Australia.
They were frequently recycled for use as rainwater tanks and hot water
This tank is severely corroded.
The basement floor sits approximately 2 metres below the water table level,
requiring an integral drainage system to prevent flooding.
Based on the current
owner’s investigations, the original drainage system is believed to
function as follows. During construction,
the excavation in the parent ironstone
clay was sloped toward the south-east corner of the basement, leading to a
10-inch earthenware
pipe. A layer of rubble topped with render was then laid to
create a basement floor that would allow excess ground water to filter
to the outlet pipe. The pipe drained the water downhill to an open gully south
of the house. In recent years, the pipe has
been extended further south (with
concrete piping) and the gully filled in.
Front ground-floor rooms: These two front rooms were designed to be
representative (that is, public-facing) and are the highest in
the hierarchy of
decoration. In particular, they are the only rooms in the house that have
cornices (run from plaster) and ceiling
centres (moulded from papier
mâché). The south-east room is further distinguished by the picking
out of the cornice
in three colours, and retention of a timber mantelpiece.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Photo 8: Ceiling of the south-east (front) room, showing the
plaster cornice picked out in three colours and the papier mâché
ceiling centre, 2025.
The north-east room has the same cornice and ceiling centre, but the entirety
of the walls, cornice, ceiling, and ceiling centre are
painted in a single
colour, indicating that this room was not actually on public show.
Both rooms also have moulded timber architraves to doors and windows, and
masonry skirtings with a simple nosing at the top. (Note
that masonry skirtings
were not uncommon in the 19th century, as they were very resistant to impact).
All joinery and skirtings are
finished in an Indian Red oil paint.
The south-east room appears to have retained exposed (that is, never
repainted) finishes on the walls and door joinery. The walls
are painted in a
matte yellow finish which may be a washable distemper. The door joinery has only
an undercoat and the current Indian
Red finish coat. There is a slight overlap
of the Indian Red atop the wall distemper, indicating the distemper has never
been washed
off and replaced. The masonry skirting, however, has been repainted
once, both times in the same Indian Red oil paint. This reflects
the traditional
economical approach to house painting, where elements were only touched up or
repainted when absolutely necessary.
Skirtings absorb frequent mechanical
damage, when furniture, brooms and mops bump up against them, hence the need for
repainting.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Photo 9: Ceiling, cornice and ceiling centre in the
north-east ground-floor room, 2025.
The walls of the north-east room are painted in a matte biscuit (pink-beige)
finish, which is not resistant to abrasion, indicating
that it is a soft
distemper. The biscuit distemper is the only finish layer present on the walls.
As there is no tell-tale overlap
of the joinery oil paint atop this layer, it is
possible but unlikely that this is a second (or later) generation finish, and
first distemper coat was washed off before this one was applied. It is also
possible that only the joinery was painted when the
house was first built, and
the walls and ceiling in this room only painted at a later date.
In both rooms the ceiling and joinery finishes are in a relatively good
condition (though they need specialist cleaning). Both rooms
have some water
damage to the wall finishes, particularly in the south-east room where there has
also been plaster patching at the
base of the wall. Retention of these wall
finishes would require specialist input from a wall paintings conservator, as
well as infill
painting in some areas.
Remainder of ground floor: In all remaining rooms of the ground and first
floors, the ceilings are square set (that is, they do not
have cornices). All
rooms have the same Indian Red oil paint to joinery and masonry skirtings as the
two front rooms.
The hallway has yellow distemper to the walls. It contains a steep and narrow
staircase to the first floor (the flight to the basement
has been removed, with
a new enclosure where this was located), which retains some Indian Red paint.
The stair balustrade is elsewhere
in the house (loose), and the landing
balustrade is reportedly in Ballarat. Due to these changes, the staircase has a
low intactness.
The walls of the north centre and rear (north-west) rooms have been repainted
– probably prior to WWII – in a light blue
distemper. The original
off-white wall finish (similar to AS2700 X33 Warm White) is clearly visible in
the north-centre room where
the fireplace mantle has been removed.
In the north-west (rear) room, the later blue was applied over an original
dove grey distemper.
The large north-west corner room retains one or more layers of dove grey
distemper on its walls, generally in a poor condition. This
room retains a
timber mantlepiece.
First floor: Rooms on this floor retain timber door and window joinery, and
smaller masonry skirtings than seen at ground floor level,
indicating a lower
level in the hierarchy of design. Most of the ceilings on the floor have been
Interestingly, the north and south-
central bedrooms have
plaster walls that have never been painted, demonstrating the frugal approach to
finishes and decoration in
this house. Near the window of the north-central
room, the plaster bears pencilled writing (graffiti) made by the children of
and Mary Clifford, who lived in the house from 1916 onward.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Photo 10: Pencilled graffiti on the east wall, near the
window of the first-floor north-central room, 2025.
The two eastern (front) bedrooms were refinished several times. The
north-east room retains three layers of dove grey distemper (in
condition). Its door architrave has been removed.
The south-east room has off-white distemper walls (probably over a previous
white coat). The door joinery was originally varnished,
and then painted
Squatting and Early
In early 1837, the Government Surveyor, Frederick D’Arcy and his party
surveyed the upper reaches of the Leigh and Moorabool
Rivers. A second
expedition led by D’Arcy followed in August 1837. One of the main purposes
of the expeditions was to find
new country upon which to establish grazing lands
for new stations. The earliest districts of Melbourne and Geelong, including the
lower reaches of the Barwon and Moorabool Rivers, had already been settled and
were almost totally occupied.
The rush to Ballarat, Blackwood and other goldfields in the 1850s, and the
subsequent political uprising of the Eureka stockade in
Ballarat brought social
reforms and measures to alleviate the land crisis. The reduction of the mining
industry in the late 1850s
instigated a call to ‘unlock the land’
for closer settlement. While the Nicholson Land Act of 1860 and the Duffy Act
1862 sought to open land selection for the small farmer, it was not until the
Grant Land Act of 1865 (refined in 1869) that gave
rise to the greatest land
settlement in the Moorabool Shire.
Robert McDowell & the Establishment of Oakvale
Between the mid 1850s and early 1860s, land immediately west and south-west
of the goldfields township of Gordons was ‘unlocked’
into smaller
allotment for private sale. Crown allotments 5 and 6 of Section 6 in the Parish
of Kerrit Bareet (comprising over 97
acres) were purchased by Robert Luke
McDowell on 3 March and 10 June 1864
respectively.247F
While it appears that McDowell and his family had moved to this property by
1869, it was not until 1874-75 that he erected a substantial
two storey brick
farm dwelling to accommodate his growing family which he named
Oakvale.248F
McDowell first
placed a tender notice in September 1874 ‘for the making and burning of
60,000 bricks, directing interested
parties to contact him ‘at my place,
Black Hill, Gordon’.249F
bricks were ready, in February 1875, he sought tenders for bricklayers to
construct ‘a brick house, [of] eleven rooms’.
The house was ready
for its finishing touches by April that year, when McDowell sought tenders for
the internal
plastering.250F
Detached from the main house, a kitchen was also constructed and later
connected by a covered
McDowell’s ability to purchase farmland and construct such a large home,
with separate servants’ quarters in the raised
basement, suggests that he
had had success with goldmining. It was described in 1880 as ‘a
substantial-looking brick house,
surrounded by about four acres of
R.L. McDowell was born at Taylor Town, County Antrim, Ireland, in
c.1825.253F
Possibly lured by
the goldrush, he emigrated to Victoria where he married Mercy Bridges (born
c.1838) in 1858.254F
continued to live at Ballarat in the ensuing years, where at least the first
four of their 12 children were born: Robert William
(born 1859, Ballarat West),
Alexander (born 1860), Thomas born 1862 and died 1863, Soldiers’ Hill,
Ballarat) and Isabella (born
1863 and died
Other children to
Robert and Mercy were: Arabella (born 1865), John (born 1867, Mt Egerton), Mercy
(born 1869, Gordons), Georgina
(born 1870, Gordons), Walter (born 1872), Grace
(born 1874, Gordons), Amelia Mary (born 1876) and
Herbert.256F
The McDowell
family belonged to the Presbyterian
Church.257F
From the 1860s, Robert McDowell farmed the rich chocolate soil, sowing wheat,
oats and English
Tragedy struck the family on 16 April 1901 with the death of Mrs Mercy
Bridges, aged 63 years.259F
She was buried in Section C in the Ballarat Old
Cemetery.260F
It seems that
Mercy’s death took a severe toll on Robert’s health, as he was
admitted to the Ballarat Lunatic Asylum
on 2 September
He died there of
pneumonia two years later on 17 May
His estate was
extensive, amounting to £6393/12/2, with Oakvale valued at
£937/9/10.263F
property was described at this time as follows:
Crown Allotment 5 Section 5 same Parish and County [Parish of Kerrit Bareet
County of Grant] containing 44 acres 2 roods and 23 perches
subdivided into 4
paddocks with post and rail fence. On this land is erected Brick house
containing 15 rooms, 2 hay and chaff sheds,
workshop, wash and buggy
During Robert McDowell’s illness, his numerous other landholdings,
including land at Gordon and land in the Parish of Woolamai,
Mornington, was let by the Master of Lunacy to two of his sons, Herbert and
Walter respectively.265F
Herbert McDowell continued to reside and farm Oakvale following his
father’s death and he acquired Title to the property in
On 7 March 1903, he
married Edith E. Cowley at the Congregational Church,
Ballarat.267F
Their daughter
was born at Oakvale on 10 December
Tragically, Edith
McDowell died in 1909 after a brief illness at the residence of her father, J.E.
Cowley of the Eureka Ironworks,
Possibly as a
consequence of the loss of his wife, Herbert McDowell sold Oakvale a year later
in 1910. As outlined in the
Bacchus Marsh Express
Mr. H.L. McDowell’s homestead farm of 97 acres, known as Oakvale, Black
Hill, Gordon, has been sold through Messrs. Greenfield
& Co., to Mr. William
Clifford, of Gordon, for £4,352/17/6, or at the rate of £44/7/6 per
Oakvale & the Clifford Family Era
Title to Oakvale was taken up by Mrs Mary Clifford (nee Hogan) and her son,
William Gerald Clifford (1882-1951), on 30 December
Another of Mrs
Clifford’s sons, Herbert, farmed a neighbouring
property.272F
husband, Timothy Clifford, Mary had established a bakery at 82 Main Street,
Gordon in 1870.273F
William Clifford became sole owner of Oakvale where he cultivated
potatoes.274F
In 1916, William Gerald Clifford married Mary Helena Ryan (1894-1974) (Photo
11), the daughter of Thomas Francis and Johanna Ryan
Maher).275F
They had seven
children: Deborah, Mary, Thomas, Gerald, Elaine, Eileen and
Cornelius.276F
The Clifford
family were members of St. Patrick’s Roman Catholic Church,
Gordon.277F
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Mary and William Clifford of Oakvale,
Source: Maureen Davenport, Canberra.
On William’s death in 1951, Oakvale passed to Mrs Mary Clifford until
her death in 1974.278F
this time until 1977, the property was owned by Thomas and Cornelius Clifford
until Thomas’ death in
It remained owned
by Cornelius Clifford until his death in
when it was sold
outside the Clifford family for the first time in 87 years. Oakvale had fallen
into disrepair at this time (Photos
Oakvale, front (east) elevation, 1998.
Source: Wendy Jacobs.
Oakvale, front (east) elevation, 1998.
Source: Wendy Jacobs
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
Oakvale, rear (west) elevation, 1998.
Source: Wendy Jacobs
Oakvale, side (south) elevation, 1998.
Source: Wendy Jacobs
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
which were identified
in the West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage 2A have been referenced with their
unique study identifier (i.e:
BLA01). Places which are already included in the
Heritage Overlay are referenced by HO number. Places which are not included in
the Heritage Overlay nor identified in the West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage
2A have no reference or identifier included.
Victorian Houses
While there were a small number of large-scale pastoral homesteads developed
in the western region of Moorabool Shire during the nineteenth
considerably more prevalent throughout this area were smaller-scaled
Victorian-era dwellings constructed between the 1860s
and 1910s. These dwellings
are a physical legacy of the varying socio-economic status of the original
Oakvale is the only known surviving two storey Victorian Georgian styled
dwelling on a farm property in the west region of the Moorabool
Shire built in
the 1860s. Other substantial two storey rural homesteads in the district and
nearby area were built in later years
Mt Boninyong
Scotsburn:281F
the homestead
was built in 1883 for Robert Scott on the family property, Mt Boninyong. The
large, two storey, brick Victorian Eclectic
styled dwelling features complex
hipped roof forms, the front having a projecting rectangular bay surmounted by a
bellcote while
the ground floor features a post-supported skillion verandah with
cast iron valances and brackets. At the rear is a projecting steeply
pitched two
storey gabled wing.
Scotsburn:282F
built in 1889
for Andrew Scott on land excised from the Scott property, Boninyong, the
polychrome brick, late Victorian styled dwelling
has a hipped roof form with an
encircling convex verandah decorated with cast iron posts, valances and
Killarney, 3109
Old Melbourne Road, Warrenheip (HO48) (Photo
built in c.1897 for Thomas O’Loughlin who as awarded the title of Papal
Count of the Holy Roman Empire, his large Late Victorian
Picturesque brick
dwelling features complex hipped and gabled roof forms, the front having
projecting segmentally-arched portico
and cast iron verandahs and balconies.
There is a gate house that was erected at the entrance to the main driveway, as
well as stables
and a coach house. The house is approached by a long drive
planted on both sides with mature specimens of English Oak and English
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
Killarney, 3109 Old Melbourne Road,
Warrenheip, 2012. Source: National Trust (VHD).
Oakvale is more rudimentary in design than the other two storey homesteads,
reflecting its earlier date of construction and possibly
the Protestant
frugality of the original owner.
Stylistically, Oakvale is more comparable to the former Commercial Bank at
157 Inglis Street, Ballan (HO23) (Photo
) built in bluestone in
and the former Post
and Telegraph Office, 140 Inglis Street, Ballan (HO24) (Photo
in brick in 1874.285F
Oakvale, both feature symmetrical, rectangular facades with three-bayed
compositions defined by window and door openings, hipped
roofs and narrow
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
Former Commercial Bank, 157 Inglis Street,
Ballan, 2010.
Source: David Rowe and Wendy Jacobs.
Former Post and Telegraph Office, 140
Inglis Street, Ballan, 2010.
Source: David Rowe and Wendy Jacobs.
Oakvale is a rare and externally, moderately intact example of a substantial
Victorian era dwelling articulated in the Georgian style.
It is the earliest
known two storey brick farmhouse in the Moorabool district and is in fair
Intact interiors
Many nineteenth century dwellings retain their original room layouts and
often their external form (though many urban houses have
lost all or part of
their service wings). Many houses also retain other internal features such as
fireplaces, skirtings, architraves,
cornices and staircases, which are regarded
as more permanent and are not usually replaced according to changing
It is far rarer to find such houses that retain their original decorative
schemes. Many of these examples are considered to be of
State-significance and
are protected in the Victorian Heritage Register. Most of these are mansions,
such as ‘Mintaro’
in Monegeetta (VHR H2317), Mandeville Hall in
Toorak (VHR H676), and Villa Alba in Kew (VHR H605). Wardlow in Parkville (VHR
is a substantial dwelling, though not a mansion. It retains some original
decoration, including wall and ceiling papers, gilded pelmets,
wood grained
joinery with gold stencilling and encaustic tessellated tiles.
Oakvale is not directly comparable to VHR-listed mansions such as Mintaro,
but it is of a similar size and design quality to Wardlow
in Parkville.
There are also a small number of dwellings in municipal Heritage Overlays
that retain more or less intact interior decoration, which
is protected by
Internal Alteration Controls in the Schedule to the Heritage Overlay. Examples
with the most similar level of internal
intactness to Oakvale are the
Shepperton HO343 - Lamrock’s Homestead, 275 Cosgrove-Lemnos Road, Pine
An externally typical late Victorian brick farmhouse. It has sat vacant
since 1956 leading to problems with water ingress, but allowing
the preservation
of its interior, described as follows: ‘There are 6 internal rooms and
many of the early finishes have survived.
This includes the original factory
finish pressed metal ceilings, the original paint finishes to some of the doors
and skirting boards.
A number of the ventilated ceiling roses have also
survived.’ It was assessed by Heritage Concepts as part of
‘Greater Shepparton Rural Heritage Study Stage
An image of the interior from the Hermes database is
reproduced below:
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Merri-beck HO359
- Former Montague Dare Residence, 130 Rennie Street, Coburg
A Victorian
Italianate villa. Its aesthetic significance is derived, in part, from:
‘...internally, fretwork, fire surrounds
and most significantly original
pressed metal ceilings which retain their original paint schemes.’ It was
assessed by Context
PL, ‘Moreland City Council: Local Heritage Places
Review’, 2004.
Yarra HO83 -
Bokhara, 1 View Street, Alphington
A Victorian polychrome
brick house, with the interior described as: ‘Internally, there is an
arched hallway with remnants of
an embossed dado and border papers. Some of the
rooms appear to have been renovated c 1910, retaining the original Victorian
roses.’ It was first assessed in 1983, but reviewed in 2007 by
Graeme Butler.
In Moorabool Shire there are currently five places that have Internal
Alteration Controls. Four of them are churches (HO63 St Andrew’s
Church, HO64 Holy Trinity Anglican Church, HO92 St Bernard’s Church, HO127
Saint George’s Anglican Church). The
fifth is a private residence: HO130
Farmhouse, 51 Dukelows Road, Balliang. It is a Victorian Italianate timber
house. The 1995 ‘Bacchus
Marsh Heritage Study’ citation notes the
following: ‘The interior is lined with horizontal beaded boards and there
no plaster lining. There is a timber Doric archway in the hall. The front
left room has a pressed metal ceiling.’ There is
no indication in the
citation that any early finishes survive intact in this house.
As demonstrated by this comparative analysis, the intactness of the interior
of Oakvale, particularly the decorative detail and early
applied finishes in the
two ground-floor front rooms, is very rare in Moorabool Shire and more widely in
the State of Victoria.
Oakvale, Statement of Significance, May 2021
Heritage Place:
179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
What is Significant?
Oakvale, at 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook, constructed in 1875, is
significant. This includes remnants of limewash on the external
brickwork and
internally: the internal layout on all three levels (excluding new closet
partition), original window and door joinery,
masonry skirtings, fireplace
mantles, and pencilled graffiti on the wall of the first-floor central north
room: also, in the two
ground-floor front rooms, plaster cornices, papier
mâché ceiling centres, oil paint on joinery and skirtings, and
on walls and ceilings.
The row of four English Oak trees to the south-east of the dwelling and
mature specimens of Pear, Apple and Plum to the north contribute
significance of the place.
How is it significant?
Oakvale at 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook is of local historical and
aesthetic significance and rarity value to the Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
Oakvale, 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook has historical significance for its
associations with early private farming developments in
the Millbrook area which
became highly successful and enduring after the unlocking of the land in the
early 1860s. Built in 1875
for Robert Luke McDowell and his wife, Mercy (nee
Bridges), Oakvale was also the home of their ten children. Their financial
is illustrated both by the substantial size of the dwelling and the
inclusion of servants’ quarters in the raised basement.
specimens of fruit trees (Apple, Plum, Pear) to the rear of the house are
remnants of a substantial early orchard which
contributes to an understanding of
a former way of life associated with pastoral properties which were largely
self-sufficient in
the 19th and early 20th century. The row of four English Oak
trees to the south-east of the residence date from a similar period
house. Their original design function is now lost, but the row provides evidence
of a deliberately designed landscape element
associated with substantial
the 19th century, Robert
McDowell farmed the land. After his death in 1904, the
property was owned by his son, Herbert, until 1910 when it was sold to William
and Mary Clifford. With his brother, Herbert, on a neighbouring property,
William Clifford cultivated potatoes at Oakvale through
the first half of the
20th century. His children left pencilled graffiti in an upstairs bedroom. The
Clifford family continued to
own the property until 1997. (Criterion A)
Oakvale, 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook, is of rarity value, thanks to the
survival of original and early finishes externally and
internally to the house.
Externally, the well-burnt brickwork was embellished by the use of limewash, and
has never been overpainted
with modern paints. Internally, the house retains all
original partitions, features such as mantelpieces and skirtings, as well as
original and very early (2nd generation) oil and distemper paint finishes in the
two ground-floor front rooms, which are a rare survival
both in Moorabool and in
the State of Victoria more widely. (Criterion B)
Oakvale, 179 Donnellans Road, Millbrook, is aesthetically significant as the
earliest, substantial two storey brick farm dwelling
in the western region of
the Moorabool Shire. Other homesteads of equivalent or larger scale were built
in the 1880s and 1890s to
different designs. Oakvale demonstrates original
design qualities of a Victorian Georgian style in its rectangular, symmetrical
brick facades, hipped roof and narrow eaves. Stylistically, it is
comparable to only the former Commercial Bank and the former Post
and Telegraph
Office, Ballan, built in 1857 and 1874 respectively. In particular, the features
which contribute to the aesthetic
significance include the symmetrical, two
storey, rectangular facades surmounted by hipped roof forms with narrow eaves,
three-bayed
composition on the main (east) façade with a centrally
located, segmentally-arched ground floor door opening (timber framed
above) and flanking segmentally-arched timber framed, 12 paned double hung
windows, three window openings on the first floor,
stone ground floor window
sills and brick first floor window sills, rear segmentally-arched ground floor
door opening at the west
end, with a four panelled timber door and transom, two
rear timber framed segmentally-arched window openings with timber framed twelve
paned double hung windows and brick sills, timber framed 12 paned double hung
windows on the north and south elevations, three face
brick chimneys with simple
corbelled tops, face brick wall construction and the corrugated sheet metal
profile roof cladding. Internally,
the two front rooms of the ground floor
retain their original decorative features, including plaster cornices, papier
ceiling centres, timber architraves to doors and windows, and
masonry skirtings, illustrating mid-Victorian fashions, such as the
picking out
of cornices in multiple colours. (Criterion E)
Primary source
West Moorabool Heritage Study (Stage 2a) Review, 2021
West Moorabool Heritage Study (Stage 2a) Review, 2021
Place No. GOR025
52 Sullivans
Road, Millbrook Assessment Date: Feb 2016, updated May 2021
Historic Themes:
Theme 4.1: Farming & Agriculture
6.2: Building Homes in the Shire
Photograph Date:
CURRENT HERITAGE STATUS ON STATUTORY REGISTERS
Victorian Heritage Register:
Victorian Heritage Inventory:
Local Planning Scheme:
CURRENT HERITAGE STATUS ON OTHER REGISTERS:
National Trust (Victoria) Register:
RECOMMENDED LEVEL OF SIGNIFICANCE:
Local Significance
RECOMMENDATIONS:
Recommended for inclusion in the Victorian Heritage Register:
Recommended for inclusion in the Victorian Heritage Inventory:
Recommended for inclusion as a Heritage Overlay in the Planning
Schedule to the Heritage Overlay
External Paint Controls Should Apply?
Internal Alteration Controls Should Apply?
Tree Controls Should Apply?
mature exotic trees adjacent to main dwelling
Fences &/or Outbuildings of Note?
Prohibited Uses May be Permitted?
Incorporated Document
- Moorabool Shire Heritage Precincts and Places Incorporated Plan
Permit Exemptions, May 2021
STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE:
What is Significant?
The Pines, 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook constructed c.1896 is
significant.
Elements that contribute to the significance of the place include: single
storey hipped roof forms, return post-supported verandah,
projecting early rear
gabled addition on the north side, corrugated sheet metal roof cladding, timber
weatherboard wall cladding,
three face brick chimneys, modest eaves with paired
timber brackets and roundels and panelling between, front timber framed doorway
with a panelled timber door and sidelights and highlights, paired and single
timber framed double hung windows with moulded timber
architraves and timber
window sills, stop chamfered verandah posts, timber bargeboards to the gable end
and the gable infill (panelling
and timber battening) to the early gabled
addition. The mature Cypress and other exotic trees at the front of the
property also
contribute to the setting.
How is it significant?
The Pines, 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook, is of local historical and
representative significance to the Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
The Pines, 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook, has historical significance for its
associations with second generation Irish Catholic farmers
who resided and
cultivated the land from the late 19
century, following on from
their forebears who had seen the potential in the rich soil for agricultural and
grazing farms at Millbrook
in the early 1860s. The Pines appears to have been
built in 1896 as the family home of Thomas James and Minnie Sullivan, the
having originally been part of a larger farming estate of Thomas’
father, Edmund Sullivan. It continued under the ownership
of the Sullivan family
until at least the late 20
century, having been farmed by three
generations of the one family. (Criterion A)
The Pines, 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook, is a representative, moderately
intact example of a small number of surviving Late Victorian
styled farm
dwellings in the Millbrook and Gordon area constructed in the late
and very early 20
centuries. Although altered and
extended at the rear, the original Late Victorian design qualities are clearly
discernible when viewed
from the front, including the hipped roof forms, return
verandah, brick chimneys, construction, windows and front door, and detailing.
The mature Cypress and other exotic trees contribute to the front setting of the
place. (Criterion D)
Heritage Overlay Map
It is recommended that the Heritage Overlay is applied the portion of the
property as shown in the following aerial image (Photo 1).
To reduce the electronic size of this document, this image has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Source of base Map:
Moorabool Shire Council, 2020.
DESCRIPTION:
The Pines farm property, 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook, is set on a large
rural farming allotment on the west side of the road, the
main dwelling and
outbuildings being clustered near the north-east corner of the site. The
dwelling has a substantial front setback
and is fenced off at the front with
timber post and wire fencing. There is an open grassed are and mature Cypress
trees near the
front boundary, there being other exotic trees near the front of
the dwelling (see Photo 6). A gravelled driveway is situated in
the north-east
portion, forming a circular driveway within the site where there is a row of
mature exotic and Cypress trees. Other
mature exotic trees are located to the
east of the main dwelling and near the northern boundary towards the fear. There
are several
outbuildings at the rear of the dwelling, possibly including farm
structures dating to the 19
century such as the gabled and skillion
outbuilding constructed of timber weatherboard to the rear of the dwelling on
the south side.
At the front near the southern boundary of the homestead complex
is an introduced, gabled galvanised corrugated steel shed.
The asymmetrical, single storey, timber weatherboard, Late Victorian styled
dwelling has a main hipped roof form at the front, together
with a return
post-supported convex verandah. There are double hipped wings that project at
the rear where an interwar gabled addition
projects towards the north, and a
more recent gabled addition projects to the south. From the rear gabled
additions are skillion
wings that reflect more recent construction. The roof
forms to the main hipped roof building and early gabled addition are clad in
painted galvanised corrugated steel, while the remainder of the dwelling is clad
in unpainted corrugated sheet metal. Three original
face brick chimneys with
cream brick bands and corbelled tops are a feature of the roofline. Modest
overhangs with paired timber
brackets and roundels and panelling between
comprise the eaves to the main hipped portion, while there are more broadly
eaves to the interwar era gabled addition which has timber
bargeboards. The gable end has early panelled and timber battening.
The front of the dwelling has an original, centrally located timber framed
doorway with a panelled timber door with sidelights and
highlights. Flanking the
front doorway are paired timber framed double hung windows with moulded timber
architraves and timber window
sills. Similar timber framed double hung windows
are located at the sides. The return verandah is supported by stop chamfered
posts, but it lacks any decorative detailing.
At the rear on the north side is a post-supported skillion verandah that
projects from the interwar era gabled addition.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
Main entrance showing the main dwelling,
Main dwelling as viewed from Sullivans Road
(south-east), 2009.
Main dwelling as viewed from Sullivans Road
(south-east), 2015.
‘The Pine’s property as viewed
from Sullivans Road (south-east), with introduced outbuilding at the front,
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
Mature and exotic trees at the front of the
property shaded blue. Source: Nearmap 3 August 2025
Squatting and Early
In early 1837, the Government Surveyor, Frederick D’Arcy and his party
surveyed the upper reaches of the Leigh and Moorabool
Rivers. A second
expedition led by D’Arcy followed in August 1837. One of the main purposes
of the expeditions was to find
new country upon which to establish grazing lands
for new stations. The earliest districts of Melbourne and Geelong, including the
lower reaches of the Barwon and Moorabool Rivers, had already been settled and
were almost totally occupied.
The rush to Ballarat, Blackwood and other goldfields in the 1850s, and the
subsequent political uprising of the Eureka stockade in
Ballarat brought social
reforms and measures to alleviate the land crisis. The reduction of the mining
industry in the late 1850s
instigated a call to ‘unlock the land’
for closer settlement. While the Nicholson Land Act of 1860 and the Duffy Act
1862 sought to open land selection for the small farmer, it was not until the
Grant Land Act of 1865 (refined in 1869) that gave
rise to the greatest land
settlement in the Moorabool Shire.
History of The Pines Farm
In the c.1850s, the Sullivan brothers, Michael, Edmund and John, emigrated
from Tipperary, Ireland, to Kapunda, South Australia, where
they established a
wheat farm of 700 acres on the Gilbert
Sullivan brothers married: Michael to Miss Alice O’Donnell in 1859 and
Edmund to Miss Elizabeth
In late 1863,
Michael and Edmund Sullivan sold their shares in the farm property for £3
an acre given that the land was better
suited to grazing sheep than for
cultivation.289F
November 1863, they set off on an overland journey to “fresh fields and
pastures new” at Millbrook,
Victoria.290F
An account of
the journey was given in
The Advocate
Facing the vicissitudes of wild bush travel, the Messrs. Sullivan chartered
caravans, drawn by bullocks, and commenced the eventful
journey overland.
Accompanying the intrepid landseekers were their wives and families. The
settler, though they found the land in
which they were to carve out a home a
complete wilderness, decided to carry on. This virgin country was noted for its
tall, thick
timber and undergrowth, and it was marked on a crude map as
Moorabool Creek.291F
Arriving at Ballarat, they were met by John Ryan, an Irish Catholic farmer,
who had already settled at Millbrook, and Thomas Ryan,
Gordon.292F
Elizabeth Sullivan stayed at the Plough and Harrow Hotel, Mair Street, Ballarat.
Continuing the journey, the Sullivan brothers
reached Millbrook after three
months of travel. They camped on the banks of the Moorabool
On 3 March 1864, Edmund and Michael Sullivan purchased 47 acres, 1 rood and
35 perches of land comprising allotment 1 of Section 6
in the Parish of Kerrit
Bareet at Millbrook.294F
Michael Sullivan subsequently purchased further land immediately south of this
allotment in 1866 and
On 24 September
1866, Edmund Sullivan acquired 15 acres, 2 roods and 34 perches to the west of
the land he had earlier acquired with
brother.296F
comprised allotment 7A of Section 3 and is now addressed as 52 Sullivans Road.
At Millbrook, the ‘locality was then
nothing more than a primeval forest
– huge gum trees and heavy
undergrowth.’297F
Sullivan brothers soon set about clearing the land for cultivation. As outlined
The Advocate
The arduous task of denuding the forest of umbrageous gums and other timber
was undertaken by the Irish settlers, and, after strenuous
toil, they began in
earnest to speed the plough. The rich, volcanic soil was found to be suitable
for wheat growing and other cereals,
as well as tuber crops. Success attended
their praiseworthy efforts. The land selected by the early pioneers nestled
beneath an extinct
volcano known as Black Hill, and the country opened up became
smiling uplands and wonderfully
productive.298F
Initially, produce was transported to the railway station at Yendon before
the railway line was opened between Ballarat and Gordon
which made access
to the Ballarat markets more convenient.
Possibly on the land originally acquired in 1864 (allotment 2 of Section 6),
Edmund Sullivan built a dwelling and farm buildings.
Here, Edmund and Elizabeth
had another five children: Margaret (born 1863, Gordon), Catherine (born 1864,
Egerton), Edward (born
1866, Egerton), Thomas James (born 1870, Gordon) and
Michael John (born 1876,
Gordon).300F
Following their
Irish Catholic heritage, the Sullivan family belonged to St. Patrick’s
Roman Catholic Church, Gordon.
Having secured his family’s future through the establishment of a
successful crop farm, and only two years after the birth of
his last child,
Edmund Sullivan died on 23 January
By this time, he
had acquired additional land, his property (valued at £1474.8.9) being
described as follows:
All those pieces of land being part of allotment one and two Section Six
Kerrit Bareet and Allotment Seven Section Three Kerrit Bareet
and part of
Urquharts pre-emptive allotment and known as Lot Four containing seventy one
acres three roods and thirty five and a
half perches, the improvements upon
which consist of a five roomed wooden house, outbuildings and
fencing.302F
As set out in Edmund Sullivan’s Will, the farm property was managed by
his widow, Elizabeth Sullivan until his son Edward attained
the age of 25 years
in 1891, when he was to receive a half
The other half
share was bequeathed to Edmund’s second son, Thomas James, when he
attained the age of 25 years in
It was in 1895 when
Thomas James Sullivan married Miss Mary (Minnie) Sullivan, eldest daughter of
P.F. Sullivan, proprietor of the
Gordon Advertiser,
Gordon.305F
The following
year, 1896, Edward Sullivan divested his share of allotment 7A of Section 3 (52
Sullivans Road) to his brother, T.J.
Sullivan.306F
It appears that the existing timber dwelling at 52 Sullivans Road was built
in 1896 as the family home of Thomas James and Minnie
Sullivan known as The
They had six
children: (Edmund Francis, born c.1899), Patrick John (born 1900), Bridget
Catherine Frances (born 1902), Agnes Veronica
(possibly born c.1903-04), Thomas
James (born c.1906) and Michael Gerard (born
c.1909).308F
Throughout the
ensuing years, Thomas James senior farmed oats and barley crops, ran 22 dairy
cows and grazed 14 cattle, 10 pigs and
17 sheep as well as some other
livestock.309F
He was also
stricken by ill-health which caused his life to be cut short on 31 August 1912,
as reported in
Mr. T.J. Sullivan, a resident of Millbrook, was standing near the Ballarat
West railway station on Saturday afternoon watching a funeral
go by when he
suddenly collapsed, and expired in a few minutes. He had for some time been
under medical treatment, and as a certificate
of the cause of death was
forthcoming, an order for burial was
Thomas James Sullivan’s property, The Pines, including the dwelling and
outbuildings, and other farmland, was described in the
Statement of Assets in
his Probate in 1913:
All those pieces of land being part of Crown Allotments 2 & 2A Section 6
and part of Crown Section A Parish of Kerrit Bareet County
of Grant containing
35 acres 1 rood & 24 ½ perches more particularly described in
Certificate of Title Vol 2616 Fol 523049.
All that piece of land being Alltoment
7A Section 3 same Parish and County containing 3 acres 3 roods and 7 perches.
The improvements
on the above land consist of an 8 roomed W.B. house pantry
washhouse and Bathroom, 4 stall stable chaff house Dairy & separator
Machinery shed, Copper house, Mens’ hut, underground well, Spring, 4 tanks
and fencing Valued at £35 per acre. Municipal
Valued at £1922.14.6, the property passed to T.J. Sullivan’s
widow, Minnie.312F
remained at the property and in later years the property seems to have been
farmed by her sons, Thomas James and Michael Gerard.
Rear gabled additions were
built on the north side of the dwelling, possibly during the interwar period.
Ownership of The Pines was
retained by Minnie Sullivan until her death in
The property
remained as part of Minnie Sullivan’s Estate in the ensuing years and in
1969 Title was transferred to Thomas
Sullivan.314F
continued to be owned by the Sullivan family until at least the late
COMPARATIVE
places which were identified in the West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage 2A have
been referenced
with their unique study identifier (i.e: BLA01). Places which
are already included in the Heritage Overlay are referenced by HO number.
Places which are not included in the Heritage Overlay nor identified in the West
Moorabool Heritage Study Stage 2A have no reference
or identifier
Victorian Houses
While there were a small number of large-scale pastoral homesteads developed
in the western region of Moorabool Shire during the nineteenth
considerably more prevalent throughout this area were smaller-scaled
Victorian-era dwellings constructed between the 1860s
and 1910s. These dwellings
are a physical legacy of the varying socio-economic status of the original
Victorian Vernacular – Hipped
A dwelling type that was common to the western region of the Moorabool Shire
and particularly to the goldfields townships were the
hipped Victorian
vernacular styled dwellings, following the steeply-pitched hipped roof forms of
the earlier Victorian Georgian designs
elsewhere. Most of these dwellings were
constructed of timber with corrugated sheet metal roof cladding. In the study
area, the hipped
Victorian Vernacular style was adopted at 65 Inglis Street,
Ballan (c.1892-94), 4 Albert Street, Black wood (c.1860), 5 Old Golden
Road, Blackwood (c.1860), and 111 Golden Pont Road, Blackwood (c.1860).
Historically, the property at 52 Sullivans Road, represents one of a small
number of surviving farm properties first established in
the Gordon and
Millbrook areas in the 1860s. Other properties include:
Summerhill, 55
Boundary Road, Gordon (GOR026) (Photo 7): first established in 1864 by the
emigrant Scottish farmer, Peter Grant, the
farm was gradually increased to 200
acres. Named Glenavon Farm, Grant grew prize-winning crops and ran sheep and a
small number of
cattle. He appears to have built the northern portion of the
existing gabled timber dwelling in c.1864. In 1897, the property was
by Mrs Mary Clifford, and the property became known as Glengariff. It was farmed
by her son, Hubert, in the ensuring years
and on his marriage in 1917 the
property may have been renamed Summerhill. Hubert and his wife, Eileen (nee
Ryan) lived and farmed
the property until their deaths in 1960 and 1959
respectively.
Oakvale, 179
Donnellans Road, Gordon (GOR016) (Photo 8): over 97 acres of freehold land was
first taken up by Robert McDowell in 1864
where he established his farm named
Oakvale. The substantial two storey brick dwelling had been built by 1869.
Llandeilo, 1001
Old Melbourne Road, Ballan (GOR009) (Photo 9): an initial 20 acres of land was
licensed to Charles Vaughan in 1866
as a consequence of the 42
Clause of the amended Land Act of 1865. Vaughan later increased his landholdings
to 1600 acres by the time of his death in 1881.
The property passed to his
brother, William. The existing dwelling on the site today was built in
Lal Lal Gardens,
10 Hennessys Road, Millbrook: it appears that the surviving hipped roofed
Victorian timber farm dwelling is associated
with the former Lal Lal Gardens
established on 154 acres in 1861 by Isaac
Westcott.317F
Summerhill, 55 Boundary Road, Gordon, 2009.
Source: David Rowe and Wendy Jacobs.
Oakvale, 179 Donnellans Road, Gordon, 2009.
Source: David Rowe and Wendy Jacobs.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
Llandeilo, 1001 Old Melbourne Road, Ballan,
2009. Source: David Rowe and Wendy Jacobs.
Architecturally, the hipped roofed form with projecting return verandah and
symmetrical front façade (with a central door opening
and flanking timber
framed double hung windows) comprising The Pines at 52 Sullivans Road,
Millbrook, represents a typical example
of a Victorian style in the area in the
and very early 20
centuries. However, it is one of
a small number remaining of this type in the Gordon and Millbrook area today.
The other surviving
examples are:
Patrick’s Presbytery, 10 Careys Road, Gordon (GOR012-08) (Photo 10): built
in 1913. Designed by the architects, Kempson
and Conolly, it is of brick
construction and has an encircling post-supported verandah with curved lattice
timber fascias and timber
framed tripartite windows. It is comparable with The
Pines through the design and brick construction, but the Presbytery is more
elaborate and intact.
Vale, 161 Conroys Lane, Gordon, built possibly c.1890 (or possibly relocated to
the site). Of timber construction, it
has a post supported verandah and
decorative cast iron valances and brackets. It is comparable to The Pines in the
hipped roof form,
post-supported verandah and window openings, although the
latter is a more intact and elaborate example.
Woodlawn, 1787
Old Melbourne Road, Millbrook, built in c.1874. This brick dwelling with a
hipped roof form, rear double hipped wings
and front post-supported verandah is
directly comparable to The Pines, although it is not as elaborate, possibly as a
result of being
constructed several years earlier.
Dwelling, 91
Ryans Road, Millbrook (YEN014) (Photo 11): built in c.1906 for P.J. Ryan (son of
John Ryan, pioneer of Millbrook). It
is built of brick and has a return
post;-supported verandah with decorative cast iron detailing. There is a central
front doorway
and flanking timber framed double hung windows. The Late Victorian
design is directly comparable architecturally to The Pines, although
elaborate. It shares a similar history with The Pines, having been established
by an Irish Catholic settler, John Ryan,
with his brother Patrick, in the early
Dwelling, 16
Tennyson Street, Gordon, built
c.1872.318F
This dwelling has
been altered and is missing a front verandah. It is in poor condition and low
integrity. It does not appear to
be directly comparable architecturally or
historically to The Pines.
602 Bungaree
Wallace Road, Wallace: a similarly designed Late Victorian timber dwelling built
in c.1882 for Patrick and Mary Linane,
Irish Catholic farmers. This dwelling
features a very similar Federation era gabled addition located at the rear and
which projects
beyond the side of the original dwelling.
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
St Patrick's Presbytery, 10 Careys Road,
Gordon , 2009.
Source: David Rowe and Wendy Jacobs.
Dwelling, 91 Ryans Road, Millbrook,
Source: David Rowe and Wendy Jacobs.
At 602 Bungaree Wallace Road, Wallace, is a similarly designed Late Victorian
timber dwelling built in c.1882 for Patrick and Mary
Linane, Irish Catholic
farmers. This dwelling features a very similar Federation era gabled addition
located at the rear and which
projects beyond the side of the original
The Pines, Statement of Significance, May 2021
Heritage Place:
52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook
To reduce the electronic size of this document, these images have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
Mature and exotic trees at the front of the property
shaded blue. Source: Nearmap 3 August 2025
What is Significant?
The Pines, 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook constructed c.1896 is
significant.
Elements that contribute to the significance of the place include: single
storey hipped roof forms, return post-supported verandah,
projecting early rear
gabled addition on the north side, corrugated sheet metal roof cladding, timber
weatherboard wall cladding,
three face brick chimneys, modest eaves with paired
timber brackets and roundels and panelling between, front timber framed doorway
with a panelled timber door and sidelights and highlights, paired and single
timber framed double hung windows with moulded timber
architraves and timber
window sills, stop chamfered verandah posts, timber bargeboards to the gable end
and the gable infill (panelling
and timber battening) to the early gabled
addition. The mature Cypress and other exotic trees at the front of the
property also
contribute to the setting.
How is it significant?
The Pines, 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook, is of local historical and
representative significance to the Moorabool Shire.
Why is it significant?
The Pines, 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook, has historical significance for its
associations with second generation Irish Catholic farmers
who resided and
cultivated the land from the late 19th century, following on from their
forebears who had seen the potential in the
rich soil for agricultural and
grazing farms at Millbrook in the early 1860s. The Pines appears to have been
built in 1896 as the
family home of Thomas James and Minnie Sullivan, the
property having originally been part of a larger farming estate of Thomas’
father, Edmund Sullivan. It continued under the ownership of the Sullivan family
until at least the late 20th century, having been
farmed by three generations of
the one family. (Criterion A)
The Pines, 52 Sullivans Road, Millbrook, is a representative, moderately
intact example of a small number of surviving Late Victorian
styled farm
dwellings in the Millbrook and Gordon area constructed in the late 19th and very
early 20th centuries. Although altered
and extended at the rear, the original
Late Victorian design qualities are clearly discernible when viewed from the
front, including
the hipped roof forms, return verandah, brick chimneys,
construction, windows and front door, and detailing. The mature Cypress and
other exotic trees contribute to the front setting of the place. (Criterion
Primary source
West Moorabool Heritage Study (Stage 2a) Review, 2021
Council Part A submission,
paragraphs 29-32
Part B submission, page 6,
paragraph 20
Ms Schmeder evidence statement,
page 18, paragraphs 80-81
Ms Schmeder evidence statement,
Submission 7
Ms Schmeder evidence statement,
Ms Schmeder evidence statement,
Council Part B submission, page
28-29, paragraph 134
Descriptive analysis of the
rear portions of the site has been based on an aerial image of the property
provided by the Moorabool
T. O’Callaghan,
Names of Victorian Railway Stations
, H.J. Green, Acting Government
Printer, Melbourne, 1917, p.25.
L.J. Blake,
Place Names
of Victoria
, Rigby, Adelaide, 1976, p.30.
A Pictorial History of
the Shire of Ballan
, Ballan Shire Historical Society, Ballan, 1989,
., pp.23-25.
Bacchus Marsh
newspaper, 18 May 1872.
Victorian Municipal
1890, p.237.
A Pictorial History,
p.49, citing the Australian Handbook, 1894.
., p.81, citing
A. Gunsser in the
Weekly Times,
17 June 1879.
See Township of Ballan
Plan, 1954, VPRS 16171 PROV. Kelly resigned as Civil Engineer in 1872 and took
up a position with the Pyalong
Bacchus Marsh Express
February 1872, p.2. According to Fraser and Ranken,
Centenary of the Sire of
Ballan 1862-1962,
Shire of Ballan, 1962, p.8, he had commenced employed with
the Ballan Shire Council in 1866.
Victorian Births, Deaths
and Marriages Indexes, Department of Justice, Melbourne.
Bacchus Marsh
, 23 September 1871, p.1.
., 8 August
1874, p.2, 12 December 1874, p.2 & J. Huggins, ‘Six Years in the life
of Bernhardt Hirsch’, in
The Settler: Official Quarterly Newsletter of
the Ballan Shire Historical Society
, vol. 5, no. 6, June 1999.
Bacchus Marsh
, 2 January 1875, p.2.
Bacchus Marsh
, 6 May 1876, p.2.
., 31 January
., 1 April 1882,
Certificate of Title, vol.
937 fol. 383 actually listed Dodgshun as proprietor as earlier as 1877, which
appears to have accounted
for a mortgage on the property taken out by Hirsch.
See also Ballan Shire Rate Book, 1888, VPRS 5557/P0 Unit 45 PROV (Ballarat),
which listed John Moran, contractor as owner, which was crossed out and replaced
with J. Alford.
Bacchus Marsh
, 18 August 1888, p.3.
‘Backtracking: Trove Tuesday: Ploughing a straight furrow’, 27
November 2012 at
http://boobookbacktracks.blogspot.com.au/2012/11/trove-tuesday-ploughing-straight-furrow.html
Bacchus Marsh
, 19 July 1873, p.2.
Phelan, op.cit.
Bacchus March Express, 17
January 1880, p.4.
, 29 January
., 5 May 1883,
Phelan, op.cit.
Victorian Births, Deaths
and Marriages Indexes, op.cit.
Bacchus Marsh
, 4 August 1888, p.2.
Ibid., 17 May 1890,
Ibid., 19 July 1890,
Bacchus Marsh
, 25 October 1890, p.2, 7.
Ballan Shire Rate Book,
op.cit., 1891.
Bacchus Marsh
, 26 March 1892, p.2, 3.
Ibid., 31 December 1892,
Ibid., 14 September 1895,
Alford, James, Probate
Administration files, 1895, VPRS 28/P2 Unit 416 PROV.
Certificate of Title, vol.
2056 fol. 164.
See Ballan Shire Rate
Books, op.cit., 1897-1901.
Certificate of Title,
op.cit. & vol. 4972 fol. 246.
Alford, Elizabeth, Probate
Administration files, 1939, VPRS 28/P3 Unit 3298 PROV.
Certificate of Title, vol.
2056 fol. 164.
Ibid., 6723 fol. 512 &
vol. 6766 fol. 193, vol. 6766 fol. 196 & vol. 7014 fol 609
Bacchus Marsh
, 16 May 1896, p.3, 5 December 1896, p.3, 18 February 1901, p.1.
John Farrow, grazier of
‘Lilyvale’ near Ballan appears to have built this dwelling in
c.1894. He held a sale of stock
and equipment at ‘Lilyvale’ in May
1894, possibly in anticipation of relocating to 78 Inglis Street. It appears
during the construction of the dwelling Farrow relocated temporarily to
Mangalore, where he died, having never assumed residency
at 78 Inglis Street.
Bacchus Marsh Express
, 19 May 1894, p.2. The first listing of a
tenement in Ballan was Mrs Farrow in 1895 in the Ballan Shire Rate Book,
, 30 May 1891
& 6 June 1891, p.7.
See McQualter, Robert,
Probate Administration files, 1894, VPRS 7591/P2 Unit 233 PROV, which stated
that the subject site, owned
by Robert McQualter and gifted to his daughter,
Annie, was unimproved in 1894, and the Ballan Shire Rate Book, op.cit. 1895,
listed the widow of McQualter, Elizabeth, as owner of a tenement.
Gascard was not listed in
the Ballan Shire Rate Book for 1898, op.cit., but he was listed as owner in
subsequent years. See also
J. Huggins, ‘Jules Samuel Gascard
1836-1899’, in
The Settler: Official Quarterly Newsletter of the Ballan
Shire Historical Society,
vol. 3, no. 10, June 1995.
The unimproved land at 39
Steiglitz Street had been purchased by R.F. Marshall in 1886 – see
Certificate of Title, vol. 928
fol. 505. The dwelling had been built by May
1887, as it was partially damaged by fire at this time – see
Marsh Express
, 21 May 1887, p.3.
Bacchus Marsh
, 6 April 1895, p.3.
See Certificate of Title,
29 April 1885, vol. 858 fol. 586, when ownership was acquired by Edward Blake.
A mortgage was taken out
with the Commercial Bank in 1891, suggesting that
‘Ramsgate’ was built at this time.
Descriptive analysis of the
rear portions of the site has been based on an aerial image of the property
provided by the Moorabool
T. O’Callaghan,
Names of Victorian Railway Stations
, H.J. Green, Acting Government
Printer, Melbourne, 1917, p.25.
L.J. Blake,
Place Names
of Victoria
, Rigby, Adelaide, 1976, p.30.
A Pictorial History of
the Shire of Ballan
, Ballan Shire Historical Society, Ballan, 1989,
., pp.23-25.
Bacchus Marsh
newspaper, 18 May 1872.
Victorian Municipal
1890, p.237.
A Pictorial History,
p.49, citing the Australian Handbook, 1894.
., p.81, citing
A. Gunsser in the
Weekly Times,
17 June 1879.
Flack’s name was
hand-written on the original Town Plan Ballan dated February 1850 and
lithographed on 24 August 1856, State
Library of Victoria.
See heritage Citation for
the Ballan Hotel for further details.
Flack, George, Probate
Administration files, 1900, includes further information of the Executors of
Flack’s Estate to the
Master in Equity, 12 December 1901, declared that
‘3, ½ acre allotments of land in Inglis St., Ballan’
been offered for sale and still remain unsold’, VPRS 28/P0
Unit 964 PROV.
Mrs Minnie Windsor was
listed as the owner of allotments 6 and 7 of Section 4, comprising 1 acre with a
net annual value of £5
in the Ballan Shire Valuation Book, 1915, VPRS
5563/P0 Unit 7 PROV (Ballarat). For details of Edward Windsor’s occupation
ownership of the Ballan Hotel, see the heritage Citation for the Ballan
See Ballan Shire Rate
Books, 1920-21, 1925-26, VPRS 5557/P0 Unit 45 PROV (Ballarat). The Rate Books
for 1920-21 listed Mrs Minnie
Windsor as owner with a net annual value of
£5. In 1925-26, Vivian Cullen was listed as occupier (and Gilbert Cowan
land having a net annual value of £4, with Cullen owner of land
having a net annual value of £1.
Ibid. The information
listed in the Rate Books suggests that the café and billiard room was
under construction in 1925-26.
The Rate Book for 1930-31 listed Vivian George
Cullen as owner of a shop, house and land with a net annual value of £70,
indicating that the building had been constructed by this time.
Ibid. The Rate Book listed
the café as Kookaburra Café.
Ibid., 1940-41.
A Pictorial History,
p.127. See also Ballan Shire Rate Book, op.cit., 1950-51.
Victorian Births, Deaths
and Marriages Indexes, Department of Justice, Melbourne. Vivian Cullen’s
father, Charles, had arrived
in Ballan in the 1850s with his mother, where he
resided for the remainder of his life. See the
Ballan Times
, 14 August
See ‘Vivian George
Valentine Cullen’, embarkation details, The AIF Project at
https://www.aif.adfa.edu.au/showPerson?pid=69023
Ibid. & Victorian
Births, Deaths and Marriages Indexes, op.cit.
‘Vivian George
Cullen’, op.cit.
Mrs G. Kirkby, Bendigo, to
Army Records, 9 August 1919 in ‘Vivian George Valentine Cullen’,
SERN 1446, series no. B2455,
service record, National Archives of Australia
Victorian Births, Deaths
and Marriages Indexes, op.cit.
December 1935, p.3.
Ballan Times,
March 1955.
There is no listing of the
subject property in Cullen, Vivian George Valentine, Probate Administration
files, 1955, VPRS 28/P4 Unit
The Settler: Official
Quarterly Newsletter of the Ballan Shire Historical Society
, September 2006
& Certificate of Title vol. 10823, fol. 876.
A Pictorial History,
T. O’Callaghan,
Names of Victorian Railway Stations
, H.J. Green, Acting Government
Printer, Melbourne, 1917, p.25.
L.J. Blake,
Names of Victoria
, Rigby, Adelaide, 1976, p.30.
A Pictorial History
of the Shire of Ballan
, Ballan Shire Historical Society, Ballan, 1989,
Bacchus Marsh
newspaper, 18 May 1872.
Victorian Municipal
1890, p.237.
A Pictorial History,
p.49, citing the Australian Handbook, 1894.
citing A. Gunsser in the Weekly Times, 17 June 1879.
N. Backhouse, H. Trigg
& J. Huggins,
Our Journey: The Anglican Parochial District of Ballan and
Bungaree 1849-1999
, Anglican Parochial District of Ballan/Bungaree, Ballan,
1998, pp.4-7.
September 1849, p.4.
Backhouse, et.al.,
March 1860, p.8.
Backhouse, et.al.,
January 1862, p.5.
Backhouse, et.al.,
., p.15, 23.
The Australian News
for Home Readers
, 25 March 1865, p.5.
See Ferguson and Urie
http://fergusonandurie.wordpress.com/2013/12/23/1874-st-johns-anglican-church-ballan-victoria/
Backhouse, et.al.,
Ferguson and Urie
website, op.cit.
Bacchus Marsh
, 28 November 1874.
February 1900, p.3.
Ferguson and Urie
website, op.cit.
Bacchus Marsh
, 19 March 1883.
Backhouse, et.al.,
There is no evidence of an entrance porch today.
Bacchus Marsh
, 17 December 1870, p.3.
Backhouse, et.al.,
., pp.48-49
& Roy Huggins, personal collection, Ballan.
Backhouse, et.al.,
op.cit., pp.48-49
Ballan Times
August 1916,
, 22, 23 & 27 December 1865 &
Marsh Express
, 21 July 1866, p.2.
The Advocate
June 1912, p.23 & Herald Sun, 8 April 2009.
All information taken
from M. Lewis, ‘Terry, Leonard (1825-1884)’, in G. Serle & R.
Ward (eds.),
Australian Dictionary of Biography
, vol.6, 1851-1890,
Melbourne University Press, Carlton, 1976, pp.257-258, unless otherwise noted.
B. Trethowan, ‘A
Study of Banks in Victoria 1851-1939’, Historic Buildings Preservation
Council Report, December 1976,
W. Jacobs & D. Rowe,
‘Former ANZ Bank, 202 Sturt Street, Ballarat: Conservation Management
Plan’, prepared for Ballham
Pty Ltd, November 1998.
M. Lewis (ed.),
Victorian Churches: Their origins, their story and their architecture
National Trust of Australia (Victoria), Melbourne, 1991, p.137. The church is
erroneously addressed as Shaw Street, Hexham.
B. Andrews, ‘St.
Paul’s Church, Oatlands, Tasmania’,
Pugin Foundation,
http://www.puginfoundation.org/assets/Oatlands_Essay.pdf
Information taken from
D. Rowe, ‘Forest, Farmland & Gold’: Thematic History of the
Western Region of the Moorabool
Shire’, prepared for the Moorabool Shire,
unless otherwise referenced.
Victoria Government
, no. 135, 23 August 1859.
Benham’s store is
shown on Map of Country Lands in the Parish of Warrenheip, County of Grant,
1858, Bungaree & District
Historical Society collection.
(Ballarat), 21 February 1861, p.4 &
The Ballarat Star
, 27 October
The Junction Hotel was
in existence by 1863 – see
, 24 January 1863, p.1. It was
located in the south-east corner of the road junction at “The
Junction”. See The Ballaarat
& Ballaarat East Water Supply Geological
Survey of Country in the Parishes of Bungaree & Warrenheip, 1870, Bungaree
District Historical Society.
Parish of Warrenheip
Plan, n.d., VPRS 16171 PROV.
January 1863, p.1.
Certificate of Title,
vol. 179 fol. 632.
The Ballarat
, 24 July 1866, p.4.
Certificate of Title,
op.cit. & vol. 235, fol. 998.
Ballarat Star
newspapers in the 1860s report on issued publicans’
licenses and those seeking a publicans’ license, including publicans
Bungaree. No report has been found under the name of Martin or Livingston, or
possible tenants of the property using the sign
‘Bridge Inn’.
Certificate of Title,
op.cit. & vol. 297 fol. 297.
James McGuan’s
Statement of Assets in his Probate Administration files, 1900, VPRS 28/P0 Unit
965 listed Sanders as a tenant.
Ibid. McGuan’s
Probate listed Mary Embleton and Annie Coghlan as his only next of kin.
R. Huggins, Transcript
Gordon Advertiser
, 11 October 1901.
Certificate of Title,
op.cit. & vol. 2859 fol. 632.
A photograph of the rear
of the hotel after substantial fire damage in 1992 shows a chimney in the
foreground that is suggestive
of Federation era construction.
Contractor Reporter
, 2 September 1913, State Library of Victoria, listed the
following tender: ‘Ballarat Brewing Co – Additions, Bridge Hotel,
Ballarat Star
February 1918.
September 1923.
Ibid., 16 December 1922,
p.16. Bungaree also suffered a tornado in 1927, seriously damaging many
buildings including the nearby
Morning Star Hotel, resulting in its 1928
rebuilding (
, 20 June 1927, p.1). While it has been proposed that
this same tornado was the reason the Bridge Hotel was reconstructed in 1930,
there is no evidence of this.
Construction and Real
Estate Journal
(Sydney, N.S.W.), 20 August 1930, p.18.
The Courier
Ballarat, 31 August 1992, p.3, article provided by the Bungaree & District
Historical Society.
See D. Rowe,
‘Heritage Assessment of the Former Ballarat Orphanage, 200 Victoria
Street, Ballarat East’, prepared for
the City of Ballarat, February
April 1953, p.20.
‘Ballarat Brewing
Company’, Federation University Australia online, April 2015, at
https://bih.federation.edu.au/index.php/Ballarat_Brewing_Company
, 20 May 1937, p.4.
The Australasian
25 June 1939, p.41.
Bungaree and District
Historical Society Newsletter
, no. 51, July 2005.
Certificate of Title
vol. 8403 fol. 246.
The Courier
Ballarat, op.cit.
Information from current
owners to the Moorabool Shire Council as part of a submission to the exhibition
of the heritage study,
20 August 2016.
The Courier,
Information from current
owners, op.cit.
The hotel was in
existence in 1863. See
, 24 January 1863, p.1.
Taylor, op.cit.
Ballarat Star
January 1865, p.3. The connection of Persse to the Junction Hotel is given in
Bendigo Advertiser
, 21 July 1882, p.2, when part of the property was
destroyed by fire.
Neil Carey was granted a
publican’s license ‘for the Racecourse hotel, Bungaree in January
The Ballarat Star
, 5 January 1866, p.4. He had advertised his
intention of seeking a licence on 15 December 1865, p.4 in the
, where he described his property as follows: ‘The house is built
of wood, and is my own property, to be known by the sign of
the Racecourse
The hotel is shown on
the opposite side of the road junction to the Racecourse Hotel in the Ballaarat
& Ballaarat East Water
Supply Geological Survey of Country in the Parishes
of Bungaree & Warrenheip, 1870, Bungaree & District Historical Society.
Daniel Clohesy sought a publican’s license in 1870 – see
, 11 January 1870-, p.,3.
P.J. Vernon, ‘The
Vernon Collection: a Selection of Architectural Drawings’, exhibition
brochure, Ballarat, 1992.
George Clegg, Probate
Administration files, 1958, VPRS 28/P4 Unit 1658 PROV.
Vernon, op.cit.
Vernon, op.cit.
M. Lewis & T. Sawyer
The Australian Architectural Index
online, University of
Melbourne & ‘Ballarat Building Permits Database’, Statutory
Planning Department, City of Ballarat.
Western Moorabool Shire
Heritage Study Stage 2A database.
Taken from D. Rowe,
‘Forest, Farmland & Gold: Thematic Environmental History of the
Western Region of the Moorabool Shire’,
draft, prepared for the Moorabool
Shire Council, June 2010.
See Plan of the Parish
of Kerrit Bareet, 1944, VPRS 16171 PROV & Certificates of Title, vol. 111
fol. 063 & vol. 111 fol.
The Ballan Shire Rate
Book (West Riding) for 1865 listed Robert McDowell as the owner of land only
– see R. Huggins, Index
of the Ballan Shire Rate Books, personal
collection, Ballan. The Buninyong Road Board Rate Book for 1866, VPRS 13490/P1
Unit 1 PROV
(Ballarat) listed McDowell as the owner of land at Black Hill, with
a net annual value of £44. The Buninyong Shire Rate Book
for 1869, VPRS
13490/P1 Unit 2 PROV (Ballarat) listed McDowell as the owner of a tenement and
land, but with a net annual value of
£35. However, Robert’s sixth
child, John, was born at Mount Egerton in 1867, with his daughter, Mercy, born
in 1869. This suggests that they were residing in an earlier dwelling
Ballarat Courier,
21 August 1874, page 3.
Ballarat Courier,
8 February 1875, page 4 and 16 April 1875, page 3.
Maureen Davenport (nee
Ryan), Canberra, personal comments, 21 January 2015. The kitchen wing has been
demolished.
Bacchus Marsh
10 April 1880, page 4.
R. Huggins, Transcript
Gordon Advertiser
, 20 May 1904, personal collection, Ballan, &
Victorian Births, Deaths and Marriages Indexes, Department of Justice,
Information kindly
provided by the Ballarat Old Cemetery, January 2015.
Bacchus Marsh
, 10 April 1880, p.4 &
, 30 November 1883, p.10.
Victorian Births, Deaths
and Marriages Indexes, op.cit. & The Argus, 17 April 1901, p.1.
Ballarat Cemeteries
and Crematorium, op.cit.
Ballarat Asylum Records,
VPRS 7426/P1 Unit 1 PROV.
Ibid. & Victorian
Births, Deaths and Marriages Indexes, op.cit. The
Gordon Advertiser
., 20 May 1904, also claimed that McDowell invented many
labour-saving implements for tilling the soil. However, the newspaper seems
have confused Robert McDowell of ‘Oakvale’ with Robert McDowell of
Hay, New South Wales, who took out a patent (no.
4574) for ‘improvements
with ploughs’ on 15 June 1886. See
Victoria Government Gazette
July 1886, p.1978.
Robert Luke McDowell,
Probate Administration files, 1904, VPRS 28/P2 Unit 688 PROV.
Certificate of Title,
vol. 111 fol. 064.
, 23 March 1907,
January 1908.
R. Huggins, Index of the
Gordon Advertiser
, 9 July 1909, private collection, Ballan.
Bacchus Marsh
, 29 October 1910. See also
, 25 October 1910.
Certificate of Title,
vol. 3010 fol. 827 & Victorian Births, Deaths and Marriages Indexes,
Davenport, op.cit.
Certificate of Title
vol. 84 fol. 755 & Davenport, op.cit.
Ibid., vol. 3467 fol.
288 & Davenport, op.cit.
Victorian Births, Deaths
and Marriages Indexes, op.cit.
July 1951, p.14.
Certificate of Title,
Davenport, op.cit.
P. Griffiths,
Times Blest: A History of Buninyong & District 1837-1901
, Buninyong
& District Historical Society, 1988, pp.121-122.
Kellaway, ‘Research into Yuulong, Scotsburn, near Buninyong’,
National Trust of Australia (Victoria), 1976.
D. Cahir, Dunnstown,
notes provided on Killarney to the author, March 2010 & Australian Heritage
A Pictorial History
of the Shire of Ballan
, Ballan Shire Historical Society, 1989, p.45 &
Australian Heritage Database online, 31 May 2009. The latter states that the
was constructed in 1857.
‘A Heritage Walk
Through Ballan’, Ballan Shire Historical Society, 1996.
Taken from D. Rowe,
‘Forest, Farmland & Gold: Thematic Environmental History of the
Western Region of the Moorabool Shire’,
draft, prepared for the Moorabool
Shire Council, June 2010.
‘A Millbrook
Octogenarian: The Late Mrs A. Sullivan’, in
Gordon, Egerton &
Ballan Advertiser
, 2 February 1917, p.1.
‘Distinguished
Pioneer Family’ in
The Advocate
, 6 March 1941, p.28.
‘A Millbrook
Octogenarian’,
Parish of Kerrit Bareet
Plan, 1944, VPRS 16171 PROV.
Ibid. See also
Certificate of Title, vol. 225 fol. 803.
‘A Millbrook
Octogenarian’,
‘Distinguished
Pioneer Family’,
District Historical Society Newsletter
, no. 40, October 2001 & Appendix
No. 29, ‘Statement Showing Dates of Opening and Length in Miles of the
Different Sections
of the Victorian Railways’, 1919,
Commonwealth
Parliamentary Papers
, 1929, National Archives of Australia, pp.86-90.
Victorian Births, Deaths
and Marriages Indexes, Department of Justice, Melbourne.
Edmund Sullivan, Probate
Administration files, 1878, VPRS 28/P2 Unit 75 PROV.
Ibid. According to
family history research by Maureen Davenport, Canberra, April 2015, Mrs
Elizabeth Sullivan remarried in 1891
and relocated to Western Australia.
Sullivan, op.cit.
R. Huggins, Transcript
Gordon Advertiser
, 17 May 1895.
Certificate of Title,
op.cit. Edward Sullivan appears to be owned and operated the Millbrook Hotel
until 1892, when he advertised
it for sale given that he was ‘leaving the
district.’ See Huggins,
., 12 August 1892. According to
Maureen Davenport, Edward Sullivan relocated to Western Australia. He enlisted
for World War One
on 21 August 1916 at the age of 49 years and 10 months. See
http://discoveringanzacs.naa.gov.au/Search/Persons?PlaceOfBirth=MILLBROOK&Page=2&Rows=15
Ibid. A mortgage was
taken out by T.J. Sullivan at this time, which further suggests that the
dwelling was built at this time.
The property was named ‘The Pines’
in a report on the marriage of Miss Agnes Veronica Sullivan to Francis John
The Advocate
, 14 June 1923, p.33.
Ibid. & Victorian
Births, Deaths and Marriages Indexes, op.cit.
James T. Sullivan,
Probate Administration files, 1913, VPRS 28/P3 Unit 388 PROV.
September 1912, p.14.
J.T. Sullivan,
Certificate of Title,
Ibid., vol. 8814 fol.
Information taken from
heritage Citations in the West Moorabool Heritage Study Stage 2A unless
otherwise referenced.
‘Isaac Westcott
& the “Lal Lal Gardens” Millbrook’, in the
Bungaree and
District Historical Society Newsletter
, no. 29, July 1998, p.3.
See Plan of the Town of
Gordon, op.cit.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (13.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter