URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2017/782.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:24:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Queen v McKnight [2017] VSC 782 (22 December 2017)
THE SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA
Not restricted
AT MELBOURNE &
S CR 2017 0022
STUART MATTHEW McKNIGHT
DATE OF HEARING
8 September & 8 December 2017
DATE OF SENTENCE:
22 December 2017
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
R v McKnight
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2017] VSC 782
First revision, 10 January 2018: paras [3], [5], [13], [33], [35], [55]
CRIMINAL LAW – Sentence – Manslaughter by unlawful and dangerous
act – Arson – Accused (aged 45) mistakenly
perceived a sexual
advance while helping his neighbour (aged 79) and then bashed him in his own
down house with neighbour (believed dead) still
inside – Very serious examples of manslaughter and arson – Commenced
as murder trial but jury discharged and new indictment filed over – Pleas
of guilty – Limited remorse – Depressing
criminal history –
Only fair prospects of rehabilitation – Sentence of eleven years’
imprisonment for manslaughter,
five years’ imprisonment for arson –
After cumulation, total effective sentence of thirteen years’ imprisonment
with non-parole period of ten years – But for pleas of guilty, sentence of
sixteen years’ imprisonment with non-parole
period of thirteen years
Sentencing Act
Appearances
For the Crown
Mr N. Papas QC with
Ms A. Moran
John Cain, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
For the Accused
Mr S. Gardner with
Ms C. Hollingworth
Stary Norton Halphen
HIS HONOUR:
Overview and summary of
the evening of Thursday 19 May 2016, Stuart Matthew McKnight, who was aged 45,
went across the street to the home of his neighbour
Graham Howard Stevenson, who
was 79. Both men lived in Bunganowee Drive, Clifton Springs, near
2 Mr McKnight, who had been unemployed for
some time, lived with his parents. He had separated from his wife and four
Mr Stevenson was a retired engineer and lived alone. His wife had
died in 1991 and his four sons had all grown up and lived elsewhere.
men were friendly and had known each other since 2008, when both moved into the
area. Mr McKnight had performed odd jobs
3 Back to the evening in question. In the
course of helping Mr Stevenson fix a broken pantry door, Mr McKnight, who was
intoxicated,
wrongly perceived what was in fact only incidental physical contact
by his neighbour as an unwanted sexual advance. Mr McKnight’s
response was to punch Mr Stevenson in the nose, causing it to break. Mr
Stevenson tried to defend himself by picking up
a carving fork from the kitchen
bench. The two men then grappled, during which Mr McKnight broke free and
assaulted Mr Stevenson
further, including with a piece of wood. All of this
caused quite serious injuries to Mr Stevenson. At some point, Mr McKnight
turned the fork against Mr Stevenson and impaled it into his
4 Believing that he had killed Mr Stevenson,
Mr McKnight panicked and cravenly sought to cover up his crime by burning down
He took a fuel can from Mr Stevenson’s shed, splashed the
contents about the house (although not on Mr Stevenson), ignited
it and then
headed back to his own home.
5 Neighbours noticed the
fire and called emergency services. When the fire brigade arrived, the house
was fully ablaze. Despite
the fire and smoke, firefighters were able to find Mr
Stevenson. The fork had been left impaled in his chest. He was in a very
way, but still alive. A firefighter described him as appearing to have been
“beaten up”.
6 Mr McKnight had returned
to the scene a little earlier. He was carrying on in an odd and
over-melodramatic fashion. For example,
he feigned an attempt to get into the
burning house to save Mr Stevenson. He exclaimed that Mr Stevenson was a
paedophile or a sex
offender and suggested that he was suicidal (none of which
is true). When asked by a firefighter what he was doing at Mr Stevenson’s
house earlier, Mr McKnight said he was “on the computer and picking
flowers from the garden”. He opened the door of
the ambulance while
paramedics were treating Mr Stevenson, and had to be told, more than once, not
to disturb them. He had blood
on his shoes and was evasive when police inquired
as to how that may have occurred. His behaviour, remarks and appearance were
that the finger of suspicion was pointed at him almost immediately. He was
arrested by police. When removed from the vehicle at
the police station later,
he smelled of petrol.
7 Mr Stevenson was taken away
by ambulance and ultimately to the Alfred Hospital. He had suffered multiple
serious head and facial
injuries, a puncture wound to his chest, carbon monoxide
poisoning, and full thickness burns to fifteen percent of his body. He
placed on life support, which was withdrawn at 1:00 p.m. on Sunday 22 May 2016.
Sadly, he died shortly thereafter.
8 A post mortem
examination revealed that the cause of death was blunt force trauma to the head
in combination with the effects of
was ultimately extinguished, but the house was effectively
10 When interviewed formally by police in
the early hours of the next morning, Mr McKnight admitted that he had been at Mr
Stevenson’s
the house was ablaze. In a subsequent interview later the same day,
he added to
his earlier version. He said, amongst other things, that Mr Stevenson told him
that he had fallen into his pantry door
and requested that he come over; that he
attended and helped Mr Stevenson remove the pantry door from the house; that he
but later smelled something and heard someone yell out about a fire;
and that he went straight over to Mr Stevenson’s house
and went inside but
could not see anything, so he left.
11 Examination of
the house revealed that flammable liquid had been spread about various locations
and used to start the fire. Flammable
liquid was also detected on Mr
McKnight’s clothes and shoes. DNA analysis indicated extremely strong
support for the proposition
that blood on Mr McKnight’s left shoe was that
of Mr Stevenson. DNA analysis of a piece of wood also indicated extremely
support for the view that Mr Stevenson’s blood was present.
Fingernail scrapings taken from Mr Stevenson, upon DNA analysis,
indicated very
strong support for the proposition that Mr McKnight was a contributor to that
DNA profile. However, Mr McKnight was
excluded as a contributor to a mixed DNA
profile found on the handle of the carving
12 Mr McKnight was charged with murder and
arson, and was ultimately committed for trial on those charges in this
13 On 28 August 2017, Mr McKnight pleaded not
guilty to those charges before a jury and me sitting in this Court at Geelong.
A substantial
amount of evidence was led at trial. However, following a break
in proceedings to consider the potential discharge of the jury for
reasons it is
unnecessary to rehearse, and in light of arguable weaknesses in the evidence
given by an eye-witness who was to be
relied on as establishing that Mr McKnight
had been seen coming from the blazing house soon after the fire started, counsel
into negotiations as to a potential settlement of the matter. The case
at trial against Mr McKnight had been a circumstantial one,
with the Director
unable to say exactly what had transpired inside the home of Mr Stevenson
leading to his death. After an assessment
of the evidence as it had fallen thus
far in the trial, the Director accepted that he could no longer exclude the
reasonable possibility
that, instead of acting with murderous intent, Mr
McKnight may have consciously, voluntarily and deliberately committed an
and dangerous act that caused Mr Stevenson’s
5 September 2017, the parties advised that the matter had settled as pleas of
guilty to manslaughter and arson. The jury were
advised accordingly and were
discharged without verdict. A fresh indictment was filed charging manslaughter
and arson. Mr McKnight
pleaded guilty to both charges. The Director and Mr
McKnight also accepted as accurate, for the purposes of the plea, the foregoing
summary of the events that led to Mr Stevenson’s
15 Mr McKnight is now to be sentenced for
those offences. There is no dispute that he must receive terms of imprisonment.
The ultimate
issue that I must determine concerns the length of those prison
sentences and the associated non-parole
16 Before passing sentence, I shall also
summarize the victim impact statements; assess the nature and gravity of the
offending; outline
the factors in mitigation and various sentencing purposes and
principles; and then deal with an ancillary order for disposal of items
connected with the offence.
Victim impact
17 So, first, to the victim impact
statements.
18 Five such statements were made –
one each by Mr Stevenson’s sons Anthony, Andrew and Craig Stevenson, and
his daughters-in-law
Aida and Michelle
They were read aloud to
the Court by Mr Papas QC, who appeared with Ms Moran on the plea for the
19 The statements reveal the terrible loss
and sadness that Mr Stevenson’s family feel as a result of his unlawful
20 Anthony Stevenson feels numb. His last
image of his father is one of blood, bruising, swelling and medical tubes. He
whether his father was scared. He feels
21 Andrew Stevenson, who is a surgeon, found
that all of his training had not prepared him for the horror that faced him and
when they saw his father, who was unrecognizable, dying in hospital.
He has disturbing dreams. He is angry at his father’s
killer. He used to
ring his dad every Friday evening as he drove from work across a bridge in
Brisbane, which his dad could always
picture, but that moment of contact is now
gone forever.
22 Craig Stevenson was also numb with
grief when he was told of what had happened. Grief then turned to fury at his
killer. He has not had a full night’s sleep since his
father’s death. He misses him
23 Aida Stevenson (who is married to
Andrew) cannot imagine that her recurring thoughts of what her father-in-law
experienced will
ever go away. She held his hand as he took his last breath,
which is another painful memory that will not leave her. She explains
sleepless nights, nightmares, tears, frustration, anger and depression have all
been a part of her family’s lives since
24 Finally, Michelle Stevenson (who is
married to Craig) explains that her family is also haunted by these events. It
is very difficult
to think of only good memories when they are so grief-stricken
and angry. She, like the others in her family, is also concerned
effect that these events will have on Mr Stevenson’s
grandchildren.
25 These victim impact statements are
powerful, eloquent and moving documents. In so far as it is permissible to do
so, I have had
regard to their contents in considering sentence, particularly on
the manslaughter.
Nature and gravity of
offences and offender’s culpability and degree of
responsibility
26 I turn now to an
assessment of the nature and gravity of the offences, and of Mr McKnight’s
culpability and degree of
responsibility.
Manslaughter
27 Manslaughter
is a common law offence the maximum penalty for which is set by statute at
twenty years’
imprisonment.
offence is serious, by definition. The life of a father and grandfather has
been lost as a result of criminally dangerous
behaviour. Further, and as the
victim impact statements show, the grief caused to his family is
immeasurable.
29 The form of manslaughter relied on
is manslaughter by an unlawful and dangerous act. This means that, while Mr
McKnight did not
have an intention to kill or cause really serious injury (or
recklessness thereto) when he bashed Mr Stevenson, for otherwise it
murder, his plea of guilty accepts that his actions were unlawful and dangerous
– dangerous in the sense that a reasonable
person in his position would
have realised that, in delivering the blows he struck, Mr Stevenson was being
exposed to an appreciable
risk of serious
30 While manslaughter
is one of the more serious crimes known to the law, the circumstances of its
commission, and the resulting sentences,
vary widely. Usually, voluntary
manslaughter (which no longer exists in Victoria since the abolition of
provocation as a defence
to murder) is the category regarded as the most
serious; then manslaughter by unlawful and dangerous act is usually a rung
and then manslaughter by criminal negligence is usually another rung
down. Often, there will be a lower level of moral culpability
in the offender
who killed by criminal negligence than the one who killed by an unlawful and
dangerous act. This is because, in most
cases of criminal negligence, there will
be no intent on the part of the offender to cause any harm whatever to the
victim, whereas
such an intention usually (but not always) will be present in
cases of manslaughter by an unlawful and dangerous act. But there
inflexible rule. Some instances of manslaughter by criminal negligence will be
more serious, and result in heavier sentences,
than instances of manslaughter by
an unlawful and dangerous act. Each case must turn upon its own particular
there can be no inflexible rule is illustrated by the circumstances of this
case. On the one hand, the offence had some very
serious features, including
the following: First, Mr Stevenson was bashed mercilessly for no reason other
than a drunken man’s
mistaken perception about the intent of minor
physical contact. Further, he was punched and then struck with a piece of wood,
caused serious injuries. It is not possible to say how many times he was
struck, but the injuries are serious and numerous enough
to suggest that the
bashing was brutal. While he did not have an intention to cause really serious
injury, it is plain from those
injuries that Mr McKnight intended at least some
harm to Mr Stevenson. That was extremely dangerous and culpable behaviour
a very high level of
culpability.
32 Secondly, the offence occurred in Mr
Stevenson’s own home, where he was entitled to feel
33 Thirdly, while death was unexpected, Mr
McKnight seriously assaulted a man who was 34 years his elder – indeed,
to be his father. I think that that is a cowardly thing to do. That
said, I recognize that Mr Stevenson does not appear to have
34 Fourthly, Mr McKnight’s subsequent
behaviour, some of which forms part of the arson offence and must not be
double-counted,
does him no credit. While I accept that he may have acted out
of panic, and while I accept that he may have believed Mr Stevenson
was already
dead, it was still a callous and cruel thing to attempt to cover up his crime by
burning not only Mr Stevenson’s
house, but also his body. Further, his
putrid and false allegations that Mr Stevenson was a paedophile and had spoken
himself were just disgraceful.
other hand, there are features of the manslaughter which tend in the other
direction. First, as Mr Gardner, who appeared
with Ms Hollingworth for Mr
McKnight, pointed out, the offence was spontaneous and involved no planning
whatsoever.
36 Secondly, Mr McKnight’s
presence at the house was well-intentioned and as a result of an invitation
– he was there
to help his neighbour. He was not an unwanted
37 Thirdly, he did not bring the piece of
wood he used as a weapon to the confrontation, but rather picked it up in the
the assault.
38 Fourthly, it seems that
the bashing, while brutal, was only
short-lived.
39 Finally, unlike some other instances
of manslaughter, the offence was not committed in
40 Mr Gardner submitted that the offence
falls into the “mid-range of gravity” of manslaughter. Mr Papas
submitted that
it is a “serious example at the upper end” of
manslaughter.
41 In so far as labels like those
matter, in my view, this is a very serious example of manslaughter, well above
the mid-range of
gravity. A 79-year-old man was beaten seriously and to death
in his own home by a much younger man over the merest of misunderstandings.
While Mr McKnight’s intoxication and misperception might explain his being
affronted, and while I take into account the matters
I have just mentioned,
including the spontaneous nature of the offence, there is no escaping the fact
that this was an extreme and
brutal response with tragic consequences and which
involved a very high level of
culpability.
is a statutory offence which carries a maximum penalty of fifteen years’
imprisonment.
a person’s home has been deliberately destroyed by fire makes this a very
serious example of arson. Further, an offence
like this also exposes
neighbouring properties to the risk of fire damage and firefighters to the risks
associated with fighting
44 On the other
hand, I accept Mr Gardner’s submission that the arson was spontaneous and
unsophisticated. Further, it was
not motivated by any desire to cause loss but
reflected panic.
45 Again, I note that, having taken
into account as an aggravating feature of the manslaughter that the house and
body were burnt
in an attempt to cover up that crime, I shall be careful not to
count the same aggravating feature when assessing the gravity of
46 Nevertheless, I still regard this as a
very serious example of arson.
47 I turn now
to the factors in mitigation on which Mr McKnight is entitled to
doing so, I shall set out in some detail his background as outlined by Mr
Gardner on the plea.
49 Mr McKnight was born on 15
December 1970. He has therefore just turned
50 His father was an aircraft mechanic. Sadly,
he died in April this year following complications resulting from a stroke. His
who is still alive, worked selling newspaper subscriptions. He also has
a brother who is married with children.
McKnight grew up in Corio and completed Year 11 at Corio Secondary College. He
left school to complete an apprenticeship in
52 He had many jobs as a child and showed
a keen work ethic as an adult. He completed his apprenticeship and then worked
as a subcontractor
in carpentry. Eventually, he started his own business in the
building industry.
53 Mr McKnight and his partner
had four daughters, who range in age from twelve to
54 Unfortunately, Mr McKnight suffered
serious spinal troubles which in turn led to heavy drinking and significant
problems within
his relationship. Ultimately, his business failed, he separated
from his partner and children and went to live with his parents.
He has worked
only intermittently ever since.
55 Mr McKnight has a
criminal history that makes for depressing reading. From his mid-twenties, he
has incurred convictions for numerous
assaults of varying degrees of
seriousness, breaching intervention orders and driving offences. All matters
have been dealt with
in the Magistrates’ Court. The penalties have ranged
from fines to community corrections orders to suspended prison sentences
intensive correction orders to relatively short immediate prison sentences. It
is plain that he has had a serious and ongoing
problem with drinking, anger
management and violence within his relationship with his
56 His health is not the best either. He
is overweight, has diabetes (Type 2), has a compressed vertebrae and suffered a
heart attack
in 2011 (which required a stent).
McKnight has had a serious drinking problem for many years. He has had two
admissions to a detoxification unit and was abstinent
for a period of two years
following a car accident. But it appears that his insight into his problem is
not as clear as it might
be. He was drinking daily at the time of the offences.
He was, in a sense, self-medicating over the sadness he felt at not being
to see his children very often.
58 He also suffers
from depression, which was diagnosed after the breakup of his relationship with
his partner. He was on an anti-depressant
medication at the time of the
59 On a more positive note, Mr McKnight
has used his time in prison wisely and productively. He has a responsible
position as a head
60 As for the future,
upon his eventual release, he would like to pursue work in the mechanical field.
He also wishes to rekindle
his relationship with his
61 Having set out that background, I turn
now to the mitigating factors.
62 First, in my view, the most important
mitigating factor is that Mr McKnight pleaded guilty to both manslaughter and
arson. While
those pleas came late, they are still significant in several
63 First, the pleas of guilty have obviated
the need to continue with the trial or commence a retrial and thereby have
least some of) the witnesses the ordeal of reliving these events and
being cross-examined about them.
64 Secondly, given
the potential doubts about the eye-witness evidence, particularly when coupled
with his being excluded as a contributor
to the mixed DNA profile found on the
handle of the carving fork, it is plain that, as things developed at trial, Mr
McKnight had
an arguable defence to murder, manslaughter and arson. Thus, while
his plea of guilty to manslaughter has avoided the risk of a
conviction for
murder, he has also foregone the chance of an outright acquittal of homicide and
of arson, which, in my view, adds
more weight to the pleas of
65 Finally, the guilty pleas involve at
least some acceptance by Mr McKnight of moral and legal responsibility for his
actions and
a willingness to facilitate the course of
second factor in mitigation is that I am satisfied that Mr McKnight has some
remorse for his crimes, albeit I think that remorse
is limited. There are four
reasons for that conclusion.
67 First, in the
circumstances of this case, his pleas of guilty indicate some remorse. As I
have said, he could have chosen to run
a trial in the hope of an outright
acquittal. But, in pleading guilty and foregoing that chance, I think he has
shown at least some
68 Secondly, while his
attempt to hide his responsibility for the killing by setting fire to the house
and lying about Mr Stevenson’s
intentions reflect a combination of panic
and lack of remorse at that time, I think it is significant not only that he has
responsibility for his behaviour by pleading guilty but also that he
has sought to apologize publicly for his actions. In particular,
objection, I received as an exhibit on the plea Mr McKnight’s letter of
apology, dated 4 September 2017. It reads:
was a friend of mine. I never intended for this to have occurred. I am sorry.
I deeply sympathize with the family.
69 I assume his
reference to not intending “this” to occur is a reference to the
killing of Mr Stevenson, which is consistent
with his pleas of not guilty to
murder but guilty to manslaughter. It cannot be a reference to the arson, for
it is plain that he
meant to burn the house. In any event, he at least has done
the decent thing by apologizing to Mr Stevenson’s family, whatever
may be worth to them.
70 Thirdly, I accept that Mr
McKnight accepts responsibility for the heartache he has put his parents
through. His father has since
died, but his mother still lives in the same
house opposite Mr Stevenson’s, which must be difficult for
71 Finally, however, I am not satisfied that Mr
McKnight’s remorse is profound. Rather, on the materials before me, I can
only a limited level of remorse in his
Prospects of
rehabilitation
72 Thirdly, I am satisfied that
Mr McKnight has some prospects of rehabilitation. I do not find that those
prospects are good or
excellent, but just fair. There are several reasons for
that conclusion.
73 First, his pleas of guilty and
limited remorse suggest at least some positive prospects of
rehabilitation.
74 Secondly,
that he enjoys the ongoing support of some members of his family, including his
mother, an aunt and one of his daughters,
gives me hope that he will have the
encouragement, support and motivation to rehabilitate himself over the longer
75 Thirdly, Mr McKnight has worked in
responsible positions in the past and, I believe, could obtain work again in the
I noted earlier, he is working in prison and hopes to work in
mechanics upon his eventual release from
76 Fourthly, he has been abstinent from
alcohol for an extended period in the past. Despite having limited insight, he
has also shown
some willingness at least to treat his problem. There is some
prospect that, with counselling and a long period of forced abstinence
prison, he will have the wherewithal to abstain from or limit his drinking in
the future.
77 Fifthly, however, as I indicated
earlier, it is also clear that he has had serious difficulties with drinking,
anger management
and violence for many years now. While his prior convictions
are not as grave or as numerous as many seen in this Court, they are
troubling in their nature, context and frequency. He has twice served prison
sentences, although both were relatively short.
On the other hand, his last
prior conviction for actual violence was incurred over six years ago. His last
convictions for any
offences were for breaching intervention orders in 2013. He
completed the community correction order imposed as a result of those
convictions.
78 It is for those reasons that, on
balance, I assess Mr McKnight’s prospects of rehabilitation as only fair.
He simply has
not shown the sustained periods of good behaviour that suggest he
has better prospects than that. On the other hand, the length
of the sentence I
am about to impose will give him plenty of time to mend his
79 I turn now to the purposes of
sentencing.
Section 5(1)
provides that the only purposes for which sentence may be imposed are,
to use the shorthand, general deterrence, specific deterrence,
denunciation,
protection of the community, just punishment and
rehabilitation.
General deterrence, denunciation
and just punishment
81 In my view, general
deterrence, just punishment and denunciation are important considerations in
respect of both offences. The
community should understand that behaviour of the
substantial
terms of imprisonment that reflect that a person’s life has
been taken by violent, unlawful and dangerous behaviour, that the
lives of Mr
Stevenson’s loved ones have been marred forever in consequence, and that a
person’s home was deliberately
destroyed by
Specific deterrence
82 While his pleas of guilty, limited remorse
and fair prospects of rehabilitation reduce the need for specific deterrence, I
that Mr McKnight’s criminal history makes it necessary to the fix a
sentence that includes a component that is designed in
part to deter him from
further offending.
Rehabilitation and protection
of the community
83 Further, despite his only
fair prospects of rehabilitation, the sentencing purpose of rehabilitation
remains an important consideration.
Such prospects as he has must be fostered
in both his and in the community’s long-term interests, because he will be
to the community ultimately.
84 However, I
do not consider that there is any need to add a separate component in sentencing
for protection of the community. Despite
the disturbing nature of the crime and
his prior convictions, I still consider it unlikely that Mr McKnight would act
unlawful, violent and dangerous way again. The sentence that results
from the other purposes of sentencing will ensure that the
sentence is of more
than sufficient severity to protect the
85 As I have implied already, I think it
is important to recognize the interplay between rehabilitation and protection of
the community
in any event. As I say, Mr McKnight will be returning to the
community ultimately. It is therefore in the community’s interests
such prospects of rehabilitation as he has be maximized, and that he is not
crushed, so that, when he does return to the community,
his risk of reoffending
is as low as it reasonably can be and his chances of successful reintegration
into society are
Sentencing Act
, relevantly, provides that “a court
must not impose a sentence that is more severe than that which is necessary
the purpose or purposes for which the sentence is imposed”.
This provision reflects the common law principle of parsimony.
I have applied
this provision and this principle when considering the appropriate sentences in
Current sentencing
87 In so far as I can determine
them, I have had regard to current sentencing practices for manslaughter and
88 Sentencing statistics show that, for the
period from 2011-12 to 2015-16, prison sentences for manslaughter ranged from
to twelve years’ imprisonment; that the average (or mean)
sentence ranged from about six years and eleven months’ imprisonment
2013-14 to eight years and eleven months’ imprisonment in 2014-15; and
that the median sentence was eight years’ imprisonment,
as was the mode.
During the same period, non-parole periods ranged from nine months to nine
years; the median non-parole period
was five years and six months; and the modal
non-parole period was five to less than six
the same period, prison sentences for arson ranged from three months to four
years and two months; the average (or mean)
sentence ranged from one year and
nine months’ imprisonment in 2015-16 to two years and seven months’
imprisonment in
2011-12 and 2013-14; and the median sentence was two-and-a-half
imprisonment.
statistics are, of course, of limited utility, mainly because they do not
distinguish cases according to their most important
sentencing considerations
– such as the seriousness of the particular offence, whether there were
significant aggravating or
mitigating factors, whether there was a plea of
guilty or not guilty, whether or not there were significant prior convictions,
so on. Nevertheless, they do give some
91 Sometimes, case comparisons can be a
useful tool in gauging current sentencing practices. I have considered several
cases of manslaughter
and arson in recent years. It is fair to say that the
sentences imposed have varied substantially. It is possible to make more
nuanced comparisons between the present case and other particular cases. But,
in the area of sentencing, it is almost always difficult
usefully to compare
other cases. No two cases are ever truly alike. Certainly, none of those I
considered was quite the same as
the present case. And, in any event, sentences
are not precedents to be applied or
distinguished.
92 Nevertheless, I have found the
other sentences I have considered, and the reasons given for imposing them,
instructive in gauging
the order of sentences imposed for manslaughter and
arson, and the extent to which those sentences tend to be affected by various
aggravating and mitigating factors.
93 In the end,
however, as is always the case, because of the limits of that process, I have
been driven to rely principally on the
particular circumstances of this case and
sentencing principles to arrive at the appropriate sentence for Mr
McKnight’s particular
offences of manslaughter and arson in view of his
particular array of personal
circumstances.
Cumulation, totality and
avoidance of double punishment
94 Mr Papas
submitted that, subject to totality, proportionality and the need to avoid
double punishment, there should be some cumulation
of the sentence for arson
upon the sentence for manslaughter. I agree. I understood Mr Gardner to accept
that submission in any
95 Further, as I have
alluded to already, both counsel submitted that, when considering the gravity of
the two offences, the individual
sentences to be imposed and the level of
cumulation that might be ordered between the sentences, I must be careful to
avoid double
(or multiple) punishment by counting more than once any feature
that might be thought to aggravate both offences in common. I agree.
while I regard the manslaughter as aggravated by the attempt to cover up that
crime by burning the house (and all that was
in it, including the body), I have
not counted that aggravating motivation again when considering the
If I have not already made
this clear, however, I should add that, even when that motivation is excluded
from an assessment of the
gravity of the offence, I still think this is a very
serious example of arson.
96 Before formally announcing
sentence, I note that Mr Papas applied for a disposal order in respect of
various items. The application
was not opposed. In those circumstances, I
shall make the order
turn now to sentence.
98 Mr McKnight, please
99 Balancing all factors as best I can, I
sentence as follows:
100 On Charge 1, the
manslaughter of Mr Stevenson, Mr McKnight is convicted and sentenced to eleven
years’ imprisonment.
101 On Charge 2, arson of
Mr Stevenson’s house, Mr McKnight is convicted and sentenced to five
years’ imprisonment.
102 I direct that two
years of the sentence on Charge 2 be served cumulatively upon the sentence on
103 That makes a total effective sentence
of thirteen years’ imprisonment.
104 I fix a
non-parole period of ten years.
105 Pursuant to
Sentencing Act
, I declare that 582 days of pre-sentence detention
be reckoned as served under this
106 Absent Mr McKnight’s pleas of
guilty, it is likely that I would have found he had no remorse at all and that
his prospects
of rehabilitation were poor. Thus, while it is always a difficult
thing to estimate, I declare, pursuant to
Sentencing Act
that, but for Mr McKnight’s pleas of guilty, I would have imposed a total
effective sentence in the order of sixteen years’
imprisonment with
non-parole period of thirteen
_________________________________________
The following summary is a
precis of the contents of the
Summary of Prosecution Opening upon Plea
(dated 7 September 2017) (Exhibit 1), as supplemented by the evidence received
and the information provided by counsel on the plea.
In this case, I think it
is unnecessary to set out the entire contents of the
Summary of Prosecution
Opening upon Plea
While, as I have noted
already, the medical evidence was to the effect that the cause of death was
blunt force trauma to the head
in combination with the effects of fire, as I
understood it, the matter proceeded on the basis that the blunt force trauma
by the assault alone was sufficient to cause death.
See Exhibits 7-11.
R v Jagroop
[2009] VSCA 46
at 90[63]-91[69] per Weinberg JA (Williams AJA agreeing at 92[75]).
, (6) and (7) of
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Snapshot: Manslaughter, No 199
, April 2017, pp 3-5.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Snapshot: Arson, No 201
, April 2017, p 3.
I note that Hollingworth J had
to deal with a similar consideration in
DPP v O’Neill
[2015] VSC 25
DPP v O’Neill
[2015] VSCA 325
(per Warren CJ, Redlich and Kaye JJA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (385 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter