URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/1007.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:26:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Kindl (Review and Regulation) [2025] VCAT 1007 (13 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
REVIEW AND REGULATION LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. Z982/2024
Review and Regulation List – referral of conduct of registered nurse
to Tribunal – s.193(1)(a)
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(Victoria) Act
– allegations proven in evidence –
forgery of purported medical advice in context of workplace investigation
fraudulent and illegally obtaining script pads and writing prescriptions
to dispense scheduled drugs – findings of professional
misconduct –
nurse no longer registered – four year disqualification –
prohibition on work in any health service
– portion of costs of Board
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
Kristy Kindl
Melbourne via videoconference
Member D. Cook, Presiding
Member P. Barry
Member M. Hally
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
29 August 2025
DATE OF LAST SUBMISSION
1 October 2025
DATE OF ORDER
13 November 2025
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Kindl (Review and Regulation)
[2025] VCAT 1007
Procedural order
is granted to the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia (‘Board’)
to file Volume 2 of the Tribunal Book.
Tribunal Book is corrected under
section 127
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic), to be filed on behalf of the Board
as applicant.
Determinations
section 196(2)(a) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(Victoria) Act 2009
(‘National Law’), the respondent is
reprimanded.
section 196(4)(a) of the National Law, the respondent is disqualified from
applying for registration as a registered health
practitioner for four years
from the date of this order.
section 196(4)(b) of the National Law, the respondent is prohibited from
providing any health as this term is referred to in
section 5 of the National
Law service for four years from the date of this order.
Costs order
section 195 of the National Law, the respondent must pay the costs of the
Nursing and Midwifery Board, fixed in the sum of $17,000.
The costs must be
paid within 90 days of the date of this order, or otherwise as agreed by the
Presiding Member
Health Practitioner Member
Health Practitioner Member
APPEARANCES:
For the Applicant
S Dawson of Counsel, instructed by the Victorian Government Solicitors
For the Respondent
No appearance
SUMMARY OF REFERRAL
Kindl became a Division 1 Registered Nurse in Australia on 12 December
18 September 2024 the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia (‘the
Board’) referred three allegations to the Tribunal
under section 193(1)(a)
Health Practitioner Regulation National
Law (Victoria) 2009
(‘National Law’).
Board reasonably believed that Ms Kindl, as a health practitioner, had behaved
in a way that constituted professional misconduct.
As such, it was obliged to
refer the matters to the Tribunal under the National Law.
Board alleged that, in summary:
Ms Kindl forged
a letter in the name of a medical practitioner and presented it to her employer
during an internal investigation (‘allegation
She engaged in
criminal conduct, resulting in a finding of guilt for indictable offences in the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
on 12 July 2023 (‘allegation
Ms Kindl failed
to notify the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
(‘Ahpra’) or the Board within 7 days of
becoming aware of a relevant
event (i.e. being charged with or found guilty of nominated categories of
offence), thereby contravening
section 130 of the National Law
(‘allegation 3’).
Which matters were pursued at the hearing?
the hearing, the Board confirmed that it no longer wished to pursue allegation
3. It explained that there may be some uncertainty
section 130 of the National Law in circumstances where the practitioner may not
have been registered at
regard allegation 3 as being effectively withdrawn, and have not made findings
in respect of it on this basis.
Board sought to prove each of the two remaining allegations.
submitted that each allegation, if proven, would constitute ‘professional
misconduct’ as this term is defined in sections
5(a) and (c) of the
National Law.
the circumstances, the Board originally sought the following determinations:
reprimand; and
disqualification
from applying for nursing registration for 4 years from the date of the
determination.
response to leave of the Tribunal, the Board now invited the Tribunal to
additionally prohibit the respondent from providing any
health service for the
duration of her disqualification.
find that Ms Kindl was a registered nurse at the time the conduct occurred,
although we have no evidence to say whether or not
she was actually working as a
registered nurse or what her actual duties were.
for reasons we explain below (relevant to determinations), her registration was
cancelled by the Tribunal in July
Kindl exercised her legal right and chose not to participate in the proceeding
in any way. She did not appear at the hearing or
provide submissions following
the hearing (responding to costs or a potential prohibition order).
Tribunal confirmed that the referral and associated documentation had been
served on her at addresses under which she was most
recently registered by Ahpra
on 1 March 2025.
Board also confirmed that Ms Kindl was provided with a copy of the Tribunal Book
(including its submissions) by way of email and
that a receipt was provided
indicating that this material had been delivered electronically.
statements of service filed by the Board indicated that it had attempted more
recent service of hearing documentation at Ms Kindl’s
residential address but that it was found to be vacant.
addition, the Tribunal has provided a copy of all orders and direct
correspondence (including the electronic link to the hearing)
to the same email
address for the respondent and has not received any ‘bounce backs’
or notifications of irregularity.
includes an order of Deputy President Proctor dated 5 December 2024, requiring
Ms Kindl to advise the Tribunal and the Board
if she intended to participate in
the proceeding by a specified date. No response was received.
these circumstances, we were satisfied that Ms Kindl was provided with
reasonable notice of the hearing and had a reasonable opportunity
participate, such that the hearing could proceed as scheduled.
Kindl is not under any obligation to participate in the proceeding, and we have
not drawn any conclusions from her lack of participation.
in practice, this has precluded us from enquiring into her current
circumstances, including her health or fitness to practice,
any potential
mitigating factors and whether she has any intention to re-apply for nursing
registration or to work in any health
practice in the future.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND AND ALLEGATIONS
allegations and particulars are set out in full in the Notice of Allegations
attached to the referral.
provide a relevant summary for the record below.
Allegation 1
Board alleged that Ms Kindl engaged in professional misconduct, unprofessional
conduct and/or unsatisfactory performance in that:
she forged a letter dated 21 July 2022 in the name of a medical practitioner,
and presented this letter to her employer during an
internal investigation.
terms of the particulars, Ms Kindl was employed as a senior administration
officer at a Victorian eye institute (‘the employer’)
from May 2021,
providing administrative support to medical practitioners.
employer became aware of allegations that Ms Kindl had stolen blank pages from a
script book on the premises and had used them
to forge prescriptions to obtain
prescribed medications in her name.
employer set out the allegations against her and provided an opportunity to
allegation pertains to a letter dated 21 July 2022 in the name of a medical
practitioner, purporting to be her treating psychiatrist
letter advised that she had been receiving treatment for depression, anxiety,
post-traumatic stress disorder and substance (opioid)
use disorder since April
referred to a negative drug screening and stated that Ms Kindl was committed to
her treatment and recovery. It mentioned that
the recent allegations have had a
devastating personal and professional impact on her.
Board alleges that Ms Kindl provided a response to her employer, received on 22
July 2024, which included the letter.
Subsequently,
her employer made enquiries with the specialist named in the letter who advised
that Ms Kindl was no longer a patient
of hers and that the letter was forged.
Allegation 2
Board sought to demonstrate that Ms Kindl had engaged in criminal offences in
connection with the forging of prescriptions and
presenting them to obtain/seek
to obtain medications, including Schedule 8 poisons from public pharmacies on 12
July 2022 and 1 August
2 claims that Ms Kindl engaged in professional misconduct, unprofessional
conduct and/or unsatisfactory performance in
On 12 July 2023, she was found guilty of the following offences:
(one count);
property by deception (one count);
a Schedule 8 poison (one count); and
to commit an indictable offence (one count).
Board provided copies of the documentation forming the prosecution brief and
Magistrates’ court record as part of the Tribunal
Findings in respect of the allegations
role of the Tribunal (convened as a panel comprising a legally qualified member
and two health practitioner members) is to consider
whether the allegations have
been demonstrated to the requisite standard.
law has confirmed that this is on the civil standard of proof, being the balance
of probabilities, albeit with the seriousness
of the allegations and cognisant
of the potential consequences in
Tribunal deliberated after hearing submissions and being directed to relevant
material within the Tribunal Book by the Board.
made findings orally during the course of the hearing, which we now confirm in
these written reasons, that:
Board has proven allegation 1 against Ms Kindl; and
Board has proven allegation 2 against Ms Kindl,
requisite standard.
findings are made on the basis of the evidence and submissions presented by the
Board, and we summarise key material leading to
our conclusions below.
to allegation 1, we have compelling evidence from her former employer that Ms
Kindl presented the forged letter to
satisfies the second element of the allegation.
we have evidence of a different nature in respect of the first component of the
allegation, that Ms Kindl forged a letter
dated 21 July 2022 in the name of a
medical practitioner.
evidence in respect of this part of the allegation is circumstantial but
nevertheless compelling.
have clear evidence from the medical practitioner (in whose name the letter was
made out) to Ahpra that the letter was forged and
that Ms Kindl was not a
current patient of hers at the
we are comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities that Ms Kindl was
the individual who forged the letter (as
alleged) since it is the only
reasonable inference available on the evidence before us, because:
it directly
aligns with the date she was under investigation by her employer;
it was provided
under cover letter of the respondent and presented to her employer as a response
to alleged complaints in respect
of allegedly stolen and forged scripts. It can
reasonably be understood as self-serving, in an attempt to deceive or cover up
and unprofessional conduct;
mistakenly refers to the practitioner as a psychiatrist when she was in fact an
addiction specialist;
there is other
evidence in this proceeding indicating that Ms Kindl has forged the signatures
of medical practitioners on numerous
it aligns with a
false statement given to Victoria Police that she was being treated by the
relevant doctor in whose name the letter
there is no
other identifiable person with direct involvement in the complaint allegation,
and no logical basis for any other person
to forge this letter.
2 is obviously proven. It mirrors the Magistrate’s Court finding of guilt
on the criminal standard (i.e. beyond reasonable
doubt) for the offences
is to a higher standard of proof than is required for the Tribunal to be
satisfied of the conduct in a referral proceeding.
addition, we have been provided with copies of the evidence relied on in the
prosecution, together with the police record of interview
with Ms Kindl where
she makes relevant admissions.
these circumstances, we are comfortably satisfied that the conduct alleged has
been proven by the Board.
CHARACTERISATION OF THE CONDUCT
the Tribunal has made findings on the allegations in a referral proceeding, its
next task is to determine how this conduct should
be characterised for the
purpose of the National Law. Each of the relevant categories are defined in
assists in providing relevant context for the conduct, and enables an assessment
of the extent of its departure from standards
expected of registered health
professionals.
also becomes a relevant input into the Tribunal’s subsequent consideration
of appropriate determinations.
Tribunal is charged with a duty to make ‘an objective assessment which
looks towards the conduct in light of the applicable
standards and relevant
definitions, rather than matters arising later in time, such as remorse, insight
and rehabilitation’.
term ‘professional misconduct’ of a registered health practitioner
is defined as including:
(a) unprofessional conduct by the practitioner that amounts to conduct that is
substantially below the standard reasonably expected
of a registered
health practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience
(b) more than one instance of unprofessional conduct that, when considered
together, amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably
expected of a registered health practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience; and
(c) conduct of the practitioner,
whether occurring in connection with the
practice of the health practitioner’s profession or not
inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper person
registration in the profession.
[Tribunal emphasis.]
‘Unprofessional
conduct’ is defined as meaning ‘professional conduct that is of a
lesser standard than that which
might reasonably be expected of the health
practitioner by the public or the practitioner’s professional
peers’. The
definition then identifies a series of relevant behaviours
within its scope.
term ‘unsatisfactory professional performance’ is defined as
...the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised by, the
practitioner in the practice of the health profession in
which the practitioner
is registered is below the standard reasonably expected of a health practitioner
of an equivalent level of
training or experience.
Board submissions
Board’s referral to the Tribunal alleged that the three allegations
constituted conduct that should be characterised as
the following by reference
to the definitions in section 5 of the National Law:
professional
misconduct within the meaning of paragraphs (a), (b) and/or (c) of this
definition;
unprofessional
conduct; and/or
unsatisfactory
performance.
at the hearing, it submitted that the conduct within the two allegations should
properly be characterised as ‘professional
misconduct’ under
categories (a) and (c).
summary, the Board relied on the following reasons for such findings in respect
of allegations 1 and 2.
conduct was ‘plainly serious’. The Board submitted:
The fraudulent tampering or creating of professional correspondence in the name
of another registered health practitioner is completely
inappropriate. Its
gravity is magnified because it was done in furtherance of dishonestly
concealing an earlier theft, forged prescription,
and unauthorised or illicit
access to Schedule 8 poisons...
conduct was criminal, deliberate and deceptive. The Board explained:
The misappropriation of Schedule 4 and Schedule 8 drugs for self-administration
is unquestionably a significant departure from the
standard expected from any
registered health practitioner. It was not a trivial or isolated incident.
also had the capacity to put the public at risk of serious harm that could be
caused through misuse of Schedule 8 poisons if diverted
or used without proper
authorisation and supervision.
Kindl’s conduct also exposed numerous health professionals to professional
risk, including the specialist whose letter was
forged, the registered health
practitioners she worked with, and the dispensing pharmacists.
was a breach of trust of her position in a medical centre, in addition to being
a breach of her professional obligations. It was
disreputable conduct that
reflected negatively on her ability to practice the profession, and negatively
on the profession or discipline
of nursing as a whole.
Tribunal findings
comfortably find that Ms Kindl has behaved in a way that constitutes
professional misconduct for the purposes of section 196(1)(b)(iii)
National Law.
are persuaded by the Board’s submission for the following
Allegation 1
essence of category (a) is that the conduct is ‘substantially below’
the standard ‘reasonably expected’
of a practitioner of equivalent
level of training and experience.
Kindl was a registered nurse with some 22 years of experience at the time of the
conduct referred to in the allegations.
behaviour fell fundamentally short of that expected under the Code of Conduct
Conduct’), a code administered by the Board and with which registered
nurses are expected to comply.
1.2 relates to Lawful behaviour. It provides:
Lawful behaviour
15.1 Nurses practise honestly and ethically and should not engage in unlawful
behaviour as it may affect their practice and/or damage
the reputation of the
profession. Nurses must:
participate in unlawful behaviour and understand that unlawful behaviour may be
viewed as unprofessional conduct or professional
misconduct and have
implications for their registration.
expectations are contained within the International Council of Nurses, Code of
Ethics for Nurses
of Ethics’) which creates expectations for nurses demonstrate professional
values including justice, trustworthiness
They are expressly
expected to maintain standards of professional conduct at all times and to
reflect well on the profession and
enhance its image and public
confidence.
find that any registered nurse, regardless of their level of experience and
training would appreciate that it is fraudulent to
forge a letter under the name
of a medical practitioner.
Consequently,
it would be reasonably expected that a registered nurse would understand the
significant potential harm to patients,
medical practices and the reputation of
the profession if a letter was forged in this context.
key element of category (c) is that the conduct is inconsistent with the person
being a fit and proper person to hold registration.
forged letter was presented to Ms Kindl’s employer in connection with the
practice of her profession. It was provided in
the context of a formal enquiry
into serious allegations against her.
any registered nurse would be reasonably expected to be forthright and honest in
their dealings with their employer when
being investigated for misconduct.
registered nurse would appreciate the fundamental importance of the medical
industry and the general public being able to rely
on the veracity of medical
Kindl’s conduct fell substantially below this standard, justifying a
finding of professional misconduct under category (a).
It also indicated that
she is not a fit and proper person to hold registration as a registered nurse
under category (c) now or into
the future.
Allegation 2
proven allegation is very serious and relates to criminal behaviour in
connection with Ms Kindl’s work.
is no doubt that in stealing script pads from her professional workplace,
forging prescriptions and using these to obtain scheduled
drugs, she acted
substantially below the standard expected of an equivalent peer, justifying a
finding of professional misconduct
under category (a).
proviso in category (c) that the conduct may be in connection with the practice
of the practitioner’s profession
is also relevant.
is unclear whether Ms Kindl was in fact working as a nurse, or whether she was
working in a different capacity, such as providing
administrative assistance.
way, the first part of category (c) provides conclusive guidance, to the extent
that the conduct does not necessarily need
to be in connection with the
‘practice of the practitioner’s profession’ at the time it
Code of Conduct provides the following applicable standard:
1.2 Lawful behaviour
23.1 Nurses practise honestly and ethically and should not engage in unlawful
behaviour as it may affect their practice and/or damage
the reputation of the
profession. Nurses must:
with relevant poisons legislation, authorisation, local policy and own scope of
practice, including to safely use, administer,
obtain, possess, prescribe, sell,
supply and store medications and other therapeutic products
participate in unlawful behaviour and understand that unlawful behaviour may be
viewed as unprofessional conduct or professional
misconduct and have
implications for their registration
our opinion, this flagrant breach of professional and personal obligations is
such that it indicates Ms Kindl is not a fit and
proper person to be registered
as a nurse.
system of medications being prescribed by an appropriate medical professional is
fundamental to our health system.
Maintaining
the integrity of this system is a vital part of the work of nurses and other
health professionals.
Kindl has deviated from ethical and legal obligations that underpin the
profession in using her privileged position to gain access
fraudulently for her own gain.
APPROPRIATE DETERMINATIONS
Submissions for the Board
Board submitted that a reprimand under section 196(2)(a) of the National Law was
necessary and appropriate in this instance to
signal to Ms Kindl and to the
profession more broadly that this conduct was unacceptable.
also sought a determination that Ms Kindl be disqualified from applying for
nursing registration for a period of 4 years from the
date of decision under
section 196(4)(a) of the National Law.
was in the context of an earlier determination of the Tribunal in
where the Tribunal cancelled Ms Kindl’s nursing registration
effective 13 July 2023, with a further disqualification period
of 2 years, until
13 July 2025.
Board also referred to a perceived lack of insight or remorse by Ms Kindl.
relied on evidence in Volume 2 of the Tribunal Book, including a more recent
finding of guilt by the Magistrates’ Court in
respect of similar conduct
by Ms Kindl (fraudulent obtaining of a scheduled drug by stealing pages from
script pads when working
as a cleaner for a medical
practitioner).
Board also provided an outline of cases which considered a suspension or
disqualification in the order of 4 years, at the request
of the Tribunal
following the hearing.
at the date of the hearing, we were advised that Ms Kindl had not re-applied to
Ahpra for nursing registration, although the original
suspension period had
Tribunal consideration
Tribunal is obliged to make the correct or preferable decision on the facts
before it. It is provided with relatively broad discretion
under section 196 of
the National Law.
primary purpose of determinations is to protect the public, not to punish the
practitioner.
considerations include general and specific deterrence and the protection of the
nursing profession in the eyes of the public
by ensuring proper ethical and
professional standards are maintained.
Professional
misconduct by a registered nurse is a serious and concerning matter.
also has capacity to undermine the public’s faith in the nursing
profession and in the medical profession more broadly.
are strongly of the view that a reprimand is necessary on the facts of this
case. Such a determination is a serious form of censure
condemnation
; not just a routine
administrative action.
further options in this proceeding are somewhat constrained since Ms Kindl does
not appear to hold current
registration.
is therefore beyond our practical scope to cancel or suspend her licence.
we would not have been able to impose applicable conditions on her registration
(such as work under supervision), even if
this had been a desirable adjunct to
other orders.
the record, on the facts before us, we would have been comfortably persuaded
that cancellation was a suitable determination.
This is supported by the
reasoning of the Tribunal in cases including
Nursing and Midwifery Board of
Australia v Daniels
found that ‘a person who engages in dishonest conduct directly related to
the place in which she works is prima facie
unsuitable to practice as a
Significantly,
it remains open to us to disqualify Ms Kindl from re-applying for registration
as a nurse for a fixed time period.
circumstances where the practitioner has acted fraudulently, committed offences
in connection with her work and demonstrated she
is not a fit and proper person
to practice, we consider this is an entirely suitable determination.
having been provided with evidence of Ms Kindl’s current health condition
and whether she has developed any relevant
insight or undertaken any relevant
training, there is a real risk that this pattern of behaviour will continue if
she is re-registered.
is also borne out by the additional evidence provided by the Board of similar
activities by Ms Kindl subsequent to the allegations
referred to the Tribunal on
18 September 2024.
arriving at appropriate determinations, it may also be appropriate to consider
evidence of character and contribution to community
and other potentially
mitigating factors (such as medical or psychological evidence, personal or
family circumstances).
do not have any material of this kind available to us in this proceeding to
potentially temper the determinations we otherwise
regard as appropriate in the
circumstances.
National Law does not provide specific guidance about the length of time that a
practitioner can or should be disqualified from
applying for health
registration.
specified period is to be determined by the Tribunal in light of relevant
considerations, including the guiding principles of
the National Law.
Ordinarily,
we are guided by decisions such as
Kindl No. 1
which found in similar
circumstances that an initial period of cancellation and two year subsequent
disqualification was warranted,
in addition to a reprimand.
we accept submissions from the Board that four years is an appropriate length of
time on the facts of this case for a number
of reasons.
are now faced with deliberate, repeat, escalating behaviour by Ms Kindl, in
addition to a prior and subsequent relevant disciplinary
the facts before us, the current offending conduct also occurred after Ms Kindl
complied with a Magistrates’ Court mandated
consider that a relatively substantial, mandated period of time out of practice
is necessary in these circumstances.
root cause of Ms Kindl’s behaviour does not appear to have been addressed
or resolved.
Ms Kindl wishes to return to nursing practice, she will need to undertake
significant work including self-reflection, training
and the like in order to
demonstrate she can practice safely.
may also require a significant self-led shift in her personal health if
addiction or substance abuse remain underlying factors
motivating her behaviour.
Doing this earnestly and with conviction will take time.
way of parity, this period of disqualification was also imposed by the South
Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal in broadly
comparable circumstances
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Seabrook
concerning the same provisions of the
National Law.
Potential prohibition order
the hearing, the Tribunal issued a subsequent order with remarks, providing the
parties with the opportunity to make submissions
necessary or appropriate for the Tribunal to make what is commonly referred to
as a ‘prohibition
order’ under section 196(4)(b)(i) of the National
196(4) of the National Law provides:
If the tribunal decides to cancel a person’s registration under this Law
or the person does not hold registration under this
Law, the tribunal may also
decide to do one or more of the following—
a) disqualify the person from applying for registration as a registered health
practitioner for a specified period;
b) prohibit the person, either permanently or for a stated period, from doing
either or both of the following—
(i) providing any health service or a specified health service;
(ii) using any title or a specified title;
restrictions, either permanently or for a stated period, on the provision of any
health service or a specified health service
by the person.
would allow the Tribunal to make a further or alternative order prohibiting Ms
Kindl from providing ‘any health service’
or ‘a specified
health service’.
term ‘health service’ is defined in section 5 of the National Law
Submissions for the Board
Board submitted that a prohibition order in addition to a period of
disqualification was appropriate. It would:
...further the purpose of the National Law by preserving the reputation and
confidence in the profession,2F as well as providing
an additional layer of
protection to the public by risks posed by a formerly registered health
practitioner.
identified features of the present case which ‘weigh heavily’ in
favour of a prohibition order being warranted, in
is consistent with the Tribunal’s approach in similar matters, including
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v
Nursing and
Midwifery Board of Australia v
Ms Kindl has
shown a propensity to take advantage of medical facilities afforded by her work
to steal blank pages from prescription
pads to produce fraudulent prescriptions.
This has also occurred while she was working in roles other than a registered
could arise even while she was disqualified. A prohibition order would
mitigate against this risk re-occurring;
the respondent
has previously attributed her conduct to an addiction or substance use
In the absence of
evidence about the status of her current condition, there is no comfort conduct
of this kind will not reoccur;
she engaged in
similar conduct while disqualified from seeking re-
registration.
Disqualification
was not a sufficient deterrent and greater protection is necessary; and
undermine the regulatory system if a person could circumvent disqualification by
providing health services in an unregulated
Tribunal consideration
found it somewhat surprising that the Board’s submissions at the hearing
did not seek a prohibition order in addition to
disqualification. The Board has
now invited the Tribunal to make such an order in strong terms.
range of appropriate determinations in any referral proceeding needs to be
principally informed by the purpose of the National
Law, to protect members of
the public from the behaviour/s underpinning the professional misconduct.
section 196(4), the National Law expressly recognises that there may be
circumstances where a registered health professional is
no longer registered,
but may pose a risk if they were to pivot into work in an alternative health
risk may be to members of the public, the individual in question or to public
confidence in the profession.
our experience, it is not uncommon for unregistered nurses to be offered roles
in a range of other health services, many of which
are less regulated than
may include non-nursing roles in health services and private practices and the
like, and care support roles for vulnerable individuals
including in aged care
facilities, community and home-based settings and NDIS approved work.
settings provide access to medication prescribed by practitioners which may be
readily available to caregivers to possess or
dispense. They also often provide
an opportunity for physical access to privileged documentation, including
prescription pads.
are concerned about the recurring conduct by Ms Kindl and the lengths she has
gone to in order to obtain access to prescribed medications
in the past. We
have been satisfied of evidence whereby she has targeted her employers (medical
or otherwise) to gain access to
prescribed medication.
note that some of the examples provided in evidence occurred when she performed
a role other than as a registered nurse, including
in an administrative position
at the ophthalmology clinic.
submissions for the Board, there is even more recent evidence of Ms Kindl having
obtained prescribed medications by stealing prescription
pads and forging
prescriptions while working as a cleaner for a
We regard this as
deliberate, escalating conduct.
the absence of direct participation by Ms Kindl in this proceeding, we have no
evidence of her current health condition.
we have is evidence of recent past performance which indicates that the risk of
similar behaviour is real. It appears likely
the respondent may seek out
opportunities for access to medication (prescriptions or actual medication) if
given the chance in an
employment context.
considered whether a targeted prohibition could be sufficiently effective as a
deterrent and to reduce risk to the public and the
individual. In cases
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v
Nursing and
Midwifery Board of Australia v
(the latter with
generally comparable findings to the current proceeding), the Tribunal imposed a
prohibition order preventing the
practitioner from providing any health service
‘where the position provides [any] opportunity for unsupervised access to
or unsecured scheduled medications [or poisons], or prescription
medications of dependence’ for a nominated period.
the circumstances of the current proceeding, given the wide range of health
services and settings which would afford an opportunity
to work with medication
to have access to prescription pads, we think it is necessary to
prevent Ms Kindl from working in ‘any health service’
equivalent period to her disqualification.
find this would be required for specific deterrence, to prevent her from having
the opportunity to engage in similar conduct.
approach was taken in broadly comparable circumstances in
concerning the National Law. The Tribunal emphasised the need for the
determinations to be effective for the purposes of specific
and general
deterrence and to protect the reputation of and public confidence in the
profession. This necessitated a prohibition
to prevent what was referred to as
‘any “back door” means of subverting the primary sanction
imposed’ to
protect the
acknowledge that a prohibition order preventing a person from working in any
health service for a given time is a significant imposition.
It will inherently
restrict future work opportunities for Ms Kindl.
on the facts before us, we regard such an order as proportionate and necessary
to reduce the risk to both the practitioner
and the public to an acceptable
are also keenly aware of the role of this Tribunal to retain the trusted
standing of health services in Australia in the eyes of
the public.
is a clear need to continue to ensure safe access to medication for those who
need it, while seeking to avoid potential abuse
of medication by people in
caregiving roles.
prohibition order will directly limit the options and exposure for such
behaviour by the respondent.
APPLICATION FOR COSTS AGAINST THE PRACTITIONER
the conclusion of the hearing, the Board indicated it sought an award of costs
against Ms Kindl.
issued a procedural order dated 4 September 2025 requiring the Board to provide
submissions and documentation in support of its
claim. We also provided leave
for Ms Kindl to make submissions in response.
have considered all submissions and documentation provided by the Board.
note that Ms Kindl did not make any submissions in reply.
application for costs is made under section 195 of the National Law which
The responsible tribunal may make any order about costs it considers appropriate
for the proceedings.
accept findings of the Tribunal in disciplinary cases concerning health
practitioners that it is appropriate to focus on this provision
as the source of
the power to award costs in referral proceedings under the National Law, instead
of the more generic provision in
section 109
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) (‘VCAT
provision confers a broad discretion on the Tribunal.
reiterate guidance from other cases in the health professional disciplinary
sphere as to how section 195 should be
is no presumption that each party will bear its own costs;
the Tribunal’s discretion is unstrained by the factors set out in section
109(3) of the VCAT Act, such considerations
may be relevant to a given
discretion must be exercised “judicially, by reference only to
considerations relevant to its exercise and upon facts connected
with or leading
up to the litigation”;
costs order is made to indemnify or compensate a party, rather than punish the
party against whom it is made; and
specific costs order made can take any appropriate form, including an award for
a lump sum or for costs to be taxed in default of
Submissions for the Board
Board is seeking an order that Ms Kindl pay its costs fixed at $17,000. It
indicated this was approximately 50% of the costs
it had incurred in the
proceeding.
Board offered the following reasons, in summary, as to why an award of costs was
justified in this case:
successful in proving the allegations pursued against Ms Kindl;
the proceeding
involved ‘grave, deliberate and dishonest professional conduct by Ms
this is the
second proceeding the Board has brought against Ms Kindl for professional
misconduct, involving effectively the same or
similar conduct;
appropriate for the costs of a proceeding for professional misconduct to be
borne by the practitioner, rather than public or
professional funds;
Ms Kindl took no
part in the proceeding and there was no scope to narrow the issues. This is
distinguishable from cases where a practitioner
fully cooperated with the
disciplinary process;
the proceeding
was brought in the public interest, pursuant to the protective purposes of the
National Law; and
the Board was
efficient in the conduct of its case and has not engaged in conduct that would
detract from its costs claim.
Tribunal consideration
Is it fair to award costs?
is no established practise or expectation in health practitioner referral
proceedings for an award of costs in favour of the
Board if successful.
are some cases in which the Board, as statutory regulator, needs to bear the
costs of a referral to the Tribunal. This is notwithstanding
that all cases
involving referral of a health care practitioner are purported to be in the
public interest.
must decide whether it is fair to make an award of costs against Ms Kindl on the
particular facts before us.
the outset we also acknowledge the legal entitlement of Ms Kindl, as respondent
to a disciplinary proceeding, to decline to participate
in the proceeding.
is not of itself a basis on which to award costs against her.
Tribunal explained in
Psychology Board of Australia v
... a health practitioner should, in the usual course be entitled, in the
setting of a Tribunal hearing where costs are not universally
nor sought, to have the issues fully canvassed and be entitled to put the Board
to its proofs without fear of a costs award.
...it is important and appropriate that no cost impediment be put in the
way of a practitioner fairly and properly testing the evidence
adduced against
him or her.
this case, the gravity of Ms Kindl’s conduct is a relevant factor in
supporting an award of costs.
involved uncontested, proven allegations of fraud and premeditated criminal
the most persuasive reason in support of an award of costs in this proceeding is
the fact that this is the second referral
of Ms Kindl’s conduct to the
is the second time that the Tribunal has found that she has engaged in
professional misconduct and that determinations are required
beyond a reprimand.
Significantly,
this is essentially the same pattern of conduct, in almost identical
circumstances compared with the allegations in
the earlier proceeding.
though the Board did not appear to expressly give notice to Ms Kindl during the
early stages of the proceeding that it may seek
an order for costs against her,
she would be well aware that her conduct has necessitated a second Tribunal
proceeding and all that
it entails.
the extent that the Tribunal in the first decision sought to secure specific
deterrence by way of its orders, it is clear that
Ms Kindl has continued to
engage in the same behaviours, even after ceasing to be registered as a nurse.
such circumstances, it is not reasonable for the Board to be required to commit
to this level of intervention and the associated
financial burden.
are strong public policy reasons for respondents in such circumstances to be
required to reimburse the Board for a substantial
portion of its fees incurred
to discourage further disregard for valid disciplinary proceedings.
What amount is appropriate in all the circumstances?
Psychology Board of Australia v Wilkinson
the Tribunal
it can be sensible, efficient and cost-effective for costs to be quantified as a
lump sum ... to avoid the expense, delay and aggravation
involved in protracted
litigation arising out of taxation.
agree that this is a case that warrants the making of an order for a fixed sum.
has been no active participation by the respondent, the Board has kept its costs
to a minimum and has been legally represented
by the Victorian Government
Solicitors Office, keeping appropriate records in line with expectations of a
model litigant.
our experience, it is reasonable to award 50% of costs incurred, as generally
representing standard costs in a proceeding of this
have found allegations 1 and 2 proven to the requisite standard and that they
constitute ‘professional misconduct’
under the National Law.
Kindl is reprimanded for this conduct.
circumstances where Ms Kindl is not currently registered, we have determined to
impose a four year period of disqualification.
is also appropriate to prohibit Ms Kindl from working in any health service for
the equivalent period of time to achieve the purposes
of the National Law.
Presiding Member
Health Practitioner Member
Health Practitioner Member
The allegations include
reference to the definition in section 5(b) as a potential alternative, but this
was not pursued in submissions
at the hearing.
Nursing v Midwifery Board
of Australia v Kindl
[2023] VCAT 981
Kindl No. 1
Service was effected on a
person who identified as Ms Kindl.
Tribunal Book
[‘TB’] 14-21.
Referred to as the test in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Received on 22 July 2022, as
per statement in TB 133.
TB, Tab 64.
And follows a plea of guilt by
the accused.
Medical Radiation Board
of Australia v Castles
[2024] VCAT 879
Dated 1 March 2018 (updated
June 2022).
Dated 1 March 2018 and
revised in 2021.
At Clause 1.8.
At Clause 2.5.
TB 277, order dated 8 March
We also observe that if Ms
Kindl had sought re-registration, she would be required to overcome a number of
important obstacles,
given the time that has elapsed since her registration was
cancelled in 2023 and her previous disciplinary history. This would have
included a need to demonstrate recency of practice requirements, capacity as a
fit and proper person compliance with relevant standards.
As summarised in
Board of Australia v Holten
[2019] VCAT 837
for example,
Medical Board of Australia v Xie
[2019] VCAT 1924
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Dutton
[2016] VCAT
has not done so since July 2023.
[2022] VCAT 457
Discharged on or around 10
December 2019.
[2022] SACAT 112.
considered the other case references provided by the Board but find this to be
the most comparable in terms of the findings
of professional misconduct and the
outcome found to be appropriate.
[2025] VCAT 365.
[2024] VCAT 640.
that case, the Tribunal imposed a prohibition for four years, which is being
sought by the Board in the current
proceeding.
example, TB Tab 5 page 25 (Preliminary brief – Statement made by Informant
dated 12 May 2023); Recording of Victoria Police
interview dated 8 November
In or around November
Beyond the evidence relied
on in the formal allegations, see TB Volume
[2025] VCAT 365.
[2024] VCAT 640.
As above, at [68].
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
[2024] VCAT 692
As summarised in cases such
Medical Radiation Practice Board of Australia v Lau
[2025] VCAT 35.
An affidavit in support was
deposed to by Ellen Kalaja, solicitor on 1 October 2025, including relevant
invoices. It indicates
that total costs likely to be incurred by the Board as
at completion of the proceeding would be $33,980.52.
(Review and Regulation),
(Corrected)
[2020] VCAT 1281
, at [47], [48].
Psychology Board of
Australia v Asher (Costs) (Corrected)
[2020] VCAT 1281
[2022] VCAT 597
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (966 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter