URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2024/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:44:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sterling Nightclubs Pty Ltd at The Love Machine [2024] VicLiqComm 8; (13 June 2024)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an inquiry into whether there are grounds to take disciplinary
action against Sterling Nightclubs Pty Ltd, licensee
of the premises trading as
The Love Machine, operating late night (on- premises) licence no. 322221115
), and if those grounds exist, whether to make a determination
for disqualification under
Liquor Control Reform
Commission:
Mr John Larkins, Deputy Chair
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair Mr Steven Brnovic,
Commissioner
Date of Hearing:
6 December 2023
Date of Decision:
13 June 2024
Date of Reasons:
13 June 2024
Appearances:
Ms Penny Marcou of Counsel (instructed by Nickolas Coumaradios, Koutsantoni
& Associates), on behalf of the Licensee, Mr Dhir
Kakar, Mr Sandeep Bassin,
and Mr Andrew Varigos
Mr Bryn Overend of Counsel (instructed by Candace Prince, Prince Legal), on
behalf of Mr Max Porritt
Ms Francesca Holmes of Counsel (instructed by Sergeant Walter Soto), on
behalf of Victoria Police
Mr Robert O’Neill of Counsel, Counsel Assisting the Commission
(instructed by Ms Caitlin McAlister, Liquor Control Victoria)
The Commission determines that there are grounds for disciplinary action
against the Licensee in accordance with section 93(1) of
the LCR Act and has
determined to:
Impose a fine of
$20,000 against the Licensee, to be paid within three months of the date of this
Issue a letter
of censure to the Licensee including a direction to:
For a period
commencing three months from the date of notification of this decision and
expiring on 30 June 2027, the Licensee must
engage an independent risk
management consultant to conduct half-yearly written reviews of the
Licensee’s operational system
to assure compliance by the Licensee with
its obligations under the LCR Act and the Licensee must implement any
recommendations made
as soon as possible and, in any event, within three months
from the date of the consultant’s written review, and notify the
Commission in writing of its implementation of any such recommendations.
For a period
commencing three months from the date of notification of this decision and
expiring on 30 June 2027, the Licensee must
request from the relevant Liquor
Inspector for the Premises at half-yearly intervals, a brief report outlining
whether the Liquor
Inspector considers that the Licence has been operated
satisfactorily for the preceding 6-month period, and convey any response
to the Commission; and
Vary the Licence
by imposing a condition that:
By no later than one month from the
date of notification of this decision, the Licensee must implement the Gender
Based Violence Management
Plan, prepared for the Licensee by Dr Tony Zalewski
prior to the Commission having made its decision, and upon request is to make
available this plan to an authorised member of Victoria Police or a person
authorised in writing by the Commission.
Victorian Liquor Commission
Liquor Control Victoria
Level 3, 12 Shelley Street T 1300 182 457
Richmond, Victoria, 3121 E
Nightclubs Pty Ltd (
) holds late night (on-premises) licence no.
) in relation to the premises trading as The Love
Machine, situated at 228-232 Malvern Road, Prahran (
Premises is a nightclub with an overall maximum patron capacity of 450. The
building consists of three levels and the Licensee
has permission to play live
or recorded amplified music on the Premises.
Premises are located within an area generally known as the Chapel Street
Entertainment Precinct. The surrounding areas comprise
a mix of commercial and
residential premises with several licensed premises in the immediate area.
Licence permits the supply of liquor for consumption on the Premises between the
trading hours of:
Good Friday Between 6pm and 5am
ANZAC Day (Monday to Wednesday) Between 6pm and 3am ANZAC Day (Thursday and
Friday) Between 6pm and 5am ANZAC Day (Saturday and Sunday)
Between 12 noon and
5am Monday to Wednesday Between 6pm and 3am
Thursday and Friday Between 6pm and 5am
Saturday and Sunday Between 10am and 5am
Licensee has been the holder of the Licence since 11 September 2018. Mr Dhir
Kakar has been a director of the Licensee since 26
January 2018. He was the sole
director between 16 January 2019 and 4 May 2020. He has been the sole director
of the Licensee since
16 October 2023.
11 October 2018 and 16 January 2019, Mr Sandeep Bassin was a joint director of
the Licensee. He was reappointed as a joint
director from 4 May 2020 and then
ceased his directorship on 16 October 2023.
Kakar is also the sole director of another registered company, Sterling
Hospitality Pty Ltd, which holds a late night (on-premises)
licence in relation
to premises trading as Lux Club in South Yarra.
4 April 2022, the then Victorian Gambling and Casino Control Commission
) received a request from Victoria Police, pursuant to
91(1)(b)(ii)
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
that the VGCCC conduct a disciplinary action inquiry in relation to the Licensee
Victoria Police Request
). The Victoria Police Request related to
allegations as to the Licensee’s operations at the Premises under the
a brief outline, Victoria Police alleged numerous instances against the Licensee
of alleged grounds for disciplinary action involving
contraventions of the LCR
Act, being found guilty of an offence against the LCR Act, and conducting its
business under the Licence
in a manner
Global Public Safety, ‘Expert
Security Report,’ 1 December 2023, page 6.
All references to legislation are
references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
that was detracting from or detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the
Premises are situated. The original allegations included
some that were not
eventually pursued by Victoria Police that were of a particularly serious
Mr Kakar and Mr Bassin, Victoria Police also alleged that Mr Andrew Varigos and
Mr Max Porritt were directly or indirectly
concerned in or took part in the
management of the Premises at or about the time of the allegations as contained
in the Victoria
Police Request. Mr Varigos and Mr Porritt were both previous
shareholders of the Licensee.
this basis Victoria Police alleged that each of Mr Kakar, Mr Bassin, Mr Varigos
and Mr Porritt were “related persons”
of the Licensee during the
period of the alleged conduct for the purposes of section 94, and therefore,
should the allegations be
proven, potentially be subject to disqualification
under section 93D.
he did not challenge the proposition that he was a related person, Mr Varigos
ultimately submitted that he did not play a direct
or indirect role in the
management of the Premises at the time of the Victoria Police allegations,
although he has been involved
subsequently as the Licensee’s marketing
manager since 2023.
Conversely,
it is undisputed that Mr Porritt was previously part of the management team of
the Premises but is no longer employed
with the Licensee, having left the
company in September 2022.
1 July 2022, the Victorian Liquor Commission (
) was established
under the LCR Act as the liquor regulator in Victoria. Pursuant to the
legislated transitional provisions contained
in Schedule 8, the Commission
assumed jurisdiction to decide whether to conduct an inquiry into whether
grounds for disciplinary
action against the Licensee exist.
the basis of the allegations made by Victoria Police, the Commission considered
that there may be four grounds for disciplinary
action as discussed below at
paragraph 20.
are two steps involved in a disciplinary action inquiry by the Commission under
Division 1 of Part 6. The Commission must first
determine whether one or more
grounds for disciplinary action against the Licensee exist. If so, the
Commission must decide what,
if any, disciplinary action to take against the
Licensee and/or a related person.
Pre-inquiry
4 August 2022, the Commission wrote to the Licensee to advise that the
Commission was considering whether to conduct an inquiry
pursuant to section
91(1)(b)(ii) to determine whether there are any grounds to take disciplinary
action against the Licensee and
enclosed a request from Victoria Police under
section 91(1)(b).
29 August 2022, the Commission received a written response from Koutsantoni
& Associates on behalf of the Licensee raising
various issues with some of
the allegations in the Victoria Police Request and raising potential practical
problems with the inquiry.
The Licensee otherwise indicated that it would defend
itself in a hearing.
3 October 2022, the Commission served a notice upon the Licensee pursuant to
section 92(1) (
). The Notice stated that the Commission proposed to
inquire into whether there were grounds to take disciplinary action against the
Commission considered that there were four broad grounds for disciplinary action
with respect to the conduct of the Licensee and
the operation of the Premises,
as follows:
“Related Person” is defined
in section 93D of the LCR Act.
Written submissions – Kakar,
Varigos, and Bassim - Koutsantoni & Associates – 4 December 2023, page
(a) the Licensee had contravened a provision of the LCR Act, the regulations
made under the LCR Act (
Regulations
), the Licence, or a condition of the
(b) the Licensee had been found guilty of an offence against the LCR Act or the
Regulations;
(c) the Licensee had conducted its business under the Licence, or allowed it to
be conducted, in a manner that detracted from or
was detrimental to the amenity
of the area in which the Premises are situated; and
(d) the Licensee is otherwise not a suitable person to hold a licence.
relation to the possible ground as described in paragraph 20(c) above, the
Victoria Police Request provided information that police
had received from the
local council of the municipal district in which the Premises is situated
Stonnington City Council
) involving amenity complaints concerning the
Commission identified in the Notice four individuals who may be subject to a
determination under section 93D. This section relates
to the disqualification of
related persons. Those individuals were Mr Kakar (director of the Licensee), Mr
Bassin (joint director
of the Licensee at the time of the Notice), Mr Andrew
Varigos and Mr Max Porritt (persons who, directly or indirectly, allegedly
concerned in or took part in the management of the Premises). Copies of the
Notice were sent to the Licensee as well as to the
related persons.
required by section 92A(1)(b), the Commission also published notice of the
disciplinary action inquiry, inviting any persons whose
commercial or financial
interests may be detrimentally affected by the inquiry to attend and/or make
submissions regarding the inquiry.
The Commission did not receive any
submissions from any such persons in response.
21 November 2022, the Commission sent the Licensee, the related persons, and
Victoria Police a proposed statement of grounds and
proposed particulars as well
as a schedule of the proposed particulars.
documentation made it clear that the Commission proposed to inquire into the
allegations as particularised in the proposed schedule
of particulars, being a
total of 113 particulars.
26 April 2023, the Commission sent the Licensee, the related persons, and
Victoria Police a revised proposed statement of grounds
and a revised proposed
schedule of particulars. This occurred after Victoria Police confirmed with the
Commission on 31 March 2023
the revised evidence and particulars that they
proposed to proceed with for the inquiry.
Commission notes that based on the revised grounds and particulars brought by
Victoria Police, the total number of proposed particulars
reduced from 113 to
32. However, there were no changes to the grounds for disciplinary action as set
out in paragraph 20 above.
6 June 2023, the Commission was informed via email communication by Koutsantoni
& Associates that it would no longer be acting
on behalf of Mr Porritt.
There was no change indicated, however, as to the legal representation for the
Licensee, Mr Kakar, Mr Bassin,
and Mr Varigos.
7 June 2023, the Commission received correspondence from Ms Candace Prince of
Prince Legal advising that she now represented Mr
relation to the revised proposed schedule of particulars, on 14 June 2023, the
Licensee and Mr Kakar confirmed that they disputed
the allegations and/or did
not consider them sufficient to amount to grounds for disciplinary action and
requested more information
from Victoria Police.
way of procedural directions dated 12 December 2022, each of Mr Kakar, Mr
Bassin, Mr Varigos, and Mr Porritt were asked to inform
the Commission if they
took the position that
they were not a related person of the Licensee within the meaning of section
93D. None of them did so.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
conducting an inquiry under Division 1 of Part 6, the Commission must have
regard to the objects of the LCR Act as set out in section
4(1). The objects
that are relevant to this inquiry are:
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising including by–
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community.
4(2) requires that the Commission, in the conduct of an inquiry, exercise its
powers “with due regard to harm minimisation”.
What are the grounds for disciplinary action?
90(1) defines “grounds for disciplinary action” to include,
relevantly in this matter:
(a) that the licensee or permittee has contravened a provision of this Act, the
regulations, the licence or BYO permit or a condition
of the licence or BYO
permit (as the case may be);
(e) that the licensee or permittee has been found guilty of an offence against
this Act or the regulations;
(o) that the licensee or permittee has conducted the business under the licence
or BYO permit, or allowed it to be conducted, in
a manner that detracts from or
is detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the licensed premises are
(q) that the licensee or permittee is otherwise not a suitable person to hold a
licence or BYO permit.
are some circumstances under the LCR Act where a person is considered not
suitable to hold a licence
these circumstances are not exhaustive. Therefore, it is necessary to consider
the concept of suitability in the context of the
relevant legislation.
It was recognised in
Holdings Pty Ltd and Anor v Loison
[2007] VSC 31
that the purpose of
Division 1 of
Given Mr Porritt’s change of
legal representation, he was also asked, by way of procedural direction dated 15
June 2023, to
inform the Commission if he took the position that he was not a
related person under section 93D. He did not do so.
See LCR Act, s 44(3): “...
person is not a suitable person to hold, or carry on business under, a licence
or BYO permit if the person or, if the person is
a body corporate, any director
of the person has, within the preceding 3 years— ... been convicted (a) of
an offence of supplying
liquor without a licence or of supplying adulterated
liquor or of an offence against any law relating to customs or excise; or (b)
engaged in activities involving the trading in or marketing of liquor in a
manner contrary to the provisions of this Act
West Heidelberg RSL Sub-Branch Inc v
Director of Liquor Licensing
[2006] VCAT 347
Egan v Director of Liquor
[2007] VCAT 806.
Part 6 of the LCR Act is “
the protection of the public, the
upholding of industry standards, and the maintenance of public confidence in the
liquor industry
for the punishment of particular individuals or
corporations
the Commission considers that protection of the public and the object of harm
minimisation are paramount. Therefore, in assessing
suitability, the Commission
must look at what is in accordance with the public interest which
embraces matters, amongst others, of standards of human conduct
acknowledged to
be necessary for the good order and well- being of the public...”
“take into account that the Act...was designed to protect the interest
of the community...and the issue of protection of the
public remains an
important consideration
What disciplinary action can the Commission take?
90 defines “disciplinary action” against a licensee to mean any one,
or a combination, of the following:
(a) the cancellation, or suspension for a specified period, of the licensee's
(b) the variation of the licensee's licence;
(c) the endorsement of the licensee's licence;
(d) the issuing of a letter of censure to the licensee; and/or
(e) the imposition of a fine not exceeding an amount that is 250 times the value
of a penalty unit fixed by the Treasurer under
section 5(3)
Units Act 2004
on the licensee.
‘Variation’
of the licensee’s licence is defined to include ‘the imposition of a
new condition on the licence
or permit.’
to s 93C, where a letter of censure is issued, the letter must specify the
grounds for disciplinary action the Commission
has determined exist, and may
censure the licensee in respect of any matter connected with the operation of
the licensed premises,
and include a direction to the licensee to rectify within
a specified time, any matter giving rise to the censure.
A failure to comply with the
direction in the time specified in the letter, may result in further
disciplinary action, which may be
taken by giving written notice to the licensee
for failure to comply with that direction.
the Commission finds that a ground for taking disciplinary action under section
90 is made out, the Commission may also determine,
pursuant to section 93D, that
the licensee or a related person be disqualified –
(a) from holding a licence or BYO permit;
Buzzo Holdings Pty Ltd and Anor v
[2007] VSC 31
It is of course a recognised principle
of regulatory and disciplinary law that provisions which are designed to be
protective and
not punitive may nevertheless have a punitive
that the fact that a particular measure taken in protection of the community may
have a punitive effect on a person does not
detract from its legitimacy or
appropriateness as a protective measure:
New South Wales Bar Association v
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177
Whiting v AMC Investments
(Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2005] VCAT 1830
, [21]; See also
Raz Pty Ltd & Anor v Director of Liquor Licensing (Occupational and
Business Regulation)
[2008] VCAT
LCR Act, s 90(1), paragraph (d) of the definition of
“variation”.
LCR Act, s 93C(1).
LCR Act, s 93C(2) and (3).
(b) from being a director in any body corporate that holds a licence or BYO
(c) from being a partner in any partnership that holds a licence or BYO
(d) from having a beneficial interest (whether directly or indirectly) in the
shares of any body corporate that holds a licence or
BYO permit;
(e) from in any way (whether directly or indirectly) taking part in, or being
concerned in, the management of any licensed premises
or any body corporate that
holds a licence or BYO permit or any licensed club; or
(f) from being employed by any licensed club or any person that holds a licence
or BYO permit.
93D(2) and (3) state that the Commission may disqualify a person in all or any
of the ways listed above even if it determines
not to take disciplinary action
under section 93, and that it must specify a period for which the
disqualification is to apply.
93D(5) further states that a ‘related person’ in relation to a
licensee or permittee relevantly means –
(a) any director or nominee of the licensee or permittee (if it is a body
corporate); or;
(c) any person who, whether directly or indirectly, is concerned in or takes
part in the management of licensed premises or club
of the licensee or
The Inquiry
Directions Hearings
December 2022 and October 2023, the Commission conducted six directions hearings
to determine what arrangements would need
to be made for the conduct of the
inquiry, the provision of documents, the lodging of written submissions and
witness lists.
the directions hearing on 31 August 2023, the Commission received correspondence
from lawyers on behalf of the Stonnington
City Council, dated 21 August 2023,
advising that it did not wish to have any active role in the inquiry beyond
providing copies
of records where relevant
commencement of the directions hearing on 19 October 2023, the Commission
received a proposed mutual statement of agreed facts
Statement of Agreed
) together with mutually proposed terms of settlement between Victoria
Police, the Licensee, Mr Kakar, Mr Bassin and Mr Varigos (collectively,
Joint Proposal
Evidence before the Commission
Pre-Hearing Evidence
Commission had before it:
(a) all evidence lodged by the Stonnington City Council on 12 February 2023;
(b) confirmation from Victoria Police, dated 31 March 2023, as to the evidence
and particulars that they proposed to proceed with
for the inquiry;
12 December 2022, 27 April 2023, 15
June 2023, 31 August 2023, 18 September 2023, and 19 October 2023.
Letter from Maddocks Lawyers on
behalf of the Stonnington City Council, dated 21 August 2023.
(c) response on behalf of the Licensee and Mr Kakar, received by the Commission
on 14 June 2023;
(d) submissions and materials lodged by Victoria Police on 6 July 2023 following
the response on behalf of the Licensee and Mr Kakar
lodged on 14 June 2023;
(e) witness list and witness statements on behalf of the Licensee, Mr Kakar, Mr
Bassin, and Mr Varigos, received by the Commission
on 18 August 2023;
(f) letter from Maddocks Lawyers on behalf of the Stonnington City Council,
dated 21 August 2023;
(g) email communication from Koutsantoni & Associates on behalf of the
Licensee, Mr Kakar, Mr Bassin, and Mr Varigos enclosing
missing documentation,
received 31 August 2023;
(h) submissions and materials lodged on behalf of the Licensee, dated 18 August
(i) submissions and materials lodged on behalf of Victoria Police on 15
September 2023, 18 September 2023, 29 September 2023, and
5 October 2023;
(j) the Joint Proposal, received 19 October 2023;
(k) written submissions on behalf of the Licensee, Mr Kakar, Mr Bassin, and Mr
Varigos, dated 4 December 2023;
(l) written report of Dr Tony Zalewski of Global Public Safety dated 1 December
2023, received 4 December 2023;
(m) written statement of Mr Kakar, dated 4 December 2023; and
(n) written submissions on behalf of Mr Porritt, dated 5 December 2023.
pre-hearing evidence was provided to Victoria Police, the Licensee, and each of
the related persons prior to the hearing.
evidence relevant to the factual allegations that the Commission was considering
was essentially overtaken by the Statement of
Agreed Facts contained within the
Joint Proposal. As explained below, in making its decision, the Commission has
not taken into account
any allegations which did not form part of or were
inconsistent with the Statement of Agreed Facts.
Statement of Agreed Facts reads as follows:
STATEMENT OF AGREED FACTS
Licensee transferred into the Licence on 11 September 2018, and has operated the
Licensed Premises as a late night entertainment
venue with live or recorded
amplified music.
November 2018 to December 2021 there were multiple notifications requiring
Police attendance in the vicinity of the licensed
these occasions police located persons drunk in a public place outside the
licensed premises. In addition, on 25 August 2018 policed
located an intoxicated
patron on the
licensed premises. On 14 April 2023, the Licensee was found guilty of
operating during Covid restrictions and failing to provide CCTV
when requested
to do so whilst the premises was operating on 10 June 2020.
incidents described above caused concern as to undue detriment to the amenity of
the area on numerous instances, leading to the
Request for Inquiry pursuant to
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
that period there have been significant changes to the management of the venue
including change of management plan, change of
security staff, and change in
employee staff.
is recognised by the Liquor Licensing Division of Victoria Police that as a
result the Love machine management has improved considerably,
and can now be
described as ‘very good’. All interactions with the divisional
licensing unit staff have been positive,
and “In terms of amenity, Love
Machine manage their awaiting patrons line better than any other venue in the
parties propose that this matter resolve by an admission by the Licensee to
particulars 4 and 12 in the context of the circumstances
noted within paragraphs
is noted that with respect to particular 12, the allegation relating to the
charge that was not found proven before HH Judge Maidment
at the County Court of
Victoria on 14/4/2023 will not form part of the narrative of the
particular.
is noted that with respect to particulars 4 & 12 that the Licensee has
already been fined by the Magistrates and County Courts
with respect to these
incidents and any penalty imposed by the Commission ought reflect those
parties jointly propose that there be a resultant fine imposed on the Licensee,
and a letter of censure containing any terms and
conditions deemed to be
appropriate by the Commission.
is jointly agreed by the parties that should the sanctions identified in
paragraph 7 above be accepted as appropriate by the Commission,
then the initial
sanctions sought at the time of referral (disqualification of the Licensee and
related persons) will not be pursued
by the Applicant.
4 referred to in the Statement of Agreed Facts (above) was that on 15 December
2021, Sterling Nightclubs Pty Ltd was found
guilty of licensee permit drunk
person on licensed premises at the Melbourne Magistrates’ Court. The
Licensee was fined $1,200
without conviction. In summary, at approximately
1:30am on Sunday 25 August 2019, police attended at the Premises and were
to the staff room where they located an unconscious male who had
vomited due to being drunk.
12 referred to in the Statement of Agreed Facts (above) was that at
approximately 10:07pm on Saturday 13 June 2020, the
Licensee conducted a live
music event at the Premises in breach of the COVID restrictions at the time.
During this event there were
no crowd controllers present which was a breach of
the Licence.
The Commission’s consideration of the Joint
will be noted that the Statement of Agreed Facts reflects agreement between
Victoria Police, the Licensee, and Messrs Kakar, Bassin
and Varigos as to both
an agreed factual basis for the Commission to make findings and exercise its
powers, and as to a proposed
outcome. The Commission’s jurisdiction is a
hybrid of inquisitorial and adversarial procedure. A proposed consent outcome is
not binding on the Commission but should be treated as a “relevant and
weighty consideration, such that it is an unusual case
where the [Commission]
rejects a proposed consent order.” The Commission nevertheless is not a
rubber stamp and must consider
the matters raised by the Inquiry for itself:
Hauer v Lord
[2006] VCAT 739
and [30]-[31].
to the jointly proposed outcome, the Commission has treated it in accordance
with the approach in
Hauer v Lord
. It notes that the parties contemplate
that the letter of censure will contain such terms and conditions as the
Commission deems
appropriate. In the light of those principles, and of the
capacity for it to impose terms and conditions, the Commission, having
considered the issues for itself, has determined to accept that outcome.
parties should note that, had no joint proposal been received, the Commission
might well have been minded to impose a significantly
heavier fine, and give
strong consideration to whether periods of disqualification should be imposed on
the related persons. Ultimately,
however, on reflection, and in the light
(a) paragraphs 5 and 6 of the Statement of Agreed Facts (as discussed above),
and the evidence of Inspector Stamper of Victoria Police
and Dr Zalewski (as
will be discussed below)
(b) the Commission’s power to impose conditions under a letter of censure,
and the undertakings given by the Licensee; and
(c) the criminal penalties already sustained by the Licensee,
The Statement of Agreed Facts
referred to the term, “Applicant.” The Commission has assumed the
use of that term to mean
Victoria Police.
See below at [64]-[72] and [77]-[82]
regarding the evidence of Stamper and Zalewski. See also above Statement of
Agreed Facts at [49].
the Commission did not consider that the proposed outcome was outside the range
of available penalties to such an extent as to mean
it was the “unusual
case” referred to in
Hauer v Lord
where rejection of a consent
position would be required.
summary, by way of the Joint Proposal, Victoria Police did not propose to call
evidence at large for the inquiry. Rather, under
the Joint Proposal, Victoria
Police proposed (with the Licensee and Mr Kakar) a resolution of the matter with
an admission from the
Licence to two particulars numbered 4 and 12, which read
(in summary):
New Particular Number
Date and Approximate Time
Summary of Allegation
2019 1.30am
At approximately 1:30am on Sunday 25 August 2019, police attended at the
premises and were directed to the staff room where they located
an unconscious
male who had vomited due to being drunk.
On 15 December 2021, Sterling Nightclubs Pty Ltd was found guilty of
licensee permit drunk person on licensed premises at the Melbourne
Magistrates’ Court. The Licensee was fined $1,200 without
conviction.
10 June 2020 10.07pm
At approximately 10:07pm on Saturday 13 June 2020, the Licensee conducted a
live music event at the Premises in breach of the COVID
restrictions at the
time. During this event there were no crowd
controllers present which was a breach of the licence.
way of the Joint Proposal, Victoria Police indicated that should the Commission
accept as appropriate, in resolution of this matter,
disciplinary action against
the Licensee in the form of a fine in the sum of $20,000 and the issuance of a
letter of censure to the
Licensee, Victoria Police would no longer be requesting
that the Commission consider disqualification of the Licensee and the related
Commission has considered the Statement of Agreed Facts and the Joint Proposal.
It has determined to accept the agreed facts set
out in paragraphs 1-6 of the
Statement of Agreed Facts (above) as the basis for its determination. It also
accepts the matters set
out in paragraphs 7-9 of the Statement of Agreed Facts
Oral Evidence at the Hearing
addition, the Commission has had regard to the oral evidence given at the
hearing on 6 December 2023, of:
Inspector Andrew
Stamper of Victoria Police;
Dr Zalewski,
expert witness for the Licensee and his report of 1 December 2023; and
The Hearing
in-person hearing took place on 6 December 2023 (
), at which Mr
Kakar was present. The Licensee and Mr Kakar were represented by Ms Penny Marcou
of Counsel.
present were Mr Bassin and Mr Varigos, represented by Ms Marcou. Neither Mr
Bassin nor Mr Varigos gave evidence.
Joint Proposal, paragraph 11 of the
Statement of Agreed Facts. See paragraph 49 herein.
Porritt was present at the Hearing, represented by Mr Bryn Overend of Counsel.
Mr Porritt did not give evidence.
the Hearing, in addition to the evidence that was heard, the Commission and the
parties discussed the Decision-Making Guidelines
issued by the Acting Minister
for Casino, Gaming and Liquor Regulation on 28 June 2023 (the
deal with considerations that the Commission must consider when dealing with
applications for licences to trade after 1am in
inner Melbourne
municipalities.
Guidelines refer to:
the ability of
the applicant to manage noise and amenity loss;
whether there is
a satisfactory history of compliance with liquor laws
additional licence conditions may be required relating to the applicant’s
ability to manage the venue to minimise risks
of harm from late-night trading;
whether the
venue has a plan to prevent and respond to gender-based violence, including
sexual harassment.
the Guidelines are not directly applicable in an inquiry under Part 6 of the
Act, the Commission considers that the considerations
set out in them are
relevant to its task in this inquiry. The Commission at the Hearing commended
them to the Licensee and the related
persons, in particular the consideration of
developing a plan to prevent and respond to gender-based violence.
Inspector Stamper’s Evidence
Stamper gave evidence at the request of the Commission rather than as a witness
called by any party
Inspector Stamper had been the Local Area Commander at Stonnington since
30 January 2023, and had also familiarised himself with the
history of the
Commission notes that Inspector Stamper has been a member of Victoria Police for
over 30 years and has been appointed as a liquor
inspector for over 10 years
Stamper stated that the history of the Premises changed after a change of
managers at an operational level and from a willingness
from Mr Kakar and in
particular the new managers to work with Victoria Police.
particular relevance, Inspector Stamper stated:
professional relationship with the current Love Machine management is very good
and all interactions with DLU staff
Commission notes that it was made clear by Inspector Stamper that the current
relationship between the operators of the Premises
and Victoria Police can be
described as a good one.
Victoria Government Gazette,
Decision-making guidelines applicable for late night licences in inner-
Melbourne areas
, No. S 356 Friday 30 June 2023.
Hearing transcript, page 51 line 40,
page 95 line 5, page 104, line 25.
Hearing transcript, page 95 lines
1-8, page 104 lines 16-24. After the Hearing, Koustantoni & Associates
lodged via email, dated
5 June 2024, the Licensee’s Gender-Based Violence
Management Plan prepared by Dr Zalewski.
Hearing transcript, page 10 line 43
to page 11 line 19.
Stamper statement at [1] and Hearing
transcript, page 13 lines 31-35.
”Liquor inspector” is
defined in section 3.
transcript, page 13, line 40 to line 45.
DLU – Drugs Liquor Unit of Victoria Police.
Stamper statement at [2].
Hearing transcript, page 14, line
stated that the current operators work collaboratively with Victoria Police,
including when members of Victoria Police are around
the Premises during trading
hours and in connection with liquor forums
his statement, dated 29 September 2023, Inspector Stamper stated that the venue
manager of the Premises had accepted an offer by
a Crime Prevention Officer for
the Premises to participate in a Crime Prevention Audit in late 2022. He said
that the Premises’
manager had responded positively with the Crime
Prevention Officer
also noted in his statement that several proactive measures had been put in
place at the Premises, including with respect to staff
allocations, lighting,
furniture arrangements, and line of sight of the toilet facilities
Stamper described the Licensee’s management of its awaiting patron line at
the Premises as being better than the other
venues in the area.
Commission accepts the evidence of Inspector Stamper. It is apparent from his
evidence that the Commission is dealing with a situation
and licensee vastly
different to that confronting the police when this application was made and
accepted by the Commission. The Statement
of Agreed Facts reflects this. In
practical terms, the effluxion of time has worked in the Licensee’s favour
as has its commitment
to best practice in the future.
commitment to best practice has included a statement on behalf of the Licensee
that it is willing to and would adopt a gender
based violence plan as described
in the Guidelines and referred to above at paragraph 62.
the Commission remains concerned regarding the future conduct of this licence
and was not overly impressed by Mr Kakar’s
evidence in the Hearing (as
will be discussed below). While confident that the Licensee has reformed and is
now capable of appropriately
managing the Premises, the Commission considers
additional assurance, by way of the requirement for ongoing independent
assessments
and reviews of the operation of the Licence for which Mr Kakar is
responsible as sole director, would ensure rectification (and verification)
the management practices that ultimately gave rise to the circumstances leading
to the grounds for disciplinary action which have
been found to have been
established. To that end, the Commission expects that the Licensee will
implement the recommendations from
those assessments and keep the Commission
informed of its implementation of any such recommendations.
Kakar was also during the course of his evidence given a clear caution by the
potential consequences of any further disciplinary proceedings. The Commission
– in no uncertain terms – said
that the Licence was under scrutiny,
and that with findings against the licensee company, it has a record. In effect,
the Commission
warned that if the licensee company were to ‘come
back’ before the Commission, it could face a harsher outcome than was
case on this occasion. In response, Mr Kakar confirmed that he understood that.
The Commission proceeds on the basis that Mr
Kakar has heard that warning and
expects that Mr Kakar will heed it lest he and the licensee company face
potentially more serious
disciplinary outcomes in the future. The Commission
trusts that the conduct of both venues continues along their current path in
manner recommended by Dr Zalewski and endorsed by Inspector Stamper.
Hearing transcript, page 14, line
Stamper statement at [2].
Stamper statement at [2].
Stamper statement at [2].
transcript, page 88, line 20 to line 39.
Both venues referred to in paragraph 75 above are The Love
Machine and the Lux Club, which is the venue also mentioned in paragraph
herein. Mr Kakar is the director of the companies holding licences for those
Dr Zalewski’s Evidence
Zalewski advised the Commission that he is an independent risk management
consultant. His curriculum vitae states that he possesses
specialised knowledge
in the field of security and safety systems, particularly with respect to
licensed venues. Dr Zalewski is an
experienced independent witness and has
appeared previously before the Commission in other matters.
relation to this matter, Dr Zalewski had prepared a report dated 1 December
2023, which he relied on in his evidence in the Hearing.
his report, Dr Zalewski stated that the current operations at the Premises
through the Licensee’s Security and Patron Management
provided a reasonable basis for effective management and security
said, he recommended that the Licensee improve its SPMP by way of a number of
updates as detailed in his report, which the Licensee
has since advised that it
has adopted
his oral evidence, Dr Zalewski explained the process he would go through when
working with a licensee, involving a launch of the
SPMP to emphasise its
importance to all staff, and how he would work with senior management to ensure
that the SPMP was fully implemented
in a particular venue.
also recommended that there be audits of the Licensee’s operational system
and explained what that process involved. The
Licensee has agreed to this
recommendation
Mr Kakar’s Evidence
Kakar stated that when the Premises were transferred to the Licensee in 2018, he
hired new staff and inherited some existing staff.
stated that, because The Love Machine was different to the operations of the
previous licensee, he created his own management plan.
stated that in 2019 the Premises closed for several months due to circumstances
outside of his control and then there were COVID-19
restrictions in 2020 and
2021. These closures adversely affected his business.
stated that from September 2022 he had made major changes to his management
team, including restructuring the whole management
team. He also changed the
security company that he had previously had in place.
stated that he had retained Dr Zalewski and had met with him twice. He agrees
with Dr Zalewski’s recommendation regarding
regular audits and the
recommendation to invite members of Victoria Police to be an integral part of
audit meetings and to be part
of meetings for the launch of the improved
his statement, dated 4 December 2023, he admitted that he was not hands on in
the day- to-day management of the Premises but states
that he has been
completely hands on since September 2022, including arranging weekly meetings
with his management staff as to compliance
also made reference to having dedicated a member of his management staff for the
purposes of attending liquor accord meetings as
Global Expert Security Report, 1
December 2023, page 3.
Global Expert Security Report, 1
December 2023, page 3; Written submissions – Kakar, Varigos, and Bassim -
Koutsantoni &
Associates – 4 December 2023, page 9.
Global Expert Security Report, 1
December 2023, page 3; Written submissions – Kakar, Varigos, and Bassim -
Koutsantoni &
Associates – 4 December 2023, page 9.
Commission remains concerned regarding the future conduct of this licence and as
previously stated in paragraph 75 above, was
not particularly reassured by Mr
Kakar’s evidence in the Hearing. While reasonably confident that the
Licensee has reformed
and is now capable of appropriately managing the Premises,
the Commission considers additional assurance is essential, by way of
requirement for ongoing independent assessments and reviews of the operation of
the Licences for which Mr Kakar is responsible
for as sole director. As
previously stated in paragraph 76 above, Mr Kakar was also, during the course of
his evidence, given a clear
warning by the Commission as to the consequences
should the operation of the relevant licences that he is responsible for fall
par in the future.
Post-Hearing Submissions
addition, the Commission has had regard to the various submissions it has
received in relation to this matter after the Hearing
from the Licensee, Mr
Kakar, Mr Bassin, Mr Varigos (collectively), from Mr Porritt, and from Victoria
submissions were all considered in the Commission’s determination of what
disciplinary action to take in respect of the
Licensee and what, if any, to take
in respect of the related persons.
the post-hearing submissions, the Commission notes that Koutsantoni &
Associates lodged submissions on behalf of the Licensee,
Mr Kakar, Mr Bassin,
and Mr Varigos on 18 December 2023, in which it was asserted that the alleged
events used to prove Ground 1
of the grounds for disciplinary action
were the same as the alleged
events used to prove Ground 2
and that, having regard to the principle of double jeopardy, the
Commission ought to only make a finding with respect to Ground 1
and refuse to
make a finding with respect to Ground 2
response, Ms Holmes submitted on behalf of Victoria Police that the alleged
events constituted breaches not only of the Licence
but also of the LCR Act, and
therefore Victoria Police does not agree with the double jeopardy submission
summarised above.
Commission accepts Victoria Police’s submission. It is clear from the
scheme of section 90(1) that the grounds for disciplinary
action are independent
of each other, but there is no reason to consider that the same conduct cannot
amount to a contravention of
more than one of them.
the criminal law context, where offences involve the same set of underlying
acts, to find that both offences have been committed
does not necessarily
involve any form of double punishment: as stated by Gleeson CJ in
Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd,
“it is one thing to say that a
person may not be put in jeopardy twice for the same offence; it is another
thing to say that
a person may not be put in jeopardy twice for the same
conduct”. A fortiori, in the disciplinary context, there is no difficulty
with finding that the same conduct is a contravention of two different grounds
for disciplinary action. Indeed, the Victorian Court
of Appeal has held that
“the common law rule against double punishment recognised in criminal
proceedings cannot apply with
the same strictness (if it applies at all) to
disciplinary proceedings.”
course, it is essential that in imposing a sanction, the Commission takes into
account that the same conduct is relied on here
under different grounds. The
Commission has been careful in setting the sanction to avoid any doubly punitive
effect, keeping in
mind that in any event the purpose of any sanction imposed is
not to punish but to protect.
Hearing transcript, page 88, line 20
to line 39.
That the Licensee had contravened a
provision of the LCR Act, the regulations made under the LCR Act, the Licence,
or a condition
of the Licence.
That the Licensee had been found
guilty of an offence against the LCR Act or the Regulations.
See paragraph 20 above.
McSteen v Architects Registration
Board of Victoria
[2018] VSCA 96
Licensee also submitted that in the light of, in particular, paragraphs 5 and 6
of the Statement of Agreed Facts above, the matters
canvassed in evidence in
relation to Mr Kakar’s subsequent addressing of the relevant issues
through the Licensee, including
its engagement of Dr Zalewski, and of the
minimal involvement of Mr Bassim and Mr Varigos in the events the subject of the
of Agreed Facts, disqualification of those persons was not
to ensuring that the Licensee complies with the conditions in the letter of
censure discussed below, the Commission accepts
those submissions in paragraph
making its findings and decision, the Commission has, amongst other factors, had
regard to the mutually made submission in the
Joint Proposal which
It is noted with respect to particulars 4 & 13 that
the Licensee has already been fined by the Magistrates’ and County Courts
with respect to these incidents and any penalty imposed by the Commission ought
to reflect those sanctions.
Mr Porritt’s submissions
separate submissions, Mr Porritt conceded that he was a related person for the
purpose of section 93D in relation to the contraventions
found against the
Licensee, and that therefore the Commission was entitled to disqualify him.
Nevertheless, he maintained that as
he made no concession as to any involvement
in any of the Licensee’s contraventions, it would not be reasonably open
Commission to disqualify him.
also submitted that “a contested hearing with substantive hearing of
evidence in relation to the allegations has not been
provided.” The
Commission rejects this submission. The course of not conducting a contested
hearing was done at Mr Porritt’s
counsel’s request, on the basis
that such a hearing was not required in the light of the concession Mr Porritt
was making that
he was a related person.
the alternative, Mr Porritt’s counsel submitted that a disqualification
was not required, in the light of his evidence as
to the salutary effect of the
proceedings upon him, and his otherwise satisfactory history of operating in the
hospitality industry.
Commission accepts Mr Porritt’s alternative submissions and does not
propose to disqualify him.
The Commission’s findings
Ground 1 – The Licensee had contravened a provision of
the LCR Act, the regulations made under the LCR Act, the Licence, or
a condition
of the Licence
was alleged that:
New Particular Number
Date and Approximate Time
Summary of Allegation
2019 1.30am
At approximately 1:30am on Sunday 25 August 2019, police attended at the
premises and were directed to the staff room where they located
an unconscious
male who had vomited due to being drunk.
On 15 December 2021, Sterling Nightclubs Pty Ltd was found guilty of
licensee permit drunk person on licensed premises at the Melbourne
Magistrates’
Statement of Agreed Facts, paragraph
Court. The Licensee was fined $1,200 without conviction.
10 June 2020 10.07pm
At approximately 10:07pm on Saturday 13 June 2020, the Licensee conducted a
live music event at the Premises in breach of the COVID
restrictions at the
time. During this event there were no crowd controllers present which was a
breach of the Licence.
the circumstances, the Commission finds this ground to be established.
Ground 2 - The Licensee had been found guilty of an offence
against the LCR Act or the Regulations
Commission finds this ground to be established.
Ground 3 - The Licensee had conducted its business under the
Licence, or allowed it to be conducted, in a manner that detracted from
detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the Premises are
Commission has considered the admission by the Licensee and Mr Kakar in the
Statement of Agreed Facts that the conceded particulars
(as set out in paragraph
49 above) had caused concern as to undue detriment to the amenity of the area.
Commission finds this ground to be established.
Ground 4 - The Licensee is otherwise not a suitable person to
hold a licence.
considering the suitability of the Licensee to continue holding the Licence, the
Commission has considered its findings with respect
to the grounds detailed
above, as well as the evidence of Mr Kakar, Dr Zalewski, and Inspector Stamper
at the Hearing.
such, the Commission has not found that the Licensee is unsuitable to continue
holding the Licence.
Grounds for Disciplinary Action
the Commission is satisfied that there are grounds for disciplinary action, it
must proceed to make a determination in accordance
with section 93 of the LCR
Act. As indicated above, the primary object of the LCR Act is the need to
minimise harm and the protection
of the public through encouraging a culture of
responsible consumption of alcohol, rather than imposing a sanction as a form of
punishment.
Commission may take into account a variety of factors in determining the
appropriate disciplinary action, including (but not limited
the paramount
need to minimise harm
need to protect the public
Statement of Agreed Facts, paragraph
See LCR Act, s 4(2), specifically,
“[i]t is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority,
discretion, jurisdiction
and duty conferred or imposed by this Act must be
exercised and performed with due regard to harm minimisation”.
With respect to public protection,
Ross v Planet Platinum Ltd (Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2012] VCAT 1670
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation v Legend Enterprises Pty Ltd (Review and Regulation)
[2013] VCAT
the nature,
extent, and seriousness of identified grounds, including the period over which
they extended;
compliance history of the licensee and/or similar previous conduct
as well as whether evidence
suggests that the licensee fosters and encourages a culture of compliance with
the LCR Act;
the level of
cooperation with the Commission or other authorities responsible for enforcement
under the LCR Act;
the financial
position of the licensee;
the need to
generally deter and discourage similar behaviour from other licensees and
specifically deter the licensee in question;
contrition and/or corrective actions taken by the licensee to improve management
of the premises
any mitigating
circumstances relevant to the matter.
Commission considers that the primary object of the LCR Act relevant to its
determination of this matter is “to contribute
to minimising
Consideration of Disciplinary Action against the
conduct admitted to by the Licensee is of great concern to the Commission,
particularly in light of the admissions contained in
the Statement of Agreed
Facts. While there may have been some mitigating circumstances, the Licensee had
failed to comply with its
obligations under its licence and its obligations to
its clientele and community. The Commission denounces the conduct. Were it not
for the evidence of significant improvement from Inspector Stamper and the
engagement of Dr Zalewski, a significantly harsher outcome
may have been
contemplated.
ultimately the Commission has considered the mutually proposed disciplinary
action contained in the Joint Proposal which,
in effect, provide a resolution of
the matter that Victoria Police, the Licensee, and Mr Kakar submit is
appropriate, subject to
the additional disciplinary action of varying the
Licence by imposing a condition on it.
Licensee’s obligations include to minimise the risk of harm to its
clientele. Minimising the risk of gender-based violence
is important to the
proper management of a venue such as the licensed premises. The Commission
accepts that the Licensee has developed
a Gender Based Violence Management Plan
(prepared for the Licensee by Dr Zalewski) prior to the Commission having made
its decision.
The Commission considers that implementing and ensuring its staff
comply with this Plan, will assist to minimise the risk of gender-based
its clientele, and thereby facilitate proper management of the venue.
Accordingly, the Commission considers that imposing
a condition requiring the
Plan to be implemented will promote the public safety and public confidence
objectives underlying the disciplinary
light of all the circumstances, and with particular emphasis on the Statement of
Agreed Facts and the improved performance and
systems engaged in by the Licensee
Buzzo Holdings Pty Ltd and Anor v
[2007] VSC 31
Hodgkin v Planet Platinum Ltd
(Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2011] VCAT 725
Hodgkin v Planet Platinum Ltd
(Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2011] VCAT 725
Holdings Pty Ltd and Anor v Loison
[2007] VSC 31
Parr v K Marketing Pty Ltd
(Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2010] VCAT 1108
Starera PL v Melbourne CC
[2000] VCAT 213
Marketing Pty Ltd (Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2010] VCAT 1108
Ross v Planet Platinum Ltd (Occupational and Business
Regulation)
[2012] VCAT 1670
[130]-[132].
Ross v Planet Platinum Ltd
(Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2012] VCAT 1670
LCR Act, s 4
period covered by the Victoria Police allegations, the Commission considers it
appropriate to take disciplinary action on the Licensee
as set out in the
following paragraphs.
relation to grounds 1, 2 & 3
(a) The Commission imposes a fine of $20,000 to be paid within three months of
the date of this decision;
(b) The Commission issues a letter of censure to the Licensee including a
direction to:
For a period
commencing three months from the date of notification of this decision and
expiring on 30 June 2027, the Licensee must
engage an independent risk
management consultant to conduct half-yearly written reviews of the
Licensee’s operational system
to assure compliance by the Licensee with
its obligations under the LCR Act and the Licensee must implement any
recommendations made
as soon as possible and, in any event, within three months
from the date of the consultant’s written review, and notify the
Commission in writing of its implementation of any such recommendations.
For a period
commencing three months from the date of notification of this decision and
expiring on 30 June 2027, the Licensee must
request from the relevant Liquor
Inspector for the Premises at half-yearly intervals, a brief report outlining
whether the Licensing
Inspector considers that the Licence has been operated
satisfactorily for the preceding 6-month period, and convey any response
to the Commission
(c) Vary the Licence by imposing a condition that:
By no later than
one month from the date of notification of this decision, the Licensee must
implement the Gender Based Violence Management
Plan, prepared for the Licensee
by Dr Tony Zalewski prior to the Commission having made its decision, and upon
request is to make
available this plan to an authorised member of Victoria
Police or a person authorised in writing by the Commission.
Consideration of disqualification of related persons under
section 93D
determining whether or not to disqualify Mr Kakar, Mr Bassin, Mr Varigos, and/or
Mr Porritt in accordance with section 93D, the
Commission has taken into
account, amongst other factors:
(a) Victoria Police’s indication, by way of the Joint Proposal, that
should the Commission accept as appropriate, in resolution
of this matter,
disciplinary action against the Licensee in the form of a fine and the issuance
of a letter of censure to the Licensee,
Victoria Police would no longer be
requesting that the Commission consider disqualification of the Licensee and the
related persons
(b) the Licensee’s apparently significantly improved systems and
performance in the period since the admitted conduct.
light of all the circumstances, the Commission is not satisfied that it is
appropriate to disqualify Mr Kakar, Mr Bassin, Mr Varigos,
and/or Mr Porritt in
accordance with section 93D.
The preceding paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of
Mr John Larkins (Deputy Chair), Mr James O’Halloran
(Deputy Chair), and Mr
Steven Brnovic (Commissioner).
All emails to the Commission must be
secretariat@liquor.vic.gov.au.
Joint Proposal, paragraph 11 of the
Statement of Agreed Facts. See paragraph 49 herein.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.45 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter