URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1581.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Litchfield v WTH [2025] VCC 1581 (31 October 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
LAW DIVISION
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
SERIOUS INJURY
Case No. CI-23-05269
HELEN LITCHFIELD
WTH PTY LTD
HIS HONOUR JUDGE GINNANE
DATE OF HEARING
8 September 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT
31 October 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Litchfield v WTH
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1581
REASONS FOR
Subject: ACCIDENT COMPENSATION
Catchwords: Serious Injury Application – right knee –
aggravation injury –
Legislation Cited:
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Cases Cited:
Seckold v Transport Accident Commission
[2015] VSCA 18
Findlay v Transport Accident Commission
[2025] VSCA 126.
Judgment: Application dismissed.
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr D McWilliams SC
Ms S Bailey
Patrick Robinson & Co Solicitors
For the Defendant
IDP Lawyers
HIS HONOUR:
Relevant Legal Principles – Serious Injury
plaintiff’s Application by way of Originating Motion for the grant of a
serious injury certificate for pain and suffering
finds its way to Court by a
somewhat convoluted route. It brings into play the circumstances pertaining to
the plaintiff’s
previous injuries to her right knee. That occurred at her
work in two incidents in February and March 2012 (the
2012 injuries
plaintiff brought an Originating Motion (
First Originating Motion
the grant of a certificate for pain and suffering (
First Proceeding
question for determination is whether a further right knee work injury suffered
in July 2018 (the
July 2018 injury
), the subject of this proceeding
commenced by Originating Motion, (
Second Originating Motion
) constitutes
a serious aggravation to the condition of her already seriously injured right
McWilliams SC and Ms Bailey of counsel appeared for the plaintiff. Ms Clark of
counsel appeared for the defendant.
plaintiff’s Court Book contained not only material relevant to the subject
July 2018 injury
, but also the
2012 injuries.
Both Originating
Motions were listed together.
the proceedings were called on, the parties told me that the
Originating
First Proceeding
had resolved. Counsel
explained that the plaintiff had been granted a certificate for pain and
suffering for the
2012 injuries
. Therefore, these reasons determine the
outcome of the
Second Originating Motion
is helpful to set out the Particulars of Injury of the
First Originating
dated 4 December 2023 that
plaintiff relies on the following injuries:
Right knee injury and/or aggravation of right knee condition, with
meniscal pathology requiring 2 arthroscopic operations and with
ongoing pain and
restriction.
2. The Plaintiff relies on the definition of serious injury in
subparagraphs (a) of
section 134AB(37)
Accident Compensation Act 1985
(Vic) (as amended).
3. As a result of her injuries the plaintiff claims to have suffered
serious impairment and loss of body function to her right knee.
Particulars of Injury filed in support of the
Second Originating Motion
July 2018 injury
are expressed as
Plaintiff relies on the following injuries:
Injury to the right knee, including patellofemoral joint crepitus;
Aggravation of a prior right knee injury;
Chronic pain;
Psychological injury.
2. The Plaintiff relies on the definition of serious injury in
subparagraphs (a) and (c) of section 325 of the Workplace Injury and
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013.
3. As a result of her injuries the plaintiff claims to have suffered
serious impairment and loss of body function to her right knee
The Plaintiff’s Affidavit Evidence
plaintiff’s Court Book included an Affidavit she affirmed on 25 January
First Injury
in support of the
First Originating Motion
2012 injuries
to the right knee.
It related the plaintiff’s personal and work history, the happening of the
right knee injury and the course
it took up to the date the
First Injury
plaintiff made a number of additional affidavits in support of the
Originating Motion
July 2018 injury
. These are:
(a) Affidavit affirmed on 26 May 2023 (
First Aggravation Injury
(b) Affidavit affirmed on 18 April 2024 (
Second Aggravation Injury
(c) Affidavit affirmed on 29 August 2025 (
Third Aggravation Injury
First Injury Affidavit
, the plaintiff deposed to being born in
Melbourne in 1965. She left school at 16 years of age and commenced working work
at a supermarket where she remained until
She married, but is no
longer, however is the mother to two adult children.
business. She performed the book keeping and paperwork
for the business in
addition to rearing her two
In early 2010, she worked
at a courier company for a short
August 2010 the plaintiff commenced work with the defendant who then conducted
its operations under the name “Avis”.
She worked at Tullamarine
Airport. She was employed full-time and worked various shifts day and night. Her
title was service agent
and her duties included driving rental cars between the
airport and the Avis yard and cleaning the interior of the cars and putting
through the car wash. It was a large operation with about 15 drivers working at
a time. Avis merged with another car rental
company known as
“Budget” following which the plaintiff’s role was mainly
confined to driving. She drove to and
from the airport and the depot car park
and was involved in moving cars in the depot car park.
Right Knee Injury February 2012
12 February 2012, the plaintiff suffered a work injury to her right knee. In the
First Injury Affidavit
the plaintiff deposed that she was parking a car
in the Avis yard in order for it to be cleaned and a car pulled up close next to
her. When she tried to get out of the car there was very little room between the
vehicles so she opened the door as far as possible
and tried to squeeze out. As
she was getting out of the car she twisted her right knee and immediately felt
very strong pain in her
right knee.
attended her GP the next day and was given a certificate for one week off work
after which she returned to work on modified duties.
20 February 2012, she lodged a WorkCover Claim.
Second right
knee injury March 2012
18 March 2012, the plaintiff twisted her right knee getting out of a work
vehicle. She attended her GP who arranged an ultrasound
of the right knee. Her
GP also organised an MRI of the right knee on 4 April
Relevant history of the right knee prior to the claimed
aggravation injury in July 2018
plaintiff was referred to Mr Russell Miller whom she saw on 22 May 2012.
9 July 2012, Mr Miller performed surgery on the plaintiff’s right knee,
which consisted of an arthroscopic synovectomy, debridement
of the condo
pathology and a partial meniscectomy (
First Surgery
July and September 2012 the plaintiff was off work. She returned to work on
modified duties.
13 November 2012, the plaintiff’s GP requested an MRI of the right
29 December 2012, in a medico-legal report prepared by Mr Miller for the
purposes of the
First Proceeding
, and having been asked to comment on the
plaintiff’s requirement for further treatment, he
“She will have an ongoing requirement for further
treatment with analgesics, anti-inflammatory agents, physiotherapy and
Glucosamines.
It is possible, but unlikely she will require further surgical
intervention of an arthroscopy and it is possible, but unlikely that
come to more major interventions such as a joint
replacement...”.
plaintiff suffered ongoing pain and restriction and was referred back to Mr
Miller. He performed surgery (
Second Surgery
) on 4 March 2013 comprising
an arthroscopic synovectomy to the right knee along with Synvisc injection. A
period off work followed
Second Surgery
. In April 2013, the
plaintiff returned to work once again on modified duties and hours.
plaintiff said in her
First Injury
that she continued to
experience constant pain in her right knee after the
Second Surgery
although she said that the intensity of the pain was “
She deposed
that she was told by doctors that there was no further treatment possible and
that her right knee was essentially as
good as it was going to get.
plaintiff’s
First Injury Affidavit
deposed to a litany of pain and
suffering, and functional and recreational pursuits, she suffered from the
2012 injuries.
Second Originating Motion
First Aggravation Injury
the plaintiff
described that on 6 July 2018, she suffered an aggravation to her right knee.
She was at work and was attempting to
collect an infant seat from where they
were stored in a shipping container in order to install it into a rental car
when a collapse
of seats occurred and her right knee was injured.
17 July 2018 the plaintiff lodged a WorkCover claim for injury.
First Aggravation Injury Affidavit
of May 2023, the plaintiff
referred back to her
First Injury Affidavit
January 2018,
and said that its
contents provided an accurate account of her
personal and employment history, as well as the medical treatment she received
right knee up to that time.
First Aggravation Injury Affidavit
the plaintiff said that she had
not received any medical treatment for the first six months of 2018.
plaintiff deposed that she did not think that the right knee had either improved
or deteriorated substantially during the first
six months of
20 July 2018 the plaintiff had an ultrasound of the right knee.
20 August 2018 the plaintiff had an MRI of the right knee.
September 2018 the plaintiff returned to work.
11 January 2019 the plaintiff was referred to Mr Hussaini. On 19 February 2019
Mr Hussaini recommended a cortisone injection and
physiotherapy.
4 March 2019 the plaintiff had a cortisone injection.
16 August 2019 Mr Hussaini performed surgery (
Third Surgery
) consisting
of an arthroscopy, chondroplasty of the patellofemoral joint, micro fracture of
the trochlear and chondroplasty of the
lateral tibial plateau.
4 September 2019, some two weeks post-surgery, the plaintiff was reviewed by Mr
Hussaini. She was experiencing a dull aching pain
in the right knee. Further
physiotherapy and hydrotherapy was recommended. Modified work duties were also
recommended along with
certain restrictions. The plaintiff said that driving
herself to work remained difficult and was accompanied by pain.
2 October 2019, the plaintiff saw Mr Hussaini for review. At this time she was
receiving physiotherapy and performing modified
duties. She said she continued
to experience a constant dull ache in her right knee. The right knee also had
some crunching and was
painful and was also locking up from time to time. Mr
Hussaini recommended strengthening exercises.
5 February 2020, the plaintiff saw Mr Hussaini again who recorded that she told
him that she had been experiencing increased pain
in the right knee joint with
trouble going up and down stairs. The pain was located in the central part of
the knee. She also had
difficulty maintaining a straight leg.
March 2020, Mr Hussaini administered a cortisone injection in response to the
plaintiff’s report of ongoing right knee pain
that was impacting her
activities.
March 2020 the plaintiff was stood down from work due to Covid.
1 June 2020 the plaintiff had another cortisone injection.
December 2020 the plaintiff was made redundant from her employment.
January 2021 and July 2022 the plaintiff worked in the Victorian Government
hotel quarantine program. The contract was scheduled
to end in June 2022. The
plaintiff undertook necessary training from January 2021 to about July 2022. She
commenced working in quarantine
hotels, initially in Southbank and then at the
Mantra Hotel in Collins Street. She was unable to cope at the Mantra Hotel
the use of lifts was prohibited and there were too many stairs for her
to navigate with her knee pain.
16 August 2021 the plaintiff had an X-ray of her right knee.
August 2022 the plaintiff commenced work as a retail merchandiser. Her work
involved attending shops or supermarkets such as Woolworths,
usually at night,
and replacing price-tags on food and other items with updated electronic
price-tags. She said she is fortunate
because her employer knows about the
condition of her knee and allows her to work around it. Also, other workers
perform tasks that
require kneeling and squatting. She said that if she must get
down onto the floor, she goes down on her left knee and gets into a
position on the floor. Sometimes she might need a hand getting up but she
usually can manage.
plaintiff expressed frustration because she believed she was at the end of the
road as far as treatment of the knee is concerned
and that her realistic
trajectory was a total right knee replacement.
plaintiff deposed that she continued to consult with her GP, maintained contact
with Mr Hussaini, and continued with gym and swim
plaintiff deposed that she took Meloxicam and Panadol Osteo as required.
plaintiff deposed that she continued to experience pain and discomfort in the
right knee that varied in its intensity depending
on activity undertaken. She
said that since the
Third Surgery
in 2019, her pain had improved
plaintiff said that her knee continued to interfere with all aspects of her
daily life in the same manner she had deposed to in
First Injury
the plaintiff’s
First Injury Aggravation Affidavit
she said that
she continued to labour from the physical limitations involving activities such
as bending, and prolonged sitting and
driving such as she had deposed to in the
First Injury Affidavit
as having been caused by the
2012 injuries
She said she continued to experience sleep disturbance, which impacted her
ability to concentrate, although she said she thought
her sleep had slightly
improved since swearing the
First Injury Affidavit
plaintiff deposed that she continued to experience similar impacts on her
hobbies and pastimes including camping, hiking, dancing,
and interacting with
young children as she had deposed to in the
First Injury Affidavit
2012 injuries
plaintiff deposed that a grandson was born in 2020. She related that she had
previously experienced difficulties playing with
friends’ children and
grandchildren, and it made her very sad that she could not play with her
difference the plaintiff relied on as being caused by the
is that her knee locks-up and she thinks it clicks more regularly
than it did beforehand. She believed that the kneecap was broken
and had been
repaired by Mr Hussaini although she feels that with some movements, the knee
cap gets stuck in the knee joint and this
can be painful if she puts too much
weight on it, or simply from overuse.
Second Aggravation Injury
Affidavit dated 18 April 2024
Second Aggravation Injury Affidavit
, the plaintiff said that she has
not had significant treatment and was continuing to consult with her GP, Dr
Naidu, once a month,
and was undertaking physiotherapy exercises at home.
plaintiff said she continued to take Meloxicam which was helping with day-to-day
movement in the joint, as well as Panadol Osteo
for pain and she was taking
every second day.
plaintiff said she continued to experience pain in the right knee. The pain
remained intermittent, however, the more she moved
around and placed weight on
it the worse the pain became. She said she experienced numbness into the lower
leg and foot from the
knee down. She deposed that “
these days the knee
is really sensitive to the touch. If I knock it or someone walk into me, it is
quite painful”
plaintiff said she experienced knee dropping two or three times a week and this
was very painful and in the past it occurred “
every now and
plaintiff deposed that Mr Hussaini has told her that she requires a full knee
replacement.
plaintiff deposed that she remained employed as a merchandiser but was
struggling more with work. She has been required to travel
interstate and that
navigating flights is difficult and the experience is very unpleasant.
Third Aggravation Injury Affidavit dated 29 August 2025
plaintiff deposed in her
Third Aggravation Injury Affidavit
that the pain
in the right knee has worsened and the pain is “
constant and the
intensity of the pain
knee gives out under her and she loses balance and she has fallen to the ground
more than a couple of
The plaintiff
said that in the middle of 2023, she stepped down on her right leg and her right
knee gave out. She fell and broke
her small toe. At hospital it was proposed to
put her foot in plaster, however, due to her right knee problem she declined the
as being too heavy, and instead wore a moon boot for 6 weeks. The
plaintiff feels as if her pain has become sharper and more frequent
and it feels
uncomfortably
plaintiff said she continues to see her GP every one to two months and performs
physiotherapy exercises daily. She continues to
take Meloxicam and Panadol
Osteo. She tries to the take Meloxicam on work days to manage the pain of the
right knee (one tablet).
plaintiff remains employed in retail merchandising on a casual basis. Her shifts
are 7-8 hours long and she tends to work between
20-35 hours a week on average.
She said that she is in receipt of a disability support pension.
plaintiff deposed that she remains unable to play with her grandchildren as she
would wish to. She said she no longer can perform
any gardening because it has
become too difficult, whereas beforehand she was able to tinker in her
Plaintiff’s Submissions
McWilliams submitted that the medical evidence relied on by the defendant belies
a finding that the plaintiff was adversely affected
to any great degree after
2012 injuries
. Mr McWilliams pointed out that the plaintiff continued
to work for Avis, and in the six months prior to July 2018, she had not
treatment, however, this altered after the
July 2018 injury
when she came to an additional arthroscopic procedure and other modalities of
McWilliams relied on the report of Mr Asaid dated 16 January 2024, whose opinion
is that not only did the
July 2018 injury
bring about the need for a
further arthroscopic intervention, which Mr McWilliams submitted Mr Miller in
2012 said was unlikely to
occur, but that the
July 2018 injury
very least hastened the need for a knee replacement procedure.
McWilliams also relied on the plaintiff undergoing “
not only a further
x-ray, ultrasound, MRI and cortisone injection on 4 March 2019, but a third
procedure performed by Mr Hussaini
on 16 August 2019 which includes arthroscopy
chondroplasty of the patellofemoral joint, a microfracture of the trochlear and
chondroplasty
of the lateral tibial
McWilliams also referred to the plaintiff having had two further cortisone
injections in March 2020 and June 2020.
McWilliams referred to what he characterised as some evidence of a possible
fracture of the patella from the
July 2018 injury.
referred to
the observations by Dr Poppenbeek in his report to the defendant dated 5 June
2020, on addressing diagnosis, who said
rather complex. I believe the diagnosis pertaining to the injury of 2018 was
probably an aggravation of pre-existing chondromalacia
of the right knee. That
Ms Litchfield understands from her surgeon there was also a fracture of the
patella which would probably
have occurred in that injury. It would be fair to
describe this condition as internal derangement via aggravation of pre-existing
degenerative change”.
McWilliams referred to the opinion of Mr Asaid dated 3 September 2025, who when
Is any damage to the right knee sustained on 6 July 2018
greater because of the 12 February 2012 injury
main difference in the findings between the surgical procedures performed is the
subsequent development of Grade III chondral
changes of both of trochlear and
lateral tibial plateau which developed at some stage between the surgery on 9
July 2012 and the
surgery on 6 July 2018”.
McWilliams submitted that Mr Asaid’s opinion should be regarded as
identifying a difference in the pathology of the right
knee. Also, in answer to
being asked, “
Did any injury suffered by reason of the 6 July 2018
incident change the clinical path to a total knee reconstruction and if so, in
”, Mr Asaid
is possible Ms Litchfield may have required a total knee replacement at some
stage in the future following the incident
on 12 February 2012, it's reasonable
to consider that the incident on 6 July 2018 may have brought forward the need
for this procedure.
As outlined in my response to question 2, that the
intraoperative findings from the surgical procedure performed following the
in 2018 demonstrated Grade III changes”.
McWilliams in advancing his submission that the medical evidence is supportive
of a finding that the consequences of the
2012 injuries
were of a lesser
order than has come to be the case as a result of
July 2018 injury
relied on the opinion expressed by Dr Barton in August 2012, subsequent to the
First Surgery,
who said that the defendant insurer could regard the
plaintiff as able to return to work.
McWilliams also referred to Dr Barton’s second report dated 29 October
2012, in which he
saw the worker I felt that her physical problem was relatively minor and there
was no particular reason why she could not
activities reviewed and in time return to normal duties”.
McWilliams referred to Dr Barton’s third report dated 31 October 2012 in
indicated previously, I believe once the worker has moved back to normal hours,
which I believe she can do now, she should be
able to do normal hours and duties
within the two-week period. I believe that she will be fit for her pre-injury
role within two
weeks from the commencement of the return to work
McWilliams addressed the report of Mr Simm dated 3 October 2018. Mr McWilliams
noted that Mr Simm was asked, "
Whether you consider the worker's current
level of impairment will continue into the foreseeable
to which he said:
"I consider that her current level of impairment is probably
slightly greater than it will be when the recent exacerbation of her
pain settles
Mr McWilliams argued, although Mr Simm had diluted the extent of exacerbation,
he nonetheless, identified that the
July 2018 injury
had caused an
exacerbation of the plaintiff’s pre-existing
Defendant’s Submissions
Clark commenced the defence to the application by submitting that prior to July
2018 the plaintiff suffered from long standing
degenerative changes in her right
knee that had been rendered symptomatic in 2012 when she suffered injury.
Clark submitted that in order to make a proper evaluation of the aggravation to
the right knee caused by the
July 2018 injury
, it is necessary to have
regard to the condition of the plaintiff’s knee prior to the
addressing the course of history and treatment the plaintiff has undergone for
the right knee prior to July 2018, Ms Clark noted
that on 4 April 2012 the
plaintiff underwent an MRI of her right knee that revealed a Grade C3/4 patellar
chondromalacia.
Clark noted out that Mr Miller performed a
First Surgery
on the plaintiff
on 9 July 2012 comprising an arthroscopic debridement and synovectomy of the
right knee. Ms Clark referred to Mr
Miller’s operation findings of
extensive and severe patellar chondromalacia involving the median ridge and
almost entire lateral
facet, with unstable chondral tissue. Mr Miller described
very slight patella tracking and with the trochlear being normal, and a
tear in the anterior portion of the medial meniscus. As to the future, Ms Clark
submitted, Mr Miller considered that the plaintiff
should benefit from the
debridement he performed, together with the ongoing use of analgesics,
anti-inflammatories and glucosamines.
He said there was quite significant
disease particularly on the retro-patellar surface, and ongoing symptoms were
anticipated.
Clark next referred to Mr Miller’s medico legal report dated 12 December
2012 in which he addressed diagnosis and prognosis
for the plaintiff’s
right knee. He said that the plaintiff suffered an aggravation of patellofemoral
disease and the development
of meniscal pathology. He said that the plaintiff
had only experienced a moderate response to the
First Surgery
ongoing symptoms were anticipated. He assessed her prognosis as only
Clark submitted that only a short period of time later in March 2013, Mr Miller
performed a
Second Surgery
that consisted of another arthroscopic
synovectomy of the right knee. In his operation report, Mr Miller said that
having examined
the plaintiff under anaesthesia, some patellofemoral joint
crepitus was found, and he said there was extensive chondromalacia patella
on the retro patellar surface involving the median ridge, most of all the
lateral patella facet part of the medial patellar
facet. The chondral tissue was
highly unstable. Again Mr Miller identified slight patellar tracking. There was
no corresponding trochlear
disease, but he did observe a small tear in the
medial meniscus but on a different part that had been detected by MRI. Mr Miller
said that the prognosis for the plaintiff’s right knee was still only fair
and that significant ongoing symptoms were likely
to occur because of the
retro-patellar pathology.
the short period between the first and second surgeries performed by Mr Miller,
the plaintiff was assessed by Mr Davison, an orthopaedic
surgeon. On 10 January
2013, Mr Davison set out the plaintiff’s status in the following
“Ms Litchfield reported the presence of chronic
persistent pain around the right knee. The pain is said to be ache-like in
She said at times the right knee feels hot and ‘it gets
tight’. There is intermittent cramping in the right calf. Ms
said that she is unable to squat, kneel or negotiate stairs. If she does not
wear the knee brace, it tends to give way.
Ms Litchfield estimated she had the following physical capacities:
1. Sitting - up to 60 minutes.
2. Driving - up to 40 minutes.
3. Standing/Walking - up to 30 minutes.
Ms Litchfield undertakes a limited range of household chores, including
sweeping, mopping and dusting, in a self-paced manner. Her
son maintains the
lawns and gardens. Her son's de facto and the claimant's housemate also assist
with household
Ms Clark commented, Mr Davison said he had no cause to disagree with Mr Miller's
opinion that there had been an aggravation of
what was probably pre-existing but
asymptomatic retro-patellar pathology. Mr Davison also thought the plaintiff had
developed a chronic
regional pain syndrome.
Clark next referred to the opinion of Mr Simm who saw the plaintiff on behalf of
the defendant in October 2018, that is to say,
July 2018 injury
but before the
Third Surgery
performed by Mr Hussaini in August 2019. Mr
Simm diagnosed advanced degenerative chondropathology in the patellofemoral
the right knee and which pathology he described as
“constitutional”.
Clark submitted that in light of Mr Simm’s diagnosis, the plaintiff may
have been predisposed to progressive chondropathology
from mild patellar
tracking as Mr Miller had identified in both surgical arthroscopies he performed
and that was already of a Grade
3-4 level prior to the first of the
suffered to the right knee. Ms Clark also pointed out that Mr Simm
said the symptoms that the plaintiff was experiencing when he
assessed her were
consistent with his diagnosis of degenerative chondropathology in the
patellofemoral joint of the right knee and
he also noted the possibility of some
pain amplification due to anxiety.
Clark referred to Mr Simm’s reporting that the plaintiff presented with
chronic established symptoms that had been worsened
“exacerbation”
in July 2018. However, Mr Simm said he
anticipated that the plaintiff’s knee would gradually settle and she would
have ongoing
chronic pain similar to that she had experienced in the first six
months of 2018, that is to say, before the
July 2018 injury
. Mr Simm said
that the plaintiff’s current level of impairment was “
slightly greater than it would have been once the exacerbation settled
He said that
the MRI the plaintiff had undergone shortly before he conducted his examination
of her was consistent with the advanced
degenerative pathology in the
patellofemoral joint.
Clark submitted that although subsequent to Mr Simm’s examination of the
plaintiff, she came to further surgery by Mr Hussaini,
nonetheless, well before
July 2018 injury
, very significant pre-existing pathology of a
degenerative nature existed.
Clark proceeded to undertake a thorough examination of the consequences to the
plaintiff from the
2012 injuries
by reference to the plaintiff’s
First Injury Affidavit
affirmed in January 2018 and approximately six
months before the
July 2018 injury
First Injury Affidavit
, the plaintiff deposed to pain and discomfort
in her right knee that remained constant. She subsequently deposed to the pain
being constant but intermittent, however, in her
Third Aggravation Injury
, the plaintiff said the pain in the right knee was constant but
that its intensity varied.
First Injury Affidavit
in support of a serious injury from the
2012 injuries
, the plaintiff described her right knee pain being of such
a calibre that on arriving home from work on occasions she would have
her eyes. She said she was taking Panadeine Forte on bad days and that it helped
dull the pain but that she was never free
of pain. At that time she likened the
constant pain in her right knee as akin to someone sticking a knife in it, and
that the pain
also shot down the right shin from the knee. She described pins
and needles and numbness in the right foot from time to time. She
described the
pain and discomfort in the right knee as interfering with all aspects of daily
living. She described an inability to
run. She said she avoided bending her
right knee which meant avoiding stairs if at all possible. She described
avoiding sitting for
long periods with a bent leg thereby limiting her from
driving long distances without regular breaks. She described difficulty in
sleeping which included trouble getting comfortable in bed. She was waking 2 to
3 times a night with pain in the right knee with
the result that during the
course of the day it proved difficult for her to concentrate. She described an
inability to go camping
and of avoiding hiking because she knew the restrictions
in her knee would aggravate her pain. She described an inability to go dancing
with friends. She described the difficulty she experienced when trying to
babysit one of her friend’s grandchildren and her
upset at realising she
would likely encounter similar difficulties when, as she anticipated, she became
a grandmother.
Clark submitted that I should be cautious in accepting that the
plaintiff’s limitations as a grandmother that she has encountered
only presented because of and since the
July 2018 injury
. Indeed, Ms
Clark submitted that the pre-existing state of the right knee and difficulties
with bending, driving and running that
the plaintiff deposed to prior to July
2018 would have impeded her in the same way from involving herself in the care
and play with
her grandchildren.
The Additional
Clark addressed the plaintiff’s
Third Aggravation Injury Affidavit
and the distinguishing consequences referred to in it but that the plaintiff
said did not exist before July 2018 and that are relied
on as amounting to a
serious aggravation of her pre-existing injury. The plaintiff deposed that,
I continue to experience similar impacts to my hobbies and pastimes
including camping, hiking, dancing and interacting with young
children in my
submitted, however, that these are the same consequences that the plaintiff
deposed in the
First Injury Affidavit
when she addressed the consequences
2012 injuries
Clark next dealt with the plaintiff’s evidence that her right knee locks
up and that it clicks more regularly. The plaintiff
deposed to a belief that the
kneecap was broken but Ms Clark contended that neither radiology nor medical
opinions support a finding
that the plaintiff sustained a fracture to the right
Clark referred to the report from Mr Hussaini dated 26 July 2021, in which he
described Grade 3 type changes in the trochlea and
that required microfracture
by way of surgical technique but had not referred to a
Ms Clark submitted
that Mr Asaid who assessed the plaintiff at the request of her solicitors
related the differences between the
findings in the surgical procedures that had
been performed, with the main difference being that the plaintiff had developed
3 chondral changes in trochlear and a lateral tibial plateau which had
developed at some stage between 9 July 2012 and 6 July
Ms Clark submitted that
having undertaken that comparison between what was found on the surgeries, there
is no evidence to indicate
a fracture as a result of the
to the reference to a fracture by Dr Poppenbeek in his report dated 5 June
Ms Clark submitted that Dr
Poppenbeek had referred to what he had been told by the plaintiff as opposed to
him having identified
a fracture.
Clark referred to the plaintiff's affidavit that she was on modified duties
following the
although Ms Clark submitted that it
is unclear from the affidavit material the nature of the duties that the
plaintiff was performing
prior to then. However, Ms Clark noted that the
plaintiff’s evidence was that she required assistance from co-workers
and, indeed, Mr Asaid had noted
Despite returning to work she attempted to manage her right knee pain
as best she could and she relied on assistance from her colleagues
strenuous tasks”
to the constancy of the plaintiff’s pain, Ms Clark referred to the
First Injury Affidavit
and the reliance by her at that time to constant
pain. At paragraph 11 of the
First Injury Affidavit
, the plaintiff said:
"The pain and discomfort in my right knee remains constant and
it varies in intensity from moderate to strong
Clark submitted that when the plaintiff affirmed her
First Aggravation Injury
her description was of constant pain. By the time of her
Aggravation Injury Affidavit
the description applied by the
plaintiff was of
"intermittent"
pain, and by 2025, she described
"constant pain"
Clark referred to a history recorded by a Flexi Personnel assessor on 15 April
2024. Ms Clark noted that the account recorded by
the assessor is expressed in
similar terms as the plaintiff had related in her
First Injury Affidavit
and for the purposes of the
2012 injuries
The Flexi Personnel
assessor related that the plaintiff said she had difficulty providing exact
timelines and dates but that between
April 2013 and July 2018 she said that
I think I was on WorkCover for about two years doing light duties. Then I
went back to normal duties, mainly driving. I had a colleague
that I worked well
with who would do the work that would require me to bend, squat - anything that
was putting pressure on my knee.
I limped around a lot. My limping got so bad I
didn't notice but my colleagues would notice it. During these five years the
was always there 24/7. It never went away. I thought it would be better off
if it was amputated. I would have to raise and elevate
my leg and knee after
work. I hated taking painkillers because they knocked me out. If I moved the
wrong way I would be sitting up
in a lot of
The assessor
recorded that the plaintiff said she tried to work and deal with the pain and
she needed to work to pay her
was shortly prior to the Flexi Personnel report, that the plaintiff affirmed her
Second Aggravation Injury Affidavit
in which at paragraph 3, she said
that she continued to take Meloxicam, an anti-inflammatory and Panadol Osteo for
pain, although
she tries to restrict their usage as she does not like
Ms Clark said the
plaintiff had previously deposed to taking Panadeine Forte and that in 2013, Mr
Miller had thought it was likely
that anti-inflammatories would be an ongoing
requirement.
Clark submitted that at paragraph 4 of the
Second Aggravation Injury
, the plaintiff deposed that the pain in her right knee is still
intermittent, and is present most days but comes and goes. The plaintiff
described experiencing some numbness down to the lower leg and foot, and more
locking and dropping of the
Ms Clark identified that
the plaintiff’s account of the impacts on her day-to-day life are those
she described in her
First Aggravation Injury Affidavit
, and apart from
the increase in the locking, is otherwise the same as the plaintiff described in
that affidavit as the consequences
2012 injuries
Clark referred to the plaintiff’s
Third Aggravation Injury
where at paragraph 5, the plaintiff described a worsening of
Ms Clark pointed out
that the plaintiff was assessed by Mr Asaid in January 2024 and, therefore,
prior to the making of the
Third Aggravation Injury Affidavit
Asaid said at that the plaintiff had reported that her overall condition had
remained largely unchanged and that she continued
to experience persistent knee
pain and that her symptoms were similar to when she was last reviewed by him on
16 January 2024.
the plaintiff deposes in that affidavit to having previously been able to
“tinker” in the garden and no longer
being able to do so. Ms Clark
contended that the account given was expressed at a very general level.
Clark submitted that although the plaintiff has needed injections, she has not
had any interventional treatment, since about 2020,
and while a potential total
knee replacement is mooted, I should be satisfied that it is uncertain the
extent to which the
July 2018 injury
contributed to the increased
likelihood for it, or of the extent of hastening of the possibility of that
Clark submitted that despite a request having been made of Mr Hussaini to
provide an updated report, he had replied to the plaintiff’s
that he did not consider there was utility in doing so because there had been no
change or need for further treatment
since his earlier
Clark addressed the reports provided by Mr Asaid. In his report of assessment
dated 17 June 2025,
described the consequences from the third incident, that is, the
, in terms that the plaintiff experienced some additional pain but
that she continued to experience improvement following
He described the
plaintiff's current symptoms and
complaints.
Having been asked
how the plaintiff’s everyday activities were impacted by the first of
2012 injuries
, he referred to the plaintiff’s current symptoms
and complaints. In answer to a similar question in respect of the
, Ms Clark submitted that despite Mr Asaid providing a
more detailed account, the substance of his reporting married up with the
description
given by him from the first of the
2012 injuries
diagnosis, Mr Asaid described the first of the
2012 injuries
aggravation of the right knee patellofemoral joint, chondromalacia and medial
meniscus tear. He described the
as a further
aggravation of the right knee patellar joint chondromalacia requiring further
surgery. The treatment that Mr Asaid outlined
for both “injuries” in
his first report is the same; that at some stage in the future the plaintiff
will require a total
knee replacement as a definitive treatment for her right
knee condition.
Clark described what she characterised as an attempt on the plaintiff’s
part to obtain a supplementary report from Mr Asaid
in order to better delineate
matters but that she submitted was unsatisfactory. In it, Mr Asaid compared the
surgeries performed
by Mr Miller and the surgery performed by Mr Hussaini, and
then described some chondral changes of both the trochlea and the lateral
plateau which he said had developed at some stage between the surgery on 9 July
2012 and the surgery of 6 July
Mr Asaid said, "
it's possible that these changes represent the natural history of the disease
and further degeneration of the knee joint it
is also possible that the further
trauma to the right knee as a result of the incident on 6 July 2018 has caused
further injury to
the trochlear and the lateral tibial plateau and necessitated
the further surgical
Clark submitted that the reporting by Mr Asaid is best understood as an
inability by him to distinguish between a natural history
of degenerative
disease that has brought about the changes or the
. Ms Clark noted that in response to being asked whether the injury
suffered by the plaintiff in July 2018 changed the clinical pathway
knee reconstruction, and if so, in what way, Mr Asaid couched his opinion in
very equivocal language and he said:
"While it's possible that Ms
Litchfield may have required a knee replacement at some stage in the future
following the incident on
12 February 2012, it is reasonable to consider that
the incident on 6 July 2018 may have brought forward the need for this
procedure”.
Clark submitted that Mr Hussaini provided no path of reasoning for arriving at
his opinion for the hastened need for the procedure
and he failed to have regard
to the very significant degenerative changes that were previously in play.
Clark referred to
Seckold v Transport Accident Commission
a decision that involved an aggravation of pre-existing degenerative changes to
a plaintiff's wrist and which had been asymptomatic
before a transport accident.
where the injury was an aggravation of a pre-existing condition, and where there
had been very little by way of any symptoms
requiring medical treatment for a
significant period of time following the accident, it was incumbent upon the
applicant to establish
the difference between the progression which would likely
have occurred had the accident not happened, and the progression which
fact occurred as a result of the aggravation caused by the accident.
Notwithstanding the need for the applicant to undertake
this exercise, the
applicant adduced no evidence which sought to deal with this issue.
Specifically, there was no evidence as to the extent of the aggravation,
or the likely duration of the effects of the aggravation.
These were matters of
evidence which the applicant was required to address as part of his case in
endeavouring to establish that
the consequences of the injury caused by the
The Legal Principles
the plaintiff’s application was pursued on the basis that the
amounted to an aggravation injury that was serious. Therefore, the
outcome of the application depends on whether the correct characterisation
the consequences from the
2018 Injury
plaintiff’s right knee is an aggravation injury that itself alone is
serious and excluding the previous insults the
plaintiff suffered to her right
knee in 2012, their consequences from it, and its likely trajectory.
because the plaintiff has been injured on several discrete occasions to the same
body function of the right knee, the general
rule of application at law is that
in deciding if the
July 2018 injury
constitutes a serious aggravation
injury, I must separate out the components of the
from each other occasion of injury from 2012, and that I cannot aggregate the
injuries despite them being occasioned to the one body
part, although across
several incidents.
the plaintiff’s
First Injury
staked out the myriad
aspects in which the condition of the right knee plagued her by way of pain and
limitations and consequences
in her everyday activities and enjoyment of life.
Those consequences have resulted in the grant of a serious injury certificate.
The fact of the already seriously injured knee cannot be added to the
consequences that arise separately from the subsequent
to found the relief sought by the plaintiff in her
Originating Motion
for a serious injury certificate. The aggravation must be
assessed on its own terms after identifying each injury, and identifying
then separating the impairment consequences of each injury in order to determine
if the additional impairment caused by the aggravation
is serious.
am not satisfied that the plaintiff has proved that the
July 2018 injury
has caused an aggravation to the right knee that itself is a serious injury.
I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has proved a serious injury caused to her
right knee from the
July 2018 injury
, this is not to decry the
plaintiff’s pain and suffering from her right knee generally, or to
challenge the plaintiff’s
veracity. The plaintiff was not cross-examined.
I accept the accounts she provided in her affidavits. However, the plaintiff has
been unable to isolate and amplify the additional consequences to the right knee
July 2018 injury
as satisfying the threshold required to
constitute a serious injury according to the two limb test. As Ms Clark amply
and comprehensively
identified, the very substantial interference and
consequences from the plaintiff’s right knee existed well prior to the
July 2018 injury
. The plaintiff’s pre July 2018 pathology was such
as to more than account for the present condition of the right knee irrespective
July 2018 injury
and for any future progression.
plaintiff’s emotional response to her limitations as they related to her
own grandchildren as opposed to other people’s
children with whom she had
encountered her restrictions before the
July 2018 injury
understandable but I am not satisfied that she has established that this is as a
result of a functional worsening of the right
knee since and due to the
2018 injury
. I agree with the submissions made by Ms Clark on the
do not accept that the evidence supports a fracture from the
. The plaintiff spoke in her evidence to a clicking and locking
sensation as attributable to a fracture. That sensation and feeling
assuming it
is attributed to the
July 2018 injury
is not of such a further
consequence to satisfy the test required to determine the
a serious injury.
am not satisfied that the plaintiff has proved that the
July 2018 injury
has increased the likely need for a total knee replacement. Although because of
the ordinary effluxion of time the plaintiff has
now reached the age that she
had previously been told she would need to obtain before considering such a
procedure, that procedure
has not occurred. I am unable to determine on the
evidence that if and when it occurs, it is because of the
, as opposed to the ordinary pre-existing condition and changes and
the effects and trajectory due to the
2012 injuries
the plaintiff came to a surgical intervention following the
, the plaintiff’s evidence is that the surgery alleviated the
a note of conference conducted with Mr Asaid on which the plaintiff relied, Mr
Asaid said:
"What I can say is that the plaintiff went from being
in a position where she was not needing any more surgery, save for the total
knee replacement at a much later date, to needing more surgery. In essence, the
6 July 2018 necessitated the need for further surgical
intervention”.
fact that the plaintiff came to a third surgery from Mr Hussaini calls to be
considered not only through the prism of the effect
but bearing in mind that well prior to July 2018 Mr Simm had
described very significant pre-existing pathology of a degenerative
nature that
was in play well prior to the commencement of the increased pain and symptoms in
February 2020.
accept that
Findlay v Transport Accident
which Mr McWilliams relied,
reinforces the need to be mindful that the
refusal of a grant of relief for pain and suffering in a gateway proceeding is
problematic
if it is due to contested matters of causation because, apart from
anything else, the limited nature of the inquiry that can be ordinarily
undertaken in such a setting and that the grant of relief does no more than
confer to an entitlement to a plaintiff proceed to law
to seek damages by means
of a fully contested trial.
consider that the decision of
by the defendant, is less applicable on the facts of this case because here the
plaintiff did adduce some evidence of a
progression in pathology of the
pre-existing right knee.
question is whether the further surgery, and two additional cortisone injections
together with the plaintiff’s account of
a sensation of locking in the
knee that followed the
July 2018 injury
on an assumption they were caused
by it, constitutes a serious long term aggravation injury to the right knee that
should be assessed
as very considerable?
am satisfied that the consequences of pain and its variable intensity, the use
of a knee brace lest the knee collapse, and the interference
with previous
activities and pursuits were well embedded as a result of the plaintiff’s
pre-existing knee pathology that the
2012 injuries
identified further consequences from the
July 2018 injury,
although of
significance to the plaintiff, when objectively assessed, and excluding the
suite of consequences that prevailed before
as part of an assessment of the claimed aggravation, are not very considerable.
In substance, the extent of the plaintiff’s
additional impairment to the
function of the knee is not of such order as to satisfy the twin tests for the
grant of a serious injury
certificate.
the reasons expressed the relief sought in the plaintiff’s Originating
Motion is refused. I will hear the parties on the
form of final orders
Exhibit P1, Plaintiff Court
Book (“PCB”) 9.
Exhibit P5, PCB 19.
No reliance was placed on
paragraph (c) of the definition of serious injury.
Exhibit P2, PCB 10-14.
Exhibit P4, PCB 20-26.
Exhibit P5, PCB 27-29.
Exhibit P18, PCB 104-109.
Exhibit P2, PCB 10.
Exhibit P11, PCB 62.
Exhibit P2, PCB 12.
Exhibit P4, PCB 20-26.
Exhibit P4, PCB 21.
Exhibit P5, PCB 27.
Exhibit P5, PCB 28.
Exhibit P4, PCB 25.
Exhibit P18, PCB 105.
(“T”) 7, Line (“L”) 25-31.
Exhibit D5, Defendant Court
Book (“DCB”) 57.
Exhibit P8, PCB 118.
Ibid, 118-119.
Exhibit P19, DCB 21.
Exhibit P19, DCB 23.
Exhibit D4, DCB 43.
Exhibit D3, DCB 25-26.
Exhibit D4, DCB 43.
Exhibit P4, PCB 25.
Exhibit P10, PCB 44.
Exhibit P8, PCB 118.
Exhibit D8, DCB 57.
Exhibit P8, PCB 36.
Exhibit P2, PCB 13.
Exhibit D7, PCB 92-93.
Exhibit P5, PCB 27.
Exhibit P18, PCB 105.
Exhibit D6, DCB 95.
Exhibit P8, PCB
[2025] VSCA 18.
Exhibit P9, PCB 126.
[2025] VSCA 126.
[2025] VSCA 18.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (490 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter