URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2007/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
07-128 [2007] VMHRB 5 (27 March 2007)
In the review of P
An involuntary patient at
Peninsula Health – Peninsula CMHS
[2007] VMHRB 5
Date of Hearing:
Board Members
Ms D Saunders
Dr T Gidley
Involuntary Patient –
Mental Health Act 1986
– Risk to others – Interference with another’s
P was an elderly man with a twenty year history of mental illness. His
current diagnosis was of bipolar affective disorder, for which
he was receiving
involuntary treatment on a community treatment order. P’s wife was also
receiving involuntary treatment for
a mental illness through a community
treatment order. Her treatment included maintenance ECT.
The treating team told the Board that P interferes with his wife’s
treatment, and for this reason is an involuntary patient
himself for protection
of members of the public. P had been refused permission to visit his wife.
Further, it was reported that P
“denies he has an illness thus lacks
capacity to provide informed consent as he fails to accept a basic fact upon
need for treatment is predicated”.
Ms Shalit, P’s legal representative, submitted that P was able to
manage himself. There was no risk to P’s health, the
only risk being in
the view of the treating team, P’s interference with his wife’s
treatment of maintenance ECT when
he was unwell. It was not Parliament’s
intention that a person could be detained as an involuntary patient because they
with the treatment of someone else. She submitted that the
“risk to others” under the Act is something greater than an
inconvenience to others or one, which creates an administrative convenience for
treating another person.
(1) The Board determined that P appears to be mentally ill.
(2) The Board was satisfied that P’s mental illness requires immediate
treatment that can be obtained while he is subject to
a community treatment
(3) In consideration of the intention of Parliament and the principle contained
[1998] VMHRB 15
(13 November 1998), MW
[1987] VMHRB 3
(10 December
1987), 99-515
[1999] VMHRB 1
(5 January 1999), the Board in this case formed the
view that “protection of members of the public” requires that the
public be likely to suffer significant physical or psychological injury or
impairment.
(4) The evidence concerning P was that when he was unwell, the risk he posed to
the public was that he interfered with his wife’s
maintenance ECT. The
Board had been informed that P’s wife was also on a CTO and therefore
subject to treatment prescribed
by her psychiatrist and administered under his
or her authority. The Board considered that the treatment for P’s wife
likely to be managed by such an arrangement and with the operation of the
Act in relation to that treatment. There was no other evidence
presented to the
Board that P posed a risk to the public or that any member of the public was
likely to suffer significant physical
or psychological injury or impairment.
Therefore, the Board was not satisfied that because of P’s mental illness,
involuntary
treatment was necessary for the protection of the members of the
(5) Accordingly,
was not met. As a result, the Board did not consider
any further criteria.
Appeal against involuntary status - appeal allowed.
P was represented by Ms B Shalit, of Mental Health Legal Centre Inc.
Date of Decision: 27 March 2007
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
Peninsula Health - Peninsula CMHS
HEARING NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
27 March 2007
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: Ms Dominique Saunders
Community Member: Dr Diane Sisely
Psychiatrist Member: Dr Terrence Gidley
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 27 March 2007:
Wife of P: JP
Doctor: Dr SM
Case manager: AH
Legal representative: Ms Barbra Shalit, Mental Health Legal Centre Inc.
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was not satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order was
The Board therefore discharged P from the community treatment order.
The appeal of P was therefore allowed.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
27 March 2007
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P was discharged from the community treatment order. Therefore P ceases
to be an involuntary patient.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
on Involuntary Status dated 12 March 2007 prepared by Dr SF and presented to the
Plan of P dated 15 January 2007, prepared by AH and presented to the Board.
4. Oral evidence at the hearing.
appeal lodged on behalf of P by his legal representative dated 7 March
, if the Board is satisfied that a person subject to a community
treatment order does not satisfy the criteria specified in
, the Board must
discharge the person from the community treatment order. Therefore, the Board
considered:
P appear to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P subject to a
community treatment order necessary for his health
or safety (whether to prevent
a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the
protection of members
of the public; and
P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of his freedom of decision and action?
, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
P is a 72-year-old married man with a twenty-year history of a diagnosis of a
mental illness. He was first seen by a psychiatrist,
Dr Y approximately 20
years ago when he was diagnosed with paranoid psychosis. His current diagnosis
is bipolar affective disorder.
In August of 2006 he was admitted to Frankston
Hospital as an involuntary patient for five weeks then discharged on a community
treatment order (“CTO”). He was treated with depot medication
administered by his general practitioner. Of relevance
to this case was that
P’s wife, JP, is also a patient at the community health service and
subject to a CTO under the
. JP’s treatment includes maintenance ECT.
It was argued by the treating team for P that he interferes with his
treatment and for this reason is an involuntary patient himself for
protection of members of the public (and other reasons under
Submissions on behalf of P
Shalit outlined her instructions that P does not agree that he has a mental
illness, therefore he sees no need for treatment.
Ms Shalit stated that P had
been seeing Dr Y for about twenty years and stopped seeing him in 2006. However
Ms Shalit indicated
that he had no treatment between 2003 and 2006. She stated
that her instructions were that P is able to manage himself. She stated
is agreeable to attending at the clinic for monitoring, and in addition, his
wife’s case manager visits their home
on a weekly basis.
Ms Shalit submitted that the central issue is the issue of risk posed by P.
She submitted that in view of the assessment of Dr SM,
that there is no risk to
P’s health and that the only risk is the one to his wife in that it was
the treating team’s
view that when unwell, P interfered with his
wife’s treatment of maintenance ECT. She submitted that P disputes such
interference
and states that while he was opposed to the treatment for his wife,
he now has a different view and supports her in such treatment.
Further, she
stated that JP’s doctor says the relationship between JP and P is
advantageous.
She submitted that
and (e) were not established and the Board
should discharge P from involuntary status.
On the question of the “protection of members of the pubic”, Ms
Shalit submitted that it was not Parliament’s intention
that a person
could be detained as an involuntary patient because they interfered with the
treatment of someone else. She submitted
that the “risk to others”
is something greater than an inconvenience to others or one, which
creates an administrative convenience for treating another person.
submitted that JP is on a CTO and subject to requirements under the
such, this ensures she receives the treatment that she needs.
Evidence of P
P agreed that Ms Shalit had presented his views. He
also stated he did not believe he had a mental illness and that if it was his
choice he would not take medication though he would see his general
practitioner. He also said that while he had concerns about
the ECT for his
wife, he agreed about four months ago that it was appropriate. He said he was
supportive of his wife and wanted
to put things in order because he was now over
70 years old.
Evidence of treating team
The Report on Involuntary Status stated that P was
admitted involuntarily in August 2006. The symptoms at that time were described
as: “hypomania - irritable, hostile, verbally abusive, threatening, rapid
pressured speech; expressing multiple bizarre ideas
“cures” for it.”
The Report stated that on 19 March 2007 he was seen by a psychiatrist at
which time he was pleasant, cooperative, but attributing
multiple physical
symptoms to his psychiatric treatment. It was also reported that (he) denies
any need for psychiatric treatment
other than Mogadon.
The Report identified the risk either to P or to others as being the
“risk of non treatment in P’s case revolves primarily
risk of his significantly jeopardising his wife’s ongoing treatment
issues.” The Report described that P
when he was unwell, actively
interferes with the treatment of his wife, who is also a patient at the same
service and in receipt
of maintenance ECT. It is for this reason the Report
stated that P is considered a risk to her.
In so far as is relevant for determining whether or not P has refused or is
unable to consent to treatment it was reported that P
“denies he has an
illness thus lacks capacity to provide informed consent as he fails to accept a
basic fact upon which the
need for treatment is predicated”. On the
question of whether treatment could be obtained in a less restrictive manner the
Report stated that P does not accept the need for treatment.
The case manager, AH, stated to the Board that her current assessment of P
was that he was more settled on medication; he was not
as aggressive or as
grandiose. She also stated that when JP was in hospital for treatment of her
mental illness, P had been refused
permission to visit his wife.
Other evidence
P provided to the Board two letters that he had from
many years ago concerning his referral from an ear, nose and throat surgeon,
whom he had been seeing for a hearing problem, to Dr Y (for psychiatric
treatment). He told the Board that at the time he had been
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board has considered the exclusionary criteria in
and has decided
that these were not relevant in this case.
The Board considered the evidence put before it, as discussed above and
determined that P appears to be mentally ill, in that he has
in recent months
exhibited symptoms of his diagnosed illness – a bipolar disorder. The
Board accepted the evidence of Dr SM
and the case manager AH that in the past P
has presented as irritable, hostile, verbally abusive, (and with) rapid
pressured speech.
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
The Board accepted the evidence of the treating team that P now presents as
pleasant and cooperative. This was also noted by the
Board in the hearing. The
Board was of the view that this is likely to indicate P’s responsiveness
to treatment for his mental
illness. P has been receiving treatment for about
six months. The Board was satisfied that P’s mental illness requires
treatment that can be obtained while he is subject to a community
treatment order.
Because of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment
of P subject to a community treatment order necessary for his health
(whether to prevent a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or
otherwise) or for the protection of members
of the public?
The Board considered the evidence of Dr SM that except for P’s
interference with his wife’s need for maintenance ECT,
P would not fit the
criteria under the
A decision to make a person an involuntary patient has serious consequences
for the person’s liberty in that their freedom of
movement and freedom of
choice is restricted. P is on a CTO and is mandated to attend for depot
medication that his psychiatrist
decides that he must take, the administration
of which, his psychiatrist authorises.
Dr SM stated that P is not a risk to himself - involuntary treatment of P
subject to a CTO is not necessary for his health or safety.
The issue was
therefore, whether or not treatment is necessary for the protection of members
of the public. As Ms Shalit submitted,
it is necessary to consider the intention
of Parliament in reaching the meaning of the words.
In the second reading speech for the
Mental Health Bill 1985
(Vic) (Hansard,
Legislative Assembly, 30 May 1985, 926–927), Mr Roper MP noted that:
[T]he Bill specifies a series of criteria for involuntary admission. These
can be summarised as being that the person needs to be
detained for urgent
treatment for mental illness in the interests of his or her health or safety, or
for the protection of others.
The criteria for involuntary admission have been drafted with a great deal of
care. The government makes no apology for the fact that
they are expressed
narrowly and will be more limited than those applying under the existing
legislation. This is not only consistent
with the principle of the least
restrictive alternative, but emphasises that involuntary admission has serious
consequences and should
be contemplated only as a matter of last resort".
A mentally ill person may be admitted and detained involuntarily only when
his or her behaviour is sufficiently harmful either to
himself or herself or to
other people.
The above Bill was subsequently withdrawn and the Mental Health Bill 1985 (No
2) was introduced. In the second reading speeches for
the revised Bill (Hansard,
Legislative Assembly, 28 November 1985, p2612), Mr Roper MP noted that the
criteria in the new Bill omits
the capacity to admit or detain a person
“for the protection of members of the public”.
Despite this, Mr Roper MP then reintroduced “for the protection of
members of the public” (Hansard, Legislative Assembly,
19 March 1986,
During the second-reading debate honourable members raised the issue of
persons who are dangers not only to themselves but also may
be dangers to others
and suggested that the Bill may have left out something that was needed to
provide protection to members of
the public.
I should emphasize that this provision is not meant to be seen in the
traditional sense, where often people with a mental illness
have been put away
behind large walls, barbed wire and large moats. That is not what we are talking
where a person may,
because of a mental
illness, become a danger to other members of the community without necessarily
being conscious of it
(emphasis added).
The Board in 99-467
[1998] VMHRB 15
(13 November 1998) considered the meaning
of “protection of members of the public” where a patient, an elderly
had a fixed belief that a surgeon was controlling her behaviour in her own
She had persistently sent
letters of complaint about the surgeon. The majority of the Board found, that
writing letters of complaint
was not (on the evidence available) anything more
than annoying and time wasting.
In the matter of MW
[1987] VMHRB 3
(10 December 1987) where it was argued
that the patient had caused psychological harm and stress to her neighbours, the
Board found
that the phrase "protection of members of the public" applies when a
member or members of the public are likely to suffer an injury
including any
significant impairment of mental, physical or emotional health whether permanent
or of a temporary nature.
The Board, therefore, found that the phrase did not apply in respect of mere
nuisance or irritation caused to members of the public.
The Board in MW adopted
the following non-exhaustive list of questions to be considered:
What conduct
will this person probably engage in as a result of his or her mental illness?
How persistent
or intense is such conduct likely to be?
circumstances is such conduct likely to occur?
Who is likely to
be affected by such conduct?
How are such
people likely to be affected?
How long is the
person likely to engage in such conduct?
In MW the Board summarised
the test to be applied in considering the phrase "protection of members of the
A person who
appears to be suffering from a mental illness, engages in conduct or represents
such a burden to care for, that significant
injury is likely to be caused to a
member or members of the public as a result of that conduct or the giving of
Injury includes
any significant impairment of mental, physical or emotional health whether
permanent or of a temporary nature.
How and when and in what circumstances the phrase “for the
protection of members of the public” applies, necessarily involves
prediction as to the future and an anticipation of the degree of risk that the
public may face. The Board considered the view
expressed in 99-515
[1999] VMHRB
(5 January 1999) that:
A person should be detained for protection of members of the pubic if, by
reason of their mental illness, there is a significant risk
in the short or
medium term that they will commit an act or omission likely to lead to a
significant risk of serious physical harm
to another person.
In consideration of the intention of Parliament and the above principles, the
Board in this case formed the view that “protection
of members of the
public” requires that the public be likely to suffer significant physical
or psychological injury or impairment.
The evidence concerning P was that when he was
unwell, the risk he posed to the public was that he interfered with his
maintenance ECT. The Board had been informed that JP was also on a
CTO and therefore subject to treatment prescribed by her psychiatrist
administered under his or her authority. The Board considered that the
treatment for JP was likely to be managed by such an
arrangement and with the
operation of the
in relation to that treatment. There was no other evidence
presented to the Board that P posed a risk to the public or that any member
the public was likely to suffer significant physical or psychological injury or
impairment. Therefore, the Board was not satisfied
that because of P’s
mental illness, involuntary treatment was necessary for the protection of the
members of the public.
Accordingly, the criterion was not met. As a result, the Board did not
consider any further criteria.
Because P was discharged from his involuntary
status, the Board considered that it was unnecessary to consider the Treatment
criteria were not met the Board made the determination set
out on page 1.
The letter requesting the appeal hearing was not seen by the
Board on the day of hearing
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (96 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter