URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/256.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Thunderbird Australia Pty Ltd v Internode Pty Ltd [2025] VSCA 256 (20 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCI 2025 0020
THUNDERBIRD AUSTRALIA PTY LTD (ACN 050 568 315)
INTERNODE PTY LTD (ACN 052 00 581) & ANOR
(according to the schedule)
Respondents
RICHARDS and KENNY JJA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
Determined on the papers
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
20 October 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 256
JUDGMENT APPEALED FROM:
Thunderbird Australia Pty Ltd (ACN 050 568 315) v Internode Pty Ltd (ACN
052 00 581) & Anor
(County Court of Victoria, Judge Palmer,
28 January 2025)
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE – Appeal – Companies – Requirement
to be represented by solicitor – Whether judge erred
in exercising
discretion – Whether judge erred in applying
Whether judge erred in costs determination – County Court judge bound by
County Court’s Act and Rules –
No error – No evidence of
applicant’s inability to afford to engage solicitor – Proposed
grounds totally without
merit – Leave to appeal refused.
Civil Procedure Act 2010
Commonwealth
Constitution
County Court Act 1958
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
rr 1.17(1), 2.04;
Judiciary Act 1903
Supreme Court Act 1986
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Krongold Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2022] VSCA 226
(2022) 73 VR 403
Enterprises Pty Ltd v Silberman
[2010] VSCA 17
(2010) 26 VR 595
Kajula Pty Ltd v Downer EDI Limited
[2024] VSCA 236
(2024) 76 VR 75
Pty Ltd v Commonwealth Bank of Australia Ltd
[2020] VSCA 223
Molonglo Group (Australia) Pty Ltd v Cahill
[2018] VSCA 147
Richmond River Council
(1998) 193 CLR, considered.
Counsel for written submissions
First respondent:
Second respondent:
Mr A Burnett
First respondent:
Mills Oakley
Second respondent:
Clayton Utz
RICHARDS JA
is an application for leave to appeal from orders made by a judge of the County
Court of Victoria dismissing an application for
review of an order made by a
judicial registrar. The judge confirmed the judicial registrar’s order
refusing the applicant
a dispensation from the requirement to retain a solicitor
to conduct its proceeding in the County Court on its behalf.
occasion for the present dispute lies in the history of the proceeding. It is
therefore convenient to commence with this history.
1 May 2020, Thunderbird Australia Pty Ltd (‘Thunderbird’) commenced
Case No. C2950/2020 in the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal
(‘VCAT’) against Internode Pty Ltd (‘Internode’).
Internode supplied 2 x ADSL
internet services (‘services’) between 2017 and 30 November 2018 to
certain companies. Amongst other things, the parties
disagree about whether
Internode supplied these services to Thunderbird.
was established under the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) to build and operate the National Broadband
NBN Co was initially named
as an ‘interested party’ in VCAT Case No. C2950/2020. It later
consented to be named as a
party to the case.
supplied the services via a copper network. This network was subsequently
decommissioned. In substance, Thunderbird alleges
that Internode supplied the
services to it; that the services were disconnected on or about 30 November
2018; and that it suffered
loss as a result of that disconnection. Amongst other
things, Thunderbird seeks compensation for that loss.
Circumstances of the
transfer from VCAT to the County Court
5 December 2023, President Woodward made an order pursuant to s 77(3) of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
’) referring Thunderbird’s case to the County Court. The
circumstances leading to the transfer were as follows.
at 1 December 2022, Thunderbird’s amended claims before VCAT
(a) against Internode, for breach of contract, negligence, breach of statutory
duty, misleading or deceptive conduct, and breach
of consumer guarantees in the
Australian Consumer Law, seeking $98,124.52 for costs and loss of profits,
$100,000 in aggravated damages,
a further $100,000 in exemplary damages, and a
pecuniary penalty under s 82 of the Australian Consumer Law in an
unspecified amount;
(b) against NBN Co, for negligence, seeking $96,700 for costs and loss of
income, plus $96,700 in exemplary damages.
17 January 2023, NBN Co applied for summary dismissal of these claims, on the
basis that VCAT did not have jurisdiction to determine
them. NBN Co contended
that Thunderbird’s claims did not constitute a ‘consumer and trader
dispute’, a ‘small
claim’, a ‘ trader-trader
dispute’ or a ‘consumer dispute’, within the meaning of the
Australian Consumer Law and Fair Trading Act 2012
as was required
to attract VCAT’s
summary dismissal application was subsequently referred to a Judicial Member of
VCAT to decide whether an order should be made
under s 77(1) of the
, having regard to a different jurisdictional issue. This issue arose
from the fact that some of Thunderbird’s claims arose
under federal
legislation.
is convenient to explain at this point the nature of the jurisdictional
difficulty. In
Thurin v Krongold Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd
’), this Court held that VCAT does not have
federal jurisdiction.
the Court in
explained, s 77 of the
Commonwealth
Constitution
Constitution
’) empowers the Commonwealth
Parliament to make laws with respect to matters mentioned in
Constitution
defining the jurisdiction of any federal court other
than the High Court; the extent to which the jurisdiction of any federal court
shall be exclusive of the courts of the States; and ‘investing any court
of a State with federal
Constitution
is invested in State courts by
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth). It follows from this that VCAT cannot be given
federal jurisdiction because it is not a court of a State; rather, it is an
administrative tribunal.
the Court said in
VCAT is not a ‘court of a State’ within the meaning of
or, therefore, within
Judiciary Act
therefore not been invested with federal jurisdiction by the Commonwealth
Parliament. Moreover, the State Parliament is incapable
of conferring on a body
other than a ‘court of a State’, judicial power in respect of any
‘matters’ in
Constitution
‘matter’ in this context is ‘a controversy, being the subject
matter of a dispute, which may be litigated in a
legal proceeding’; and
‘encompasses all claims made within the scope of the controversy, whether
or not those claims
are ultimately
established’.
‘matters’ in
Constitution
any matter arising under any laws made by the Commonwealth Parliament –
that is, under federal
legislation.
as stated in
Where a Commonwealth law is relied on as the source of a claim or defence
asserted in the course of a justiciable controversy, the
controversy is one
‘arising under’ a law of the Commonwealth within the meaning of
Constitution
concluded that, once the federal claims were raised,
‘the matter the subject of the VCAT proceeding came within federal
and VCAT lacked jurisdiction to hear and determine
The Court held, however,
that s 77 of the
enabled VCAT to act of its own motion or on
application, to refer a matter directly to the Victorian Supreme Court or the
Decision to transfer from
VCAT to the County Court
Woodward applied
when he transferred Thunderbird’s case to
the County Court pursuant to s 77(3) of the
. After stating that
he had ‘reviewed the initiating application, including the amended points
of claim, and other relevant
materials on file’, his Honour observed
... In its amended points of claim dated 1 December 2022, the
applicant includes some claims (amongst others) purporting to rely
Telecommunications Act 1997
Competition
and Consumer Act 2010
— Schedule 2 The Australian Consumer Law
(Hereinafter ACL)’, the ‘National Broadband Companies Act 2011
(Commonwealth)’
Competition and Consumer Act
(Commonwealth)’ (
Based on these matters, it seemed clear that the proceeding raised federal
claims which the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear and
determine: see
] particularly at paragraph [64].
I note that the subject matter of the proceeding concerns claims of, amongst
other things, breaches of
of the ACL (Cth), and breaches of
Telecommunications (NBN
Continuity of Service) Industry Standard 2018
, enacted by the TCA,
concerning the provision of fixed static IP internet services by the
respondents to the applicant. In my assessment,
the County Court of Victoria
will be able to deal with this subject matter.
Representation of
Thunderbird
present issue concerns the representation of Thunderbird in the County Court.
Matysik is the sole director and secretary of Thunderbird. He holds a law
degree, but he is not admitted to practice as
a solicitor. While in VCAT, the
conduct of Thunderbird’s case was subject to the
s 62(3) of the
, it was open to Mr Matysik to represent the
company in VCAT, and he did
however, Thunderbird’s case was transferred to the County Court, the
conduct of the case was no longer subject to the
. Rather, on
transfer, Thunderbird’s case was subject to the
County Court Act 1958
County Court
County Court Civil Procedure Rules 2018
County Court
Relevantly,
this includes r 1.17(1), which, in effect, provides that a corporation must be
represented by a solicitor in County Court
proceedings, and r 2.04 which allows
the Court to dispense with compliance with any of the requirements of the
County Court Rules
. Under the
County Court Rules
, unless the court
dispenses with the requirement in r 1.17(1), Mr Matysik cannot represent
Thunderbird in the court because he is
not a solicitor.
to r 2.04, Thunderbird applied for a dispensation from the requirement for a
corporation to be represented by a solicitor
under r 1.17(1). A judicial
registrar dismissed Thunderbird’s application on 15 November 2024.
28 November 2024, Thunderbird applied for review of the judicial
registrar’s decision pursuant to r 84.03(3) of the
County Court
represented Thunderbird at the review hearing. On 28 January 2025, a judge of
the County Court dismissed Thunderbird’s
application and confirmed the
judicial registrar’s
The judge’s
judge in the County Court considered the matters identified by Weinberg JA in
Enterprises Pty Ltd v Silberman
’) as relevant to the exercise of the discretion
to dispense with the need for a corporate litigant to retain a
His Honour also noted
that Mr Matysik ‘primarily relied on an argument that it was fundamentally
unfair that Thunderbird should
now be required to be legally represented given
that the proceedings were commenced in VCAT, where legal representation was not
Honour stated that Mr Matysik had been unable ‘to articulate the basis of
[Thunderbird’s] claims in a way that can
readily be understood, either by
the defendants ... or by the court
His Honour rejected
Mr Matysik’s submission that the case was ‘a simple
concluding that
‘Thunderbird’s claims involve considerable legal and factual
complexity, and would do so even if clearly
articulated by a competent legal
practitioner’.
did not accede to Mr Matysik’s argument that it was fundamentally unfair
that Thunderbird should be required to
be represented by a solicitor in the
County Court, even though the proceedings had been commenced in VCAT where there
was no such
requirement.
judge held that:
The presentation of Thunderbird’s case would
require extensive witness and documentary evidence, and legal argument. I cannot
envisage how Mr Matysik could conduct Thunderbird’s case in an
orderly or efficient fashion.
Allowing Mr Matysik to conduct Thunderbird’s case is likely to make the
case much harder and more costly for the defendants
to defend; and is likely to
... require significantly more court time.
Thunderbird has not provided any material suggesting that it lacks the
resources to engage a solicitor; and Mr Matysik specifically
declined to rely on
any such matter.
Proposed grounds of
Thunderbird
seeks leave to appeal on three proposed grounds:
Judge erred in holding that the criteria to be considered in deciding whether a
company could be represented without a solicitor
as set out in
Enterprises v Silberman
[2010] VSCA 17
, should be applied in matters such
as this that involve some ‘Federal Jurisdictional Issues’, which due
to the Court
of Appeal’s decision in
Thurin v Krongold
Constructions
[2022] VSCA 226
are only before a higher Court due to their
transfer mid-stream into that jurisdiction pursuant to s 77(3) of the VCAT
does apply, the Judge erred in his application of the
criteria enunciated in
to find against the Applicant in its
Application for leave to appear in the County Court without a Solicitor in this
particular instance.
the same reasons as submitted at points 1 and 2, it is submitted that costs in
cases referred to the County Court due to ‘Federal
Issues’ should continue to [be] determined in accordance with the costs
rules in s 62 of the VCAT Act.
Thunderbird’s
submissions
written submissions in support of its proposed first ground, Thunderbird
submitted that its case was fundamentally different from
was because
‘centred on ... whether a company could
appeal a matter that had already been decided by the VCAT to the Supreme Court
representation by a
solicitor’.
Thunderbird
submitted that
was therefore a ‘case where the Applicant
argued that it should be able to appear without a solicitor at a stage in the
proceedings
where it was normal to engage a
solicitor’.
Thunderbird’s submission,
‘concerned a
“routine” appeal procedure in accordance with the rules for lodging
such an appeal’. It submitted
that its case was different because it was
commenced in VCAT and transferred to the County Court — without being
— only because of its Federal subject matter and the ruling in
. Thunderbird submitted that ‘[t]here was no requirement for
[it] to engage a solicitor to represent it whilst the matter was
VCAT’ and that ‘it should continue to be able to appear without a
solicitor at a stage in the proceedings where
it is normal not to engage a
solicitor’.
It submitted
that the judge erred in:
not giving weight to the extraordinary circumstances surrounding cases such as
this which started off in a forum where a Party was
permitted to appear without
a solicitor as of right and then finds itself in a higher [c]ourt due to
circumstances and judicial/legislative
forces beyond its
Thunderbird
submitted that ‘the Krongold/Federal Jurisdiction issue is the strongest
“proper reason” for exercising
the discretion to dispense with the
’, and the judge was in error in so far as he held
to the contrary. In Thunderbird’s submission, the judge was in error
because he did not give effect to ‘the extraordinary circumstances
surrounding cases such as
In this connection,
Thunderbird referred to the County Court’s obligation to ‘seek to
give effect to the overarching
purpose ... to facilitate the just, efficient,
timely and cost-effective resolution of the real issues in
support of its proposed second ground, Thunderbird submitted, in substance, that
the application of the criteria in
favoured its application to
dispense with the need for a solicitor.
Thunderbird stated
there has been no indication whether the most recent and final
‘definitive’ VCAT Points of Claim, (approximately 10
pages against
NBN Co and 18 pages against Internode) contained within a 62 page document ...
dated 1 December 2022 were actually
transferred from the VCAT to the County
Thunderbird submitted that the case might proceed in the County Court on
these Points of Claim or be redrafted by Mr Matysik. It further
submitted that
it had only one witness – its director — and that ‘... all of
the documentary evidence can be presented/re-presented
as a single bundle of
documents by Affidavit sworn by the director ...
this context, Thunderbird stated that its case against Internode and NBN Co was
as follows:
(a) The case against Internode is that:
(i) Internode breached its contract to provide static ADSL IP address services
to the Applicant/Plaintiff. Then it was negligent
in not restoring the services,
and as further evidence of negligence it also breached its statutory duty under
the Telecommunications
(NBN Continuity of Service) Industry Standard 2018 (TIS)
to co-operate with other telecommunications carriers to quickly get the
reconnected.
(ii) Internode Pty Ltd was negligent in not offering to supply a static IP
address NBN services as a replacement for its STATIC ADSL
Service as a matter of
course and if it had done so the services would already have been connected to
the NBN by the time NBN Co
disconnected the service in error.
(b) The case against NBN Co is that:
(i) NBN Co was negligent in disconnecting, or allowing the disconnection of the
services on the basis that either*:
was already an unrelated parties’ NBN service at the premises, or
NBN Co acted under the belief that 18 months had expired since the service
became available in the area — when that demonstrably
was not the case. (*
NBN Co has offered both reasons as a possible explanation)
(ii) NBN Co also did not comply with its statutory obligation to co-operate with
other carriers to ensure that the service was quickly
(iii) Finally, NBN Co was negligent in not ensuring that carriers were obligated
to replace existing ADSL static IP address services
with NBN Static IP
(iii)’, there was, so Thunderbird submitted,
‘nothing so complex about the case’ as to require it to engage a
and its case could properly be conducted in an ‘orderly and
efficient way by Mr Matysik, and indeed was ‘ready to run’.
(v)’, Thunderbird submitted that:
[I]t is now only a matter of presenting the facts, establishing the events that
occurred by production of the relevant inter-party
emails and other documents as
evidence, and then making submissions as to how those facts gave rise to causes
of action, that losses
were encountered as a result, and then quantifying of
those losses.
In this context, Thunderbird made specific reference to its
‘“Summary of Submissions” filed on 9 January 2025 prior
hearing of the County Court Appeal’.
applicant submitted the following in relation to the remaining
considerations:
(vii)’ — that ‘in [Thunderbird’s] view the case is ready
to be run’;
(viii)’ — that the judge had effectively confirmed that ‘[i]f
the Applicant’s director presents the case,
it will give the Applicant a
greater chance of success than if it used a solicitor, as a result of it being
harder to defend’;
(ix)’ — that dispensing with the requirement for a solicitor
‘may make it faster’, adding that it was ultimately
the fault of the
Department of Justice that its case was before the County Court and affecting
its resources because the Department
had failed to provide Mr Matysik with
information about an amendment to the
. Thunderbird submitted
that this amendment (new Part 3) provided for a transfer to the
Magistrates’ Court where it could be
heard without a
Thunderbird contended
... had been aware of Part 3A, it most likely would have dropped the claims for
exemplary damages, thereby reducing the claim amount
... so that the matter
could have been heard in the Magistrates’ Court.
Thunderbird
supported its proposed third ground of appeal by reference to the reasons it had
advanced in support of its proposed first
and second grounds of appeal. It
further submitted that any costs considerations in this matter should be
determined in accordance
with Division 8 of the
Respondents’
submissions
first and second respondents, Internode and NBN Co, submitted that leave ought
not be granted because the judge did not err for
any of the reasons identified
by Thunderbird. Internode adopted the written submissions filed by NBN Co. These
submissions will therefore
be referred to hereafter as ‘the
respondents’ submissions’.
response to Thunderbird’s proposed first ground, the respondents submitted
was, as its facts disclosed, intended to apply to matters
that commenced in VCAT and subsequently found their way to a court. Further,
the respondents’ submission, the factors to which
referred were of general application. The respondents contended that
Thunderbird’s statement that its situation was different
circumstances in
, in that its proceeding is ‘at a stage
... where it is normal not to engage a solicitor’ was incorrect, because
not ‘normal not to engage a solicitor’ in the County Court.
They argued that the ‘very existence of r 1.17’
showed that it was
‘abnormal for a corporation not to engage a solicitor’; and that
Thunderbird’s approach was
perverse in so far as it was ‘to require
the County Court to inherit the Tribunal’s rules’. It would be
they said, ‘to require the County Court to ignore its own Rules in
favour of the Tribunal’s rules’ in such a case.
respondents submitted that there was no error in the judge’s statement
the fact that proceedings have been transferred to this court from VCAT —
against a corporate party’s wishes —
[was] not, in itself, a
sufficient, or even weighty, reason to grant leave for that corporation to be
represented by its director.
respondents maintained that there was no ‘inherent unfairness’ in
the judge’s decision and that Thunderbird
‘has steadfastly refused
to address whether it can afford a solicitor’. The respondents noted that
Thunderbird had ‘agreed
to this matter being transferred to the County
Court from the Tribunal’.
to Thunderbird’s proposed second ground, the respondents commenced by
noting that Thunderbird’s submissions before
the judge focussed on
and characterised
as ‘irrelevant’.
They also noted that Thunderbird did not challenge all the judge’s reasons
for confirming the
judicial registrar’s decision: that is, Thunderbird did
not challenge his Honour’s statement that it had not ‘provided
material suggesting that it lacks the resources to engage a solicitor; and that
Mr Matysik specifically declined to rely on any
such matter’. The
respondents submitted that it was open to the judge to draw the conclusions he
did about Thunderbird’s
claim and Mr Matysik’s ability to conduct
its proceeding efficiently without the assistance of a solicitor. It was also
to the judge, in the respondents’ submission, to conclude that,
without a solicitor, ‘it was likely the case would be
more costly for the
defendants and require more court time’. The respondents submitted that
Thunderbird failed to show that
the judge took into account an irrelevant
consideration or failed to consider a relevant consideration; or otherwise made
of the kind referred to in
House v The King
to proposed ground 3, the respondents submitted that the County Court is not
required to apply VCAT’s
Regarding costs, the
respondents submitted that, pursuant to s 78A of the
County Court Act
‘the costs of and incidental to proceedings are in the discretion of the
County Court’. The respondents went on to submit
that the usual order as
to costs is that costs follow the event, so that a successful party is entitled
to an award of costs against
the unsuccessful party. Since Thunderbird’s
application to review the decision of the judicial registrar was unsuccessful,
they submitted that it was open to the judge to exercise the discretion as to
costs in favour of the respondents.
regard to these submissions, the respondents submitted that Thunderbird’s
application for leave to appeal should be refused.
They further submitted that
Thunderbird’s proposed grounds were ‘totally without merit’,
referring to their submissions
on Thunderbird’s grounds, and noting that
Thunderbird had not shown that it could not afford a lawyer or that its case
be disadvantaged by having a lawyer.
Consideration – general
observations
Thunderbird
sought leave to be represented in the proceeding in this Court by
Mr Matysik. The respondents did not contest this application
and, for the
purpose of determining Thunderbird’s application for leave to appeal, the
Court would grant such leave.
Thunderbird
specifically stated that it did not seek an oral hearing of its application for
leave to appeal.
submissions, the respondents agreed that the matter should be determined on the
Subsequently, by emails
on 1 and 2 September 2025, each of the parties confirmed that it wished to have
the matter determined on
the papers. Bearing this in mind, and to lessen costs
and other burdens on the parties
and to conserve court resources, the Court has determined the matter on the
Supreme Court Act 1986
Supreme Court
’), this Court can grant an application for leave to appeal
‘only if it is satisfied’ that the proposed appeal ‘has
prospect of success’.
Court will not always grant leave even if it is so satisfied; rather, it may
refuse leave in the exercise of what is sometimes
called its residual
discretion.
Section 14D
Supreme Court Act
is also relevant if the Court dismisses an application
for leave to appeal without an oral hearing and has determined that the
application
is totally without merit. In that circumstance, ‘the applicant
has no right to apply to have the dismissal set aside or
the present case, Thunderbird seeks to challenge the judge’s order
confirming the order of the judicial registrar that that
the proceeding be
stayed unless and until Thunderbird appoints a solicitor. An order of this kind
is interlocutory and concerns a
matter of practice and
judge’s decision to confirm the judicial registrar’s order involved
an exercise of discretion, in order to
show relevant error, Thunderbird must
show that there was a material error in the exercise of that discretion of the
kind recognised
House v The
For the reasons stated
below, it has not done so.
Consideration – proposed
first ground
its proposed first ground, Thunderbird submitted that the judge erred by
considering the wrong criteria when exercising the discretion
in r 2.04 of
County Court Rules
. In substance, in Thunderbird’s submission,
this was because
was relevantly different from the present
case, and that difference made the criteria in
inapplicable.
applicant in
, World Wide Enterprises Pty Ltd (‘World Wide
Enterprises’), sought leave in the Supreme Court to appeal a decision of
VCAT that it did not have jurisdiction over its claim for pecuniary losses. The
respondents sought an order under r 1.17(1) of the
Supreme Court
Civil Procedure) Rules
Supreme Court Rules
that the Supreme Court proceeding be stayed unless World Wide Enterprises
retained a solicitor. In response, World Wide Enterprises
applied for
dispensation from the need to retain a solicitor under r 2.04 of those
Rules. Both rr 1.17(1) and 2.04 are in very similar
terms in the
Court Rules
County Court Rules
enough, the circumstances in which Thunderbird found itself in the County Court,
having commenced its case in VCAT, were not
identical to the circumstances in
. For the following reasons, however, this does not mean that
the judge considered the wrong criteria when he had regard to the criteria
accepted that the requirement that a company proceed
by a solicitor was intended to promote the proper administration of
As Weinberg JA
... The Court must have regard to the difficulties posed when a lay individual
endeavours to conduct a complex piece of litigation.
Experience has shown that
cases conducted by litigants in person, particularly those who happen to be of a
querulous disposition
as some such litigants are, can be very protracted. This
means that valuable court time is wasted, at the expense of other prospective
litigants who are denied timely resolution of their disputes. As well,
significant costs are likely to be unnecessarily
Court accepted that, relatedly, there were a number of considerations relevant
to the exercise of the discretion in r 2.04 of
Supreme Court
to dispense with the need for a solicitor. The considerations were as
(a) The manner in which the case had progressed at the time that the application
(b) The manner in which the case could proceed in the future without a
(c) The complexity of the issues involved in the case;
(d) Whether the lack of legal profession disciplinary measures in relation to
the person seeking to represent the company would affect
the administration of
(e) Whether the case could be conducted in an orderly and responsible fashion
without a solicitor;
(f) Whether there were financial considerations which would inhibit a company
from obtaining legal representation;
(g) The stage which the case had reached;
(h) Whether the defendant was likely to expend more funds in defending the claim
absent a solicitor acting for the company; and
(i) What effect, if any, permitting a company to appear without a solicitor
would have on court resources and, particularly, the
effect upon other litigants
in the Court list.
are considerations of general application. They reflect the nature of the
potential risks to the proper administration of justice
that might be realised
if there were no provision such as r 1.17(1) in the
Supreme Court Rules
and, similarly in the
County Court Rules
, requiring the company to
proceed by way of a solicitor, subject to the dispensation discretion in
r 2.04 in both sets of Rules.
fact that World Wide Enterprises and Thunderbird entered the different
is of little moment as
the relevant rules are very similar in both jurisdictions. Further, the fact
that each of them encountered
a different jurisdictional issue preventing them
from proceeding in VCAT has no bearing on the application of r 1.17(1) or
exercise of discretion in r 2.04. This is because the focus of
r 1.17(1) and any associated exercise of discretion to dispense with
requirement to retain a solicitor will always be on the proper administration of
justice in the court in which the proceeding
is to be run, whether in the County
Court or the Supreme Court. As a consequence, the generally expressed
considerations referred
will be relevant in any case
where a corporate litigant seeks a dispensation from the requirement in
r 1.17(1), in exercise of the
discretion in r 2.04, whether in the
County Court or the Supreme Court.
is not to say that these considerations will always be the only relevant
considerations when such a dispensation is sought. Depending
circumstances of the case, there may perhaps be some further matter falling for
consideration, although there was none such
in this case. Moreover, some of the
considerations to which reference is made in
may weigh more
heavily than others in the exercise of discretion, also depending on the
circumstances of the case.
circumstance that led to the transfer of Thunderbird’s case from VCAT to
the County Court was relevant only in so far as
it explained why the case had
arrived in the County Court. Once in the County Court, however, the focus of the
exercise of the discretion
to dispense with the need to retain a solicitor was
on the proper administration of justice in that Court, in relation to the
in which the dispensation was sought and in relation to other
proceedings in the Court. How the matter arrived in the Court does
not bear on
this inquiry, although associated matters, such as the manner in which the case
has previously progressed, are relevant
because they inform the assessment of
what the administration of justice is likely to require.
permitted Mr Matysik to represent Thunderbird in VCAT, that
Act had no application to a proceeding in the County Court. Once
Thunderbird’s
case was transferred to the County Court, the case was
instead subject to the
County Court Act
County Court
. As the respondents submitted, in that Court, it was not open to the
judge to allow the matter to proceed as if governed by the
the circumstances of the case, there was no ‘inherent unfairness’ in
the judge’s decision not to allow Thunderbird
to proceed without a
solicitor. Thunderbird did not submit that it could not pursue its case if
required to retain a solicitor because
it could not afford to do so. As his
Honour specifically noted, ‘Thunderbird has not provided any material
suggesting that
it lacks the resources to engage a solicitor; and
Mr Matysik specifically declined to rely on any such
the foregoing reasons, Thunderbird’s proposed first ground has no real
prospect of success. Moreover, it has not shown any
rational basis on which it
might be concluded that the judge made an error of the kind suggested.
Consideration – proposed
second ground
its proposed second ground, Thunderbird maintained that the judge erred in
applying the factors identified in
as relevant to the exercise
of discretion to dispense with the requirement for a solicitor in
r 1.17(1). For the reasons that follow,
this proposed ground also has no
real prospect of success.
party contended that Thunderbird’s case had progressed satisfactorily as
at the date the judge heard Thunderbird’s
review application. Thunderbird
had commenced the case in VCAT more than three years before. The judge
specifically noted that Mr
Matysik had not yet been able to articulate the
basis of his claims in a way that could readily be understood by the defendants
There was a clear
basis for his Honour’s assessment, as reference to the amended points of
claim dated 1 December 2022 (‘December
points of claim’) makes
clear. The 62 pages of the December points of claim fail to afford the reader
any clear and coherent
understanding of the legal and factual bases of
Thunderbird’s claim.
Thunderbird’s
submission that the proceeding in the County Court might proceed on the basis of
the December points of claim
indicated a significant misunderstanding on its
part of the requirements for an adequate statement of its claims. It also
a failure to appreciate the difficulties the December points of claim
presented for anyone seeking to understand the facts and the
law on which
Thunderbird relied to make out its case. Further, it is doubtful that a
redrafting, as proposed by Thunderbird, would
cure the problem. The fact that
Thunderbird has already produced numerous versions of its claims that have
failed to satisfy VCAT
was (and remains) indicative of the difficulty
Thunderbird has had in stating its case adequately.
having regard to the December points of claim, it was also clearly open to the
judge to conclude that Thunderbird’s
case involved ‘considerable
legal and factual complexity’; and that it would require witness and
documentary evidence,
The judge’s
assessment in this regard is confirmed by Thunderbird’s most recent
statement of its case.
also clear enough from Mr Matysik’s submissions before the judge, and in
writing in this Court, that he has failed to
appreciate that the task of placing
evidence before the Court in order that the Court can find the relevant facts is
not straightforward.
these circumstances and in view of this history of Thunderbird’s case, it
was clearly open to the judge to conclude that
Mr Matysik would have difficulty
conducting Thunderbird’s case in an orderly or efficient way; that if he
were to conduct Thunderbird’s
case, then the case would take up more court
time than if Thunderbird were represented by a solicitor; and that the case
‘harder and more costly for the defendants to
last-mentioned matter did not signify, as Mr Matysik contended, that ‘the
judge had effectively confirmed’ that ‘[i]f
the Applicant’s
director presents the case, it will give the Applicant a greater chance of
success than if it used a solicitor,
as a result of it being harder to
Rather, his
Honour was stating his conclusion that the burden on the defendants, including
the costs burden, was likely to be more
than they would encounter if the
litigation were pursued in the orderly and efficient way that representation by
a solicitor is designed
submit, as Thunderbird did in this Court, that ‘it is now only a matter of
presenting the facts, establishing the events
... and then making submissions as
to how those facts gave rise to causes of action’ entitling Thunderbird to
the relief it
seeks’ greatly underestimates what will be involved in
conducting Thunderbird’s case. Further, Mr Matysik’s
submissions
that Thunderbird’s case was ready to run is plainly mistaken;
and, contrary to Mr Matsik’s submission, dispensing with
requirement for a solicitor would be unlikely to assist bringing about a
‘faster’ — and at the same time just
— resolution of
Thunderbird’s case.
the circumstances to which the judge referred, it was also relevant that
Thunderbird did not provide any material indicating that
it would be unable to
afford to engage a solicitor and, indeed, declined to rely on a consideration of
light of the forgoing, it simply cannot be said that the judge erred in his
application of the criteria identified in
. The proposed second
ground has no real prospect of success. Further, Thunderbird has shown no
rational basis to support the contention
that the judge made an error of the
kind proposed.
Consideration –
proposed third ground
Essentially
for reasons already stated, there is no substance at all in Thunderbird’s
proposed third ground.
already stated, when Thunderbird’s case was transferred to the County
Court, the case became subject to the
County Court Act.
Pursuant to s
78A(1) of that Act, the costs of and incidental to all proceedings in the Court
are ‘in the discretion of the
In the exercise of
this discretion, a judge is, of course, subject to the general law. As McHugh J
explained in
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
, in courts, the
‘usual order as to costs’ is that a successful party is entitled to
an award of costs in its favour and
the unsuccessful party bears the costs of
the successful litigant.
that Thunderbird’s application to review the decision of the judicial
registrar was unsuccessful, it was open to the judge,
in the exercise of his
discretion, to make the usual order as to costs in favour of the respondents and
against Thunderbird.
ground 3 has no real prospects of success. There is simply no rational basis on
which it might be concluded that the judge
made an error of the kind
the reasons stated above, Thunderbird’s application for leave to appeal
must be refused, since none of its proposed grounds
has any real prospects of
success. Moreover, for the reasons indicated, the application for leave to
appeal is ‘totally without
merit’ within the meaning of
Supreme Court Act
written submissions, the respondents submitted the application for leave to
appeal should be refused, with
Costs would ordinarily
follow the event upon the refusal of an application for leave to appeal.
Nonetheless, we would give Thunderbird
the opportunity to make written
submissions (not exceeding 2 pages) about costs, including why they should not
follow the event in
SCHEDULE OF PARTIES
THUNDERBIRD AUSTRALIA PTY LTD (ACN 050 568 315)
INTERNODE PTY LTD (ACN 052 00 581)
First respondent
NBN CO LIMITED (ACN 136 553 741)
Second respondent
Asymmetric Digital Subscriber
Line, a type of internet connection that supplies data using copper telephone
Also known as NBN Co Limited
NBN Co is a public company,
which is wholly-owned by the Commonwealth of Australia.
Australian Consumer Law
and Fair Trading Act 2012
(2022) 73 VR 403
[2022] VSCA
(McLeish, Niall and Walker JJA), citing
Constitution
(citations omitted).
, 414 [48].
Constitution
(2022) 73 VR
[2022] VSCA 226
, 415 [55] (citations omitted).
s 62(3) provides that a party that is a body corporate may be represented
in a proceeding by a director, secretary or other officer.
Amongst other things, the
County Court Act 1958
provides for the jurisdiction and powers of the
Court, and for rules to be made to govern the conduct of civil proceedings: see
s 78(1)(aab).
Pursuant to
r 84.03(6)(a) of the
County Court Rules
, the review of a decision of
judicial registrar is conducted by way of hearing de novo.
His Honour also ordered
that Thunderbird pay the respondents’ costs of and incidental to the
review hearing on a standard
(2010) 26 VR 595
Ruling, [6]. See also, in
this regard, Ruling, [7] and [8(e)].
Ruling, [8(b)].
Ruling, [8(a)].
Ruling, [8(a)].
Emphasis omitted.
Emphasis omitted.
Emphasis omitted.
Emphasis omitted.
Gold Developments
Pty Ltd v Sandgate Service Company Pty Ltd
[2023] VSC 342
, [11] (emphasis
Emphasis omitted. See
Civil Procedure Act 2010
. In this context, Thunderbird also
[2022] VSCA 226
(2022) 73 VR 403
, 407 [14], 411–2 [32]–[36];
[2022] VSCA 226.
This case concerned the application of time limitations, in
connection with the transfer of a matter owing to the presence of a federal
claim. Different considerations arise in this context, however.
Thunderbird’s
submissions used this form of referencing to refer to the various matters that
Weinberg JA identified as considerations
relevant to the exercise of the
discretion to dispense with the requirement for a solicitor in
Emphasis omitted.
Emphasis omitted.
Emphasis omitted.
Other Acts Amendment (Federal Jurisdiction and Other Matters) Act 2021
The respondents submitted
that Thunderbird’s approach was perverse in so far as it was ‘to
require the County Court to
inherit the Tribunal’s rules’: see
paragraph [
Application for leave to
appeal, [4].
Written case in response
for the first respondent, [6]; Written case in response for the second
respondent, [40].
Civil Procedure Act
Milfoil Pty Ltd v Commonwealth Bank of
Australia Ltd
[2020] VSCA 223
Supreme Court Act
Supreme Court Act
Supreme Court Act
Kajula Pty Ltd
v Downer EDI Limited
[2024] VSCA 236
(2024) 76 VR 75
, 99 [83] (Macaulay, Lyons and
[2024] VSCA 236
Molonglo Group
(Australia) Pty Ltd v Cahill
[2018] VSCA 147
, [96] (Maxwell ACJ, Whelan and
Kyrou JJA).
Supreme Court Act
[2010] VSCA 17
, 598 [15]–[17] (Weinberg JA, Bongiorno JA agreeing at 607 [74]);
[2010] VSCA 17.
Even supposing error, for the court to grant leave to appeal in
such a case, the applicant will ordinarily be required to show that
suffer substantial injustice should the judge’s decision be allowed to
stand: see, for example,
[2024] VSCA 236
(2024) 76 VR 75
[83]–[84] (Macaulay, Lyons and Orr JJA);
[2024] VSCA 236.
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40.
[2010] VSCA 17
, 601–2 [35] (Weinberg JA);
[2010] VSCA 17.
[2010] VSCA 17
, 601–2 [35] (Weinberg JA), see also 607 [76] (Bongiorno JA);
[2010] VSCA 17
, 602 [41] (Weinberg JA);
[2010] VSCA 17.
Ruling, [8(e)].
Ruling, [8(b)].
See Ruling, [8(a)].
Whether Thunderbird might
have taken a different path had it had different information, as it asserted, is
unknown and, in any event,
irrelevant to the present inquiry.
County Court Act
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
(McHugh J);
[1998] HCA 11.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (562 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter