URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VLSC/2018/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:33:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commissioner Determination (Acting contrary to instructions) [2018] VLSC 25; (27 June 2018)
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner
A notice made under s.
318 of the Legal Profession Uniform Law (Victoria)
names of the Complainant, Respondent Lawyer and any other persons have been
removed from this document in compliance with
the requirements of the
Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2014
Commissioner Determination (Acting contrary to instructions)
[2018] VLSC 25
Date of Determination:
27 June 2018
Pursuant to section 299(1) of the
Legal Profession
Uniform Law (Victoria)
(‘the Uniform Law’), I have decided that
the Respondent Lawyer has engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct and
make the following order –
The Respondent
Lawyer is cautioned pursuant to section 299(1)(a) of the Uniform
STATEMENT OF REASONS
November 2014 the Respondent Lawyer’s Law Practice was instructed by the
Complainant in respect of his WorkCover claim (‘the
Claim’). The
matter was fixed for hearing on 6 September 2016 in the County Court of Victoria
before a jury.
or around the beginning of March 2016, the Respondent Lawyer took over conduct
of the Complainant’s matter. Consistent with
previous advice provided by
the Law Practice, the Respondent Lawyer advised the Complainant of the risks of
his case and the significant
cost implications his previous statutory counter
offer had triggered.
to engaging the Law Practice, the Complainant had made an application to
WorkCover for leave to file an application for both
pain and suffering and
pecuniary loss against the Defendant. Following such leave being granted, the
Complainant was required to
make a formal offer for settlement before a Damages
Writ could be issued (referred to as a statutory offer). The Defendant made a
statutory offer of $245,000 for pain and suffering and economic loss damages and
the Complainant made a statutory counter offer of
Complainant’s statutory counter offer held significant costs implications
in that, if the amount of any judgment or order
was 90% or more than the
statutory counter offer and, greater than the statutory offer put by the
Defendant, the Defendant would
be responsible for part of the party/party costs
and their own costs. If the judgment or order was equal to, or less than, the
offer made by the defendant then the Complainant would be responsible
for the party/party costs of the Defendant in addition to his
own legal costs.
If the amount of the judgment or order was greater than the statutory offer made
by the Defendant but less than
90% of the statutory counter offer made by the
Complainant then he would be responsible for all of his legal costs.
the Complainant had made a statutory counter offer of $780,000 he would need to
obtain a judgement or order of $702,000 to avoid
paying costs. The Respondent
Lawyer advised the Complainant that this was a highly unlikely outcome.
the beginning of April 2016, the Complainant instructed the Respondent Lawyer to
enter into settlement discussions with Minter
Ellison (“the Defendant
Firm”). This was on a ‘pain and suffering’
‘suffering and economic loss’ (both heads) basis. Negotiations
with the Defendant Firm commenced and continued for several
19 August 2016, on the Complainant’s instructions, the Respondent Lawyer
emailed the following offer to the Defendant Firm:
$480 for both
$175 for pain and suffering
(the Respondent Lawyer has informed the Victorian Legal Services Commissioner
(‘the Commissioner’s office’) that
the figures intended were
$480k and $175k and that the ‘k’ was accidentally omitted).
offer was rejected by the Defendant Firm and a final counter offer of $350,000
was made by them on a both heads basis with no
costs. The Defendant Firm advised
that they would not be making a further pain and suffering offer.
24 August 2016 the Respondent Lawyer wrote to the Complainant strongly advising
him to accept the Defendant Firm’s $350,000
‘both heads’
offer. The Respondent Lawyer outlined that if the matter was to proceed to a
jury trial the Complainant
was unlikely to receive more than $70,000 as a net
figure because it was highly likely that he would be liable to pay his own legal
costs and the costs of the Defendant. In addition to this, if he was awarded
damages at the jury trial he would also be required
to pay back the weekly
payments and impairment benefits he received from WorkCover which was estimated
to be $230,000.
24 August 2016, the Complainant emailed the Respondent Lawyer to confirm that he
had decided to go ahead with the trial and as
such rejected the Defendant
Firm’s offer. He also confirmed in that email that he was
looking for $500k in our hands with medical and like costs and
”. In terms of the ‘training’, the Complainant
suffered a back injury while at work as a school teacher. His instructions
the Respondent Lawyer were that due to his back injury he was unable to work
and/or continue to work as a teacher and as such
would need to be retrained in a
different profession.
Respondent Lawyer telephoned the Complainant on 25 August 2016 and sought his
‘bottom’ numbers. The Respondent Lawyer
for both heads and $175k for pain and
suffering” as last offers. The
Complainant advised the Respondent Lawyer that he would consider this and get
the same day the Complainant sent the Respondent Lawyer an email and confirmed
that his final offer was “
$500k plus costs with medical and like costs
and retraining...”
. The Respondent Lawyer replied by email and asked
whether the Complainant had “
a final offer for pain and suffering
. The Complainant replied and advised “
$175 for pain and
the morning of 29 August 2016, the Defendant Firm telephoned the Respondent
Lawyer to obtain the final position of the Complainant.
The Respondent Lawyer
has informed the Commissioner’s office that the purpose of the telephone
conversation with the Defendant
Firm was to see if the Respondent Lawyer had
instructions to ‘re-put’ his client’s previously rejected
$480,000 “both heads” and $175,000 “pain and
suffering”. As the Respondent Lawyer did not hold instructions
to put such
an offer he was unable to inform the Defendant Firm of the final position of the
Complainant.
29 August 2016, following the telephone call with the Respondent Lawyer, the
Defendant Firm emailed the Respondent Lawyer seeking
clarification on the
following: “
for both heads; and/or - $175k for pain and suffering (no costs) is your
client’s final/bottom line position for which
he is willing to resolve his
claim, and whether it is worth [him] re-tabling it with [his]
[the complainant] is no longer offering to resolve on this basis amount, and
will be proceeding to trial and judgment.”
the same day at 2.08pm the Respondent Lawyer emailed the Complainant advising
that the Defendant Firm wanted him to make a final
offer to him. The Respondent
Lawyer asked:
“Can I have your instructions to re-put our
last offer of $480k for both heads and $175k on pain and suffering to
Respondent Lawyer telephoned the Complainant to follow up his email sent at
2.08pm. The Respondent Lawyer states that during the
call the Complainant
confirmed his final “both heads” offer was $500k. There was no
mention of a pain and suffering offer
during this conversation. A handwritten
file note, contained on the Respondent Lawyer’s file, states
final both heads offer $500k
Complainant replied to the Respondent Lawyer’s 2.08pm email at
approximately 3.06pm stating:
Our final offer is $500 K
with all costs with medical and like costs and retraining as we have moved
straight from $780K which is
reduction of 280K”
Respondent Lawyer did not see the Complainant’s email until approximately
4.19pm due to having a conference with another
the same day, at 3.16pm, following the telephone call with the Complainant, the
Respondent Lawyer emailed the Defendant Firm stating:
instructed to put the following offers as final offers:
$500K on a both heads basis and
$175K on the [pain and suffering] basis.”
The Respondent Lawyer has informed the Commissioner’s office that he
believed that he had instructions from the Complainant
to put the $175,000
“pain and suffering” offer to the Defendant Firm. He says those
instructions came from the Complainant’s
email to the Respondent Lawyer on
25 August 2016 (referred to in paragraph 7 herein). There had been no discussion
and suffering’ offer in his telephone conversation
with the Complainant and that for at least six months prior to the offer
put, the Respondent Lawyer had been negotiating with the Defendant Firm on
behalf of the Complainant by putting offers (and
considering counter offers) on
a “both heads” and “pain and suffering” basis. The
figure for the “pain
and suffering” basis had not changed. As such
the Respondent Lawyer informed the Commissioner’s office that he had no
reason to believe that the Complainant intended to depart from that course and
make a “both heads”
offer. It is for these reasons the
Respondent Lawyer made the ‘pain and suffering’ offer to the
Defendant Firm.
9.30am on 30 August 2016, the Defendant Firm called the Respondent Lawyer to
accept the ‘pain and suffering’ offer.
receipt of the acceptance by the Defendant Firm, the Respondent Lawyer
telephoned the Complainant to inform him of settlement.
During this call the
Respondent Lawyer was informed by the Complainant that he did not hold
instructions to put the ‘pain and
suffering offer’ to the Defendant
Firm at that time.
10.37am on 30 August 2016 the Respondent Lawyer received a fax from the
Defendant Firm confirming their acceptance of the offer
(for pain and suffering damages only)”.
approximately 11:00am on 30 August 2016 the Respondent Lawyer telephoned the
Defendant Firm to advise that the Complainant wished
to retract the offer in the
sum of $175,000 (being for pain and suffering damages only
1.02pm the Respondent Lawyer received an email from the Complainant stating:
Our final offer in yesterdays’ email is 500K for both heads with
costs, with medical and like costs and retraining as you asked
me again to give
you final offer. Please check yesterday’s email
this pain and suffering offer has been put to them, is
beyond our comprehension when our last final offer is just for both heads.
are not sure what you upto
and we didn’t direct you for
receipt of the above email from the Complainant, the Respondent Lawyer
immediately sought the assistance of a Senior Lawyer
within the law firm and
engaged Counsel to communicate with the Defendant Firm in an effort to rectify
the mistake.
attempts made by the Respondent Lawyer to rectify his mistake and retract his
offer of $175,000 “pain and suffering”
were not successful, and on 2
September 2016 the Defendant Firm sent a letter enclosing the settlement cheque
for $175,000, as full
and final settlement.
Issues under
investigation
allegations under investigation were as follows:
Respondent Lawyer settled the Complainant’s WorkCover claim contrary to
instructions;
Respondent Lawyer failed to adequately advise the Complainant of the settlement
options sufficient to prepare them for settlement
negotiations in relation to
their claim;
Respondent Lawyer told the Complainant and his wife that his skin colour would
be a factor against them in Court and behaved in
a manner which was intimidating
and rude; and
Respondent Lawyer failed to adequately prepare the Complainant’s claim for
Investigation
or about 4 October 2016, the Commissioner’s office received the
Complainant’s complaint.
4 October 2016 and 26 February 2018, various communications were exchanged
between the Commissioner’s office, the Complainant
and the Respondent
Lawyer, where notices, responses, comments and submissions were given and
26 February 2018, the Commissioner’s office sent letters to the Respondent
Lawyer and the Complainant which gave notice of
the proposed determination and
invited written submissions about the proposed order.
26 February 2018, the Commissioner’s office received an email from the
Complainant responding to the above letter and the
proposed order.
31 March 2018, the Commissioner’s office received a letter from the
Respondent Lawyer which contained his submissions.
and reasonings on issues under investigation
Inadequate advice
part of the investigation I have reviewed correspondence sent from the
Respondent Lawyer to the Complainant regarding his WorkCover
claim. I am
satisfied that the Respondent Lawyer provided the Complainant with adequate
advice in relation to his position with respect
to his claim and discussed his
concerns and the Complainant’s options verbally a number of times, as well
as in writing, on
6 January 2015, 22 March 2016, 12 July 2016 and 24 August
Inappropriate Comments
sought information from the Respondent Lawyer with respect to the comments made
to the Complainant and his wife allegedly about
their skin colour. The
Respondent Lawyer explained that, in giving advice in relation to the nature of
a jury trial, he outlined
that the jury is a panel of lay persons with limited
knowledge of the law, and that once they are empanelled, control over any
settlement of the matter is lost. He also explained to the Complainant
that because the jury is comprised of lay persons, he could
be exposed to any
prejudices the jury members may hold. Whilst the Respondent Lawyer could have
chosen his words more carefully,
I do not find that the comments amount to a
disciplinary breach.
Preparation for trial
review of the Respondent Lawyer’s file indicates that he had undertaken
significant work to prepare for the trial. Specifically,
in preparation for
trial subpoenas had been issued to medical practitioners and medico-legal
experts as well as briefing Barristers
to appear at the
Settlement of the matter
the course of the investigation into whether the Respondent Lawyer had settled
the Complainant’s WorkCover claim contrary
to instructions, the Respondent
Lawyer made the following submissions:
with the benefit of hindsight he accepts that he acted without instructions when
he put the “pain and suffering”
offer to the Defendant Firm;
the time of putting the “pain and suffering” offer he had a genuine
belief that he had instructions to do so;
acknowledges he should have confirmed the instructions of the Complainant in
to putting an offer to the Defendant Firm;
soon as he was made aware he had acted contrary to instructions he sought the
assistance of a senior lawyer within his firm and
engaged counsel to assist in
retracting the offer.
the basis of the admissions made by the Respondent Lawyer and the evidence
before me, I find the following proved:
Respondent Lawyer settled the Complainant’s WorkCover claim contrary to
instructions.
on the basis of the evidence before me, and having conducted a thorough
investigation, I find that the following concerns
do not amount to a
disciplinary breach and accordingly that no further investigation is
Respondent Lawyer failed to adequately advise the Complainant of the settlement
options sufficient to prepare them for settlement
negotiations in relation to
their claim;
Respondent Lawyer told the Complainant and his wife that his skin colour would
be a factor against them in Court and behaved in
a manner which was intimidating
and rude; and
Respondent Lawyer failed to adequately prepare the Complainant’s claim for
Relevant law
Uniform Law applies to the conduct subject of the finding in paragraph 31(a) as
the conduct occurred in August 2016.
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors’ Conduct
Rules 2015 (“Solicitors’ Rules”)
solicitor must follow a client’s lawful, proper and competent
instructions.
Characterisation of conduct
reason of the above findings of fact, I find that the Respondent Lawyer has
breached Rule 8.1 of the Solicitors’ Rules.
the nature of this breach, I find that the Respondent Lawyer’s conduct is
properly characterised as unsatisfactory professional
conduct because it
occurred in connection with legal practice and falls short of the standard of
competence and diligence that a
member of the public is entitled to expect of a
reasonably competent lawyer.
have considered analogous previous decisions of this office and of the Victorian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal (‘VCAT’).
Of the decisions
considered, some conduct involving acting contrary to instructions has been
characterised as unsatisfactory professional
conduct. Those decisions involved
conduct where the lawyer mistakenly acted contrary to instructions and at the
time had a genuine
belief they had instructions.
do not find that the Respondent Lawyer’s conduct is properly characterised
as professional misconduct because it does not
amount to a substantial or
consistent failure to reach or maintain a reasonable standard of competence and
diligence, nor does it
justify a finding that the Respondent Lawyer is not a fit
and proper person to engage in legal practice.
the face of it, it appears that settling the Complainant’s Workcover claim
without adequate instructions is a substantial
failure by the lawyer. The effect
of the error, however, must be given considerable weight.
to 29 August 2016, the Defendant Firm’s highest offer was $350,000 for
both heads which was rejected by the Complainant.
This meant that the
Complainant would have had to proceed to a jury trial. To avoid paying the costs
of the Defendant Firm, the Complainant
would have needed to receive $702,000 in
damages, which, based on the evidence before me, was deemed extremely
if the Complainant was awarded the $500,000 in damages that he sought (which he
was advised by the Respondent Lawyer, and
I accept, was unlikely to occur), he
would be required to pay his own legal costs as well as the legal costs of the
Defendant which
were estimated at approximately $200,000 in total. This is
because the amount was less than 90% of his statutory counter offer ($702,000).
Accordingly, should the matter not have settled, the costs implications for the
Complainant were likely to have been severe.
addition to paying costs, the Complainant would also have been required to repay
WorkCover for any payments and impairment benefits
he had received prior to the
trial, which was estimated at $230,000. Therefore, if the matter had proceeded
to trial it was likely
that the Complainant would have received a net figure of
$70,000 or less.
the basis of the above, I cannot properly characterise the Respondent
Lawyer’s conduct as a substantial
failure to reach or maintain a
reasonable standard of competence and diligence. A ‘substantial’
failure has been described
as a failure to “meet the requisite standard in
a way that is meaningful or relevant to the legal practitioner's ability to
practise law”
. I do cannot find that the Respondent
Lawyer’s failure was sufficiently serious to question his competence to
continue in practice.
conduct cannot properly be characterised as a consistent failure by the
Respondent Lawyer to reach or maintain a reasonable standard
of competence and
diligence as the conduct was not ongoing or persistent.
I find that a caution is the appropriate order in all of the circumstances. In
arriving at this decision I have taken into
account the Respondent
Lawyer’s submissions to this office, as outlined in paragraph 36 above. I
have also taken into consideration
that the Respondent Lawyer has shown
significant insight into his conduct and has learnt from this experience. The
Respondent Lawyer
has now implemented strategies to ensure this mistake does not
occur again. An essential component of this is to confirm all instructions
at the conclusion of the investigation the Commissioner’s office made
enquiries with the Respondent Lawyer regarding
any bills rendered to the
Complainant for legal costs. The Respondent Lawyer confirmed that no bills had
been rendered and that approximately
$60,000 of the fees had been waived. The
Complainant confirmed this was so. But for the remorse of the Respondent Lawyer,
his attempts
to rectify the error and the waiver of fees, a greater penalty
would have been ordered.
Determination & reasons
to section 299(1) of the Uniform Law I find that the Respondent Lawyer has
engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct
and I make an order cautioning
the Respondent Lawyer pursuant to section 299(1)(a) of the Uniform Law.
considered all of the evidence and the relevant law, and having made the above
findings on the issues under investigation,
I determine that it is fair and
reasonable in all the circumstances to make the orders detailed
to Section 314 of the Uniform Law, a respondent lawyer or a legal practitioner
associate of a respondent law practice may,
in accordance with the applicable
legislation appeal to the VCAT, or seek a review by the VCAT, of this
determination made under
s299 of the Uniform Law.
Russell Daily
Executive Director, Complaints &
Intervention
Delegate of the Victorian Legal Services
Commissioner
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (253 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter