URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VLPT/2005/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:33:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Meeuwissen v Hands [2005] VLPT 15 (7 November 2005)
Tribunal reference: T0074 of 2004
Name and address of
Mr Bob Meeuwissen
Name, address, and reference of legal
practitioner:
Mr Alan Hands
RPA and its reference: The
Victorian Bar Inc.
Ref: BAR/04/003
CONCERNING A DISPUTE
between Mr Bob Meeuwissen
(the “client”) and Mr Alan Hands (the “legal
practitioner”).
REASONS OF FULL TRIBUNAL OF LEGAL PROFESSIONTRIBUNAL
FOR DECISION OF
7 NOVEMBER 2005
(Section 409 Legal Practice
This is an appeal brought pursuant to section 169 of the
Practice Act 1996
(“the Act”) by Mr Meeuwissen who is the lay
client in this appeal. The appeal is against the Order of the Deputy Registrar
which was dated 27 June 2005. The Deputy Registrar on that occasion found
against the appellant and by way of Notice of Appeal under
section 167 of the
Act the appeal comes before the Full Tribunal.
The facts briefly may be
pointed out that in or about July 2003 Mr Meeuwissen, hereinafter referred to as
the client, instructed Mr
Michael Vukovic to act on his behalf in respect of
proceedings to be brought in the County Court on his behalf against IBA
Technologies.
The claim was in respect of unpaid commission. Mr Vukovic
accordingly briefed the legal practitioner, Mr Hands of Counsel, to advise
conference and draw a statement of claim. This Mr Hands did and charged $880.00
for which he was paid. The conference was held
on 8 July 2003, drafting of the
statement of claim occurred and the statement of claim was later served on the
defendant. On receipt
of the defence by the plaintiffs, the legal practitioner
expressed his opinion that the defence did not disclose a defence and an
application for summary judgement ought to be issued. The legal practitioner
provided an estimate of the costs of the application.
On 28 September
2003 the client sent an email direct to Counsel and that included some nine
questions enquiring in general terms as
to Mr Hands’ expertise in the
field and experience. In general terms the questions which were asked were, in
the view of the
Tribunal, not inappropriate, they are the sort of questions
which a lay client is perfectly entitled to ask, the only criticism,
perhaps, is
a harsh word in the circumstances, the only way it could have been better
handled is, as my colleague, Mr Southall of
Her Majesty’s Counsel, quite
properly points out, should have been that the email was directed through the
solicitor. Nevertheless,
it was sent direct to Counsel and Counsel forwarded
I’m not interested in quiz shows and that his attitude is a recipe for
disaster legally. I am making myself unavailable for
his matter.” The
questions by some could be regarded as abrasive. Mr Vukovic forwarded this
email to the client. Counsel’s
reaction may be open for debate as to
whether it could have been “in the better put department” but in no
way does it
offend any rule of professional misconduct and it was a course of
action indicating that he would not be acting in the future for
the client.
This latter view that he was no longer going to act was a course that he was
perfectly entitled to take. His brief
to advise and draw a statement of claim
was at an end. He followed that up with a memorandum in which he said he would
be acting for Mr Meeuwissen. Now being a lay person and making
allowance for that, Mr Meeuwissen had difficulty understanding
views on the subject. Mr Meeuwissen submitted to us that Counsel had no right
to indicate at that stage that he
was no longer going
to act because one of the
consequences was that he was forced to have further discussions with his
instructing
solicitor, Mr Vukovic,
which caused Mr Hoyne of Counsel to be
Mr Hoyne took a view that the statement of claim of Mr Hands
was one with which he did not agree and Mr Hoyne accordingly drafted
statement of claim and expressed in a memorandum some criticism of Mr
Hands’ drafting. We say at the outset that
Mr Hoyne was not called before
the Deputy Registrar at the hearing below nor has he been called or sought to be
called at this proceeding.
The issues here are as the Tribunal sees them.
First of all, what was the scope of Mr Hands’ retainer and that was a
advise in conference and draft the statement of claim. This he charged
for and was duly paid. Another Counsel was briefed and he
took a different view
of Mr Hands’ drafting and drafted the document in the way he thought it
ought to be drafted. In no way
does that immediately raise a presumption that
there was any error on Mr Hands’ part and there was no suggestion in any
of these Reasons for Judgement, or indeed in the judgement of the learned
Deputy Registrar, which cast criticism on Mr Hands, the
practitioner’s professional conduct or upon his professional skill and
The fact of the matter is that a second Counsel took a
different point of view which can frequently occur. However, for the appellant
to proceed to succeed in this dispute, it is necessary for him to demonstrate,
on the balance of probabilities, that Mr Hands’
work was, in effect, so
negligent and so lacking in care that second Counsel had to be retained to
draft, as it were, an amended
statement of claim to make up for any errors that
Mr Hands had produced.
Section 122(1)(b) of the Act sets out what is to
be proved in a pecuniary costs dispute such as this –
“(b) a claim that a person has suffered pecuniary losses as a result
of an act or omission by a legal practitioner or firm in
the provision of legal
services to the person, other than loss in respect of which a claim lies against
the Fidelity Fund;”
There is no evidence before us nor is
there any finding by us in any way that the work that Mr Hands did was in anyway
inappropriate
or breached any rules of professional conduct or was lacking in
care or professionalism in any way.
In particular, there is no proof of
pecuniary loss as a result of the act or omission of Mr Hands under section 122
of the Act.
The lay client, Mr Meeuwissen, rightly, and from a human
point of view, points out to us that to have Mr Hoyne here would have cost
$1,697.00 and one can appreciate that is, of course, a substantial amount of
money. It must, however, be realised that in order
to prove that a professional
person has caused the pecuniary loss it is beholden upon the person who makes
that allegation to prove
it and it is imperative in these proceedings that Mr
Hoyne should have been called for evidence, be cross-examined and have the
aired openly and fairly in an open forum. That has not been done and
certainly no criticism is made of the lay client in that regard.
brought home to him that it is a very necessary ingredient in proof of any case
of where it is sought to prove an act
or omission, the person who makes the
allegation, namely himself, supported by evidence from Mr Hoyne, has at least
been called and
given evidence and produced other evidence if necessary to
demonstrate the point which he submits. However, there is a complete
the part of the appellant to have complied with that demand of evidence. In
actual fact Mr Hoyne could have been subpoenaed
by the appellant and would have
been entitled to a professional witness fee only.
This Tribunal is not
bound by the rules of evidence except to the extent set down by it. [See
section 408 of the Act]. However,
in this case there is no opportunity or any
reason why the Tribunal should act on hearsay. In fact, to do so would cause a
injustice and in order to bring this appeal to a conclusion, having heard
from Mr N Klooger of Counsel who appears to assist the
Tribunal, and from Mr
Meeuwissen, we are satisfied that under section 169(2) of the Act this appeal is
misconceived or lacking in
substance. We therefore, by unanimous decision of
the three members, dismiss the appeal.
Mr A Southall, Q.C., Advocate
This is an appeal in respect of a claim under section 122(1)(b) of
the Act, being a claim in respect of pecuniary loss which is not
subject to the
time limitation point problem which the Learned Deputy Registrar correctly
decided. Under section 122(1)(b) it is
provided that the claim in respect of
pecuniary loss must occur as a result of an act or omission by a legal
practitioner in the
provision of legal services. In my view, for the reasons
given by the Learned Presiding Judge and Chairman of this Tribunal, it
been demonstrated by evidence or otherwise to me that there has been a pecuniary
loss which has occurred as a consequence
of an act or omission by a legal
practitioner, in this case Mr Hands.
The Chairman:
I agree with the
statements of the advocate member, Mr A Southall, Q.C. I add these comments of
my own. When a lay client is in
dispute with a legal practitioner and, prima
facie, there is merit in the dispute, it is understandable that some leniency
strict rules of evidence is exercised. In that regard, the Tribunal is
in fact required to act in accord with Section 408 of the
Act. We are concerned
with protection of the public and possess an ability, albeit limited, to redress
costs and other pecuniary
losses caused to citizens by wrongful acting legal
practitioners. The dispute jurisdiction exists under the
Legal Practice Act
This case demonstrates the injustice and harassment which
can be brought to bear upon a legal practitioner who has acted with complete
propriety and in accord with the highest standards of his profession. This lay
client who is articulate and a professional employee
has no doubt since about
July 2003 caused this barrister considerable anxiety, embarrassment, time and
money. The appellant brought
a complaint before the Ethics Committee of The
Bar, which was dismissed. He referred the barrister to the Legal Ombudsman who
no impropriety. The next step was conciliation which was apparently
unsuccessful. The next step of the appellant was to bring proceedings
the Deputy Registrar where his claim was dismissed. He now appeals to this Full
Tribunal. It is to be firmly kept in mind
that this man has a specious claim
and in my view knows it.
All these tactics and hearings have not cost him
one cent yet he has been able to make Mr Hands’ life very difficult for a
in excess of two years. With a compassion which does him great credit,
Mr Hands sought no costs of this appeal which was dismissed
on the basis that it
was misconceived and lacking in substance. Fortunately, these types of cases
are not all that common. This
appellant brings strong censure from
These comments are in no way intended to reflect upon the many
genuine members of the public with legitimate claims.
I note that the
Legal Profession Act 2004
no longer allows appeals from disputes at first
The appeal is dismissed.
.......................................................................
Chairperson
of Legal Profession Tribunal
1. Copies of this document will be provided by the Tribunal to the client, the
legal practitioner, the Legal Ombudsman, and the recognised
professional
association that originally handled the dispute.
2. More information about the operation of the Tribunal can be found on the
Tribunal’s website at
www.legalpt.vic.gov.au
Tribunal reference: T0074 of 2004
Name and address of
Mr Bob Meeuwissen
4 Mount Pleasant Drive
MT WAVERLEY VIC 3149
Tel: 9807 3478
Mob: 0422 954 343
Name, address, and reference of legal
practitioner:
Mr Alan Hands
C/- Clerk P
P J Roberts Pty Ltd
Tel: 9225 7000
Fax: 9225 8951
RPA and its reference: The Victorian Bar Inc.
Ref: BAR/04/003
CONCERNING A DISPUTE
between Mr Bob Meeuwissen
(the “client”) and Mr Alan Hands (the “legal
practitioner”).
ORDER OF FULL TRIBUNAL ON APPEAL
HEARING BEFORE: Full Tribunal constituted by His Honour Judge Dee Q.C.
(Chairperson) and Mr A Southall Q.C. and Mr K Stone (Members)
HEARING: 7 November 2005
DATE OF ORDER: 7 November 2005
SECTION(S) OF LEGAL PRACTICE
ACT UNDER WHICH HEARD: 169
ATTENDANCES: Mr N Klooger appeared to assist the Full Tribunal.
Mr B Meeuwissen appeared in
Mr A Hands appeared in person.
THE FULL TRIBUNAL
LEGAL PROFESSION TRIBUNAL
having found under section 169(2) that the
appeal is misconceived and lacking in substance
ORDERS THAT
the appeal be
.......................................................................
Chairperson
of Legal Profession Tribunal
I CERTIFY that this order, signed by me and stamped with the seal of
the Legal Profession Tribunal, correctly and fully sets out the
order made by
the Full Tribunal of the Legal Profession Tribunal on 7 November
.............................................................
of Legal Profession Tribunal
1. Copies of this document will be provided by the Tribunal to the client, the
legal practitioner, the Legal Ombudsman, and the recognised
professional
association that originally handled the dispute.
2. Any party may appeal against this order to the Court of Appeal, but only on a
question of law:
Legal Practice Act
section 170.
3. Any party, after giving written notice to the other party, may enforce this
order by filing a copy of this document free of charge
in the Magistrates'
Legal Practice Act
section 135.
4. More information about the operation of the Tribunal can be found on the
Tribunal’s website at
www.legalpt.vic.gov.au
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter