URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VRAT/2008/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:38:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Collins (GRE) - App 07 2008 [2008] VRAT 7 (7 July 2008)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
Appeal Number 7 of
In the matter of an Appeal
MR DAVID COLLINS
AGAINST THE PENALTY OF THREE YEARS DISQUALIFICATION IMPOSED BY GREYHOUND
RACING VICTORIA FOR BREACHING GREYHOUND AUSTRALIASIA RULE
JUDGE HICKS
, His Honour
Mrs M. Long,
Mr I. Vigor, Adviser
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT MELBOURNE ON MONDAY 7
JULY 2008 AT 10.28 A.M.
DR B. WILLIAMS appeared on behalf of Greyhound Racing Victoria.
MR D. COLLINS appeared on his own behalf.
(His Honour Judge Hicks)
D E C I S I O N
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal by Mr David Collins against the decision
of the Stewards of Greyhound Victoria made on 28 April 2008.
On that date
Greyhound racing stewards found the appellant guilty of breaching Greyhound
Australasian Racing Rule 125(1)(g) and
disqualified the appellant for a period
of three years effective from 28 April 2008. Greyhound Australasian Racing
Rule 125(1)(g)
states "any person who wilfully assaults, obstructs,
impedes, abuses, interferes, threatens or insults the board, commission or any
member of the board, commission, a club, any member of the committee of a club,
or any steward, any other official of the board,
commission or of a club in any
way or in any place including the vicinity of the place where the inquiry is
taking place, is guilty
of an offence".
At the hearing before the Stewards the appellant pleaded guilty to the
offence. He has also indicated to this Tribunal that this
matter he now appeals
is a question of penalty only. The circumstances of the offence, that at
approximately 6.40 p.m. at the Greyhound
Racing Meeting at Warragul on 16
October 2007, the appellant entered the official inspection kennel area at such
race meeting and
then assaulted the officiating vet Dr Tim Bowden with a punch
to the left side of his head.
At the Stewards hearing Dr Tim Bowden, the veterinary surgeon, gave
evidence to the effect that he was inspecting dogs prior to
Race 1 as part of
his normal officiating duties in the kennel area, when he saw out the corner of
his eye Mr Collins approaching
him and the next moment Dr Bowden stated, he gave
evidence, he was struck on the left hand side of the face by a punch.
said that the punch was of such force that it caused him to rock
slightly on his feet but that he did not fall over.
The appellant then made an enquiry of persons in the room as to where
the Steward Mr Polson was and commenced to leave the area.
Before leaving such
area he turned back to Dr Bowden whom he then had just assaulted and stated to
the effect "I'm not finished
with you yet". The circumstances leading up to the
event in question, the events of 16 October 2007 have as their genesis an
which occurred at the Warragul Greyhound Race Meeting held on 4
September 2007. On that day the appellant's dog was required to
be vetted and
following the examination in the vet's room Dr Bowden found his dog to have an
injury and the dog in question was stood
down from racing for seven days.
This caused the appellant on that date to become upset and agitated
whereupon he chested Mr Polson the Steward as officiating at
such meeting. As a
result of the appellant's chesting Mr Polson at the Warragul Greyhound Race
Meeting on 4 September 2007 the appellant
was charged with breaching Greyhound
Racing Rule 125(1)(g) as a person who engages in conduct which is
detrimental to the interests
of Greyhound Racing Industry.
The inquiry by Stewards as to the incident on 4 September 2007 was
heard by Stewards on 16 October 2007. On that date Mr Collins
the appellant had
pleaded not guilty. Several witnesses were called at the Steward's Inquiry
including Mr Polson the Steward and
Dr Bowden the victim in the present matter.
As a result of the Stewards Inquiry on 16 October 2007 he was found guilty and
the appellant
was disqualified for a period of four years. The appellant then
left the Steward's Inquiry.
The inquiry by the Stewards on 16 October 2007 was conducted at
Cranbourne on that date and finished sometime by mid afternoon.
The appellant
Mr Collins then unfortunately and quite regrettably decided not to let matters
rest there. At some later stage on
16 October 2007 the appellant left the
Steward's Inquiry at Cranbourne and after a period of time made his way to the
Warragul Greyhound
Race Meeting which had been conducted on that evening on 16
October 2007. At about 6.40 p.m. on that evening the appellant then
entered the
official inspection area, he'd approached the veterinary surgeon Dr Bowden and
then assaulted him.
It is this incident of punching Dr Bowden at the Greyhound Racing
Meeting on 16 October 2007 is the subject matter of this appeal
before this
Tribunal. The appellant was then charged with assaulting Dr Bowden by Stewards
who then conducted a subsequent inquiry
into the matter on 28 April 2008 and
disqualified the appellant for a period of three years which is now the subject
matter of this
appeal. There are two additional matters which the Tribunal
desires to note. The first is that as a result of the Steward's Inquiry
the first incident, being the incident which arose at the Warragul Greyhound
Race Meeting on 4 September 2007 when the Steward
Mr Polson was chested and
where Stewards subsequently issued and conducted an inquiry on 16 October
2007 and found Mr Collins guilty.
He was disqualified for a period of four years and then appealed
against that matter. The appeal by this Tribunal into Mr Collins'
actions on 4
September 2007 was conducted by His Honour Judge Williams on 25 January 2008.
On appeal, which was conducted by way
of a contested matter, the appellant was
found guilty by the Tribunal however his period of disqualification was reduced
disqualified for a period of six months only. The second matter that
the Tribunal desires to note is the appellant was criminally
charged regarding
the assault on the veterinary surgeon Dr Bowden on 16 October 2007 and was
dealt with on 18 February 2008 and suffered
a without conviction fine of some
What is then is the question of appropriate penalty. In this matter
the appellant has pleaded guilty. I have taken that matter
into account by way
of mitigation of sentence. Further I accept that the appellant is totally
contrite and genuinely remorseful
for his actions. He has both via a letter and
personally apologised to Dr Bowden. I also accept on the material placed
that apart from the first incident which occurred at the Warragul
Greyhound Race Meeting on 4 September 2007 the appellant has a
clean sheet, that
is apart from one very minor matter, he has not been in trouble with the
Stewards for over some 17 years of training
in the greyhound industry.
The appellant can properly be described as a trainer with only a small
team but he clearly has a passion for the greyhound industry
and he has been
quite successful in the greyhound industry. He has twice won awards in the
Gippsland area for his greyhound training.
I've taken in to account also the
appellant is now nearly
60 years of age and any period of
disqualification upon him at such an age would greatly interfere with his love
of the greyhound
industry. It is also to be noted that besides being a licensed
trainer the appellant voluntarily by way of community radio, conducts
sessions and is an active promoter of the greyhound industry on such sessions.
I also accept the appellant's evidence that he gave both at the
Steward's Inquiry on 28 April 2008 and what he stated before this
Tribunal of
today's date. That the events in question were out of character for him and
that he has been a life long sportsperson
participating in racquet ball, golf,
football and cricket and has never been at all in any trouble with officiating
persons in the
past. I accept what he stated to the Stewards and before this
Tribunal that he's had considerable medical complications with his
that he has suffered several traumatic episodes concerning his heart and
subsequent operations.
I also accept that the appellant has been on medication and this may
have contributed and affected his behaviour on the night in
Nevertheless the appellant's actions on this night were quite appalling. First
on 16 October 2007 at Cranbourne he attended
a Steward's Inquiry into his own
conduct. The Stewards then conduct a perfectly proper inquiry at Cranbourne
into the appellant's
behaviour back on 4 September 2007.
They make a finding against him which he did not like, and whereupon he
quite deliberately and intentionally seeks out a witness
who gave evidence
against him and goes to the Warragul Greyhound Race Meeting later that night and
seeks out veterinary surgeon Dr
Bowden who was one of the witnesses who gave
evidence against him at the Steward's Inquiry and without warning comes up to
who's doing no more than his normal officiating duties, and
assaults him by punching him in the left side of the face.
In my opinion this incident bears a very high level of culpability. It
is an action where a licensed person who's dissatisfied
with the Stewards
conducting of an inquiry into the matter and in particular where he's
dissatisfied with a witness and then goes
out deliberately to seek that witness
and then assaults that witness later that night. General deterrents must have a
significant
part to play in the sentencing exercise. Officials in the industry
must be protected and particularly protected by persons who intentionally
deliberately go out of their way to assault them.
In addition it's an aggravating factor in my opinion, in this whole
matter, that the very person assaulted was a witness in an earlier
Inquiry. Dr Bowden was doing no more and no less than being a witness. He and
other officiating members of the industry
deserve better and must be protected
from conduct such as this. This is a far more serious matter than the chesting
of the Steward
back on 4 September 2007. This is an action of someone seeking a
witness out. Being dissatisfied with that witness and criminally
In all the circumstances whilst this Tribunal clearly takes into
account the powerful matters put on Mr Collins' behalf by way of
of penalty, this Tribunal treats the matter before it as a very serious one
indeed, and despite the somewhat savage consequences
to Mr Collins in
considering his age and love of the industry and his excellent record, this
Tribunal disqualifies him for a period
of three years effective from 28 April
The message needs to be delivered that conduct such as this will not be
tolerated. If it was not for the excellent character of
Mr Collins, his
excellent background and also the medical matters put on his behalf, I can
state the penalty would have been quite
high. I should add that this decision
is mine and mine alone but I'm most thankful being able to consult and receive
the experience
and wisdom of my two colleagues on this matter. I order a refund
of the appellant's deposit however. Thank you.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (30.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter