URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2025/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:43:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Flinders Lane Pty Ltd at Melbourne Wine Room [2025] VicLiqComm 6; (30 July 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application under
section 153
Control Reform Act 1998
by 247 Flinders Lane Pty Ltd for an internal review
of a decision by a delegate to grant an application for a restaurant and cafe
licence for the premises known as Melbourne Wine Room, located at 247-251
Flinders Lane, Melbourne
Commission:
Mr John Larkins, Chair
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair
Mr Steven Brnovic, Commissioner
Appearances
Mr Martin Towey, Counsel for 247 Flinders Lane
Mr Marc Barnes and Ms Wendy Barnes for the Internal Review
Ms Sara Kong, Counsel Assisting the
Date of Hearing: 11 June 2025
Date of Decision: 30 July 2025
Date of Reasons: 30 July 2025
The Commission has determined to vary the decision of the
delegate and grant the application for a restaurant and cafe licence subject
the conditions set out in Appendix A
John Larkins
Original Application
19 March 2024, liquor consultant, Mr Peter Aldred, on behalf of 247 Flinders
Lane Pty Ltd (
) applied to the Victorian Liquor Commission
) under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for a restaurant and cafe
licence for premises located at 247-251 Flinders Lane (
Melbourne Wine Room (
Original Application
Premises are located within a five-story building named ‘Ross
House’, which is heritage listed and spans from Flinders
Flinders Lane.
way of the Original Application, the Applicant sought to operate as a restaurant
with an ancillary wine room business.
the Original Application was made, the fit out of the venue was in progress. The
Applicant advised they would be opening for
business in March 2025. The venue
officially opened for business on 24 April 2025.
Applicant sought to trade between 7am and 3am the following day, 7 days a week.
The Applicant also sought a maximum capacity of
400 patrons in the internal part
of the Premises. No external patron capacity was sought.
accordance with section 33(1) of the LCR Act, a copy of the Original Application
was served on the Chief Commissioner of Police
and the local licensing
) on 1 May 2024. On 12 June 2024, Victoria Police advised the
Commission that it did object to the grant of the application unless
Applicant agreed to the following conditions (in summary):
(a) the licensee shall install and maintain a CCTV system at all times.
(b) signs are to be displayed in all areas subject to camera surveillance and
“For the safety and security of patrons and staff this area is
under electronic surveillance”.
(c) the licensee shall erect signs at all patron exits asking patrons to respect
the amenity of the area.
(d) when live or recorded amplified music other than background music is
provided, crowd controllers licensed under the
Private Security Act 2004
be employed at a ratio of 2 crowd controllers for the first 100 patrons and 1
crowd controller for each additional 100 patrons
to monitor the behaviour of
patrons at any private function over 100 patrons.
Applicant informed the Commission that it would accept all such proposed
conditions. Victoria Police subsequently advised they
no longer objected.
accordance with
, a copy of the Original Application was served on the
City of Melbourne (
) on 1 May 2024. On 24 May 2024, the Council
informed the Commission that it did not object.
Commission received five objections to the Original Application from local
residents (
). The Objectors’ primary concern related to
amenity, especially noise levels and safety due to potential anti-social
15 July 2024, the Applicant responded to the objections and highlighted that the
Premises is located in the Central Business District
) of Melbourne
where there is no requirement for a council planning permit to supply liquor.
The Applicant also emphasised that the
Premises had no external capacity and
there would be an airlock installed at the entrance.
five Objectors maintained their objection to the Original Application. Only one
of the Objectors, Mr Marc Barnes, expressed specific
concerns in relation to the
late trading hour of 3am.
9 January 2025, the restaurant and cafe licence was granted by a delegate of the
Commission (
Original Decision
) with all conditions included as was
proposed by Victoria Police.
to section 9A(1), a restaurant and cafe licence authorises the licensee to
supply liquor on the licensed premises for consumption
on the licensed premises
where the predominant activity carried out at all times on the premises is the
preparation and serving of
meals to be consumed on the licensed premises
Predominant Activity Requirement
to section 9A(1)(a), a restaurant and cafe licence authorises the licensee to
supply liquor during ordinary trading hours
(as defined in
between 11pm on any particular day until 1am on the following day and subject to
any other times determined by the Commission
and specified in the licence for
consumption on the licensed premises.
9A(3)(a) further provides that a restaurant and cafe Licence is subject to the
condition that “tables and chairs must
be placed in position on the
licensed premises so as to be available for at least 75% of the patrons
attending the premises at any
Application for
Internal Review
15 January 2025, Mr Marc and Mrs Wendy Barnes, who had objected to the original
application applied for an internal review of the
Application
further confirmed on 23 January 2025 that they also represented the other
Objectors under the same internal review application.
16 January 2025, the Objectors provided the following reasons for applying for
review of the Original Decision:
(a) the granting of the licence to 3am would set a ‘dangerous
precedent’. The only nearby venue with a 3am final trading
hour is Lustre
Bar, which is limited to Friday and Saturday only and operates under a late
night (on-premises) licence. The patron
capacity is also significantly lower
than 400; and
(b) the Premises is located in a council designated ‘Hot Zone’ where
there are high concentrations of residential buildings;
(c) a restaurant and cafe licence is inappropriate and there is potential to
abuse the ‘background music’ condition as
was done previously by
another venue in the same locality.
matter was ultimately listed for a hearing commencing on 11 June 2025
17 March 2025, the Objectors invited the Commissioners to their residential
precinct on Flinders Lane to gain a better understanding
of the proximity of the
area and Objectors’ homes to the Premises. On the same day, the
Commissioners also visited the Premises.
23 April 2025, the Objectors submitted (in summary):
(a) many of the nearby residential buildings are heritage listed and are unable
to undergo change to the external façade,
windows or have any
soundproofing works. Further, the heritage nature of the buildings means that
the windows installation was not
done in anticipation of sound impacts.
(b) the Premises does not differ from a wine bar. There is a strong emphasis on
hosting events in an open plan layout which mimics
a winery cellar door.
(c) community impact statements from over 40 signatures indicates substantial
objection to the 3am final trading hour. Those statements
raise concerns with
amenity detriment, particularly sleep disruption, lack of safety, increased
vandalism and more traffic congestion.
(d) there are no other premises nearby operating under a restaurant and cafe
licence with a final trading hour past 1am.
16 May 2025, the Applicant provided an acoustic report prepared by Renzo Tonin
& Associates (Acoustic Report), in which it
was stated:
(a) background music in all areas of the Premises will achieve Environmental
Protection Authority (
) compliance given the intervening distance,
high environmental background noise levels, building construction, and shielding
by other buildings.
(b) speakers would not be located near the east or north façade windows.
Windows and doors shall be closed during the night
period except for the access
and egress.
(c) if louder music levels are sought, 15mm acrylic shall be fixed in front of
the existing 6.38mm glass windows along the east of
the Premises, in particular
to any area proximate to speakers.
(d) patrons will be encouraged to enter the licensed area, rather than
congregate outside. This shall also be managed by security.
Acoustic Report also contained information as to noise and amenity plan measures
including measures to be taken by management
and staff to ensure patrons do not
cause nuisance or annoyance beyond the land;
(a) installation of appropriate signage throughout the venue and in common areas
instructing patrons on expected behaviour, including
minimising noise levels in
outdoor areas.
(b) maintenance of a register for any complaints.
(c) a telephone number to contact the Premises, provided on the internet and a
notice put on the door and linked to the complaints
(d) deliveries and waste collections shall not occur after 10pm, and before 7am
weekdays or 9am all other days.
(e) emptying bottles into bins or glass crushing shall not occur after 10pm, and
before 7am weekdays or 9am all other days. Noise
enclosures are to be used for
any bottle crushing.
the Hearing, the Objectors confirmed that their main concern was the trading of
liquor until 3am. The Objectors also raised concern
having been installed on the Premises and no airlock having been installed on
the Premises despite the commitment
to do so set above. Collectively, these were
the key concerns from the Objectors.
Martin Towey, solicitor on behalf of the Applicant, indicated that an airlock
would be installed, and the speaker would be removed
immediately.
the course of the Hearing, Mr Towey also informed the Commission that his client
agreed to a revised final trading hour of 1am
(as opposed to 3am) (
Original Application
) at this time. He also repeated that his client would
proceed with the installation of the airlock. A revised venue management plan
would also be provided to the Commission.
Post-Hearing
submissions
20 June 2025, Mr Towey submitted the revised venue management plan on behalf of
his client, which contained information as to the
supply of liquor being limited
to up to 1am and a plan against gender-based violence
Material before the Commission
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the materials before the
delegate. The Commission also received and considered
the following
(a) Original Decision, dated 9 January 2025.
(b) Review Application, dated 15 January 2025.
(c) Submissions received from the Objectors on 16 January 2025.
(d) Submissions received from the Applicant on 23 January 2025.
(e) Further material submitted by the Objectors on 23 April 2025.
(f) Acoustic Report, submitted by the Applicant on 16 May 2025.
(g) Reply material submitted by the Objectors on 23 May 2025.
(h) Comment on ‘background music’ from Renzo & Tonin, dated 20
(i) Draft Melbourne Winery Venue Management Plan, received 20 June 2025.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review
of part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under
section 152, the decision made by the delegate in
the Original Decision is
a reviewable decision and the Objectors are an eligible person to apply for a
review of that decision. The
Review Application was made pursuant to
section 153.
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the Original Decision; or
(b) sets aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Amended Original
Application. In this case, the Commission must decide whether to:
(a) grant the Amended Original Application and, if so, whether to do so subject
to conditions;
(b) refuse to grant the Amended Original
Application.
Determination of a contested application
the LCR Act, an application for the grant of a licence may be contested or
uncontested. The Original Application was contested,
with five objections
received under division 5 of part 2 within the relevant
an application is an contested application, pursuant to
section 47(1):
Subject to Division 3, the Commission must,
after the period for making an objection under Division 5 has expired, including
any extension
of time granted for making an objection, grant or refuse a
contested application.
47 empowers the Commission to refuse to grant the Review Application on any of
the grounds set out in Section 44(2), including
(a) the granting of the application would detract from or be detrimental to the
amenity of the area in which the premises to which
the application relates are
situated. (section 44(2)(b)(i)); and
(b) the granting of the application would be conducive to or encourage harm
(section44(2)(b)(ii)).
the purposes of the LCR Act, the amenity of an area is defined as being the
quality that the area has of being pleasant and agreeable.
Factors that may be
taken into account in determining whether granting a licence would detract from
or be detrimental to the amenity
of the area include:
(a) the possibility of nuisance of vandalism;
(b) the harmony and coherence of the environment;
(c) any other prescribed matters.
the definition of “amenity” for the purposes of the LCR Act is not
limited by these factors.
the internal review power
172D(3) and 172U(3)(b) require the Commission, in exercising its internal review
power, to have regard to the objects of
the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines in respect of the regulation of liquor issued by the Minister. The
objects of the
LCR Act are set out at section 4(1) as
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
4(2) further provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament
that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or
imposed by this Act
must be exercised and performed with due regard to harm
minimisation.
3(1) defines “harm” as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol,
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury or
property damage.
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker;
(b) may consider further information, material or
Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in
section 44(2) are relevant considerations, the determination
of a contested
application is ultimately to be made pursuant to sections 47(1) and 157(1)
at the discretion of the Commission, with
reference to the objects of the LCR
section 49, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the
grant of an application.
Conduct of an inquiry
Section 47(3)
provides that the Commission may have regard to any matter it considers relevant
and make any enquiries it considers
appropriate. The Commission is required to
give the applicant and objectors an opportunity to be heard concerning the
application.
172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit
and is bound by the rules of natural
Issues for determination on review
deciding whether to exercise its discretion to affirm, vary or set aside the
Original Decision and in turn grant or refuse the
Original Application that is
the subject of the Review Application, the Commission must determine the
following key issues:
(a) whether the Commission is satisfied that the Predominant Activity
Requirement is met;
(b) whether the granting of the Amended Original Application would detract from
or be detrimental to the amenity of the area in which
the Premises to which the
application relates are situated;
(c) whether the grant of the Amended Original Application would be conducive to
or encourage harm or be contrary to the objects of
the LCR Act; and
(d) having considered the previous issues, whether the Amended Original
Application should be granted or refused, having regard to
the objects of the
of these issues is discussed in turn.
Predominant Activity
Requirement
Towey submitted that the Applicant’s director, Mr Eddie Muto, has
extensive experience in the hospitality industry and has
operated multiple
Premises has an extensive a la carte menu with food available for purchase at
red line plan for the Premises shows a large-scale commercial kitchen, which the
commissioners visited on 13 May 2025.
the Applicant proposes to offer events and functions at the Premises, they are
not the Applicant’s predominant activity
at the Premises. Overall, the
Commission is prepared to accept on this occasion that the Applicant’s
predominant activity at
all times is the preparation and service of meals to be
consumed on the Premises. It has been much assisted in coming to this conclusion
at this stage by the reduction in hours of operation to 1am. Should the
applicant wish to attempt to vary the licence in the future
to 3am then this
will again raise the issue of whether there is a more appropriate licence which
should be applied for. In the meantime,
the Commission will seek to reinforce
the central elements of the restaurant and café licence by a condition
requiring food
availability at all times the licensed premises is in
noted above, the Applicant’s Amended Original Application contains a final
trading hour of 1am (as opposed to 3am). The Applicant
has also informed the
Commission that the outdoor speaker would be removed, and an airlock installed
at the Premises’ entrance.
The Commission considers that these measures
would assist in mitigating the risk of unreasonable noise impacting the amenity
latest venue management plan also contains information about a complaints
register and a phone number for anyone to contact if
they have any
the Commission is satisfied, that subject to the conditions detailed in Appendix
A would not detract from or be detrimental
to the amenity of the area.
the imposition of the conditions as set out in Appendix A, the Commission
is satisfied that adequate controls exist over the
supply and consumption of
liquor at the Premises and that the grant of a restaurant and cafe licence in
this instance would not be
conducive to or encourage
Whether the Amended Original Application should be granted
having regard to the objects of the LCR Act
the Commission is satisfied that no grounds for refusal exist under section
44(2), the Commission must still exercise its
discretion whether or not to grant
the Amended Original Application. Such a discretion must be exercised by the
Commission with regard
to any other relevant considerations, as well as with
regard to the objects of the LCR Act.
all reasons discussed above, the Commission is of the opinion that a grant of
the Amended Original Application would be in furtherance
of the objects outlined
in section 4(1)(b) and section 4(1)(c) and not contrary to the objects of the
Decision on review
regard to all the matters set out above, the Commission has determined to set
aside the Original Decision of the delegate and
to exercise its discretion to
vary the decision of the delegate and grant the application for a restaurant and
cafe licence subject
to the conditions set out in
Appendix A.
The preceding 57 paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Decision of Mr John Larkins (Chairperson), Mr James
(Deputy Chair) and Mr Steven Brnovic
(Commissioner).
General information
Any reference to the
Liquor Regulator below is a reference to the Victorian Liquor Commission, or any
successor statutory office,
body or officer however named, under the
Control Reform Act 1998
(LCR Act) or successor legislation, that has powers
and carries out regulatory functions equivalent to the Victorian Liquor
Commission.
This licence is a restaurant and
cafe licence and authorises the licensee to supply liquor on the licensed
premises for consumption
on the licensed premises during the trading hours
specified below.
Restaurant & Cafe Conditions
This licence is subject to the following conditions:
(a) the predominant activity carried out at all times on the premises must be
the preparation and serving of meals for consumption
on the licensed premises;
(b) tables and chairs must be placed in position on the licensed premises so as
to be available for at least 75% of the patrons attending
the premises at any
one time; and
(c) the licensee must not permit –
(i) the live performance of any musical works; or
(ii) the playing of any recorded musical works - on the premises at higher than
background music level at any time outside ordinary
trading hours.
Condition (c) does not apply to music performed or played on the licensed
premises outside ordinary trading hours as part of a function
that is held in an
area of the premises that is set aside for the exclusive use of persons who have
booked a table in that area and
their guests, and is attended only by those
persons and their guests.
The licensee shall not cause or permit undue detriment to
the amenity of the area to arise out of or in connection with the use of
premises to which the licence relates during or immediately after the trading
hours authorised under this licence.
Special conditions
CCTV System
The licensee shall install and maintain a CCTV system at all times. Signs, as
described below, are to be displayed in all areas subject
surveillance. Such signs shall read: "For the safety and security of patrons and
staff this area is under electronic surveillance".
The licensee shall erect signs at all patron exits asking patrons to respect
the amenity of the area.
When recorded amplified music other than background music is provided: Crowd
controllers, licensed under the
Private Security Act 2004
, are to be employed at
a ratio of 2 Crowd controllers for the first 100 patrons and 1 crowd controller
for each additional 100 patrons
to monitor the behaviour of patrons at any
private function of over 100 patrons.
No speakers are to be installed and used outside the premises.
By 7 November 2025 the licensee must install an airlock at the front entrance
at Flinders Lane and otherwise maintain the airlock.
Maximum capacities
400 patrons
Trading hours
ANZAC Day Between 12 noon and 1am the following
On any other day Between 7am and 1am the following morning.
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
As to the meaning of
“licensing inspector”, see section 3.
Section 157(2) to (5) further
prescribes the manner in which the Commission is to undertake internal
LCR Act, sections 44, 49 and
LCR Act, sections 44 and
LCR Act, section 3(1)
(definition of “contested application”).
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2012] VSCA 325
confirms that harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act
and therefore the primary consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although
not to the exclusion of the other objects).
LCR Act, section 157(2).
LCR Act, section 157(3).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (888 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter