URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICCAT/1998/1322.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Central Equity v Port Phillip CC Central Equity v Port Phillip CC [1998] VICCAT 1322 (31 December 1998)
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
Land and Dimensions
AMENDMENT OF THE PERMIT APPLICATION
THE SITE AND LOCALITY
THE PROPOSAL
Total 115 apartments
THE PLANNING SCHEME PROVISIONS AND PLANNING POLICY
The Zone and Overlay Controls
State Planning Policy Framework
Local Planning Policy Framework
Policy Basis
Use of Land
Neighbourhood Character, Heritage and Urban Design
Landscaping
Residential Development
THE PERMIT APPLICATION
Orderly Planning
Architecture
The Public Realm
Urban Design
Private Open Space
Car Parking
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
NO: 1998/52420
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON THURSDAY 3
DECEMBER 1998
Anthony Liston, Presiding Member
Struan Gilfillan, Member
Applicant for Review/Permit Applicant Central Equity Ltd
Responsible Authority Port Phillip City Council
Respondent/Objector W F (Bill) Stephen
NATURE OF APPLICATION
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
review of a decision
to refuse to grant a permit
Permit Application No 558/98/C
Multi Dwellings, 115 dwellings in a 10 storey building with associated car
39 Dorcas Street, South Melbourne
Land and Dimensions
Frontage 48.75 metres
Depth 50.12 metres
Area 2443 sq. metres
: This is a portion of a larger site of 9200 sq. metres)
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING/OVERLAY CONTROLS
Port Phillip Planning Scheme (Mixed Use Zone/Design and Development Overlay
(Schedule II)) Environmental Audit Overlay.
APPEARANCES
Mr John Carey, Solicitor of Best Hooper, Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Responsible Authority, Port Phillip City Council.
Mr Carey called Mr Kent
Dodgshun, Urban Designer of Edaw (Australia) Pty Ltd as a witness in support of
his submissions.
Mr W F (Bill) Stephen, respondent/objector, appeared on his own behalf.
Mr Robert Osborn Q C with Mr Christopher Townshend, Barrister, instructed by
Nathan Cooper Hall, Solicitors, appeared on behalf of
the applicant for review
and permit applicant, Central Equity Ltd. Mr Osborn and Mr Townhsend called Mr
Hank Span, Architect of
the Span Group Architects, Ms Catherine Heggan, Town
Planner, of Fulcrum Town Planners, Mr Des Grogan, Traffic Engineer of Grogan
Richards Pty Ltd and Mr Tim Biles, Town Planner of Contour Planning, as
witnesses in support of his submissions.
The parties and the witnesses in the appeal made both verbal and written
submissions and a number of photographs, plans and other
documents were
tendered to the Tribunal. The Tribunal inspected the appeal site and its
AMENDMENT OF THE PERMIT APPLICATION
At the commencement of the hearing Mr Osborn applied to amend the permit
application by the substitution of amending plans, plans
drawn by the Span
Group Architects, drawings numbered P01A to P06A. No person opposed the
amendment of the permit application in
this way, the Tribunal ordered the
amendment of the application under the provisions of Clause 64 of
Schedule 1 of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(VCAT Act).
THE SITE AND LOCALITY
The appeal site is a regular parcel of land located on the south side of Dorcas
Street approximately 45 metres west of Wells Street
in South Melbourne. The
appeal site is located in the north-western corner of a larger lot also owned
by Central Equity Pty Ltd,
this large lot has an area of some 9,200 square
metres and is bounded by Dorcas Street, Wells Street and Bank Street with a 4
wide carriageway easement connecting Dorcas and Bank Streets along its
western boundary. This larger Central Equity site which includes
site forms the eastern third of a much larger site bound by Dorcas Street,
Wells Street, Bank Street and Kingsway. This
is the site of the former South
Melbourne Tramways depot, it is cleared, relatively flat, and is at present
used for temporary Car
The surrounding locality, between St Kilda Road and Kingsway, comprises of a
mix of medium rise, two high rise commercial and residential
developments. In
the streets which immediately abut the tramways depot site more utilitarian
commercial uses predominate, and the
scale of the existing buildings in this
location is lower.
THE PROPOSAL
The proposal is for a 115 flats in a 10 storey building with associated car
parking, the proposal is described in some detail in
the following extract from
Ms Higgins' submission:
"The proposal envisages the development of a 10 storey building for the
purposes of apartments and associated car parking.
The building provides for 115 apartments as follows:
1 x bedsit apartment
39 x one bedrooms
55 x two bedrooms
20 x three bedrooms
Total 115 apartments
All apartments within the complex have private open space area ranging from
3 to 4 sq m to 36 sq m of ground floor and podium level
open space areas. A
communal open space is provided on the rooftop of the second level car park
building. The communal area includes
swimming pool, tennis court and open
paved courtyard area and gymnasium.
Car parking is located within a two level building to the area (south) of
the apartment building. The car parking area is accessed
via a 4m wide
carriageway easement along the western boundary of the site. The carriageway
will function in a oneway north-south
direction so that vehicles enter off
Dorcas Street and exit to Wells Street. The car parking area is fully enclosed
and accommodates
118 cars (including one tandem space). The apartment building
is to be setback 1.6m from the carriageway whilst the carpark building
rear is sited on the boundary of the site with the carriageway easement.
Pedestrian entry to the building is achieved from Dorcas Street via a large
foyer area at ground level. This area also provides for
mail delivery and has
a security entrance and lighting for the safety of residents and visitors. As
with most high rise development,
individual apartment access is from within the
building although alternative pedestrian entry can be achieved to 5 of the
level apartments directly off Dorcas Street. The height of the building
is 27.3m excluding architectural features, plant and equipment.
The overall
height of the building is approximately 34m.
The building is characterised by a two level podium base, a five level
middle section and a three level top component.
The podium base is 6.2m high and incorporates a 0.8m high treated metal
handrail on top. The Dorcas Street elevation of the building
is characterised
by expressed vertical elements that extend between ground level and the top of
the building.
At the podium base polished dark concrete wraps around the north east and
north west corners of the building. The same material is
used at the
pedestrian entry into the apartment complex from Dorcas Street with polished
black granite used as a highlight material.
The location of the pedestrian
entry is further visually identified by the proposed entry canopy. Powdered
metal pergolas stretch
between rough cast concrete columns and extend across
the face of the expressed vertical elements at street level. The pergolas
across the Dorcas Street facade to the dark polished concrete corners of the
The apartments behind the two level podium are set back 1.8m above the
podium on the Dorcas Street elevation. The top three levels
of the building
incorporate chamfered balconies so that they extend out to the property
boundaries and hang over the podium level.
The horizontally extended top level
balconies provide for a strong visual finish to the top of the building. The
central fin feature
on the Dorcas Street elevation extends over the top level
of the apartment complex and intersects with the encased lift motor
The building will be finished in neutral tones with blue highlights."
THE PLANNING SCHEME PROVISIONS AND PLANNING POLICY
This is the first application for review which raises significant planning
policy issues to come before this division of the Tribunal
since the adoption
of the new format planning scheme for the Port Phillip municipality. Within
the new scheme there is a large volume
of material which is relevant to the
decision to be made, in this decision the Tribunal will try to paint a picture
of the statutory
and policy framework relevant to this application by quoting
quite extensively from the planning scheme itself.
Necessarily the
quotations will be of selected extracts only setting out the paragraphs and dot
points which seem most useful in describing
their provisions of particular
relevance in the context of this Application for Review.
At the time of the hearing there was an amendment to the Planning Scheme,
Amendment C5, which affected local policies and schedules
relating to the land.
The parties dealt with this amendment in their submissions. On the
of December 1998, Amendment C7 was approved and gazetted, this
amendment gave effect to the new provisions found in Amendment C5.
It is these
new provisions set out below.
The Zone and Overlay Controls
The appeal site and surrounding sites fall within a Mixed Use zone under the
provisions of the Port Phillip Planning Scheme, zone
provisions are found at
Clause 32.04. The zone purposes are:
To implement the State Planning Policy Framework and the Local Planning Policy
Framework, including the Municipal Strategic Statement
and local planning
To provide for a range of residential, commercial, industrial and other uses
which complement the mixed-use function of the locality.
Dwelling is a
or permitted use within the zone. However, Clause
"Construction and Extension of Medium Density Housing and
Residential Buildings"
provides that a permit is required to construct two
or more dwellings on a lot. The clause also sets out decision guidelines,
in this particular case as the building is in excess of four storeys
in height and therefore the Good Design Guide does not apply,
these decision
guidelines do not add anything to the general decision guidelines found in
Clause 65 of the Scheme. Clause 65.01 states
65.01 Approval of an application or plan
Before deciding on an application or approval of a plan, the responsible
authority must consider, as appropriate:
* The matters set out in
of the Act.
* The State Planning Policy Framework and the Local Planning Policy Framework,
including the Municipal Strategic Statement and local
planning policies.
* The purpose of the zone, overlay or other provision.
* Any matter required to be considered in the zone, overlay or other
* The orderly planning of the area.
* The effect on the amenity of the area.
* The proximity of the land to any public land.
The review site is also affected by a design and development overlay, under the
provisions of Clause 43.02 of the planning scheme.
The clause provides that a
permit is required to construct or carry out works. The decision guidelines
applicable to the clause
provide, among other things, that the Responsible
Authority must consider as appropriate:
* The design objectives of the relevant schedule to this overlay.
* The provisions of any relevant policies and urban design guidelines.
Schedule 4 to the design and development overlay under the Port Phillip
Planning Scheme affects the St Kilda Road Queens Road, Kingsway
and Queensway
area, an area which includes the review site. The design objectives of this
schedule are:
1.0 Design objectives
To encourage development that will enhance the appearance, dignity and
spaciousness of St Kilda Road, Queens Road and the surrounding
To encourage quality landscaping and active use of setback areas as a means of
enhancing the treed boulevard character and enhancing
pedestrian safety and
To encourage landscaping which is in keeping with the character and appearance
of the area.
The area affected by Schedule 4 is divided into a series of precincts, with the
applicable precinct for this site being Precinct
DDO4-A2. The Schedule sets out
the maximum building height and related setbacks for of the precincts. Within
this precinct the maximum
building height within 5 metres of the frontage is 9
metres and beyond 5 metres the maximum building height is 45 metres, these
requirements
are discretionary. Additional decision guidelines provide that the
Responsible Authority must consider "
The St.Kilda Road Neighbourhood
The Port Phillip Design Manual
State Planning Policy Framework
The State planning policy framework is found at Clause 19 of the Planning
Scheme Ordinance. Clause 19.03 relates to design and built
form. Relevant
extracts of this aspect of State Planning Policy include:
19.03 Design and built form
19.03-1 Objective
To achieve high quality urban design and architecture that:
* Reflects the particular characteristics, aspirations and cultural identity of
the community.
* Enhances liveability, diversity, amenity and safety of the public realm.
* Promotes attractiveness of towns and cities within broader strategic
19.03-2 General Implementation
Development should achieve architectural and urban design outcomes that
contribute positively to local urban character and enhance
the public realm
while minimising detrimental impact on neighbouring properties.
For development proposals for non-residential development and multi-unit
development not covered by The Good Design Guide for Medium
Density Housing
Revision No 2, Department of Infrastructure, April 1998 planning and
responsible authorities must have regard to
the following design principles:
* Development must take into account the natural, cultural and strategic
context of its location.
* A comprehensive site analysis should be the starting point of the design
process and form the basis for consideration of height,
scale and massing of
new development.
The public realm
* The public realm, which includes main pedestrian spaces, streets, squares,
parks and walkways, should be protected and enhanced.
Pedestrian spaces
* Design of the relationship between buildings and footpaths and other
pedestrian spaces, including the arrangement of adjoining
activities,
entrances, windows, and architectural decoration, should enhance the visual and
social experience of the observer.
Architectural quality
* New development should aspire to the high standards in architecture and urban
* Any rooftop plant, lift over-runs, service entries, communication devices,
and other technical attachment should be treated as
part of the overall
Landscape architecture
* Recognition should be given to the setting in which buildings are designed
and the integrating role of landscape architecture.
Planning authorities should emphasise urban design policies and frameworks for
key locations or precincts.
Local Planning Policy Framework
The Municipal Strategic Statement (MSS) is found at Clause 21 of the Planning
Scheme Ordinance. The MSS deals with residential land
uses at Clause 21.02-1
relevant parts of which include:
21.02-1 Residential land use
Social perspective
Port Phillip is home to many different cultures, families and individuals, all
living closely together and all with their own particular
needs. It is
important that the range of housing choices, facilities and services available
in the city reflects the diversity and
needs of its people.
What do we want to achieve?
* A high level of amenity for residents - including adequate open space,
* Design excellence for all residential development, with the emphasis on
complementing and enhancing the built and natural environment
of Port Phillip,
and conserving resources and energy.
* A range of housing types to suit the diverse needs of the Port Phillip's
community and to provide reasonable access to low-cost
housing for low-income
households.
With the exception of particular policies relating to housing, gaming, and
outdoor advertising, local planning policy within the
Planning Scheme is dealt
with on a neighbourhood basis with the review site falling within the South
Melbourne, Albert Park and Middle
Park Neighbourhood. The Scheme provisions
relating to the this neighbourhood are found at Clause 22.03. Each
neighbourhood is then
further subdivided into areas, where the review site
falls within the Kingsway and Albert Road commercial and residential area with
the most relevant planning policies including:
22.03-5 AREA 5 - ALBERT ROAD, KINGSWAY & ALBERT ROAD COMMERCIAL &
RESIDENTIAL AREA
Policy Basis
The Municipal Strategic Statement encourages the consolidation of the major
office and commercial uses in this area, together with
the development of
higher density residential uses to achieve urban consolidation
objectives.
It is important to maximise opportunities for the preferred new commercial
and residential uses to capitalise on this area's important
strategic location
and excellent infrastructure.
Use of Land
To encourage a mixture of commercial and residential developments in
appropriate locations to support the mixed use role and function
of the wider
St Kilda Road and Queens Road area, and to discourage new warehouse or
industrial uses from being established.
To ensure that new development provides adequate on site parking and that
traffic associated by the use uses appropriate transport
routes to access the
Neighbourhood Character, Heritage and Urban Design
To ensure that the built form of new development complements the regionally
strategic role and function of this area as described
in the Design Objectives
of Schedules 3 and 4 to the Design and Development Overlay (Clause
To encourage urban design and streetscape improvements so that the physical
environment offers variety, interest, safety and convenience
to people in the
To encourage a high standard of amenity for new residential
developments.
To promote active street frontages at ground level within new developments
as part of creating a vibrant and visually stimulating
environment.
Any proposal to alter or construct a building in this area should be
consistent with:
The Design Objectives and requirements of Schedules 3 and 4 to the Design
and Development Overlay (Clause 43.02) in regard to building
The guidelines contained in the Port Phillip Design Manual (1998).
a) New buildings which adjoin a street frontage are designed to ensure
visual interest, safety and promote an active street frontage
Clearly defined entrances which are visible from the street;
The use of windows and other detail to provide articulation to the facade,
and avoiding the use of blank walls facing the street,
particularly at ground
floor level; and
Ensuring that all front fences are no higher than 1.5 metres or at least
50% transparent.
b) The orientation, landscaping and layout of new development is designed to
reduce energy use and makes optimum use of natural ventilation,
daylight and
solar access.
c) Buildings used for residential purposes may have a frontage setback to
allow for the provision of private or shared open space.
Landscaping
a) Landscaping should be provided within frontage setbacks, to ground floor
open space areas, and to outdoor car parking areas.
b) Where appropriate, landscaping should be provided along side and rear
boundaries.
Residential Development
a) In the Mixed Use zone, the design of residential development should
include the following features, where appropriate:
Use of internal courtyards and mews-style laneways to promote residential
Balconies and decking orientated to take advantage of solar access, or to
maximise available views."
The local policy relating to housing is also of relevance to this proposal
relevant extracts of the policy include:
22.12 HOUSING
This policy applies to new residential use and development within the City of
Port Phillip
Policy Basis
The City of Port Phillip adopted a Housing Strategy in May 1997. The
fundamental purpose of this Strategy is to encourage
`housing diversity
which contributes to the maintenance of social diversity, and to achieve this
by the facilitation of affordable,
accessible and suitable housing which meets
the needs of all groups within the community, in particular those which are
disadvantaged
within, or unable to adequately access the private housing
* To ensure that the municipality continues to be a desirable place to live
* To provide reasonable access to low cost housing for low income households
The Responsible Authority has adopted Draft Planning and Design Guidelines for
the Former Tramways Depot Site. The guidelines were
prepared and adopted after
this permit application was submitted to council. It was submitted on behalf of
the permit applicant that
it was inappropriate and unfair to retrospectively
apply such a policy to this application. In some cases such a submission may
some validity, but in this case the policy relates to urban design, which
is a live issue in any event, and the policy really only
addresses design
approaches which would inevitably be a matter of debate. Relevant parts of the
draft policy are:-
2. Site Redevelopment Vision
The City of Port Phillip is the responsible Planning Authority for this site
and wishes to ensure that this site is redeveloped to
maximise its
opportunities and positively contribute to this part of the municipality. This
site is a large island site, bound by
wide roads with no immediate residential
interface, no significant heritage or urban character value, is within an area
that is undergoing
transition from industrial and warehousing to new office and
residential uses and is within a regionally strategic location close
CBI) and excellent infrastructure. This site therefore provides an important
opportunity for commercial and residential development
which can contribute to
the municipality's commercial employment opportunities and economic base as
well as achieve urban design
and architectural excellence, a greatly improved
pedestrian environment and public realm surrounding and within the site, and
urban consolidation objectives ( Figure 2 General Land Uses Plan).
5. Site Redevelopment Opportunities
The opportunities for the redevelopment of this site are as follows:
to redevelop the site for commercial and higher density residential uses as
well as uses that serve the shopping, dining and entertainment
needs of local
workers and residents,
architecture
to encourage a high standard of contemporary architecture and urban design
that recognises the site's urban context, addresses street
frontages and main
pedestrian paths and takes advantage of landmark locations on the site,
Surrounding streets
to improve the streetscape surrounding the site particularly along Wells
Street and Kingsway and provide for the construction of a
roundabout at the
intersection of Wells and Dorcas Streets, and
Traffic permeability
to ensure that the private carriageway easement connecting Dorcas and Bank
Street immediately abutting lot 4 is able to safely and
effectively cater for
anticipated traffic volumes, 2 way traffic flow and provide good access to rear
car parking areas for lots
2, 3 ) and 4* thereby minimising vehicular entries
on the main street frontages.
6. Site Guidelines
6.2 Lot frontage and streetscape
Active frontages are to be provided to all streets and to the pedestrian
spine. An active frontage is a building frontage that encourages
interest, safety and activity on adjoining street(s) or pedestrian areas by
providing uses and entrances, windows and other
details that maximise movement.
outlook and surveillance between occupants of the building and its surrounds.
Active building frontages
thereby provides a more interesting, friendly and
safer environment for pedestrians.
Higher elements of buildings above 31 storeys should be set back to ensure
new developments do not dominate the streetscape and minimise
building bulk and
overshadowing, provide a human scale to the street, provide an interesting and
varied streetscape, maximise opportunities
for direct sun and light penetration
and reduce wind effects. Recommended setbacks are outlined below.
All residential development should be designed in accordance with the
principles contained in the City of Port Phillip Good Street
Design Guidelines
(Included in Appendix 4) and maximise individual dwelling entries and windows
at the street level.
Streetscape improvements. including additional street trees, associated
plantings. irrigation and other works. should be undertaken
as an integral part
of any proposed development.
6.3 Set backs (illustrated in Figure 6 and 7)
Ground level setbacks within the site should comply with the
Dorcas, Wells and Banks Streets- zero setback or setback consistent with
adjoining buildings.
Carriageway- 2 metre setback for buildings to the west and east of the
carriageway easement.
Proposed residential and mixed use developments may have a frontage setback
to allow the provision of private or shared open space.
Higher elements of buildings (above 3 storeys) should be set back (as
illustrated in figures 6 and 7) a minimum of.
10 metres on Kingsway, Bank, Dorcas and Wells Streets,
5 metres to either side of the carriageway easement,
6.4 Building Design
New buildings should create interest to all 4 elevations of the upper levels
and provide a sense of variety, visual interest and articulation
in the upper
facade treatment and roofscapes when viewed both individually and combined with
other buildings from immediate. intermediate
and distant vantage points.
New buildings should display excellence in contemporary design, in
architecture and urban design. The existing building styles in
the area are
mostly commercial or industrial in character with little heritage value
providing the opportunity for new buildings
to make a lasting contribution to a
new character for this site.
New buildings should be parallel to the road alignment and should be
predominantly rectilinear in plan.
THE PERMIT APPLICATION
The application was first submitted to the Responsible Authority on the
of May 1998. The application was advertised and two objections
were submitted to the Responsible Authority. These objections are
very briefly
summarised in Mr Carey's submission at paragraph 3.3. The Responsible
Authority decided to issue a Notice of Refusal
to Grant a Permit on the
of July 1998. The reasons for refusal are:
1. The proposed development is inadequately configured on the site, having
regard to inadequate setbacks from side boundaries, inadequate
provision for
two way vehicular access, inadequate provision of car parking and insufficient
provision of private open space.
2. The proposal is inconsistent with the objectives of the Good Design Guide
and Council's Municipal Strategic Statement.
3. The proposal does not achieve design excellence, is of poor architectural
design and is not site responsive, having regard to the
poor interconnection
between the building and Dorcas Street.
4. The proposal does not create a pedestrian friendly environment at ground
level and minimal opportunity has been provided for landscaping
enhance the quality of the streetscape.
5. The proposal does not provide for the proper and orderly future
development of the site.
A Victorian Planning Provisions Scheme such as the Port Phillip Planning Scheme
call for a policy based approach to the consideration
of significant projects
such as this. In the reasons below the Tribunal has attempted to distil from
the mass of policy referred
to above the factors most relevant to this project
and to then analyse the projects success at responding to these issues.
Orderly Planning
In the Tribunal's view the key focus of the planning scheme provisions and
planning policy discussed in the preceding section is
an emphasis on orderly
planning. In part this is a direct requirement, Clause 65.01 provides that
among other things in deciding
whether or not a permit should be issued orderly
planning is a consideration. More generally however, the new planning
expressed in these new Victorian Planning Provisions Schemes starts
from the proposition that planning controls should be based on
strategic approach to the planning of an area. The Port Phillip Planning
Scheme is an example of this, planning policies
and strategies are expressed in
quite considerable detail, but inevitably notwithstanding the level of detail
set out in the scheme
in many respects these planning policies provide a
framework for a strategic approach to the development of sites and sub
within neighbourhoods.
This emphasis on orderly planning is even more clearly spelt out in relation to
medium density housing. The Good Design Guide and
its predecessor Vic Code 2
required a site analysis which looks not only at the subject land but its
immediate neighbourhood, and
then call for a site responsive design. While the
Good Design Guide does not apply directly to medium density developments in
of four storeys, this aspect of the Good Design Guide approach, that is
the need for site analysis and site responsive design has
been extended to
relate to all medium density developments. The planning scheme now requires
that a site analysis and design response
is required for all medium density
development.
It is the Tribunal's view that the principal defect in this proposal is the
fact that it has been developed without any consideration
in relation to how
the balance of the Central Equity land might be developed. The Tribunal must
consider the merits of the proposal
without any knowledge of how the project
will relate to the development of the rest of the land.
Orderly planning is an important requirement of the planning scheme. Central
Equity land is an important part of the former Tramway
site , and the Tramway
site is the most significant development opportunity which has or is likely to
arise in this precinct. It
is acknowledged that the subdivision of the land
limits the degree to which the overall Tramways land can be planned as a whole,
but notwithstanding this the Tribunal is of the view that these large
individual lots should be comprehensively planned, and in particular
important for the Central Equity lot, because of the need to consider carefully
how a residential environment can be created
in this rather unprepossessing
environment.
Architecture
Another related focus of the strategic and policy framework is an emphasis on
design standards. A high standard of innovative contemporary
architecture is a
recurring theme. Good design is intended to provide environments which are
pleasant and stimulating. The amenity
of neighbours, the future occupants of a
particular use or development, and the uses of an area is to be considered and
and if possible enhanced.
A central theme of the submissions made on behalf of the permit applicants is
to describe the design of the proposed building as
"simple and
, relying on a building construction formula which results in an
affordable housing form. Mr Biles in his evidence said:
"Following on from this success, Central Equity moved into the Southbank
area and has substantially transformed an area that the marketplace
were saying in the late 1980's could not be used successfully for residential
purposes. Central Equity demonstrated that
there was a very buoyant market for
affordable housing in this area and has led the transformation of this former
commercial and
industrial area into a series of residential precincts. Whilst
it is easy to criticise the form of some of this housing, it is nevertheless
very clear that it has been highly successful in the marketplace and has
provided large numbers of people with very satisfying and
accommodation next to the central activities district.
One of the significant contributions that Central Equity has made to the
rejuvenation of medium density housing in inner-city Melbourne
is the fact that
it has been successful in what it does in locations that others would not risk
their capital.
A significant problem that confronts planners trying to manage the evolution
of land use from one activity to another is the need
to ensure that it occurs
successfully.
One of the reasons that the Southbank area was successfully converted to the
place we now regard as an important part of Melbourne
was that the initial
buildings on the site were pioneered by being affordable and relatively cheap.
This led to the perception that
this was an area that could work in the
marketplace and could achieve the vision that had been described by the Cain
Government.
Although these initial buildings are often criticised for their
bland architectural contribution to Southgate, they nevertheless
were buildings
that signalled the prospect that this was a precinct that could work
successfully, for that reason alone, they are
important contributors to the
Southgate experience."
The Tribunal does agree that there is a risk that the imposition of
increasingly stringent planning and design standards will lead
development of less affordable housing. The production of affordable housing
within the inner city is an important objective
particularly having regard to
the trends which have developed within the housing market on a metropolitan
scale over the last 5 to
It is also agreed that construction techniques are a very important factor
influencing the ultimate cost of housing in particular
for multi storey
Notwithstanding this, the Tribunal is of the view that a high standard of
design is still possible, and that ultimately for the long
term it is important
that a high standard of design is achieved so that the area as a whole
benefits, and so that future residents
are provided with a reasonable standard
of accommodation.
The proposed building was in architectural terms described as being simple and
honest. Unfortunately the Tribunal is of the view
that it is also an
unimaginative response to the opportunities created by this remarkable site.
It is considered that even within
the constraints of this affordable
construction technique, a more imaginative, site responsive, and visually
interesting building
could be achieved.
The Public Realm
There is a focus on the public realm in the policy framework of the scheme. A
recognition that streets, and the landscaping design
of streets themselves play
a vital part in creating the character and environmental standards of a
locality. The use and development
of adjoining land should enhance these
public spaces. Buildings should be attractive, they should not be overbearing,
and the use
of the land and buildings should be organised in such a way that a
lively and attractive interaction between the public and private
realms, there
"active street frontages"
. In this particular locality there
is a strong emphasis on the creation of attractive pedestrian environments, a
recognition perhaps
that in this area in particular attractive pedestrian
environments are going to be an important part of achieving a successful
in this area from its historic, commercial, semi industrial
character into a more mixed residential and commercial precinct.
The general area around the site encompassing Dorcas Street, Wells Street and
Banks Street has at present few attributes of an attractive
residential
precinct. However, to the north of the site there are a number of streets
which have been developed for residential
purposes, many of the developments
being developments of the applicant company in this case. In the Tribunal's
view the lesson to
learned from these streets to the north is that the most
attractive residential environments depend heavily on the attractiveness
street itself and its landscaping supported by the design of buildings and
associated landscaping on the adjoining private
land. A good example of this
is the north side of Coventry Street between Wells and Dodd Streets. In this
case at the intersections
the buildings have a zero setback while in between
there is a landscape setback. This approach has created a space with a highly
urban character but which could nevertheless be regarded as a good quality
residential environment.
The project relies almost entirely upon the public realm, that is the
streetscape of Dorcas Street, for the creation of a landscaped
residential
environment which it is hoped will be highly regarded by future residents of
the area. The draft policy for the former
Tramways Depot site envisages a
considerable redevelopment of the existing streetscape, and proposes a
developer contribution scheme
to fund this work. It is intended that this
permit applicant contribute to the cost of these works, but it cannot be said
current proposal considered in isolation will contribute to or enhance
the public realm generally or the landscape character of the
particular.
The proposed building is designed with a quite hard edge to Dorcas Street,
admittedly in accordance with the Council's policies for
the area. Except for
the apartments fronting the street the proposed building is essentially a multi
level building on a two level
car parking podium extending to the boundaries of
the development site. It is difficult to see how such a development form, if
over the balance of the site can ultimately enhance the character of
the area. There would be no landscaped setbacks, there will
be no glimpses
from the street into internal landscaped spaces, and it is difficult to see how
pedestrian linkages could be established
on the site.
Urban Design
The policy framework and the Design and Development Overlay set out
discretioanary approaches to urban design. Design approaches
particularly
applicable to the site and its immediate surrounds include generous height
limits recognising the potential for relatively
intensive development within
the locality. The management of the bulk of buildings through setback
requirements which envisage a
three level podium with the taller elements set
back from the base of this podium. The acceptance of a quite urban environment,
zero setbacks at the building line. A reliance on landscaping within the
street itself to provide the setting for buildings, although
recognition that residential developments may, or even should, include
landscaped private or shared open space.
The Responsible Authority's draft policy, and the recently amended planning
scheme introduces a series of height and setback requirements
designed primarily to moderate the visual impact of the proposed building and
to create a more human sense of scale at
street level. While these height and
setback requirements are discretionary, it is considered that in the context of
this particular
proposal where one basically has a broad rectilinear building
placed hard against the street alignment then the provisions set out
scheme and the policy should be regarded as a minimum standard rather than one
which can be further reduced. Had the Tribunal
been of a mind to grant a
permit in this case, it would have required the upper levels of the building to
be inset from the podium
levels by 5 metres.
Private Open Space
Another matter of concern to the Tribunal was the adequacy of the proposed open
space. The ground level dwellings have small courtyards
fronting onto Dorcas
Street, an inspection of the Park Street flats would suggest that this type of
open space is of very limited
utility particularly because of the lack of
of the balconies are larger most would have a minimum dimension of 1
metre and an area of something less than 4 sq. metres. This
can be compared
with the Good Design Guide requirement of a minimum dimension of 1.6 metres and
a minimum area of 8 sq. metres.
It was argued that this relatively minor
provision of open space or balcony space is acceptable in this type of
development in a
highly urban environment such as South Melbourne. However,
while the Tribunal accepts that some standard other than that spelt out
Good Design Guide may be acceptable and that there are many instances in which
attractive dwellings are established with little
or no open space and balcony
space, the Tribunal queries whether or not this is an appropriate standard of
design for new residential
accommodation in this day and age. Perhaps the
minimal provision of open space could be justified if the dwellings were in the
Centre, or they were part of or close to Brunswick Street in Fitzroy or
Fitzroy Street in St Kilda for example. In this case we
are dealing with a
very large number of dwellings in a fairly isolated location. There seems
little justification for a minimum
design standard.
Car Parking
In the Tribunal's mind car parking was not a major issue in this appeal but Mr
Osborn asked the Tribunal to attend to this question
given the rather confused
provisions which applied to car parking for this precinct in the planning
scheme. However, since the adoption
of Amendment C7 this confusion no longer
exists, and the ordinary provisions of the scheme apply. The Tribunal considers
it unlikely
that the ordinary car parking requirements of the scheme, or the
car parking requirements set out in the Good Design Guide, will
be particularly
applicable to developments in this area. For example Mr. Grogan derived car
parking demand for developments of this
"My firm has recently undertaken on-site parking observation surveys at a
number of Central Equity developments located in South Melbourne
The survey results indicate peak on-site parking demands of:
1. Park Street (96 Units 96 On-Site Spaces) 0.60 spaces/apartment
2. The Sovereign (109 Units 176 On-Site Spaces) 0.82 spaces/apartment
3. Southbank
Royale (146 Units 163 On-Site Spaces) 0.79 spaces/apartment.
This is considerably less than more conventional residential car parking
Within the area there are a large number of on-street car spaces usually
provided as angle spaces utilising the very wide streets
of the area. During
the working day these spaces are heavily used because of the large number of
commercial buildings in the area.
However, as the area moves from being an
essentially commercial/industrial environment to a mixed commercial and
residential environment,
there should be a better sharing of this public car
parking facility because of the temporal differences in parking demand evident
for this mix of uses. However, this may not be true all through the area as in
some places residents and their visitors would be
competing with theatre
patrons and the like for on-street car spaces. It would not be appropriate to
require the on-site provision
for visitor car parking in this case.
It would be appropriate for the Responsible Authority to undertake some
empirical research about residential parking demand in this
area generally and
introduce a parking precinct plan for the area which both modifies the ordinary
parking standards of the scheme,
but also looks at the question of whether or
not in some parts of the area it may be necessary to require visitor parking to
be provided
It is the Tribunal's conclusion that this proposal is unacceptable, primarily
because of the failure to demonstrate how the proposal
responds to the site
having regard to the future development of all the Central Equity land. This
is a key site in the area, the
area is in transition, it is important that the
overall development of the larger site results in a residential enclave of
considerable
quality and that the development of the site in concert with the
redevelopment of the public streetscapes ultimately produces an
residential environment.
The application for review by the permit applicant is disallowed. The order of
the Tribunal is that the decision of the Responsible
Authority is upheld, no
permit is granted.
PRESIDING MEMBER
K S GILFILLAN
APL:fh 130199
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter