URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2007/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
07-094 [2007] VMHRB 1 (8 January 2007)
In the review of P
An involuntary patient at
Central East Area Mental Health Service – Upton House
[2007] VMHRB 1
Date of Hearing:
Board Members
Involuntary status –
Mental Health Act 1986
(1)(e) – mental illness – consent – treatment in
less restrictive manner –
– review and revision of treatment
plan – all factors in
not taken into consideration
P was an involuntary patient diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia and
substance abuse disorder.
Ps legal representative submitted that P now accepted that she suffered from
schizophrenia and accepted that she needed treatment
and was prepared to meet
regularly with the service, but did not want to continue with the treatment that
was being prescribed for
her. She had no problem with the sodium valproate she
was taking at night, but her fortnightly injection of 50mg of risperidone
(Risperidal
Consta) was a major problem. On her instructions, P suffered side
effects from that treatment.
It was submitted that, as P agreed that she needed treatment for a mental
illness, and was prepared to continue to attend the clinic
as a voluntary
patient, the criteria in
,(d) and (e) of the Act were not satisfied.
An application for non-disclosure was lodged with the Board seeking an order
that P not be given access to certain documents or parts
of documents on her
clinical file.
(1) The Board was satisfied that to give P access to the documents relating
to the application for non-disclosure would involve the
unreasonable disclosure
of information relating to the personal affairs of a person. As such, the
application for non-disclosure
was granted.
(2) The Board was satisfied that P did appear to be mentally ill, in that she
did have a significant disturbance of thought.
(3) P’s mental illness required immediate treatment, and that
treatment could be obtained by P being subject to a community
(4) The Board found that P does not have a full understanding of the
importance of taking her medication regularly. The Board also
found, on the
basis of the history during 2006, that P has difficulty complying with her
treatment, even when she does intend to
continue taking medication. The Board
was satisfied that at the time of the hearing P was unable to consent to the
necessary treatment
for her mental illness.
(5) There was no evidence to suggest that P could receive adequate treatment
in a manner less restrictive of her freedom of decision
and action. The Board
was satisfied that P cannot receive adequate treatment for her mental illness in
a manner less restrictive
of her freedom of decision and action.
(6) The treatment plan did not show that the authorised psychiatrist had
taken into account the matters specified in
That was of particular
concern to the Board, because both P and her legal representative stressed that
P accepted that she needed
treatment for a mental illness, but said that the
major problem with her community treatment order was the side effects she was
experiencing
as a result of the particular medication prescribed for her. They
said that she would prefer to be taking olanzapine, which had
previously been
prescribed for her.
(7) On its review of the treatment plan in this matter, as required by
of the Act, the Board determined that the authorised psychiatrist had not
complied with
in making, reviewing or revising the plan.
(8) The Board ordered the authorised psychiatrist to revise the treatment
Appeal against involuntary status - appeal dismissed.
P was represented by P Dunn and A Wynne, of the Mental Health Legal Centre
Date of Decision:
8 January 2007
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
Central East Area Mental Health Service-Upton House
HEARING NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
8 January 2007
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: Ms Joan Dwyer
Community Member: Ms Christine Hayes
Psychiatrist Member: Dr David Baron
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 8 January 2007:
Doctor: Dr JK
Legal representative: Ms Paula Dunn, solicitor, of the Mental Health Legal
Centre (“MHLC”) with Ms Amanda Wynne, a solicitor
training with the
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary
patient subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
The appeal of P was therefore dismissed.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
8 January 2007
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P continues to be treated as an involuntary patient subject to a
community treatment order.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
on Involuntary Status dated 4 January 2007 prepared by Dr JK and presented to
Plan of P dated 21 December 2006, prepared by Mr KJ, case manager, and presented
to the Board.
4. Oral evidence at the hearing.
of P, dated 28 November 2006 and lodged with the Board on 1 December 2006.
6. Application for non-disclosure dated 8 January 2007
with the Board on 8 January 2007.
Section 26(8)
empowers the Board to order that a patient not be
entitled to inspect or have access to all or some of the documents to be given
to the Board for the hearing, if the Board is satisfied that to do so would (a)
cause serious harm to the patient’s health,
or the health or safety of
another person, or (b) involve the unreasonable disclosure of information
relating to the personal affairs
of any person, or (c) breach a confidentiality
provision imposed by a person who supplied information that is contained in the
The Board considered an application by Dr DC, the authorized
psychiatrist, that P not have access to
documents or entries on the
clinical file dated 14 August 2006, 21 August 2006, 29 September 2006, 7 May
2006 and 8 October 2006,
on the ground that such access would involve the
unreasonable disclosure of information relating to the personal affairs of any
, if the Board is satisfied that a person subject to a community
treatment order does not satisfy the criteria specified in
, the Board
must discharge the person from the community treatment order. Therefore, the
Board considered:
P appear to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P subject to a
community treatment order necessary for her health
or safety (whether to prevent
a deterioration in her physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the
protection of members
of the public; and
P refused or is she unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of her freedom of decision and action?
, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
Application for non-disclosure
Prior to the commencement of the hearing P and her legal representative had
been given access to her clinical file, with some documents
or parts of
documents removed from the file. Shortly prior to the hearing
application under
was lodged with the Board seeking that P not be given
access to documents or parts of documents on her clinical file dated 14 August
2006, 21 August 2006, 29 September 2006, 7 May 2006 and 8 October 2006, on the
ground that such access would involve the unreasonable
disclosure of information
relating to the personal affairs of a person. In the absence of P, the Board
heard the application by
Dr JK on behalf of the authorized psychiatrist, that P
not be given access to those documents. Ms Dunn appeared for P and stated
she was instructed that P did not oppose the application.
The Board was satisfied that to give P access to the documents the subject of
the application would involve the unreasonable disclosure
of information
relating to the personal affairs of a person. The Board therefore ordered that P
was not entitled to inspect or otherwise
have access to the documents the
subject of the application.
Dr JK, in applying for the order for non-disclosure, did explain that the
person supplying the information contained in one of the
specified documents had
expressly imposed a confidentiality provision, and that this was noted in the
document. He also said that
the other documents, in his opinion, included an
implied confidentiality provision. The Board suggested that in future, in such
a situation, it would be wise to indicate in the application that reliance was
placed on both
P was a 24 year old woman who was diagnosed as
suffering from schizophrenia and substance abuse disorder. She was first
as having a mental illness in early 2000, and became an involuntary
patient under the
on 24 February 2006. P has been subject to a number of
community treatment orders since 31 March 2006. The file indicated that
treatment orders had been revoked on 12 September 2006, 1 October 2006
and 25 October 2006.
The Board noted that the Report on Involuntary Status was very brief and
uninformative, and was inaccurate in the details it gave
as to the current
community treatment order. At the time of the hearing the current community
treatment order had been made on 26
October 2006 and was to expire on 23
February 2007.
In her appeal P stated that she appealed against her community treatment
order because:
“I don’t feel it is what I need. I don’t have
schizophrenia- makes me too sleepy”
Submissions on behalf of P
Ms Dunn said that P now accepted that she suffered
from schizophrenia and accepted that she needed treatment and was prepared to
regularly with the service, but did not want to continue with the treatment
that was being prescribed for her. She said that she
was instructed that P was
not regularly using any illicit substances, only occasionally used marijuana,
and had never used heroin.
She said that P had been on a methadone program
until July 2006, but P had instructed her that this had been arranged by her
partner, as a means of controlling her through her reliance on methadone,
at a time when she was very vulnerable.
Ms Dunn said that she was instructed that P’s difficulty with her
community treatment order was with her medication. She had
no problem with the
sodium valproate she was taking at night, but her fortnightly injection of 50mg
of risperidone (Risperidal Consta)
was a major problem. She said that she was
instructed that P suffered the following side effects from that treatment;
stomach cramp, dizziness, nausea, blurred vision, involuntary mouth
movements, neck stiffness, absence of menstrual cycle and lack
of motivation,
and that she was prescribed additional medication to control the involuntary
mouth movements. P had instructed Ms
Dunn that, after her first admission in
2003, which was to the Alfred Hospital, she had been prescribed olanzapine; she
much preferred
that medication and felt that she was more motivated on that
Ms Dunn explained that she was aware that the Board could not direct any
change of treatment but she requested that if the Board decided
not to allow
P’s appeal, the Board consider ordering a review of the treatment plan
. Ms Dunn said that her instructions were that P’s
first preference would be to take olanzapine, or failing that to have
risperidone
in tablet form, or, as a least desired option, to have a reduced
dosage by injection.
Ms Dunn submitted that as P agreed that she needed treatment for a mental
illness, and was prepared to continue to attend the clinic
as a voluntary
patient, the criteria in
,(d) and (e) of the
were not satisfied.
Evidence of P
P gave evidence that she thought she did have a
mental illness. She was prepared to accept the diagnosis of schizophrenia,
in answer to questions from the Psychiatrist Member of the Board, she
had difficulty describing her symptoms.
P gave the Board a summary of the history of her mental illness. Although it
was somewhat disjointed, it was substantially similar
to that set out in much
more detail in a report from the Alfred Hospital (“the Alfred”)
dated 18 April 2006. As the
Report on Involuntary Status was so uninformative,
the Board took a copy of that report from the clinical file. It provided a
chronological history, which enabled the Board to see the current
admission in context.
P said that she admitted herself to the Alfred in 2003 after she had been
found lying by the side of the road due to having suffered
a seizure, as a
result of three months drug use. She said that she was treated after that
incident with injections of Cogentin and
as a side effect developed neck
problems, which lead her to attend the hospital emergency department. She said
that she again admitted
herself to the Alfred in 2003. At that time she remained
an inpatient for approximately six weeks. She was treated by a private
psychiatrist and then managed by Waiora Clinic on a community treatment order.
The Alfred report stated that P was discharged from
her community treatment
order in January 2006, as she was “mentally stable and compliant with her
medication”.
Unfortunately problems developed in February 2006, and P’s next
hospital admission was in February 2006, which she explained
was after she split
up with her boyfriend.
P said that she accepted the diagnosis of schizophrenia, and agreed that she
needed treatment, but she had severe problems with the
side effects of her
medication. She said she suffered with diarrhoea, stomach cramps, dizziness,
nausea, blurred vision, involuntary
movements of the mouth, stiffness of the
neck and absence of a menstrual cycle.
P gave evidence that she liked the doctor she saw at Waiora Clinic and that
he knew her very well. She said her health was stable
while she was being
managed at that clinic and taking olanzapine. She said she had the treatment
prescribed for her then because
it was good for her, although she thought she
was also on a community treatment order.
When the Psychiatrist Member of the Board asked P in what way she thought the
medication was good for her, she replied that it,
“might make me think
more clearly for a while”.
“Sometimes I do get
angry and think scattered thoughts...I am really a nice person”.
P showed the Board a testimonial she had received from Wellington House, a
drug rehabilitation program, dated 26 June 2006. It stated
that she was valued
“her great progress and ability to achieve despite the
obstacles”.
P told the Board that she had two children aged one and two. She said that
they were both in foster care and that she had very little
during 2006, but that she had recently been able to arrange more regular
on the Friday following the hearing
and was hopeful that she would then have weekly contact.
P said that she had plans to enrol for some courses through Holmesglen TAFE
in 2007, but that it was not yet time to enrol.
In response to questions from the Board arising from Dr JK’s
explanation as to the diagnosis of schizophrenia, P said that she
school half way through year 11, and that since leaving school she had had a few
part-time jobs at Red Rooster, KFC and
at a dry cleaner.
Evidence of treating team
The Board asked Dr JK the reasons for the diagnosis
of schizophrenia. He said that P was unreasonably suspicious, that she
did not attend for her depot injections and that she needed reminders
“assertive action”.
Dr JK referred to an incident when P
attended Upton House wearing large sunglasses, and refused to remove them, even
indoors. In
response to questioning from the Legal Member of the Board, as to
the relevance of that conduct, he suggested that the reason for
wearing the
sunglasses could have been to prevent staff observing whether her pupils were
dilated, which can be a sign of drug abuse.
He said that P often has
“tangential thoughts”
Dr JK suggested that it was a sign of P having a mental illness that she was,
“now not able to be employed”.
He referred to her as having
previously been
“high achieving”.
Dr JK denied that the new
antipsychotic medications reduce motivation and claimed that there is research
suggesting that they improve
motivation.
Dr JK described P as
and said that the fact that,
“she is not
able to communicate clearly is a worrying sign”.
He said that P was,
“at pains to try to hide how she actually functions at home, she
doesn’t function well and doesn’t think clearly.”
Dr JK told the Board that when P was taking medication she was not
co-operative about having her serum levels taken or having urine
stream tests.
He said she was sometimes
“less cantankerous or argumentative, but her
level of guardedness remains high”.
He said that he was concerned
that if P were to be discharged from being an involuntary patient, she would not
take her medication
and her condition would deteriorate.
Other evidence
The documentation before the Board, and the report
from the Alfred, showed that P does have a history of non-compliance with
medication,
even while she was being prescribed olanzapine and being managed by
Waiora Clinic, where she said she liked the doctor treating her,
and he knew her
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board has considered the exclusionary criteria in
and has decided
that these were not relevant in this case.
Even though P agreed that she had a mental illness, and accepted the
diagnosis of schizophrenia, it is the responsibility of the Board
satisfied that a person, “
appears to be mentally ill”
P presented well and was courteous and helpful in giving her evidence. She
had a good recollection of relevant dates and gave a generally
accurate history,
although there were some points on which she seemed surprisingly vague. She did
not know whether she had been
on a community treatment order all the time she
had been treated at Waiora Clinic, she had difficulty explaining her symptoms or
the benefits of her medication, and she could not explain why she had been
allowed only very limited contact with her children last
year. She sometimes
lost her thread of thought while answering questions or did not quite respond to
the question asked of her.
She did not appear to have paranoid thinking or to
be unreasonably suspicious, but the Board did not know how she might have
if she were not on her prescribed medication.
Dr JK’s explanation of the diagnosis of schizophrenia, perhaps because
he had not seen P very often, was not very persuasive.
However the Board was
satisfied from the evidence given by P, and by Dr JK, and from the material in
the clinical file, that P did
appear to be mentally ill in that she did have a
significant disturbance of thought.
Therefore, the Board found that this criterion was met.
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
The Board was satisfied, and P and her legal representative did not dispute,
that her mental illness does require immediate treatment,
which can be obtained
by making P subject to a community treatment order.
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
Because of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment
of P subject to a community treatment order necessary for her health
(whether to prevent a deterioration in her physical or mental condition or
otherwise) or for the protection of members
of the public?
The Board was satisfied that treatment was necessary to prevent a
deterioration in P’s mental condition. The Board noticed
how quickly
P’s condition deteriorated in January 2006, after she was discharged from
her community treatment order. Because
the Board concluded under criterion (d)
that P was unable to consent to treatment, it was satisfied that involuntary
treatment of
P subject to a community treatment order was necessary to prevent a
deterioration in her mental condition.
Therefore, the Board found that this criterion was met.
Has P refused or is she unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness?
P has not refused to consent to the necessary treatment for her mental
illness, nor has she clearly consented to that treatment.
She said that she
would continue to attend Upton House, even if her community treatment order was
discharged, but she did not say
that she would continue to take whatever
treatment was prescribed. She is clearly very reluctant to continue having the
fortnightly
depot injections, because of what she believes to be their side
P said that she would prefer to take other medication, which she believed
suited her much better. Unfortunately, the report from
the Alfred showed that
even when P was taking that preferred medication, and was attending the clinic
where she liked the doctor,
and believed that he knew her very well, there were
problems due to her non-compliance with medication. The report from the Alfred
states that in 2006, P was referred back to the Alfred from Waiora Clinic in
“because of poor medication compliance and deterioration in
mental state.”
After P moved into accommodation in Ashwood, and her care was transferred to
Upton House, the documents before the Board show that
community treatment orders
were revoked three times, because of non-compliance with medication, between 12
September and 25 October
2006. At the time of the first and second of those
revocations, P’s mental state seems to have deteriorated so that she
inpatient treatment for over a week each time, before again being
discharged on a community treatment order.
The Board found, from the answers P gave to questions asked of her as to her
symptoms, and as to the improvements achieved by taking
her medication, that she
does not have a full understanding of the importance of taking her medication
regularly. The Board also
found on the basis of the history during 2006, that P
has difficulty complying with her treatment, even when she does intend to
taking medication.
The Board was satisfied that at the time of the hearing P was unable to
consent to the necessary treatment for her mental illness.
Therefore, this
criterion was met.
Is P unable to receive adequate treatment for the mental
illness in a manner less restrictive of her freedom of decision and
There was no evidence to suggest that P could receive adequate treatment in a
manner less restrictive of her freedom of decision and
action. There was
evidence that in the past, P has been non-compliant with medication as indicated
in the Alfred report. The Board
was satisfied that P cannot receive adequate
treatment for her mental illness in a manner less restrictive of her freedom of
and action.
Therefore, this criterion was met.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient’s treatment plan, the
Board must be satisfied that the requirements of
have been met. The Board considered each of the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
Section 35A
(1) On each appeal and review under this Division, the Board must review
the patient's treatment plan to determine whether—
(a) the authorised psychiatrist has complied with
section 19A
reviewing or revising the plan (as the case may be); and
(b) the plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
(2) The Board may order the authorised psychiatrist to revise the treatment
plan, if the Board is satisfied that—
(a) the authorised psychiatrist has not complied with
section 19A
reviewing or revising the plan; or
(b) the plan is not capable of being implemented by the approved mental
health service.
Thus the Board has an obligation in every appeal or review to review the
treatment plan before it, to determine whether the authorised
psychiatrist has
complied with
in making, reviewing or revising that plan.
Section 19A(2)
(2) In preparing, reviewing and revising a treatment plan for a patient, the
authorised psychiatrist must take into account—
(a) the wishes of the patient, as far as they can be ascertained; and
(b) unless the patient objects, the wishes of any guardian, family member or
primary carer who is involved in providing ongoing care
or support to the
patient; and
(c) whether the treatment to be carried out is only to promote and maintain
the patient's health or well-being; and
(d) any beneficial alternative treatments available; and
(e) the nature and degree of any significant risks associated with the
treatment or any alternative treatment; and
(f) any prescribed matters.
(3) The treatment plan for a patient who is detained in an approved mental
health service must contain an outline of the treatment
the patient is to
(4) The treatment plan for a patient who is subject to a community treatment
order or restricted community treatment order must contain
or specify—
(a) an outline of the treatment the patient is to receive; and
(b) the authorised psychiatrist or delegate of the authorised psychiatrist
who is to monitor the patient's treatment (
"monitoring psychiatrist"
(c) the registered medical practitioner who is to supervise the patient's
treatment (
"supervising medical practitioner"
(d) the patient's case manager; and
(e) the place at which the patient is to receive treatment; and
(f) the times at which the patient is required to attend to receive
treatment; and
(g) the intervals at which the supervising medical practitioner must submit
a written report concerning the patient's treatment to
the monitoring
psychiatrist.
(5) A treatment plan may contain anything else the authorised psychiatrist
thinks appropriate.
(6) The authorised psychiatrist must ensure that—
(a) the patient is given a copy of his or her treatment plan and any
revisions to it; and
(b) the treatment plan is discussed with the patient by a registered medical
practitioner, the patient's case manager or any member
of a prescribed class of
The treatment plan dated 21 December 2006, which was before the Board did not
show that the authorised psychiatrist had taken into
account the matters
specified in
That was of particular concern to the Board, because
both P and her legal representative stressed that P accepted that she needed
treatment for a mental illness, but said that the major problem with her
community treatment order was the side effects she was experiencing
as a result
of the particular medication prescribed for her. They said that she would
prefer to be taking olanzapine, which had
previously been prescribed for
Section 19A(2)(a)
requires that the authorised psychiatrist take
into account the wishes of the patient, as far as they can be ascertained.
was no difficulty in ascertaining that P wished to be on a different
medication, which she believed, on the basis of her past experience
medication, would give her less side effects. The Board considers that
requires that the treatment plan, which it must review
, should show that P’s clearly expressed views on the issue of
her medication were taken into account in the preparation of
the treatment
Section 19A(2)(b)
requires that unless the patient objects, the wishes of any
family member who provides ongoing care and support to the patient must
into account. The treatment plan in this matter did not address those issues at
all. It did not identify anybody who may
provide care or support to P, nor did
it say whether she objected to the wishes of any such person being taken into
Section 19A(2)(c)
was not specifically addressed in the treatment plan,
although it did seem that the treatment was intended to promote and maintain
patient’s health and well-being.
Section 19A(2)(d)
requires that the authorised psychiatrist take into account
any beneficial alternative treatments available. P suggested the alternative
treatment, olanzapine, which she said was more beneficial for her. There is
evidence in the Alfred Hospital report that while she
was taking that treatment
she was well enough in January 2006 to be considered mentally stable and to be
discharged from a community
treatment order. The Board considers that
requires that the treatment plan demonstrate that those
matters have been taken into account in its preparation.
Section 19A(2)(e)
requires that significant risks associated with the
prescribed treatment and any alternative treatment be taken into account in the
preparation of a treatment plan. The treatment plan before the Board did not
refer to any risks associated with either the prescribed
treatment or the
alternative treatment P said she preferred. There may, of course, be valid
reasons why an authorised psychiatrist
chooses to prescribe one medication
rather than another, even though a patient expresses a preference for the
alternative treatment.
Sometimes that choice of treatment can be explained on
the basis of a comparison of risks. It is helpful to a patient in such a
situation to understand the basis of the choice of treatment. The
that the nature and degree of any significant risks associated with any
prescribed or alternative treatment be taken into
account by the authorised
psychiatrist, and that the treatment plan show to the Board, when it is
reviewing the treatment plan, that
this matter has been taken into account in
the preparation of the treatment plan.
On its review of the treatment plan in this matter, as required by
, the Board determined that the authorised psychiatrist had not complied
in making, reviewing or revising the plan.
Section 35A(1)(b)
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
The Board determined that even though the plan did not comply with
, in a number of respects, it was capable of being implemented by the
approved mental health service.
Because the Board was satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist had not
complied with
in making, reviewing or revising the treatment plan, under
, it ordered the authorised psychiatrist to revise the
treatment plan.
criteria were met and the treatment required for P can be
obtained through her being subject to a community treatment order, the
made the determination set out on page 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (82.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter