URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/75.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:47:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Rice [1996] VicRp 75; [1996] 2 VR 406 (29 February 1996)
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA COURT OF APPEAL
BROOKING and CHARLES JJA and SOUTHWELL AJA
12, 29 February 1996
Brooking JA
Sylvia Jill Cave, a young woman, aged 34, stopped work on the night of Friday 13 October 1989, having told her employers she would
return on Monday to finish the report she was writing. She had booked a seat on an aircraft to fly to Perth the following Wednesday
18 October, to attend her sister's wedding, which was to take place three days later, and had bought a set of glasses as a wedding
The applicant, Michael Geoffrey Rice, lived in the same block of flats in George Street, Fitzroy as Jill Cave. His flat was opposite
hers and they became friends. He moved into her flat. Jill Cave told friends that he and she were to spend the weekend of 14-15 October
at the Ringwood Lake Motel to patch up differences which had arisen between them. She did not fly to Perth to attend the wedding
as arranged. She did not contact those she might have been expected to contact and was not seen alive again by her family, friends
or employers. On 2 June 1993 her body was found in a locked 44 gallon drum in a shed on a small farm at Mt Eliza. The body was enclosed
in plastic bags and wrapped in plastic sheeting and the drum was filled with lime.
The property was owned by a man named Kee, an acquaintance of the applicant, who had visited him from time to time. On a date which
Kee could not fix, even approximately, the applicant, who was an American citizen entitled to reside permanently in Australia, told
Kee he was returning to America for six to nine months and asked if he could store his car and some other personal belongings in
a shed on the Mt Eliza property. The applicant parked his car, full of personal belongings, in the shed, leaving the car keys with
Kee. The following weekend the applicant returned to the property, driving a utility, in the back of which was a 44 gallon drum with
a padlocked lid. This, the applicant told Kee, contained his computer, which he had packed in powder. The drum was placed in a room
in the shed and Kee retained the key to the shed. The applicant did not give him the key to the padlock fitted to the drum. The applicant
told Kee he was leaving for America in a few days' time. The drum remained where it had been stored by the applicant until it was
opened by the police on 2 June 1993 and found to contain a body which was later identified as that of Jill Cave, who had been reported
as a missing person by the applicant on 20 October 1989. The applicant was charged with murder; he had left Australia for the United
States on 19 March 1991 and was arrested there. He succeeded at his trial in obtaining a directed verdict of not guilty of murder
and the trial proceeded as a manslaughter trial. He was convicted of that offence and sentenced to seven years' imprisonment with
a non-parole period of four years. He now seeks leave to appeal against that conviction.
A third person, a young woman named Nobuko Hasegawa, shared the flat in George Street, Fitzroy where the applicant and the deceased
lived together. Because of the planned weekend away of the applicant and the deceased, Hasegawa arranged for her boyfriend, David
Thompson, to stay the night at the flat. She understood the purpose of the weekend away to be to patch up differences which had arisen
in the relationship between the couple. The applicant had told her in September 1989 that he was sad and expected the
relationship to end. The deceased had told a friend, Paul Juraszek, that she intended to go away for the weekend with the applicant
to "patch things up". She had told another friend, Anne Collie, that she had paid $200 for lingerie which she intended to use in
the course of the weekend with the applicant, and had shown it to her.
The deceased went to the Ringwood Lake Motel on Saturday 14 October and checked into suite 21. She was alone when she did this. Early
in the morning of Sunday 15 October - she said it was about 5.30 or 6am and certainly no later than 9am - Hasegawa was awakened by
loud banging on the door of the flat and found to her surprise that it was the applicant. She saw no-one else. He said something
like "so sorry" and she returned to bed. Later on the Sunday she noticed a newspaper which the applicant had evidently read and left
on the kitchen table at the flat. She and Thompson went out for a late lunch and did not return to the flat until that evening and
on their return she noticed several cans of beer in the refrigerator which had not been there when they went out.
Juraszek lived in Collingwood and at about 7pm on Sunday 15 October the applicant visited him. He asked the applicant why he was
there instead of being away with Jill for the weekend and the applicant replied that he had driven back, leaving Jill at the motel
in Ringwood, and that it was his intention to go back to the motel late that day and then to go, early on the Monday morning, from
Ringwood to Tullamarine Airport. He said that the reason why Jill was not with him in Collingwood was that she was back at the motel
in Ringwood packing things up. Juraszek described the applicant as a little bit agitated and depressed. The applicant stayed with
him for only about 15 minutes.
The motel receptionist said that on the evening of Sunday 15 October a man checked out of suite 21, saying that he was leaving early
on Monday. She said there was definitely no other person present when the man checked out. (According to the father of the deceased,
he was told by the receptionist in November 1989 that a woman was with the man when he checked out.)
The applicant told no less than nine people that on Monday 16 October he had left the deceased at Tullamarine Airport. The degree
of detail varied. He told some of these persons he had left her at the airport at about 7.15am, or left her there to catch an 8am
flight. He said he had left her at the airport to go back to Perth for a family wedding. He told one witness he had dropped Jill
off at the airport near the terminal. He gave another witness a description of the clothes she was wearing.
The deceased had an economy ticket on a flight leaving Tullamarine for Perth at 3.15pm on Wednesday 18 October. On Sunday 14 October
at about 4.55pm a man telephoned the airline, giving the name of Michael, and arranged that the passenger should travel on a flight
leaving Tullamarine Airport at 8am on Monday 15 October. He also altered the ticket from economy to first class, saying that the
difference in fare would be paid when the ticket was collected at Tullamarine and was told that the additional fare would be $400.
No such ticket was ever collected at the airport and the original ticket obtained by the deceased was later found, unused, among
personal belongings of the deceased in the car which the applicant had stored in the shed on the Mt Eliza property. These belongings
included the deceased's wallet, which contained, among other things, her bank keycard, medicare card, bankcard and business cards,
in addition to the air ticket.
Notwithstanding that the deceased was a conscientious and punctual employee who had told her employers on Friday 13 October she would
return on the
following Monday to complete a report on which she was working, her employers did not hear from her again after Friday 13 October.
The father of the deceased and his wife had intended to go to Perth airport to collect their daughter on the afternoon of Wednesday
18 October. Mrs Cave had telephoned her daughter's flat on the evening of Tuesday 17 October and been told by Hasegawa that Jill
was in Perth and that Michael had taken her to the airport on the Monday morning; she was also told that Michael was not in. As a
result either of this or of some further telephone call made by Mr or Mrs Cave, leaving a message for the applicant, he telephoned
Mr Cave on Wednesday 18 October before the Caves left home in the afternoon with the intention of collecting their daughter at the
airport. In this conversation the applicant told Cave he could not understand why Jill had not reached Perth, as he had arranged
a flight for 8am from Tullamarine on the Monday morning, having arranged for her to travel first class instead of economy and having
given her $400 to pay the excess fare. Cave told the applicant he would contact him again if Jill was not on the aeroplane that afternoon.
She was, of course, not on the aeroplane and that night Cave telephoned the applicant, told him Jill had not arrived on the flight
and asked him to notify the police, as it appeared that she had gone missing from the Melbourne end. He asked the applicant what
had happened over the weekend and was told that he and Jill had been away for the weekend, that they had arrived home late on the
Sunday evening and that he had helped Jill pack her bags for the early morning flight at 8am.
On Thursday 19 October the applicant told Gould, one of his superiors at work, that Jill's parents had called him to say that she
had not arrived in Perth. The applicant said that Jill had originally been going on the Wednesday but had decided to go on the Monday,
that there were no economy seats available on the Monday and that he had therefore paid to upgrade her to travel first class so that
she could travel on the Monday. The applicant said that he had dropped her off outside the airport. Gould told the applicant that
he found it unusual that he had not gone into the airport and the applicant replied, "I just stopped outside and in she went". Gould
then said in effect that it was strange that she should go missing in those circumstances and received only the response, "I just
dropped her off in the morning". Gould also swore that in this conversation the applicant told him that he and Jill had had a weekend
away at a hotel, but that on the Sunday he had gone back to the flat to collect her clothes because she had wanted to go to Perth
on the Monday.
On Thursday 19 October Cave telephoned the applicant to ask if he had reported the matter. The applicant said that he had not. Cave
then asked about the weekend and the applicant said, "I was away and so was Nobuko, but Jill was at home". At about this time the
applicant telephoned a friend of the deceased named De Sair and asked him if he knew where Jill was.
On Friday 20 October the applicant reported to the police that the deceased was missing.
Mr and Mrs Cave flew to Melbourne on 23 October to conduct their own investigations. They met the applicant. He told Cave that Jill
was worried about losing her job and was in financial difficulties. (In fact she was not in financial difficulties.) He also said
he had lent Jill two suitcases, since hers were too travel worn to use. The applicant told Cave he and the deceased had been at the
motel for the weekend. (This conflicted with what he had told Cave on 19 October.) Mrs Cave put it to the applicant that he had not
taken her daughter to the airport; he did not reply; according to Mrs Cave, "He just looked at the floor and never
answered me". In looking through the flat Cave found a set of glasses "in a box as purchased". He also found a suitcase, which he
described as far from travel worn. As the Caves were leaving the applicant said to them, "Well, what are you worried about? She was
only adopted".
On about 17 October the applicant told Juraszek that Cave had told him that the deceased had not arrived in Perth. The applicant
said that in his opinion she had run off to be a prostitute. He showed Juraszek photographs of her in a red outfit in which her underwear
was exposed and said that he had sexually liberated her.
On 15 November the applicant told the deceased's sister that the suitcases he had lent Jill were green. (He had told Mr Cave that
they were dark blue or black.)
Late in 1990 the applicant told West, the detective investigating the missing person report, that a recent bank statement on one
of the deceased's accounts suggested there had been a transaction on the account after her disappearance. It was proved at the trial
that the bank itself was responsible for the entry in question. In March 1991 West told the applicant that because he had been the
last person to see Miss Cave before her disappearance he, West, needed to get a statement from him and that he was the only person
the police did not have a statement from. According to West: His reply was that he didn't want to give a statement because he couldn't
be specific about things that occurred at the time of the disappearance because he was worried that the family might take it the
wrong way and think that he had been involved in her disappearance.
Late in 1989, after the disappearance of Jill Cave, the applicant said in a casual conversation that he had been in the Israeli army,
that he knew how to kill people and that they taught him how to kill people, and added that if lime was used in burying a body it
would speed up the decomposition of the body and that there were acids that could be used for the same purpose.
On 25 October 1989 the applicant bought 200 kgs of hydrated lime sold under the trade name "Limil".
On the same day he rented a locked room about two by three metres in a "self-storage warehouse" in South Melbourne. This was let
to him from that date until 17 March 1991. During this period he had access to it on 54 occasions. When he vacated the room there
was white powder to a depth of half to three-quarters of an inch all over the floor. This powder and the powder found in the drum
containing the body of the deceased were shown to be hydrated lime of the same type as the Limil bought by the applicant on 25 October.
There was evidence that this tends to preserve a dead body rather than make it decompose more quickly.
When removed from the drum the body was found to be dressed in black lingerie, which was identified as that which the deceased had
bought for use on the weekend away. The deceased was also wearing earrings and a necklace. The body was dressed in a black brassiere,
a garter belt, black split-crotch panties and black stockings. A rope was separately encircled around each ankle and knotted in the
According to Dr Landgren, who performed the autopsy, the body was fairly well preserved, being partly mummified. Most of the internal
organs were well enough preserved to enable them to be examined. The pathologist could find no natural cause for the death. There
was no natural disease evidenced. He could discover no penetrating injuries to the body. The only abnormality detected was
that the right one-third of the hyoid bone was mobile from the other two-thirds. The hyoid bone is a small, horseshoe-shaped bone
in the bottom of the neck. The most common way of causing mobility of the hyoid bone was, Dr Landgren said, fracture resulting from
compression of the neck. There were, however, rare cases of a congenital abnormality in which there was mobility of either one or
both sides of the hyoid bone. As I understand his evidence, Dr Landgren had seen only one such case in more than 5000 autopsies.
In strangulation, the hyoid bone might or might not be fractured. Dr Landgren described the telltale signs of strangulation so far
as the soft tissues are concerned, and said that decomposition made it impossible in this case to say whether any of those signs
were present. Dr Landgren said that he had never seen a case in which the hyoid bone had been fractured during life and that he had
never seen a well-documented case of post-mortem fracture.
There were, Dr Landgren said, a number of natural deaths where there was little if any evidence at autopsy of the natural disease
even in a well-preserved body. Asthma, epilepsy and irregularity of the heartbeat were the three main causes of death where not much
in the way of evidence of their presence was found at autopsy. Most people who died from asthma, epilepsy or irregularity of the
heartbeat suffered some form of symptoms during life, often receiving medical attention for those symptoms, he added.
Dr Landgren said that because of the degree of decomposition and the impossibility of determining whether the hyoid bone had been
fractured or was congenitally abnormal he was unable to determine the cause of death.
There was a good deal of lay evidence that the deceased was healthy and in particular that she did not appear to have ever suffered
from epilepsy or a heart condition or asthma. According to her general practitioner, there was nothing to suggest that she had suffered
from any of those three conditions.
At the close of the Crown case a no-case submission was made in relation to the charge of murder. It was said that, assuming that
it was open to the jury to find that the applicant had caused the death, the inference could not be drawn that he had done so with
the specific intent necessary for the crime of murder. In the course of the discussion it was made clear that the applicant's counsel
was not submitting that the jury could not find that the applicant had caused the death by an unlawful and dangerous act, so as to
be guilty of manslaughter: it was accepted that the trial should proceed as a manslaughter trial. His Honour upheld the submission,
ruling that the words and conduct relied on by the Crown would not support a finding of murder as distinct from a finding that death
had been caused by an unlawful and dangerous act. The jury were accordingly directed to, and did, return a verdict of not guilty
of murder. The defence thereupon elected to call no evidence and the final address of the Crown Prosecutor began. This was at about
mid-morning on the fifth day of the trial. The charge began in the course of the afternoon on the same day. On the morning of the
following day, before the charge was resumed, counsel for the applicant, while accepting that he had in making his submission at
the close of the Crown case "effectively conceded" that there was sufficient evidence to go to the jury of manslaughter, made a no-case
submission in respect of that offence. This further submission was rejected. The concealment of the body by the male prisoner, however
atrocious, must not lead you to conclude that the crime of murder was committed by him, though concealment is in general a difficult
thing to get over.
So began the address to the jury of counsel for the prisoners in R v Greenacre (1837) 8 Car and P 35;
[1837] EngR 613
173 ER 388.
Greenacre had cut off the head and legs from the trunk of Hannah Brown and concealed the remains in several places (Wills, Circumstantial
Evidence, 7th ed, (1937), at 148-9). His defence was accidental death. He was convicted of murder and executed. The man who secretes
a body and lies about it may be found, in most cases, to be concealing his own crime, and therefore to be the murderer. That is so
because personal guilt, unless the circumstances point to some other connection, is the reasonable inference.
The words are those of Cardozo J in People v Galbo
112 NE 1041
(1916), the annotations to which in
2 ALR 1227-9
deal with a number of the earlier American and English cases in which an attempt to conceal or dispose of the body was considered
as evidence connecting the accused with homicide. In Greenacre and in Galbo there were injuries to the body additional to those inflicted
in dismembering it. Where, the body having decomposed or been destroyed or disappeared, the cause of death cannot be shown by means
of an autopsy and there is no eyewitness and no admission from which the cause of death can be ascertained, judges have had to consider
what inferences might be drawn on the whole of the evidence about the way in which death came about. Often the cases are also concerned
with the now long discredited proposition that the whole or part of a body, identified as that of the alleged victim, must be found
before a homicide conviction is possible. A number of the older decisions concern the death of an illegitimate child at the hands
of one or other of its parents or of baby farmers. The case of R v Makin (1893) 14 NSWR(L) 1 (better known in relation to evidence
of similar facts) is an example. It is of interest for present purposes because of what was said by the Full Court of New South Wales
within two days the child was dead and buried. When the body was found decomposition was so far advanced as to make it impossible
to determine the cause of death. Leaving aside the similar fact evidence, the Crown relied on evidence of motive (the inadequacy
of the premium for the support of the child), the secret disposition of the body and the falsehoods told by the accused. Windeyer
J thought there was ample evidence of murder leaving aside the similar fact evidence: no attempt had been made by the accused to
rebut the inference that would otherwise be drawn. His Honour referred to R v Burdett (1820) 4 B and Ald 95;
, a decision often cited in this connection in cases of this kind.
The case of R v Murphy (1867) 4 WW and a'B(L) 63, which was relied on in Makin, is another example of a conviction of murder where
the body (having in that case been consumed by fire) could not evidence the cause of death. A similar case is R v Ryan
(1906) St R Qd 15.
Then there is Peacock v R
[1911] HCA 66
(1911) 13 CLR 619
, where the body had disappeared and the Crown's case was that the accused had burnt the victim's clothing and caused the body to
be buried in some secret place. O'Connor J at 670 referred to Burdett. Passages from the judgments of Barton J and O'Connor J in
Peacock were cited with approval by Menzies J in Plomp v R
[1963] HCA 44
(1963) 110 CLR 234
at 246-7. Another case of the death of an illegitimate child is R v Nash (1911) 6 CAR 225. The body of a five year old boy was found
in a well; there was no medical evidence of the cause of death. A child of that age could have lifted the well cover and might therefore
have fallen in accidentally. The mother had set off on foot with the healthy child, saying that she was going to Mrs Hillier's house;
this would have taken her close to the well, and on that day a woman was seen with the child not far from the well. On her return,
the mother falsely said that she had left her son with Mrs Hillier. She told other lies. She had a motive to dispose of the child,
being unable to support it. The jury were held entitled to infer that the mother had murdered the child. In Attorney-General v Edwards
(1935) IR 500
the baby's body was never found. There was evidence of motive on the part of the mother and her sister, and they were the last persons
to be seen with the child, still alive, when they took it into the woods. There was evidence of consciousness of guilt. The appeal
against the convictions of murder was dismissed.
Unfortunately, having regard to the state of the law before Woolmington v Director of Public Prosecutions
[1935] UKHL 1
[1935] AC 462
, the expressions used in these early cases are of little assistance when one is considering whether an inference of murder as opposed
to manslaughter may be drawn. Indeed, in Makin Windeyer J at 14 seems to have accepted that in homicide, upon proof of the fact of
killing, the malice necessary to constitute murder was to be presumed, it being for the accused to lower the offence to manslaughter.
Accordingly, little, if any, help is to be derived from statements like that of Innes J in Makin at 35 ("It is sufficient to shew
that death was caused by crime"), of Stawell CJ in R v Murphy (1867) 4 WW and a'B(L) 63 Murphy at 83-4 (where the reference is to
the unlawful taking of life) and of Williams J in the same case at 90 (where the reference is to a person's having met with his death
by crime). Peacock v R
[1911] HCA 66
(1911) 13 CLR 619
Peacock was a case, not of wilful murder, but of death in consequence of illegal abortion. The references to unlawful killing in
R v Nash (1911) 6 CAR 225 Nash and to a felonious killing and violence or criminal neglect in Attorney-General v Edwards
(1935) IR 500
Edwards are to be read in the light of the then state of the law. The charge in R v Greenacre (1837) 8 Car and P 35;
[1837] EngR 613
Greenacre instructed the jury that once it was shown that the prisoner caused the death it was for him to show that the crime did
not amount to murder.
There are decisions after Woolmington which may be of assistance. In People v Kirwan
(1943) IR 279
a torso was found in a bog. The cause of death could not be ascertained. The victim lived with the accused, his brother. He unexpectedly
disappeared one night. The accused had a motive to dispose of his brother. His behaviour after the disappearance was relied on as
showing consciousness of guilt. He stood mute. The Court of Criminal Appeal described the conclusion that murder had been committed
as practically inevitable at 285. The trial of the steward James Camb in 1948 for what became known as the porthole murder does not
appear to have given rise to any reported decision, but the evidence, addresses, charge of Hilbery J and decision of the Court of
Criminal Appeal are all set out in the Notable British Trials series. The victim's body was never found: it was thrust out of a porthole
by the accused. The medical evidence, based on stains found in the bed in the victim's cabin, was that death might have resulted
from natural causes and might have resulted from strangulation. Camb gave evidence, saying that Gay Gibson had died of natural causes
during consensual sexual intercourse. The Crown case was that he had tried to rape her. The defence suggested that the victim was
asthmatic and had a weak heart. Much was made by the Crown of conduct on Camb's part said to exhibit consciousness of guilt. An unusual
feature of the case is the judge's failure to define murder in his charge. Although the Crown case was that rape was being attempted,
the defence addressed on the basis that the case against it was simply one of wilful murder. The judgment of the Court of Criminal
Appeal concludes thus:
The reason why the learned judge thought it unnecessary and why in fact it was unnecessary to give a definition [of murder] in this
case, was that nobody contended that if the case for the prosecution was right the case was not one of murder or that it ought to
be reduced to manslaughter. The case simply was: Did this woman die of strangulation or did she die a natural death? There is no
ground for interfering in this case at all and the appeal is dismissed.
Other decisions may be mentioned. The first is R v Horry
[1951] NZCA 24
[1952] NZLR 111
, where there was no body. The Crown case was that the accused was an adventurer who had married the victim for her money and murdered
her very shortly afterwards. She was in fact never seen again by any member of her family after the married couple set off from the
wedding reception. She was last seen by anyone on the day after the wedding, when she was in the company of the accused. The real
question was whether there was sufficient evidence of the death. The Court of Appeal of New Zealand did, however, reach the conclusion
at 123 that there was evidence to go to the jury that the wife had been murdered. At 124-5 the court reviewed the evidence which
led it to the conclusion that there was ample evidence that the appellant had murdered his wife. The possibility that the evidence
supported no more than the inference of manslaughter is not mentioned. Horry is discussed by Dr Norval Morris in terms which suggest
that in the learned author's view on occasions strict rules may have to yield to practical and common sense considerations. Reference
is made to the desirability of preventing the manifestly guilty escaping justice by means of over-technical rules and it is said
that the murderer's success in avoiding direct evidence of his crime should not in all cases be sufficient to exculpate him: "Corpus
Delicti and Circumstantial Evidence"
(1952) 68 LQR 391
Another case of disappearance of the victim without trace is R v Onufrejczyk [1955] 1 QB 388. Again the case is notable for the absence
of any suggestion that the evidence would support the inference only of conduct amounting to manslaughter. At 400 the Court of Criminal
Appeal, in a judgment delivered by Lord Goddard CJ, said this: ... here there are facts which point inevitably, as it is said irresistibly,
towards the appellant being the person who knows what happened to the missing man and who disposed of that man in one way or another.
It may be that it would have been desirable to emphasise to the jury that the first thing to which they must apply their minds was
whether a murder had been committed; but, speaking for myself, I think that the way the judge put it in the two passages which I
have read did sufficiently direct the attention of the jury to the fact that they had to be satisfied of that, and that if they were
satisfied of the death, the violent death, of this man they need not go any further.
At 395 the court cited a passage from the charge of the trial judge, Oliver J: If he did not die by natural causes, he was killed.
Members of the jury, if he was killed his body was concealed or destroyed and has not been found. If he is dead and was killed and
the body was destroyed or concealed, he was murdered, was he not? That is the point. I want you to apply your minds to that set of
circumstances, and decide for yourselves whether in the light of those facts, and many more to which I shall have to draw your attention,
you can say that you are satisfied that no rational hypothesis except that he is dead, dead by violence, is open. If you are driven
to that conclusion, that would be a verdict of murder; but if you think that that would be going too far, and that you could not
safely say that no rational explanation of his death except murder could be conceived, why then it will mean that you have a doubt
This passage was described by the court as "as ample and as fair to the accused man as it is possible to conceive".
In R v Nash (1911) 6 CAR 225 Nash, to which I referred a little earlier, the submission for the appellant was that the Crown had
failed to prove that she had killed her son; only then, ran the argument, did the onus shift on to her to show that the killing was
lawful or amounted only to manslaughter. This submission is not surprising in an appeal heard 24 years before Woolmington v Director
of Public Prosecutions
[1935] UKHL 1
[1935] AC 462
Woolmington. It is, however, interesting to find that in a remarkable poisoning case which came before the Supreme Court of India
Lagu v State of Bombay [1960] (2) SCR 460 (Lagu v State of Bombay [1960] (2) SCR 460) Das and Hidayatullah JJ having discussed Onufrejczyk
R v Onufrejczyk [1955] 1 QB 388 and R v Horry
[1951] NZCA 24
[1952] NZLR 111
Horry, appear at 507-8 to have expressed the opinion that even in 1960 it would have been open to a jury to convict of murder on
the facts proved in Nash.
In Weissensteiner v R
[1993] HCA 65
(1993) 178 CLR 217
the owner of a boat and his companion set off on a cruise, taking Weissensteiner with them. They were never seen again and Weissensteiner
remained in possession of the boat. He was charged with their murder and theft of the boat. At his trial he stood mute. He appealed,
not on the ground that there was no evidence to support the verdicts, or on the ground that the convictions were unsafe, but on the
ground that the judge had misdirected the jury by telling them that they might have regard to his failure to give evidence. By majority,
the High Court held that there had been no misdirection. The case was one in which the Crown relied on evidence of consciousness
of guilt, as appears from the judgment of Pincus JA reported in
(1992) 62 A Crim R 96
at 106-7. It does not seem to have been suggested at any stage of the proceedings that the inference of consciousness of guilt of
the crime of murder was not open, or that the jury should have been invited to consider whether the accused might have been conscious
of his guilt only of the crime of manslaughter.
I also draw attention to State v Kader
270 P 2d 160
(1954), where the defendant, charged with first degree murder, was convicted of manslaughter. She had hidden the body of her three
year old daughter and given several false accounts of how the girl came by her death. The Supreme Court of Oregon considered that
the defendant's conduct pointed to her as the killer. The trial judge's direction about consciousness of guilt was held to be adequate.
The report suggests that the direction did not distinguish between consciousness of guilt of murder and consciousness of guilt of
manslaughter. In the United States it seems to be accepted that conduct put forward as guilty conduct must show consciousness of
guilt of the crime charged, as opposed to mere consciousness of guilt of crime, although my impression is that, as in England and
Australia, it is only in relatively recent times that this requirement has come to the fore.
In numerous murder trials in Victoria in which, in the alternative to murder, manslaughter has been left to the jury (sometimes involuntary,
sometimes voluntary and sometimes both varieties), and the Crown has relied on evidence of consciousness of guilt in one form or
another, for example, flight or lies, juries have been charged in terms which have not raised the possibility that the accused might
be conscious of his guilt not of the crime of murder but only of the crime of manslaughter. Interesting in this regard is what the
Full Court of Victoria said in R v Woolley
(1989) 42 A Crim R 418
at 423-4: It has been the practice to direct juries in cases of false denials or flight or similar cases in terms of whether the
evidence in question demonstrates a consciousness of guilt of the offence charged. The reference to the offence charged is an obvious
and usually convenient way of relating the conduct to the material wrongdoing, as opposed to some other wrongdoing. There is no authority
for the proposition that the accused must be found to have acted out of a consciousness of guilt of a particular offence where
the wrongdoing may cover a number of possible charges. Thus, where a serious assault has taken place, it would be fanciful to make
possible resort to the conduct in question by the jury depend on whether the accused had a consciousness of guilt of particular offences
such as causing grievous bodily harm, or actual bodily harm or common assault. It would in our opinion be equally fanciful to require
as a precondition to possible use of the conduct that the accused had turned his mind to particular alternatives such as murder or
various categories of manslaughter. That is not to say that a jury should not consider the particular conduct in the light of a particular
charge where there are a number of separate charges, whether as separately listed counts on the presentment or as statutory or common
law alternatives of the count or counts on the presentment. This is part of the jury's obligation to consider each charge separately.
Thus, the jury would be obliged to consider the evidence relevant to each count separately and so consider as part of this evidence
the conduct in question, whether it be lies or flight. No doubt in this process it may be useful to ask whether the conduct betrays
a consciousness of guilt of that charge but this is not an obligatory formula. It would seem preferable for the jury to be directed
that if they are satisfied that the statements were made and were not true, then it is open to the jury to add these statements to
other evidence to assist in drawing an inference of guilt. The drawing of inferences will itself be the subject of a separate direction,
including the customary direction that no inference of guilt can be drawn unless it is the only reasonable inference open. Turning
back then to what may be described as the threshold question as to whether the conduct, whether it be a false denial or otherwise,
is relevant and material, it is not always meaningful to ask whether the accused was betraying consciousness of guilt of the crime
charged, for at the point of time when the conduct occurs the accused is presumably not thinking of guilt of a specific offence,
much less of a series of alternatives. Rather the question is whether he is betraying a consciousness of being implicated in the
actus reus, whether it be the killing or the robbery. The use of the inquiry as to consciousness of guilt of the crime charged may
be convenient in the majority of cases but it would not be appropriate in all cases. It is a mistake to convert this inquiry into
a rigid formula. As was pointed out in R v Perera
[1982] VicRp 91
[1982] VR 901
[1982] VicRp 91
[[1982] VR 901
6 A Crim R 225]
at 905; 230:
"These considerations render it unwise, if not impossible, to attempt to formulate general propositions or rules which will govern
the occasions on which lies told by an accused person, whether in court or out, will give rise to an inference that he is thereby
displaying a consciousness of guilt. Everything must depend upon the circumstances of the particular case." In the present case the
directions given by the learned trial judge did not, in speaking of consciousness of guilt, refer to each alternative to the principal
charge on the presentment. For the reasons already indicated, it is not in our opinion necessary or indeed desirable to adopt such
an artificial approach. The critical matters that had to be addressed in the context of this case were that the jury should understand
that lies may be told for reasons that do not indicate consciousness of guilt of murder and that the defence explanations of self-protection
or fear were put to the jury. The direction here clearly dealt with these matters.
One should not fail to notice R v Sharmpal Singh
[1962] AC 188.
Singh was convicted of the murder of his pregnant wife. He appealed to the Court of Appeal for Eastern Africa, which substituted
a conviction of manslaughter. The Crown appealed to the Judicial Committee, seeking to restore the conviction of murder, and the
accused cross appealed against the conviction of manslaughter, contending that the Crown had not shown that the death was not caused
accidentally in the course of a sexual embrace. The case is not one in which the body had disappeared.
It should be noted that there is at 196-7 in the opinion of the Judicial Committee a reference to Director of Public Prosecutions
[1961] AC 290
, followed by the statement that the board is bound to presume, because there is nothing to suggest the contrary, that the accused
intended the consequences that would naturally follow from the exercise of the degree of force proved. For the law in Australia it
will suffice to refer to Smyth v R
[1957] HCA 24
(1957) 98 CLR 163
, where the High Court disapproved of use of the supposed presumption.
In R v Singh death was due to asphyxia, caused by pressure to chest, neck and throat. The medical evidence showed that sexual intercourse
had taken place just before death. There were signs of internal injury in both the neck and chest and the medical evidence was that
the simplest explanation of those injuries was that they were caused by a hand or hands on the throat and a knee or elbow on the
chest. Before the Judicial Committee the accused argued that the Crown had not excluded the possibility that he killed his wife with
a hand pressing on her neck and throat and an elbow pressing on her chest during a sexual embrace.
After the death the accused tried to make it appear that his wife had been attacked and robbed in the courtyard on her way to the
toilet. He took her body out to the courtyard, stabbed it and faked other signs of robbery. This conduct the prosecution relied on
as evidence of consciousness of guilt. The defence submitted that it might well be attributable to panic after an accidental death.
At the trial the defence was that the wife had been murdered by a stranger in the course of a robbery. Before the Court of Appeal
counsel for the appellant did not raise either accident or manslaughter. The court itself raised manslaughter and did not in its
judgment refer to the possibility of accident. It was not until the appeal to the Judicial Committee that the accused contended that
accident was a possibility which raised a reasonable doubt.
According to p190 of the report, Singh made an unsworn statement on his trial. From what is elsewhere said in the report it may be
inferred that in this statement he gave an account of his wife's going out into the courtyard and of her apparently being stabbed
and robbed there. He seems to have said in his unsworn statement that he had intercourse with his wife before she went out into the
courtyard. At 197 the Judicial Committee said this: The accused did not himself give evidence and so there is no conflict between
his intention as deposed to in evidence and that which would have been formed by a reasonable man in his position: ...
This observation (the latter part of which evidently reflects Director of Public Prosecutions v Smith
[1961] AC 290
Smith) may have been based on the view that the unsworn statement was not part of the evidentiary material. But whatever view was
taken of the status of the unsworn statement, the bare assertion in it that intercourse took place said nothing about acts which
might have caused death or about the intention with which those acts were done.
The Judicial Committee remarked that there was nothing to suggest that the accused intended merely to inflict serious injury upon
his wife and that if he was deliberately inflicting any serious injury on her then he must have meant her to die. Their Lordships
were not satisfied that the degree of force was so extreme as to be consistent only with an intent to do serious harm. Their Lordships
continued at 197-8: There is here a complete absence of motive. The marriage was a new and happy one. Only an abnormal man could
intend to strangle his wife while making love to her, and there is no suggestion of known abnormality. The medical witnesses accepted
that an inexpert strangler generally uses much more violence than is necessary to cause death;
and the fact that there were no external signs of violence or of any struggle create [sic], like the absence of motive, a weakness
in the prosecution's case. These considerations are of themselves enough to induce in their Lordships' minds, as they did in the
minds of the judges in the Court of Appeal, a real doubt about the accused's guilt of murder. Their Lordships have next to ask themselves
whether they are satisfied that the degree of force used was unlawful. The question is whether what was done was within the limits
permitted by the wife's submission to intercourse and its normal accompaniments or whether it went beyond those limits so as to constitute
an assault upon her amounting at least to a matrimonial offence. ... If death had been caused solely by the pressure on the chest,
it would have been quite consistent with accident and the contact would obviously have been within the permitted limits. The difficulty
in the way of the defence is to find a plausible explanation for the handling of the neck; the internal injuries suggest at least
extensive pressure. Since an expert can cause death with very little force, it is conceivable that a husband might accidentally hit
upon the same means. But deaths caused accidentally in sexual intercourse when the wife has ordinary health must be very rare indeed.
The natural inference from the medical evidence is that the accused pressed much too hard. It is possible that, as the Court of Appeal
thought, the accused was "applying pressure in an excess of sadism to frighten or torment her, or to overcome resistance". But it
is unnecessary to say more than that the evidence of the prosecution, unless explained away, proved that the accused had gone well
beyond the limits. This is the sort of case in which a not incredible explanation given by the accused in the witness box might have
created a reasonable doubt. But there is no explanation; and the prisoner's silence is emphasised by his consequent conduct. How
did he come to squeeze his wife's throat? When the prisoner, who is given the right to answer this question, chooses not to do so,
the court must not be deterred by the incompleteness of the tale from drawing the inferences that properly flow from the evidence
it has got nor dissuaded from reaching a firm conclusion by speculation upon what the accused might have said if he had testified.
On the evidence they have their Lordships are left with no reasonable doubt that this was a case of manslaughter.
The statement that "the prisoner's silence is emphasised by his consequent conduct" is no doubt intended to refer to the subsequent
conduct of the prisoner in trying to make it appear that his wife had been murdered by a robber.
One might respectfully wonder whether there is an inconsistency between use of the absence of motive and known abnormality as making
murder unlikely and willingness to accept as a possibility that Singh was applying pressure in an excess of sadism to frighten or
torment his wife.
I return now to the present case.
Mr Tehan submitted that the conviction should be quashed and a verdict of acquittal entered on the ground that the verdict was unsafe
and unsatisfactory. In the alternative, he said that there should be a retrial on the ground of misdirection concerning the matter
of consciousness of guilt.
The submission that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory rested on the contention that, there being no evidence of the circumstances
in which the death took place and no medical evidence of the cause of death, it was reasonably possible that Jill Cave had died from
natural causes, so that a finding could not be made that the applicant had killed her by an unlawful and dangerous act. Mr Tehan
took up different positions at different stages of the argument and for a time seemed to be contending that it was possible that
the deceased had been killed by some person other than the applicant after the applicant left her on Monday 16 October and that her
dead body had, by some unexplained means, thereafter come into his possession. I do not think that in the end he maintained this
last contention. He did, however, appear to me to make and maintain the
submission that on the evidence it was reasonably possible that the deceased did not die during the weekend of 14-15 October and
that she was not dead until 25 October, when the applicant bought 200 kgs of hydrated lime and rented the bin in the warehouse.
I entertain no doubt that it was well open to the jury to be satisfied that the deceased met her death on the weekend of 14-15 October.
I shall mention some of the circumstances which support such a finding. So far as the evidence called at the trial goes, the deceased
was last seen alive on Saturday 14 October, when she checked into suite 21 at the motel. She had bought black lingerie for use on
that weekend and when her body was found it was clad in that lingerie. By his own out of court admissions, the applicant went away
for the weekend with her to the motel. There was evidence that an unaccompanied man checked out of suite 21 on the Sunday evening.
Early on the Sunday morning the applicant arrived at the flat in George Street, Fitzroy unexpectedly and without explanation. On
the Sunday evening the applicant visited Juraszek unexpectedly in Collingwood and appeared to be agitated and depressed. There is
no evidence of the applicant's whereabouts between the time he visited the George Street flat early on the Sunday morning and his
visit to Juraszek the same evening. He told Juraszek that he had left Jill at the motel packing things up. This was in answer to
the question why she was not with him in Collingwood. The applicant was hardly likely to be telling Juraszek at 7pm that the reason
why Jill was not with him in Collingwood was that she was packing things up if he meant by this that he had left her at the motel
early that morning, packing things up, and on the applicant's statement he could be regarded as telling Juraszek that he had left
Jill at the motel earlier that evening. If this is what he was saying, the jury might think it strange that he should leave the motel
and go to Fitzroy early on the Sunday morning, then return to the motel, then go to Collingwood and then go back to the motel in
time to check out that evening. This was unusual behaviour in view of the avowed purpose of the weekend away. If, on the other hand,
the applicant was continuously away from the motel from early on the Sunday morning until the Sunday evening, then his behaviour
was equally strange having regard to that avowed purpose. By 5 o'clock on the Sunday afternoon the applicant had booked the deceased
onto a flight leaving Tullamarine at 8am the following day. In view of this, the jury might think it surprising that he should travel
to Collingwood on the Sunday evening, unaccompanied, and then return to Ringwood, where he checked out of the motel, saying that
he was leaving early on the following day, when it would have been simpler for both the applicant and the deceased to leave the motel
on the Sunday afternoon or evening and return to Fitzroy, with a view to making the much shorter journey from there to Tullamarine
the following morning. Then there is the circumstance that the deceased, a conscientious and punctual employee, who had promised
to return to work on the Monday morning to finish a report, did not contact her employer to say that she would not be returning on
that day or to explain why she had not returned. It is also strange that she did not inform her parents of her altered travel arrangements.
The hypothesis that the deceased met her death in the course of the weekend is of course greatly strengthened by the fact and circumstances
of her disappearance. If she was not dead by the morning of the following Monday, where had she gone? It is clear that she had not
gone to Perth. It is clear that she did not return to the flat where she lived with the applicant. It is clear that she did not return
to her place of employment. It is clear that she did not contact her
friends, family or employer. If she was still alive in the ensuing few days, how is it that her dead body later came into the hands
of the applicant?
It was well open to the jury to find that the deceased died at the motel during the weekend and in particular that she died on the
Saturday night.
Mr Tehan conceded that the jury could properly find that the applicant had possession or control of the body from 25 October 1989
until it was discovered by the police. In my opinion the jury could properly find that he had that possession or control from the
time of death and, as I have said, that death occurred on the weekend of 14-15 October.
Mr Tehan repeatedly submitted that the present case was one of murder or nothing. A layman, uninstructed in the mysteries of the
criminal law, might well be disposed to agree, and be puzzled by the directed acquittal on the charge of murder. On more than one
occasion, having submitted that the case was one of murder or nothing, Mr Tehan went on to submit that the question was whether the
accused had killed the deceased. If he had done so, said Mr Tehan, then it was murder.
This approach accepts that, if it was open to the jury to find that the applicant killed the deceased, then it was open to them to
find that he murdered her. On this approach, it is accepted that no practical issue arises about specific intent. Mr Tehan then submitted
that it was not open to the jury to find that the applicant had caused the death; there was, he said, at least one reasonable alternative
hypothesis, that of death from natural causes. He did go on to submit, however, that it was not open to the jury to find that the
applicant had caused the death by an unlawful and dangerous act. In the end it seems to me that he is to be taken as having submitted
that manslaughter could not be found because it could not be found that the accused had caused the death; if such a finding was not
possible, then inevitably the further finding (that the cause of death was an act of the accused that was unlawful and dangerous)
would not be open.
I would not have withdrawn the case of murder from the jury, having regard to the whole of the evidence, which in my view permitted
of a finding that the applicant strangled the victim. But we are not directly concerned with the correctness of that ruling. It is
clear that it was open to the jury to convict of manslaughter: it was well open to them to find that the deceased died as a result
of unlawful and dangerous violence on the part of the applicant. Although this is not essential to the conclusion just expressed,
I repeat that in my view the evidence as a whole warranted a finding of strangulation. But whether it was open to the jury to find
that the victim died as a result of a murderous attack - an attack with the necessary specific intent - need not, as I have said,
be decided. If the jury were satisfied that there was a murderous attack, that would of course not prevent them from returning a
verdict of guilty of manslaughter. Upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to find that the applicant used unlawful
and dangerous violence upon, and killed, Jill Cave in suite 21 at the Ringwood Lake Motel on the weekend of 14-15 October. His subsequent
conduct, including his statements, was not reasonably to be explained on any other basis.
The suggestion that the death occurred not during but after the weekend is fanciful. The jury were well entitled to find, and it
would be remarkable if they did not find, that the young woman met her death in the motel suite, dressed as she was when the body
was found, and that thereafter the applicant had possession or control of the body and did everything possible, by his words and
other conduct, to conceal the death and make people believe that she had parted from him on the Monday and was still alive but that,
if she was not, he had nothing to do with her death.
Mr Tehan in argument advanced the hypothesis of death from natural causes. He did not advance any hypothesis in which death, while
caused by the conscious, voluntary act of the applicant, had not been caused by an act which was both unlawful and dangerous. If
the woman died from natural causes, or if her death was caused by an act of the applicant which was not unlawful and dangerous, why
should he act as he did? It was open to the jury to reject these innocent hypotheses. The case is not one of a man committing adultery,
or having intercourse with a prostitute, in what might be circumstances highly embarrassing to him. His sexual relationship with
the deceased was an open one; their friends knew of the forthcoming weekend and its purpose; the applicant had nothing to hide so
far as that was concerned. The hypothesis of accident has not been put forward by Mr Tehan. Nor has he put forward the hypothesis
that death was caused by the conscious, voluntary act of the applicant which was not unlawful and dangerous. This last hypothesis,
while theoretically open, is an extremely improbable one, as it seems to me.
If the woman died from natural causes, or in any other circumstances than those of an unlawful and dangerous act on the part of the
applicant, what did he have to fear if her death came to light? Any reasonable person must have realised that, by concealing her
body and her death as he did, and telling the lies which he told, he ran a great risk that, if the body was found, he would be charged
with murder. Why should a man take such a risk if the explanation of the death was an innocent one? She must have known when she
cast the body into that place that if it ever was discovered, and if the fact came to light that she was the person who had thrown
it there, a surmise would arise that she took the course in order to dissemble a homicide and the manner in which it had been effected.
State v Kader
270 P 2d 160
(1954) at 173.
The present case moreover cries out for the application of the principle that in considering whether hypotheses consistent with innocence
are rational or reasonable regard may be had to the absence of evidence to support them when that evidence, if it exists at all,
must be within the knowledge of the accused: Weissensteiner v R
[1993] HCA 65
(1993) 178 CLR 217
; R v Neilan [1992] 1 VR 57. Why should the jury be deterred from rejecting the hypothesis of death from natural causes and any other
hypothesis consistent with innocence when the applicant did not, either at any time before the trial or during the trial, say a single
word tending to support an innocent explanation of the death?
In an independent argument, Mr Tehan submitted that this was a case of murder or nothing, and that manslaughter should not have been
left to the jury, and he relied on Mraz v R
[1955] HCA 59
(1955) 93 CLR 493.
But that case bears no resemblance to the present. That was an example of alleged felony murder, committed in the course of rape.
The case was truly one of murder or nothing and the introduction of manslaughter into the trial was inappropriate.
Then it was contended that the jury had been misdirected concerning consciousness of guilt. Two complaints were made in this regard,
each of them based particularly upon Edwards v R
[1993] HCA 63
(1993) 178 CLR 193.
In the first place, it was said, in reliance upon a passage in the joint judgment of Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ at 210-11 that
the lie should have been "precisely identified", as
should "the circumstances and events that are said to indicate that it constitutes an admission against interest". In the second
place - and this was really the primary submission - it was said that, the alleged lies being "an indispensable link in a chain of
evidence necessary to prove guilt", the jury should have been directed that the lie and its character as an admission against interest
must be proved beyond reasonable doubt before guilt could be found.
No exception was taken to what was said in the charge about consciousness of guilt. The judge referred, in fairly general terms,
to most of the statements by the accused on which the Crown relied as evidencing that. His Honour made it clear that the jury must
first be satisfied that any statement relied on was false. Then his Honour went on to deal, along conventional lines, with the reasons,
other than consciousness of guilt, which might lead an accused person to tell lies and emphasised that the lie could be used as pointing
towards guilt only if the jury were satisfied that the lies were told in consequence of consciousness of guilt of killing Jill Cave
by an unlawful and dangerous act. It is now said that his Honour should have been more precise in his identification of the lies
and should in addition have directed the jury to ignore, for present purposes, a number of statements which the applicant was shown
to have made (not included in his Honour's summary of the evidence concerning consciousness of guilt) and which, it is now suggested,
could not be used as evidence of consciousness of guilt. At the trial, it does not appear to have been suggested by counsel for the
applicant that any of the suggested lies referred to in the charge were not in fact lies. The burden of the final address of counsel
for the applicant seems to have been, not that the suggested lies might not have been lies at all, but that, untrue though they were,
the statements did not point unequivocally towards guilt of the crime charged. Indeed, it may be said that either literally or almost
without exception the statements relied on by the Crown were statements which either showed or suggested that the deceased was still
alive at a time when it was either beyond argument that she was dead or at all events well open to the jury to find that she was
dead. At the trial counsel for the applicant was attempting to persuade the jury, not that his client had not by every possible means
sought to conceal the death, but that his doing so should not be attributed to his consciousness of guilt of manslaughter.
Whether a particular piece of evidence was capable of being viewed as showing that the applicant was pretending that Jill Cave was
still alive is neither here nor there, since there was such a vast body of evidence, uncontradicted evidence, showing his repeated
attempts to conceal her death. If the judge had dealt with the suggested lies in greater detail, as it is now suggested he should,
the tendency would have been to disadvantage the applicant. It is clear enough that the trial was conducted on the basis that evidence
of the untrue statements made by the applicant would be elicited in a leading and tightly controlled way. This was done with the
consent, at least tacit, of counsel for the applicant, who no doubt wanted the evidence brought out as briefly as possible and who
may well have feared that if the witnesses were not led evidence of additional lies told by the applicant would come out. The evidence
was elicited by leading questions and not challenged in cross-examination. The applicant cannot claim that he suffered any disadvantage
as a result of what was done. I may add that the discussion shows that his Honour and counsel were all well aware of what had been
said by the High Court in Edwards v R
[1993] HCA 63
(1993) 178 CLR 193
I come now to the suggestion that the judge failed, contrary to what is laid down in Edwards, to instruct the jury that the lies
and their character as an
admission against interest had to be proved beyond reasonable doubt, since they were indispensable links in a chain of evidence necessary
to prove guilt. This was said by Mr Tehan to be his main point in relation to misdirection. I shall assume that Mr Tehan is correct
when he describes the lies as indispensable links in a chain of evidence necessary to prove guilt. On this assumption, in my opinion
the jury were instructed in terms which meet the requirements laid down in Edwards. I begin by repeating that the uttering of the
lies and their falsity were not in issue at the trial and that the approach of counsel for the applicant at the trial was one of
confession and avoidance. In any event, when the charge is read as a whole one finds that the jury were sufficiently made aware that
the telling of lies and their falsity must be proved beyond reasonable doubt.
The judge charged the jury about the burden and standard of proof in a general way in terms which are not criticised. His Honour
then went on to say that the case was in essence a circumstantial case and charged the jury, in terms which again are not criticised,
that the circumstances relied on as leading to the conclusion of guilt must be proved beyond reasonable doubt and that the circumstances
must exclude all hypotheses consistent with innocence before guilt could be inferred.
Evidence of consciousness of guilt is itself circumstantial evidence. It is now said, and with some justification, that the jury
were charged in terms which may have suggested to them that this was not so. And it is said, as I have mentioned, that in this case
the jury ought to have been instructed that they could use lies as showing consciousness of guilt only if satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that that was the correct conclusion.
The evidence of what the accused did, as opposed to said, in order to conceal the body was of importance as tending to link the accused
with the death. It was in addition cogent evidence of consciousness of guilt. But at the trial both counsel and the judge seem to
have concentrated on the words rather than the deeds of the applicant as possible evidence of that consciousness. It has not been
suggested, however, that the jury would not have regarded the directions given about circumstantial evidence as extending to the
physical acts done by way of concealing the body. As regards the matter of lies, the judge made it clear to the jury that they could
not be used against the applicant unless the jury were satisfied that the only conclusion open was that they betokened consciousness
of guilt in the sense of consciousness of killing by unlawful and dangerous act. Read as a whole, the charge made it clear that the
test to be applied was that which had been laid down in respect of circumstantial evidence. It was also made clear that the jury
had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the lies flowed from what the judge called "the unlawful and dangerous killing by
him of Jill Cave". The judge said this: The next and a very important prerequisite in the context of this case is that the consciousness
of guilt must be shown by the prosecution to be of the crime charged. In other words, not just the general feeling of some responsibility,
or a falsehood based on or made for some other reason, but falsehoods based on the consciousness of guilt of the crime of manslaughter
in this case; in other words, the unlawful and dangerous killing by him of Jill Cave. So if there is no other interpretation of those
falsehoods other than the consciousness of guilt of this unlawful and dangerous killing, then you can, of course, use that in your
conclusions. However, if you are not satisfied that that is the only interpretation, then you cannot so use it. Now, I am obliged
to tell you that it is human experience, and I am sure you know that yourselves, that people tell lies for all sorts of reasons,
especially when they are
under some sort of pressure. In other words, not all lies necessarily indicate a consciousness of guilt of the particular thing or
the particular event. For example, lies are sometimes told by people to protect others or out of fear or out of panic or out of some
irrational belief. There are all sorts of reasons why people might tell lies. So before you use a lie or set of lies upon which the
Crown relies here as consciousness of guilt, pointing to his guilt of this charge, you must be satisfied that the lies were due to
the consciousness of guilt of his killing of Jill Cave by an unlawful and dangerous act.
His Honour then defined manslaughter in terms which have not been criticised and said that the elements of the crime had to be proved
beyond reasonable doubt. Dealing with the final address of the Crown Prosecutor his Honour said this: The prosecution, through Mr
Hicks addressing you, puts the case on the basis that you ought to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that this death was the result
of the unlawful and dangerous act of the accused causing the death of the deceased and therefore amounts to manslaughter. He puts
it on the basis that, of course, although there is no direct evidence, that what you have is the combination of circumstantial evidence
which associates the accused with the deceased at the relevant times, that is during that weekend on, and then leads to the situation
where he is found, by virtue of that circumstantial evidence, to be involved in the hiding and the disposing, dealing with the body
of the deceased. He argues that it is a very strong circumstantial case pointing to the accused being involved with that right up
to the time when the body was found in the barrel at Mount Eliza. Mr Hicks also relies in combination with that circumstantial evidence,
on what has been described as the consciousness of guilt of the accused which, he argues, emerges from the fact that when confronted,
or first asked and later confronted about Jill Cave's movements, that he, being the person who knew about them, told a lot of lies
and gave a lot of misinformation about it, and that the inference to be drawn from that, is that, point to his consciousness of guilt
of the crime of manslaughter, of the unlawful and dangerous killing of the deceased, and he argues that because of the type of stories
told by Mr Rice and the persistence of them, particularly at a time when he had possession of the body of the deceased, all pointing,
he argues, to the proposition that the only proper inference is that he was not simply conscious of some wrongdoing or some fear
of being falsely accused, or anything of that kind, but the extent of those untruths and that conduct, together with the circumstances
which show that he was in fact the last person to be with her and the person who dealt with her body later on in the way he did,
all combined to point to the fact that this goes beyond the inference of just any other consciousness of any other problem, but rather
the consciousness of guilt of the killing.
A little later his Honour said this: But the thrust of his argument is that when you look at the conversation with the family of
the deceased, and the version given to the employer, Mr Gould, and all those comments by the accused at the time - some of them at
the time when he would actually have the body stored probably at the storage place from the circumstantial evidence that the Crown
relies on, all that is conduct which can be consistent only with the consciousness of guilt of the unlawful killing and not with
anything else, because that is the level to which that has to get before it can be used as I already told you.
This links the discussion of the Crown's submission with the directions about the law already given and is a direction to the jury
that consciousness of guilt is shown only by conduct which is consistent only with consciousness of guilt of the unlawful killing
and not with anything else. A little later his Honour said: So all that combined, Mr Hicks submitted, was a strong case which ought
to satisfy you beyond reasonable doubt that his possession of the body and all these other
circumstances, including his lies and his distractions and persistently given, are capable of only one inference, and that is that
he killed her unlawfully, and that is why he had to behave in that way, so he called it, for the purpose of his argument, the extreme
behaviour by Mr Rice which shows the consciousness of guilt of the unlawful killing.
Later again, still dealing with the prosecutor's closing address, his Honour said: She disappears. The circumstances of that weekend
and her disappearance are such that when you add that to the way her body was treated by Rice and his campaign of misinformation,
of lies, that the only conclusion open from all that, although there is no direct evidence of what happened and when and where, that
the only inference from those circumstantial evidence and the consciousness of guilt, is that the act which killed her was the unlawful
act by him and therefore it could only have been the unlawful and dangerous act which the medical evidence suggests, although not
concludes, namely, the pressure to her neck, and therefore you should use the combined effect of those factors to be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt as you must be. Mr Hicks submits you must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt and therefore convict the accused
of manslaughter.
In dealing with the final address of counsel for the applicant, the judge said that the argument was that the applicant may have
lied for all sorts of reasons and that the circumstantial evidence and the telling of the lies were far from enough to satisfy the
jury beyond reasonable doubt that the accused killed the woman by an unlawful and dangerous act. Later the judge said, in terms which
amounted to an endorsement of the proposition, that counsel had emphasised that the Crown had to exclude the possibility that the
lies were attributable to anything other than consciousness of guilt of manslaughter and then went on to say, still dealing with
the argument of counsel: So something went wrong, but how can you be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that it was an act of manslaughter
by the intentional killing by the unlawful and dangerous act. So all those arguments were directed to the proposition that when the
prosecution relies on consciousness of guilt, it must be able to exclude all other conclusions other than that the consciousness
of guilt is due to the consciousness of guilt of the crime charged and not of something else. He argued that that could not be done.
After referring to what counsel had said about the need for satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt, the judge concluded his charge
as follows: You must follow the very important rules which this community has in criminal trials about the onus and burden of proof
and the way you can use circumstantial evidence and evidence of consciousness of guilt. If you have no reasonable doubt as a result
of all this about the fact that this was a death in the circumstances of manslaughter, namely, by an act, conscious, voluntary act
which was both unlawful and dangerous by the accused that caused her death, well then, your duty is to convict him of manslaughter.
But it is also equally your sworn duty to acquit him if you have a reasonable doubt about any of the elements of that offence.
In my opinion, the charge, read as a whole, was adequate. That no exception was taken to it by the applicant's very experienced counsel
is significant.
I would dismiss this application.
[For a notable example of a case in which the body was never found and there was no evidence of the cause of death or of the circumstances
in which it occurred, see Pfennig v R
[1995] HCA 7
(1995) 182 CLR 461
, especially at 471 per Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ and at 536-7 per McHugh J. The court saw no difficulty about the drawing of
the inference of murder. RB.]
I agree with Brooking JA.
Southwell AJA
I have had the advantage of reading in draft the reasons prepared by Brooking JA. I agree that this application should be dismissed
for the reasons there given.
Application dismissed.
Solicitor for the applicant: Legal Aid Commission.
Solicitor for the respondent: PC Wood, solicitor to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter