URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2025/685.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DPP v Corbett [2025] VSC 685 (14 November 2025)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
AT MELBOURNE
CRIMINAL DIVISION
JUDE NOAH WYLE CORBETT
DATE OF HEARING
15 October 2025
DATE OF SENTENCE
14 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
DPP v Corbett
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VSC 685
CRIMINAL LAW — Sentence — Attempted murder— Offender,
aged 20, stabbed victim multiple times in his own home —
the offender’s father — Objectively serious offending —
History of childhood abuse and neglect while
living with victim —
Involvement of Child Protection services — Offender diagnosed with
personality disorder, complex
post‑traumatic stress disorder and some
cognitive disabilities — Reduced moral culpability — Full admissions
police and early plea of guilty — No relevant criminal history —
Very good prospects of rehabilitation — Sentenced
eight years’ imprisonment with a non‑parole period of
four years and three months’ imprisonment —
Bugmy v The
(2013) 249 CLR 571;
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269
Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic) v Herrmann
[2021] VSCA 160
(2021) 290 A Crim R
APPEARANCES
For the Crown
Ms K Hamill with Mr D White
Office of Public Prosecutions
For the Accused
Ms J Munster
Victoria Legal Aid
HER HONOUR:
Introduction
1 Jude Corbett, you have pleaded guilty to
the attempted murder of your father, DE. The maximum penalty for attempted
murder is 25
years’ imprisonment.
evening of 19 October 2024, you went to DE’s apartment and stabbed him
multiple times with a knife. You were arrested
hours later by police. You were
extremely cooperative and made full admissions to wanting to kill your father.
In order to place
your offending in context, it is necessary to first say
something about your background and personal
circumstances.
3 At the time of the offending, you
were 20 years old. You are the youngest of a sibship of three and have two
older sisters, Lucinda
(the eldest) and Tabitha. Your background, which I will
come to in more detail, was dysfunctional, damaging, abusive and unstable.
parents separated around the time of your birth, and your father formed a
relationship with another man. Child Protection
Services (‘Child
Protection’)
had extensive
involvement with your family throughout your childhood. Between the ages of
approximately 4 and 16, you and your sisters
were moved between foster care,
kinship care and the care of your father. From at least the age of 8, you
disclosed experiences
of sexual abuse by your father. These disclosures were
largely ‘not substantiated’ by Child Protection. Around 2012,
father was granted custody, and you and your sisters lived with him and his
partner for approximately three years. During this
time, the three of you
were exposed to physical violence, neglect and drug abuse, leading to your
removal from your father’s
care. What followed were different foster
placements, and periods where you were returned to your father’s custody.
last returned to your father’s care in January 2018 when you were
aged 14. Two months later, you left, and were ultimately
placed back
with foster carers who you knew and trusted. You did not return to your father
for the balance of your childhood, and
there was only minimal contact between
4 Around January 2024, your sister, Tabitha, who
had reconciled with your father, arranged for the three of you to meet. You
to the meeting, but found it uncomfortable and were flooded with bad
memories. You did not want your father to touch or hug you.
You left wanting
no further contact with your father and did not see or contact him again before
the night in question, other than
the occasional social media message
5 In October 2024, you and your mother were
living with your sister, Lucinda, and one of Lucinda’s young sons, in her
in Croydon. Lucinda’s elder son was living with his father.
Lucinda does not speak to your father and has made it clear to
him, since the
time of her second son’s birth, that he will never have any sort of
relationship with her children.
6 At around 7pm on 19
October, your mother called Tabitha, who was residing in NSW, asking for your
father’s address so she
could send him a birthday card. Tabitha provided
the address via a message. The phone was on loudspeaker, and according to you,
Tabitha spoke about your father, saying he had been doing a lot of counselling
said she was concerned that
DE had asked to have her son stay with him, so he could teach him to be a
‘real man’. This
is supported by Lucinda’s account of the
conversation, but not by Tabitha’s. According to Lucinda, Tabitha also
her that their father was using Lucinda’s children’s names as
passwords, which infuriated Lucinda.
7 At around
8pm, you photographed the message containing your father’s address in
St Kilda. You then borrowed your mother’s
car, telling her you were
going to visit a friend, and drove to St Kilda. You had two folding knives
with you in the vehicle. They
had been purchased weeks earlier, and it is not
alleged they were purchased for the purpose of committing this, or any other,
8 At around 9pm, you parked nearby and
walked to your father’s apartment, taking one knife with you. You
climbed a fence to
access an internal courtyard and banged on the front door,
eventually calling out that it was you. Your father opened the door and
you inside. The two of you engaged in small talk for around half an hour.
According to DE, you told him about your grandparents
passing and said you were
withdrawing from ice. You told him you had purchased a knife and handed him the
open knife. DE looked
at the knife, closed it and handed it back to you. You
then said, ‘I have to do this because I know what you’re
to do to my nephews and I don’t want you to do it, I’m
going to stop you’. You proceeded to stab DE in the throat
and arm. DE
yelled and pleaded with you to stop, but you continued to stab him. At one
point he crumpled in a heap on the floor,
and you stabbed him in the back of the
head. A neighbour heard the commotion and tried to open the front door, but you
him from doing so. After a while, the neighbour left and went to look
for help. You asked DE what you should do, and he told you
to open the door.
You then left the apartment, closing the door behind you, and ran back to your
vehicle. At some point, you discarded
9 The neighbour returned, together with
another resident, and saw DE covered in blood. Emergency services were called,
and paramedics arrived. DE was rushed to the Alfred Hospital
emergency department. He had suffered extensive blood loss and
life‑threatening
injuries. He was placed into an induced coma and
administered emergency care, including massive blood transfusions. There were
in excess of 30 knife wounds and, if not for the prompt emergency treatment
and medical intensive care, DE would have died from his
injuries. He suffered
injuries to his spinal cord, neck and pancreas, and had surface injuries to all
parts of his body. After
10 days, he was woken from the induced coma and
transferred to a ward for further monitoring and treatment. He was finally
from hospital on 8 November
10 After returning to your vehicle in
St Kilda, you called your sister Lucinda and told her you were ok. You
then returned to her
apartment in Croydon. While in the elevator, you pulled
your sleeves over your hands to conceal the blood from the CCTV cameras.
inside, you asked Lucinda to shave your head, saying it would ‘make their
job a lot easier if they catch me’.
You placed your hair cuttings and
clothes into a garbage bag, and placed the bag inside a backpack in the living
room. You then
went to bed.
11 Police identified
the vehicle you were driving and telephoned your mother to ask whether you were
you to attend at the front door to speak with
them. At 4:23am, you presented at the front door with your mother and your
Lucinda. You were peaceably arrested and interviewed later that day.
You did not request to speak to a lawyer and made extensive
admissions to the
12 You told police that you had been
physically and sexually abused by your father since your childhood. You said
you wanted to stop
DE from hurting your nephews in the same way he had hurt you,
your sisters and your dog. You went to his apartment intending to
You felt relief while stabbing your father, and hoped he was dead. You knew the
knife was very sharp, and you recalled
stabbing him multiple times, including in
the throat and neck. As soon as police arrived, you decided to be honest with
told police you needed mental health assistance.
13 You were charged with the attempted murder of DE
and remanded into custody. You were granted bail on 21 December 2024,
the seriousness of the charge and the inevitability of a custodial
sentence, and remained on bail until the date of your plea.
Victim impact
14 DE provided a victim impact statement.
He has been left hurt, angry and fearful as a result of your attack. His
depression and
anxiety have worsened. Physically, he is unable to walk without
a crutch or aid. He is unable to effectively use his dominant right
is worried he may never be able to work again and cannot manage public
transport, meaning he uses taxis or Uber. This
has resulted in greater costs
and financial pressures. He is scared that his physical appearance means he
will remain single, and
he feels that his lifestyle has slowed and his injuries
have aged him. He often suffers from pain, and his sleep is constantly affected
Personal circumstances
15 You were born in January 2004 and are
now 21 years old. You have a very minor criminal history which is of no
relevance when sentencing
you today. Three reports were tendered on your
behalf. In the order they were written, they were: a neuropsychological report
Ms Jane Lofthouse dated 17 December 2024; a family violence expert
report authored by Dr Boxall, criminologist, dated 24 August 2025;
a forensic psychiatric report by Dr Pandurangi dated 13 September
2025. Dr Pandurangi gave evidence on the plea. Five character
were also tendered, including one co‑authored by Brian and Helen Sparrow
(‘the Sparrows’), who have
cared for you frequently throughout your
16 Child Protection were involved with your
family before you were born. For the first four years of your life, your
mother cared
for you and your sisters. Your mother had significant mental
health diagnoses. Around the age of four, you and your sisters were
from your mother’s care and placed into foster care. The reasons are
somewhat unclear, but include allegations of
physical and emotional abuse, and
neglect. In 2011, you disclosed experiences of sexual abuse perpetrated by your
father, but the
reports were ‘not substantiated’ by Child
Protection. You and your sisters were interviewed by
and no clear disclosures were
made. Child Protection also held concerns about your mother’s mental
health, and whether you
may have been coached to make accusations against your
father. Your mother applied for an intervention order against your father,
protecting both her and the children. A final order was made, by consent, in
July 2011. Two months later, you and your sisters
were removed from your
mother’s care, and you were placed into foster care placements, including
with the Sparrows.
17 In April 2012, you and your
sisters were reunified with your father. Your father and his
then‑partner, Mr Ashley Sparrow
(Brian and Helen’s son), were
granted custody and you commenced living with them full‑time. Your
mother’s access
was limited to supervised visits, due to concerns she was
saying negative and untrue things about DE. In May 2012, you disclosed
your father and his partner were sexually abusing you, but you later retracted
the accusation. Child Protection remained involved,
and between August 2011 and
December 2013 it appears that a number of concerns arose while you were in your
father’s care.
Some of these concerns were ‘substantiated’ by
Child Protection, including allegations of sexual abuse or failure to
you from harm of that type. Another area of concern was that your father was
‘unresponsive’ to the emotional
needs of his children. You remained
living with your father until November 2015, despite these
18 After three years of being in DE’s
full‑time care, you and your sisters all made disclosures of physical
abuse, neglect,
exposure to drug use and drug making, and violence between DE
and Mr Ashley Sparrow. These disclosures were substantiated by Child
Protection and, in November 2015, you were removed from your father’s
care. You were again placed in the care of the Sparrows.
19 In July 2016, when you were aged 12, Child
Protection reunified you and your sisters with your father. Your father moved
a share house with two other men but this arrangement was deemed
unsatisfactory. Child Protection assessed the men as being unsuitable
due to mental health issues, criminal activity, inappropriate sexual behaviour
and potential grooming behaviour. There were
further allegations of neglect,
abuse, and exposure to family violence and drugs. This is also when your
sister, Lucinda, reported
that she had had contact with the men, who told her DE
wanted to have ‘father‑son’ sex with you once you turned
In November 2016 you were placed back with the Sparrows. You progressed well in
this placement. You made strong connections
with the Sparrows, attended school
and made a positive connection with your counsellor.
20 In January 2018, aged 14, you returned to your
father pursuant to a court order. Two months later, you felt unsafe with
your father
and left to live with a family friend. In June 2018, you were
placed back in the care of the Sparrows. At your request, this arrangement
formalised and a Permanent Care Order was made, transferring parental
responsibility to the Sparrows. You remained living with
the Sparrows until
2022 when, aged 18, you moved into a local share house.
21 Your education was unsurprisingly disrupted. You
struggled from a young age and repeated prep. During that repeated year, you
were removed from your mother’s care. You passed Year 9 but failed
Years 10 and 11 and left school. Your behaviour at school
disruptive. You were frequently suspended for fighting, non‑attendance
and engaging in drug and alcohol use. After leaving
school, you enrolled in a
plumbing apprenticeship. You struggled with the theory component, could not be
bothered attending work
and left after nine months.
22 You began drinking your father’s alcohol at
age 12, and drank steadily and increasingly throughout your adolescence.
stopped drinking when you were aged around 19. At age 14, you
commenced smoking cannabis. Your cannabis use steadily increased,
such that you
were smoking approximately seven grams per day. Your use only ceased when
you were remanded, and you have not used
cannabis since being released on bail.
Between the ages of 18 and 19, you tried many other illicit drugs but
did not use any of
them regularly.
23 In 2024, you
were living with your mother and maternal grandparents in Wallan. Your life was
going well. You had obtained an
apprenticeship as a heavy diesel mechanic in
Heidelberg, which you enjoyed, and were driving daily to work. Unfortunately,
2024, both your grandparents passed away within a week of each other,
and you and your mother had to leave the Wallan house. Ashley
Sparrow, your
father’s former partner who you saw as a step-father figure, also passed
away around this time. As a result
of the disruption and the need to move, you
did not attend work at times and ultimately lost your job. Three weeks
prior to this
offending, you and your mother moved in with your sister,
Psychological material
24 Ms Lofthouse interviewed you in
December 2024 in custody. In her opinion, your overall intelligence and general
ability fell within
the borderline range, and for the most part, fell within the
lower end of the borderline range. These deficits would have been present
the time of the offending and, without appropriate treatment, will continue to
impinge on your future functioning. You have long‑standing
patterns of
poor impulse control, ill‑considered decision‑making and rigid
problem solving. Ms Lofthouse opined that
your intellectual functioning,
together with the psychological factors relating to your history of abuse, would
have significantly
contributed to your offending on this night. In combination,
these matters led you to react and behave violently, in an ill‑reasoned
attempt to protect your nephews from your father. Additionally, your cannabis
use would have further destabilised your psychological
state and adversely
impacted your intellectual
functioning.
25 Ms Lofthouse addressed the
question of whether you have an acquired brain injury (‘ABI’),
resulting from physical blows
to the head as a child, or early drug and alcohol
use, or both. Initially, she said your intellectual functioning was
‘suggestive’
of an ABI, and that your early drug and alcohol use
would have placed you ‘at risk’ of an ABI. She then concluded
you are a person ‘with an ABI’. I found it unclear how that
conclusion was reached. However, it seemed to me that Ms
Lofthouse’s
opinions were based on you suffering from a significant intellectual impairment,
and did not depend on the precise
cause of that intellectual impairment or the
diagnosis of an ABI.
26 Dr Boxall addressed the
impact of family violence on you as a child. Between the ages of 10
and 16, you were repeatedly placed
in DE’s care, despite documented
concerns and reports of abuse. Dr Boxall noted that your disclosures,
including about your
father, were often minimised or discounted by people in
authority. When your mother raised concerns, she was accused of coaching
children. These experiences likely reinforced your perception that formal
systems could not be relied upon to protect vulnerable
children. This context
is critical in understanding your decision‑making on this night, and it is
likely that you did not
perceive formal help‑seeking as a viable option.
This in turn contributed to your beliefs that you alone could protect your
nephews, and that violent action was the only viable means of
protection.
27 I note that three of the character
references attest to your traumatic childhood. Ms Joyce, who has known you
since you were 7,
recalls your father’s house was always filthy and
he made the children clean while he stayed in bed. She would often arrive
find you and your sisters in tears after being punished with a wooden spoon or a
belt. Ms Wilson has known you since you were
10 years old. She also
recalls your father demanding you do the chores while he lay in bed, and said it
was common for you to have
marks on your body from being hit with a wooden spoon
or a belt. The Sparrows wrote that when you were in their care, you often
not want to go to supervised visits with your father, saying you did not like
him or did not feel well. You told the Sparrows
on the bottom in a way that made you feel uncomfortable, and that your father
had said he could not
wait until you were old enough to have
‘father‑son’ sex. The Sparrows reported these concerns to
Child Protection.
For completeness, I note that DE, in his recorded police
statement, denied ever abusing you or your sisters.
28 Dr Pandurangi diagnosed you with a Moderate
Personality Disorder arising from your early life experiences, which in turn
in you suffering from a profound lack of sense of self. You experience
poor self‑worth, difficulties forming relationships,
poor emotional
regulation, impulsivity, inability to manage conflict and lack of consequential
thinking. You also suffer from complex
post‑traumatic stress disorder
resulting from your past, prolonged trauma. You are at risk of developing a
depressive disorder
in the future. In his opinion, there is no single isolated
cause or event which can fully explain your offending. However, your
health conditions, which existed at the time, would have impaired your capacity
to make calm and reasonable decisions.
Lofthouse, whose report was written before you were granted bail, expressed
concern that your cognitive functioning may impinge
on your ability to engage
with treatment. Dr Pandurangi opined that, given your age and willingness
to seek treatment, you have
excellent prospects of rehabilitation. I note that
you told police during your interview that you both needed and wanted mental
health treatment. There is no evidence of past antisocial behaviours or
difficulties with violent attitudes. Overall, Dr Pandurangi
assessed you
to be a moderate risk for future serious physical harm, and a low risk of
imminent violence. Your underlying mental
health conditions will likely make
your time in prison more onerous when compared to a person who does not suffer
from any mental
health afflictions.
evidence, Dr Pandurangi noted that while on bail you have attended
Headspace and made good inroads into your difficulties.
You have also complied
with the requirements of Court Integrated Services Program (‘CISP’)
bail. This shows you have
the capacity and motivation to engage with treatment,
which enhances your prospects of rehabilitation.
31 Dr Pandurangi gave evidence that you
suffered from an extremely neglectful and disrupted childhood, with no
opportunity to form
proper attachments to caregivers. If the allegations of
sexual abuse are true, that makes the disadvantage you suffered even more
severe. He noted that the records indicate you repeated allegations of abuse
over a long period of time, from late childhood to
mid‑adolescence. You
repeatedly did not want contact with your father, and did not want to be placed
in his care. You have
consistently and truly believed the sexual abuse
32 Dr Pandurangi stated that
childhood shapes our personalities, and personality disorders commonly result
from problems etched in
early life. People with such disorders cannot deal with
difficult situations, react inappropriately to stress, and use maladaptive
coping strategies, such as consuming drugs. In his opinion, your underlying
mental health conditions are important when explaining
why you behaved as you
did on this night.
33 In cross‑examination,
Dr Pandurangi agreed that your nephews were not in imminent or immediate
danger, and you travelled
for approximately one hour to reach your
father’s apartment. Neither of these matters altered his opinion that
your mental
health conditions are linked to the offending.
considerations
34 Your counsel submitted your moral
culpability is reduced due to a combination of limb 1 of
and the principles
difficult to separate out these overlapping considerations, and it is not
necessary to do so.
My task is to
assess your overall moral culpability. I accept that there is a causal
connection between your offending behaviour
and your background of childhood
Based on the material, it
is likely you were sexually abused by your father, or at least exposed to
situations and behaviours that
made you feel sexually uncomfortable and unsafe.
However, as the prosecution accept, whether the sexual abuse did or did not
what matters is that you genuinely believe that it did. Through no fault
of yours, the abuse you experienced (or believe you experienced)
father, and what you would have perceived as a failure by authorities to protect
you, would have fostered your view that
other people cannot be trusted to
protect your nephews. Your background of neglect and deprivation was the
genesis of your mental
health conditions, and additionally, you suffer from
cognitive disabilities. I accept that limb 1 of
enlivened insofar as your intellectual disability and mental health issues
impaired your ability to make calm and reasoned decisions.
Overall, I accept
that there are good reasons to find that your moral culpability is reduced. The
same factors mean the weight
afforded to general deterrence will also be
35 Based on the evidence of
Dr Pandurangi and Ms Lofthouse, I accept that your mental health
conditions and cognitive impairments
will make your time in custody more onerous
than it would be if you did not suffer from these conditions and
impairments.
This mitigates the
sentence I would otherwise impose.
Nature and circumstances of the offence
36 Both counsel referred me to a number
of sentencing decisions, acknowledging the limitations that attach to any
comparison process.
cases of attempted murder, involving circumstances of family violence and the
use of a knife. I have found them helpful
and they provide some general
guidance, noting of course that each sentencing decision ultimately turns on its
own unique facts.
37 Attempted murder is a grave
offence, involving a specific intent to
You tried to take the life
of DE and, but for rapid medical intervention, you would have succeeded. Your
counsel submitted your
offending falls within the ‘middle range of
gravity’ for the very serious offence of attempted murder. The
prosecution
warned of the need for caution when employing terms such as
‘middle range’, but nonetheless submitted this was a ‘serious
example’ of the offence.
38 In my view, this
is an objectively serious example of attempted murder. DE was in his own home,
where he was entitled to feel
safe. He was unarmed, defenceless and no doubt
utterly shocked when you commenced your brutal attack. You ignored his pleas
you to stop, and prevented a neighbour from coming to his aid. I do not
agree with your counsel’s characterisation that, after
the attack, you
were asking your father for advice and permission to leave. I am somewhat
unsure if this was said to be mitigating,
but in my view, it is not. I accept
that you asked DE what you should do, but when he told you to open the door, you
and closed the door behind you. This was also a crime of family
violence, albeit not intimate partner violence, which is more frequently
physical injuries sustained by a victim of attempted murder range from serious
and life‑changing, such as brain damage
or quadriplegia, to
non‑existent, such as where a gun is fired but the shot misses. The
nature of the physical injuries suffered
by a victim is relevant when assessing
the gravity of the offence.
Here, DE’s injuries are not trivial, but nor do they sit at the most
serious end of the spectrum. He bears the physical impact
of your attack and
will continue to suffer from those impacts; in particular, he has reduced
mobility and an inability to effectively
use his right hand.
40 The prosecution characterised your offending as
‘vigilante behaviour’. I have found the label
‘vigilantism’
unhelpful in this case as, while not inaccurate, it
does not fully capture the complex, subjective factors that are linked to your
offending. You acted to protect your nephews and, while you knew what you were
doing was wrong, your behaviour was affected by your
own childhood trauma
inflicted by the very person you attacked on this night. Your moral culpability
is reduced for the reasons
I have been through. Nonetheless, your crime must be
condemned by the courts and you must be adequately punished. No person has
right to take the law into their own hands and attempt to kill another human
being, regardless of what they know or believe that
person has done in the past,
or may do in the future. General deterrence remains a relevant sentencing
Other matters
41 You made full admissions to the police
and pleaded guilty at the earliest opportunity. This entitles you to a
meaningful sentencing
discount. Your plea of guilty spared the witnesses in
this case, particularly the victim DE, from the trauma of having to give
and relive the events of this night. It shows a willingness by you to
facilitate the course of justice. I am less persuaded that
your guilty plea
provides any real evidence of remorse. The question of remorse is vexed in this
case. I accept that you wish you
had not done this, but as Dr Pandurangi
stated, any expression of regret is heavily coloured by your early life
experience and resulting
mental health conditions, together with your cognitive
difficulties. It could not be said that you are genuinely remorseful, but
have taken responsibility for your offending.
prosecution submitted the principle of community protection in sentencing is
‘particularly relevant’ in this case.
The submission relied on your
intellectual functioning, history of substance use, and maladaptive but
entrenched personality disorder.
Additionally, the ‘planned and
unprovoked’ nature of the offending elevates the importance of community
protection.
I note that this was not a random attack on a member of the public.
Community protection is always a relevant sentencing principle,
but I can find
no reason to place greater or additional weight on the principle when sentencing
you. You have no history of violent
offending. You have not attempted to
an intervention
order in place preventing any contact, and you have been
residing a considerable distance away. I accept that the victim may remain
at some risk. Specific deterrence has some relevance here, and the need to give
effect to that consideration will be addressed by
the inevitable period of
imprisonment I will impose.
43 You are not a
young offender within the meaning of the
turned 21, but the principles relevant to sentencing young offenders still
have relevance here.
and rehabilitation assume some significance. There is great public benefit in
the rehabilitation of a young offender,
and maximising the prospect that they
will live a productive and law‑abiding life. Additionally, youth may be
mitigatory because
the courts recognise that the young and immature are more
prone to ill‑considered or rash
The decision you
made on this night would fit that description. That said, the weight to be
attached to your age is reduced given
the seriousness of your
counsel also submitted that your disadvantaged background ‘may’
warrant the exercise of mercy.
The prosecution submitted that your personal circumstances are not so extreme as
to warrant a ‘downward departure’ from
the principle of
proportionality. The principle of proportionality is not displaced here.
However, it is well established that
mercy has always been properly regarded as
running ‘hand in hand with the sentencing
discretion’.
Here, on the
evidence before me, your youth and traumatic background are strong mitigating
factors and provide a basis to adopt
a more lenient approach. Nonetheless, any
punishment must be ‘just in all the
circumstances’,
an approach cannot justify an inadequate
45 Ms Joyce and Ms Wilson have known you
since you were a child. They both describe you as a quiet, sweet boy who,
despite the trauma,
was respectful, courteous and showed kindness to others.
Mrs Robertson, a qualified Men’s Behaviour Change program
facilitator,
has known you for the past seven months. You have been
working with her grandson and have regularly visited her home. In her view,
have a courteous, kind and friendly nature, and she has never observed any
negative behaviour. Mr Robertson, your employer for
seven months, described you as trustworthy and conscientious. He is
prepared to employ you despite this matter. Finally,
the Sparrows’
reference provides considerable insight into your life. After this incident,
they visited you in prison and
agreed you could live with them if granted bail.
Since being on bail, you have been very respectful and taken your bail
seriously. You have taken responsibility for what you did and wish
you had taken a different course. You have struggled at times
with anxiety, but
overall you have remained positive and tried your best to prepare yourself for
prison. The Sparrows attended the
plea hearing and remain very supportive of
46 The final CISP bail report, dated
2 July 2025, confirms that you attended drug counselling, engaged well and
reported abstinence
from all drugs including cannabis. Your CISP worker found
you to be personable, engaged and fully compliant. You were reluctant
consult with a therapist due to negative past experiences, but overcame this
reluctance and attended Headspace. A letter from
Headspace confirmed you
attended counselling. You participated willingly and with a high level of
engagement. In my view, your
prospects of rehabilitation are very good for two
main reasons: one, your youth and lack of prior convictions; two, your
willingness
to engage in treatment. Dr Pandurangi gave evidence that your
mental health and cognitive difficulties will not prevent you from
benefitting
from appropriate treatment.
Conclusion and sentence
47 The different purposes of sentencing
frequently pull in different directions, as this case highlights. DE had, and
right to live a peaceful and safe life. Fortunately, he survived
your attack, but the real gravamen of your crime is that you intended
him. However, there are also substantial matters in mitigation, including your
cooperation with police, guilty plea, youth,
reduced moral culpability, lack of
criminal history and positive prospects of rehabilitation.
48 On the charge of attempted murder, you are
sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment. I fix a non‑parole
period of four
years and three months’
imprisonment.
49 I declare you have served
93 days by way of pre‑sentence detention, not including today, and
such period is reckoned as time
already served under this
50 I make the forfeiture order sought by
the prosecution.
51 Pursuant to s 6AAA, but
for your plea of guilty, the sentence I would have imposed is 10 years’
imprisonment with a non-parole
period of seven years’
imprisonment.
For ease, I will use the
umbrella term ‘Child Protection’ throughout these reasons, as the
various services and departments
have had different names throughout the
relevant period.
SOCIT are the Sexual Offences
and Child Abuse Investigation Team of Victoria Police, who specialise in
investigating child abuse
and sexual crimes.
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571;
[2013] HCA 37
DPP (Vic) v Herrmann
[2021] VSCA 160
(2021) 290 A Crim R 110
, 128 [84] (Maxwell P, Kaye, Niall,
T Forrest and Emerton JJA);
[2021] VSCA 160
594–595 [43]–[44] (French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and
Keane JJ), where the High Court set out the two ways
childhood deprivation
are potentially relevant when sentencing. One is in a ‘general’
sense, meaning the moral culpability
of an offender is likely to be less than an
offender who had the advantage of a stable and regular home environment. The
is in a specific or ‘causal’ sense, where there is a link or
nexus between the offending and childhood abuse or disadvantage
offender experienced. See also
118–120 [36]–[42]
(Maxwell P, Kaye, Niall, T Forrest and Emerton JJA).
The cases referred to were
DPP v Cigercioglu
[2023] VSC 772
R v Mikhail
[2020] VSC 681
R v Hannarong
[2017] VSC 264
R v Tedford
Chey v The King
[2022] VSCA 262
DPP v Chambers
DPP v Boodhoo
[2016] VSC 458
[2016] VSC 516.
Hudson v The Queen; DPP v
[2010] VSCA 332
(2010) 30 VR 610
, 628 [69] (Ashley, Redlich and Harper JJA);
[2010] VSCA 332
Of the eight cases referred
to, seven involved intimate partner violence.
[72]–[73] (Ashley, Redlich and Harper JJA) where the Court
differentiated between the sentences on two charges of attempted
murder for a
number of reasons, including that the injuries suffered by one victim were more
serious that those suffered by the other
Sentencing Act 1991
(definition of ‘young offender’).
R v McGaffin
[2010] SASCFC 22
206 A Crim R 188
, 210 [69] (White J).
Azzopardi v R
[2011] VSCA 372
, 57 [44] (Redlich JA);
[2011] VSCA 372.
Counsel relied on
(Vic) v Snow
[2020] VSCA 67
, 25 [86] (Maxwell P, Beach JA and
Croucher AJA).
[1997] VSC 22
, 592 (Tadgell JA). Further, at 594, Charles JA observed that
the task of the sentencing judge was to consider whether, on the evidence
him or her, ‘a reasonable basis existed in well‑balanced judgment
for adopting a course which might bear less
heavily on the applicant than if he
were to receive his just deserts’.
Adams v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 77
, 15–16 [70] (Nettle, Redlich JJA and
Kyrou AJA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (299 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter