URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICmr/2025/62.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
'FZ8' and City of Casey (Freedom of Information) [2025] VICmr 62; (6 June 2025)
Notice of Decision and Reasons for Decision
City of Casey
Decision date:
6 June 2025
Exemptions and provision considered:
Sections 33(1), 34(1)(b), 25
'FZ8' and City of Casey
(Freedom of Information)
[2025] VICmr 62
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION – council documents – building plans and
drawings – external building plans – section
33(1) personal affairs
information – business, commercial or financial information of an
undertaking
All references to legislation in this document are to the
Information Act 1982
) unless otherwise stated.
Notice of Decision
I have conducted a review under section 49F of the
Agency’s fresh decision to refuse access to a document requested by the
under the FOI Act.
My decision on the Applicant’s request differs from the Agency’s
decision and more information is to be released.
The Schedule of Documents in
sets out my decision.
Please refer to page 8 for information about review rights through the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (
My reasons for decision follow.
Penny Eastman
Public Access
Deputy Commissioner
6 June 2025
Reasons for Decision
Background to review
Applicant made a request to the Agency seeking access to the following
I am requesting to get some documents (Plans, Permits and
Drawings) of the pergola with fire wall constructed [address in Victoria
provided between specified dates].
submitting their request, the Applicant consented to ‘personal details
and/or irrelevant information be removed’
from any documents located in
response to their request.
Agency identified eight pages of engineering drawings (the
refused access to all pages in full under section 31(1)(a) and 31(1)(d). The
Agency’s decision letter sets out the reasons
Review application
Applicant sought review by the Information Commissioner under section 49A(1) of
the Agency’s decision to refuse access to
the document.
Applicant and the Agency were invited to make a written submission under section
49H(2) in relation to the review.
receipt of the Agency’s submission, OVIC staff provided the Agency with
their initial view that section 31 would not
apply to the document.
49M(1) permits an agency to make a fresh decision on an FOI request during a
review. On [date], the Agency made a fresh decision
to refuse access in the
document under section 33(1) in full.
Applicant did not agree with the Agency’s fresh decision and, as required
by section 49MA(2), I proceeded with my review
on the basis of the fresh
have examined a copy of the document subject to review.
have considered relevant communications and submissions received from the
undertaking my review, I have had regard to the object of the FOI Act, which is
to create a general right of access to information
in the possession of the
Government or other public bodies, limited only by exceptions and exemptions
necessary to protect essential
public interests, privacy and business
note Parliament’s intention the FOI Act must be interpreted so as to
further the object of the Act and any discretions conferred
by the Act must be
exercised, as far as possible, so as to facilitate and promote the disclosure of
information in a timely manner
and at the lowest reasonable cost.
conducting a review under section 49F, section 49P requires that I make a new or
‘fresh decision’. Therefore, my review
does not involve determining
whether the Agency’s decision is correct, but rather requires my fresh
decision to be the ‘correct
or preferable
This involves
ensuring my decision is correctly made under the FOI Act and any other
applicable law in force at the time of my decision.
Section 33(1) – Documents affecting personal privacy of third
more information about section 33(1) see the FOI
Guidelines.
33(1) protects an individual’s privacy where their right to privacy
outweighs the public interest in disclosing their
information.
This will only occur
when disclosing the individual’s personal affairs information is
unreasonable.
document or information is exempt under section 33(1) if two conditions are
(a) the document or information relates to the ‘personal affairs’ of
a natural person (living or deceased); and
(b) disclosure of that personal affairs information is unreasonable in all the
circumstances.
Does the document contain personal affairs information of other
individuals?
concept of personal affairs information is broad. Information will relate to the
personal affairs of a person if it ‘concerns
or affects that person as an
individual’.
This includes
information relating to health, private behaviour, home life, or personal or
family relationships of
individuals.
document will indirectly disclose personal affairs information if it contains
information from which any person’s identity,
address or location can
reasonably be determined. This means that a document can be exempt under section
33(1) where the document
itself does not contain personal affairs information,
but its disclosure would reveal personal affairs information.
affairs information can be revealed or indirectly disclosed by connecting or
linking the information in the disclosed document
with other information
available to the applicant.
requested document shows information and drawings titled “Standard
Notes”, “Site Plan”, “Timber
Deck Plan”,
“Roof Plan”, “Elevation (A, B & C)”, “Section
(1 & 2)”, “Deck
Framing Plan” and “Roof Framing
Plan”. These pages all show external features (outside and some of which
be publicly visible), including measurements and construction
requirements, of the building project.
there is reference to an existing building, it is labelled as “Existing
Residence” and shows the outline of the
building from either a “Site
Plan” (topographic) or “Elevation” (side-on) viewpoint. There
are no internal
features of the “Existing Residence” displayed
within the document.
document, titled “Architectural and Engineering Drawings,” contains
personal affairs information on each page consisting
of an individual’s
name in a box titled “Client”, which is assumed to be the owner of
the property, as well as
in a box titled “Project” which is assumed
to contain the private address of the “Client.” It also contains
personal affairs information of persons who prepared or certified the document,
such as their name, initials and building practitioner
Applicant specified when submitting their FOI request to the Agency that they
consented to ‘personal details’ being
deleted. Therefore, I am
satisfied all the information described above, that specifically identifies
third parties, is irrelevant
information that the Applicant consented to be
am satisfied that plans for a third party’s property constitute personal
affairs information, as they concern and affect the
third party. It can be
inferred that the Applicant intended this information to be included in the
scope of their FOI request.
Consultation
Agency is required to consult with affected third parties, unless it is not
reasonably practicable to do so.
is no information before me regarding any consultation having taken place
between the Agency and a third party, however, for
the purposes of this review
it will be assumed any third party would reasonably likely object to their
personal affairs information
being released.
Would disclosure of
the personal affairs information be unreasonable?
determining whether disclosure of the personal affairs information would be
unreasonable in the circumstances, I have considered
the following factors:
The nature of the personal affairs information
The personal affairs information relates to a third party’s dwelling
and there is an important right to privacy in relation
to one’s dwelling.
However, there are no internal plans for the dwelling, which would be more
sensitive in nature in comparison
to the external plans to which the document
concerns. I do not consider plans relating to external parts of a dwelling to be
particularly where they would be visible to neighbouring properties.
The circumstances in which the information was obtained
The document was obtained by the Agency as part of its obligations under
relevant building and planning laws.
The extent to which the information is available to the public
On the information before me, I understand the document is not publicly
The Applicant’s interest in the information
During consultation with the Agency, the Applicant revealed their request for
the information was to assist with identification and
resolution to issues
arising during the construction period and after completion of the building
project. Specifically, the Applicant
advised in their request that their
neighbour built a pergola and fire wall on the zero boundary without the
Applicant’s consent.
Whether any public or important interest would be promoted by release of
the information
There is no public or important interest to promote from release of the
particular information contained in the document, noting it
engineering drawings. Rather, disclosure would primarily serve the
Applicant’s interest.
Whether the individuals to whom the information relates object, or would
be likely to object, to the release of the information
As stated, it is reasonable to assume the property owner would object to
their personal affairs information being released, given
the document concerns
their dwelling and the circumstances in which the document was obtained by the
Whether disclosure of the information would or would be reasonably likely
to endanger the life or physical safety of any person
There is no information before to suggest this factor is relevant in this
balance of the above factors, I am not satisfied it would be contrary to the
public interest to disclose the external plans. As
such, I am not satisfied the
document is exempt under section 33(1).
Section 34(1)(b)
– business, commercial or financial information of an
undertaking
Agency did not rely on the exemption under section 34(1)(b). However, as I have
decided section 33(1) does not apply to the document
in full, section 34(1)(b)
is a relevant exemption to consider.
document or information is exempt under section 34(1)(b) if three conditions are
(a) the document or information was acquired from a business, commercial, or
financial undertaking.
(b) the information relates to matters of a business, commercial or financial
(c) disclosure of the information is likely to expose the undertaking
unreasonably to disadvantage (based on matters listed in section
34(2) and any
other relevant considerations).
Was the document
acquired from a business, commercial, or financial
undertaking?
phrase ‘information acquired’ involves some positive handing over of
information to an agency in a precise
actual document does not itself need to be acquired from an
undertaking.
It may also disclose
relevant information acquired from the
undertaking.
information can be acquired from an undertaking through a third
document comprises of engineering drawings prepared by a third party business
undertaking. The document itself was not obtained
by the Agency directly from
the third party business undertaking, however, the information itself discloses
information acquired
from the third party undertaking.
information relate to matters of a business, commercial or financial
‘Business’,
‘commercial’ and ‘financial’ should each be given their
ordinary meaning.
am satisfied the engineering drawings relate to matters of a business nature, as
they would have been produced for a fee for the
disclosure of the document be likely to expose the undertaking unreasonably to
disadvantage?
considering whether disclosure will expose an undertaking to unreasonable
disadvantage, I can consider, along with any other relevant
consideration, the
factors set out in section 34(2). These are:
(a) whether the information is generally available to competitors of the
undertaking.
(b) whether the information would be exempt if it were generated by an agency or
a Minister.
(c) whether the information could be disclosed without causing substantial harm
to the competitive position of the undertaking.
(d) whether there are any considerations in the public interest in favour of
disclosure which outweigh considerations of competitive
disadvantage to the
undertaking, for instance, the public interest in evaluating aspects of
government regulation of corporate practices
or environmental controls.
relevant considerations include whether disclosure would:
(a) give a competitor of the undertaking a competitive financial advantage.
(b) enable that competitor to engage in destructive competition with the
undertaking.
(c) lead to
unwarranted conclusions about the undertaking's financial affairs and position
that result in commercial and market
consequences.
is no information before me concerning the views of the third party business
undertaking that created the document about its
disclosure. In any case, I
consider the business undertaking may have objected to the document being
disclosed if it was consulted
and I have factored this into my considerations
the document would not be available to the undertaking’s competitors, it
is unlikely that the designs could be copied
by a competitor because drawings
are designed for a specific dwelling and purpose.
is no information before me to support that disclosure of the document would
have any detrimental impact on the third party
business undertaking on business,
commercial or financial terms.
Accordingly,
I am satisfied that disclosing the document would not be likely to expose the
third party business undertaking unreasonably
to disadvantage.
Section 25 – Deletion of exempt or irrelevant
information
25 requires an agency to grant access to an edited copy of a document where it
is practicable to delete exempt or irrelevant
information and the applicant
agrees to receiving such a copy.
whether it is ‘practicable’ to delete exempt or irrelevant
information requires an agency or Minister to consider:
(a) the effort involved in making the deletions from a resources point of
(b) the effectiveness of those deletions – that is, whether the edited
document still has meaning.
information is information which is clearly outside the scope, or beyond the
terms of the Applicant’s request.
irrelevant information contained within the document relates to the stated
request that no personal information was required.
Therefore, the explicit
personal information referred to in paragraph 22 is considered as irrelevant
information under the terms
of the request.
have considered the effect of deleting irrelevant information from the document.
In my view, it is practicable for the Agency to
delete the irrelevant
information because it would not require substantial time and effort, and the
edited document would retain
the information before me, I am not satisfied personal affairs information in
the document is exempt from release under section
33(1). I am also satisfied the
document is not exempt from release under section 34(1)(b).
I am satisfied it is practicable to provide the Applicant with an edited copy of
the document with irrelevant information deleted
in accordance with section 25,
access is granted in part.
document is to be released in accordance with the marked-up version provided to
the Agency with my decision.
Timeframe to seek a review of my
either party to this review are not satisfied with my decision, they are
entitled to apply to VCAT for it to be
Applicant may apply to VCAT for a review up to 60 days from the date they are
given this Notice of Decision.
Agency may apply to VCAT for a review up to 14 days from the date it is given
this Notice of Decision.
Information
Alternatively, VCAT may be contacted by email at
admin@vcat.vic.gov.au or by
telephone on 1300 018 228.
Agency is required to notify the Information Commissioner in writing as soon as
practicable if either party applies to VCAT for
a review of my
party review rights
I have determined to release a document in part which was refused by the Agency
in full under section 33(1) and which contains
business affairs information, if
practicable, I am required to notify affected third party individuals or
business undertakings of
their right to seek review by VCAT of my decision
within 60 days from the date they are given
this case, I am satisfied it is practicable to notify relevant third parties of
their review rights and confirm they will be notified
of my decision on the date
of decision or as soon as possible thereafter.
decision takes effect
decision does not take effect until the third party’s 60-day review period
expires. If a review application is made to VCAT,
my decision will be subject to
any VCAT determination.
Document No.
Date of document
Document Description
No. of pages
Agency Decision
OVIC Decision
Engineering Drawings
Refused in full
Section 33(1)
Release in part
The document is to be released in accordance with the marked-up version
provided to the Agency with my decision.
Drake v Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 24 ALR 577
https://ovic.vic.gov.au/freedom-of-information/foi-guidelines/section-33/.
Police v Marke
[2008] VSCA
v Department of Education & Training
[2007] VCAT
Re F and Health
(1988) 2 VAR 458
, quoted in
RFJ v Victoria Police FOI
[2013] VCAT 1267
v Victoria Police
[2022] VCAT 280
https://ovic.vic.gov.au/freedom-of-information/foi-guidelines/section-33/#would-disclosure-be-unreasonable.
Thwaites v Department of Human Services
(1999) 15 VAR 1
Gill v Department of
Industry, Technology and Resources
(1985) 1 VAR 97
Gill v Department of
Industry, Technology and Resources
(1985) 1 VAR 97
Department of Natural Resources
(1997) 13 VAR 1
Re City Parking Pty
(1996) 10 VAR 170
Gibson v Latrobe CC
[2008] VCAT 1340
Dalla-Riva v Department
of Treasury and Finance
[2007] VCAT 1301
Mickelburough v Victoria
[2009] VCAT 2786
The Herald and Weekly Times Pty
Limited v The Office of the Premier (General)
[2012] VCAT 967
Honeywood v
Department of Human Services
[2006] VCAT 2048
Victoria Police FOI Division (Review and Regulation)
[2013] VCAT 1267
[140], [155];
Re Hutchinson and Department of Human
(1997) 12 VAR
The Applicant in
section 50(1)(b) and the Agency in section
Sections 50(3F) and
Sections 49P(5),
50(3), and 52(3).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (331 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter