URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2024/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ORW [2024] VMHT 26 (5 December 2024)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2024] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan mental health service
Mode of hearing:
Tribunal members:
Robert Daly (Legal Member)
John Serry (Psychiatrist Member)
Katherine George (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
By telephone
With online video
Case manager
With online video
James Roughly
Legal representative, Mental Health Legal Centre
With online video
Observer, La Trobe University
With online video from the health service
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal made a community
treatment order with a duration of 16 Weeks expiring on
13/02/2025.
This statement of reasons:
After the hearing
your legal representative requested a written explanation of the Tribunal's
decision. A copy of this statement of
reasons will be given to your treating
team as well as to you and your legal representative.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because your treating team
applied for another treatment order and your community treatment order had been
to an inpatient treatment order. The Tribunal had to have a hearing to
decide whether or not to make a treatment order.
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental
health and wellbeing principles (‘principles’).
Based on the
information provided in your hearing and our understanding of your
circumstances, the Tribunal identified the following
principles were
particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
autonomy – the Tribunal understood your right to be treated with dignity
and respect.
restriction – the Tribunal considered what you said were your future goals
and made its decision with the aim of promoting
your recovery and full
participation in community life.
decision making – the Tribunal considered your views and preferences, in
particular your preference to be treated
as a voluntary patient
Diversity of
care – the Tribunal considered your preference to receive treatment for
The Tribunal must also give proper consideration to your
rights under the
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’). Compulsory treatment engages and limits a
number of human rights protected under the Charter including
freedom from medical treatment without consent, and where a person is being
treated in hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your
rights protected under the Charter, and whether limits on them are reasonable,
the Tribunal
must thoroughly examine three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Preliminary issue
Application to deny access to
The mental health service must give you access to any
documents in its possession that are connected to the hearing at least two
days before the hearing. If the treating psychiatrist believes
information in those documents may cause serious harm to you or another
they can apply to the Tribunal to deny you access to those
Your treating psychiatrist applied to deny you access to
certain documents. The Tribunal conducted a preliminary hearing to decide
whether you could see those documents. Your lawyer attended this hearing.
The Tribunal decided that the documents should be withheld from you
because disclosure of the information may cause serious harm to
you or another
person. The Tribunal explained this decision to you when you joined the hearing.
4. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your file. Both you and your treating team spoke
to and answered questions from the Tribunal in the hearing.
representative also made submissions on your behalf. This statement of reasons
does not summarise all that information,
but the next section refers to the
information the Tribunal relied on to make its decision and explains
The Tribunal must have regard to your views and preferences. From
what you told the Tribunal and the materials we read you prefer
treatment, such as counselling, rather than medication as a voluntary patient
5. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the four questions that need to be answered under the
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
Information received at the hearing
James said you question the treating team’s diagnosis of
schizoaffective disorder, but you agree that you have post-traumatic
disorder (PTSD) and that you have experienced symptoms including disturbance of
your mood, thought and perception.
You told us you have experienced
symptoms of a mental illness in the past but not for many years. You said you
were recently treated
in hospital due to your behaviour and not because you were
experiencing delusions as the treating team have asserted.
the treating team prepared for your hearing (the report) says you have been
given a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder,
substance use disorder
(methamphetamine, cannabis) and borderline personality disorder and that when
unwell you experience significant
disturbance in your mood, thought and
perception. The report states that you were brought into hospital in February
because you believed
that your mother and child were murdered in the apartment
above you, that a body fell from the roof and that your neighbours were
your mobile phone.
During recent reviews the report indicates you have
been aggressive towards the treating team and were experiencing persecutory
that people were entering your home at night, taking things, moving
furniture and other objects around the home and poisoning your
cat food, stating
the cat food smelt of petrol and your cat was sick.
A psychiatrist
recently provided an independent second opinion on your request and said the
treating team give an account of an illness
consistent with schizoaffective
disorder with episodes of acute distress and disorganisation related to a
psychotic illness and distinct
shifts in your mood state.
The treating
team varied your treatment order to an inpatient treatment order on in October
2024 because they were concerned about
your mental state. CM said you have been
distressed and worried about your daughter’s safety and saying you did not
CM said you had not been brought to hospital at the time of hearing
because you had been evading police. You told the Tribunal
you did not need
treatment in hospital, and you are well now.
The Tribunal acknowledges that you do not accept the
treating team’s diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder. However, the
does not have to be satisfied of a particular diagnosis to be satisfied
you have a mental illness. Rather, the Tribunal must be satisfied
that you have
symptoms involving a significant disturbance of your thinking, mood, perception,
or memory. The Tribunal accepted the
evidence before it, including your views,
and was satisfied that you have experienced a significant disturbance of your
mood and perception.
(b) Does your mental illness mean you need to be treated now,
to try and prevent your mental health or physical health seriously
deteriorating;
or to prevent serious harm to you or someone else?
Information provided to the Tribunal
James said you do not agree with the current recommended treatment you are
receiving from the mental health service, and you do not
accept that the
anti-psychotic medication you are receiving provides any benefits or does
anything. James said you also deny that
you have ever caused any harm to
yourself or another person, including your neighbour or your family.
You told the Tribunal that your neighbour is a criminal and that your
mother and stepfather are running a paedophile ring.
You said you
don’t want to continue receiving any of the medication being prescribed,
because it numbs your mind and blocks
out reality. You said you want
personalised care including counselling to treat your PTSD.
said that you need immediate treatment including antipsychotic medication to
prevent serious deterioration in your mental
health. The report indicates that
when unwell you become irritable and aggressive and if untreated there is a high
risk you could
cause harm to yourself or other people. The report notes that in
January you engaged in a physical altercation with your neighbours
reportedly charged by police for ‘threats to hit the neighbour with a
cricket bat if the neighbour didn’t leave
her daughter
The psychiatrist who provided the second opinion agreed
that this criterion applies, and, in her report, she said you agreed you had
made verbal threats towards people in the past. The second opinion stated,
verbal threats, even when made during periods of high
emotion are harmful to
those the threats are directed towards.
The treating team said your
mental state has deteriorated recently in the context of continuing illicit drug
use and your refusal
to accept the depot medication resulted in their decision
to make an inpatient treatment order in October. You agreed you are using
methamphetamines and cannabis.
Tribunal’s decision
The Tribunal acknowledges that you do not agree that you need the treatment
you are currently receiving from the treating team. However,
the Tribunal
accepted the information provided by your treating team and decided you need to
continue to have immediate treatment,
including antipsychotic medication, to
prevent a serious deterioration in your mental health and to prevent serious
harm to yourself
and others.
(c) Will you receive immediate treatment if you are on a
treatment order?
As you had received treatment up to the time of
the hearing, the Tribunal was satisfied that if a Treatment Order was made you
continue to receive treatment, including the injectable anti-psychotic
medication.
(d) Is there a less restrictive means than a treatment order
that would enable you to receive immediate treatment?
Information provided to the Tribunal
James said you wish to be a voluntary patient so you can manage your own
mental health. He said you will continue to engage with the
treating team, but
you would like to have your care transferred to your GP. He said you receive
good support from NDIS support workers.
James said the principles under the Act
require that people receiving mental health services be allowed to make
decisions about their
assessment, treatment and recovery that involve a degree
You told us that if you were a voluntary patient, you would
work with your current case manager but you would prefer not to continue
the current prescribed medication due to the side effects and because you don't
believe it is helpful in treating your mental
health. You wish to have ongoing
care from people specialised in PTSD services.
The report states that
based on recent attempts to treat you as a voluntary patient the treating team
are concerned that without a
treatment order you will disengage with the
treating team and self-cease your medications, placing yourself and others at
risk unintentionally.
The treating team said they recently varied your
treatment order to an inpatient treatment order because you were refusing to
your medication, and your mental health was worsening.
that if you are a voluntary patient, you will stop taking medication and there
is a high chance you will become unwell
again and require hospital
Tribunal’s decision
The Tribunal took
into account the principles under the Act including least restrictive treatment
and that you be allowed to receive
treatment with a degree of risk. The
Tribunal acknowledged your views that you prefer to be a voluntary patient and
engage with
your GP about any future treatment, including counselling for PTSD.
However, we also took into account your preference to stop taking
antipsychotic medication if you were a voluntary patient. The Tribunal accepted
that if you were not on a treatment order you
would stop taking the
antipsychotic medication which was necessary to stabilise your mental health and
to prevent serious deterioration
in your mental health. Therefore, the Tribunal
decided that your treatment order needed to remain in place for you to receive
immediate treatment you need at this time.
6. Decision
Given the Tribunal decided that all of the
compulsory treatment criteria applied to you the Tribunal made a treatment
Treatment in hospital or in the community
inpatient treatment order places the greatest limits on your rights protected
under the Charter. For this reason, the Act says
that the Tribunal can only
make an inpatient treatment order if it is satisfied that a person cannot be
treated in the community.
Your treating team said community treatment was
not possible because you were evading treatment, and your injectable
anti-psychotic
medication was overdue. You told the Tribunal that if a community
treatment order was made you would attend the clinic and accept
the injectable
anti-psychotic medication because you did not want to be treated in
The Tribunal decided to make a community treatment order on the
basis of your agreement to attend the clinic the next day and accept
recommended dose of injectable anti-psychotic medication.
of the Treatment Order
The Act sets a maximum duration of six months
for treatment orders. Your treating team requested a treatment order to run for
months to allow time to build rapport with the community treating team and
to assess the current medication and any side effects.
Your legal representative
submitted that the Tribunal should make an order for a duration of twelve weeks
which he said would be
sufficient time to allow you and the treating team to
negotiate any changes to the medication.
Taking into account the mental
health principles in the Act, including that a person receiving mental health
services should be provided
treatment in the least restrictive way possible with
voluntary treatment preferred, the Tribunal decided to make a Treatment Order
for a duration of 16 weeks. The Tribunal hopes this period of compulsory
treatment will enable you to receive a period of sustained
treatment for your
mental illness. The necessary treatment includes antipsychotic medication so
that you can stay well and hopefully
prevent the need for further treatment in
Sixteen weeks is the longest this Treatment Order can last.
Your treating doctor must revoke your Treatment Order at any time if they
believe the treatment criteria no longer apply.
determination: 25-10-2024
[Signed by the legal member]
Robert Daly
Presiding member, on behalf of the Tribunal
Date: 05 December 2024.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143 Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
Section 5 What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (538 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter