URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2025/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Owners Corporation v Jones [2025] VMC 10 (8 July 2025)
IN THE MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
Case No. MAG-CI-230231448
OWNERS CORPORATION PLAN NO. RP013206
LEONIE MICHELLE JONES
Plaintiff / Respondent
Defendant /
Magistrate M A Hoare
DATE OF HEARING
19 May 2025
DATE OF DECISION
8 July 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Owners Corporation v Jones
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
APPLICATION – Re-hearing –
‘Recovery of money owed to the owners corporation by a lot owner’
– Jurisdiction
of the Magistrates’ Court – Statutory
interpretation
Owners Corporations Act
, Division 1,
Magistrates’ Court Act
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff / Respondent
Mr L Magowan
Tisher Liner FC Law
For the Defendant / Applicant
Law Ink Pty Ltd
INTRODUCTION
1 Ms Leonie Jones, the applicant /
defendant (
), makes application seeking to set aside a previous
default judgment of the Court and for re-hearing.
2 Jones, is a lot owner within the meaning of the
Owners Corporations Act
) of a lot on registered Plan of Subdivision No. RP013206. The
respondent / plaintiff is the Owners Corporation (
) of the Plan, an OC
within the meaning of the OCA.
3 In the application, Jones raised a matter of
broader importance to OCs and lot owners related to jurisdiction of the
Magistrates’
Court. The same jurisdiction question arises in a number of
matters presently before the Court.
Owners Corporation Plan No. 000675 v
this Court was
asked to decide whether the Magistrates’ Court has jurisdiction to hear
and determine claims by OCs recover
money owed to the OC by a lot owner upon a
final fee notice under the OCA.
the Magistrate agreed with the lot owner that the Court did not have such
interpretation.
6 In the present case, the issues for
determination were:
a) Whether default judgment
was entered regularly or irregularly (separate to the jurisdiction
b) Whether the applicant has shown she has
an arguable defence to the proceeding (separate to the jurisdiction
c) Whether the present application (being
a further application for re-hearing) is an abuse of process (separate to the
d) Whether the lot owner
waived her right to challenge the Court’s
e) Whether Parliament intended that
VCAT has exclusive jurisdiction regarding recovery of money owed by a lot owner
as a matter of
statutory construction of the OCA;
Magistrates’ Court has concurrent jurisdiction to hear and decide such
claims brought by OCs under
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
) and s 30 of the OCA (
the jurisdiction
first deal with the merits of the re-hearing application itself and the abuse of
process arguments before turning to the
proceeded in the usual way, upon summons and affidavits and by way of oral
argument and submissions.
8 It is necessary to set out the
procedural history in some detail.
9 By complaint
dated 9 October 2023, the OC commenced the proceeding against Jones and claimed,
upon a final fee notice issued under
s 32 of the OCA, the sum of $11,880.18
(comprising outstanding fees, levies, interest and charges owing) plus costs and
from the date the proceeding was commenced.
10 On 19 January 2024, the Court granted the
OC’s application to dispense with personal service of the complaint and
made orders
for substituted service.
February 2024, the Court granted the OC’s application for default judgment
and made orders on the claim plus interest
12 On 22 May 2024, Jones filed an application for
re-hearing (
the first application
) together with a brief affidavit
affirmed 22 May 2024 (
the first Jones affidavit
13 Pausing here, at the time of filing of the first
application, Jones was self-represented. The first Jones affidavit comprised a
single hand-written paragraph. It deposed to the date ranges of four successive
periods of management of the OC and stated that each
communicated to on multiple occasions not limited to OC fees, part payments and
outstanding [sic] and with the exception
of 1 x registered post I have not
received OC/Court details’.
14 On 19 June 2024,
the Court ordered that Jones file a further and better affidavit in support of
the first application deposing
to the merits of any defence she might have in
response to the OC’s statement of claim.
10 July 2024, the application was struck out by a Magistrate due to the
non-appearance of Jones on that date and the lack of
any further supporting
affidavit having been filed by her.
16 Thereafter,
the OC commenced enforcement proceedings upon the default judgment and on 7
November 2024, the Supreme Court issued
a warrant of seizure and sale.
17 On 24 April 2025, Jones filed the present
application for re-hearing (
the second application
) together with an
affidavit sworn 20 April 2025 (
the second Jones affidavit
). Additionally,
Jones’s solicitor, Mr Mermelstein (
Mermelstein
) filed two
affidavits in support sworn 14 April 2025 (
the first Mermelstein
) and 12 May 2025 (
the second Mermelstein affidavit
18 Pausing here, in the second Jones affidavit,
Jones deposed to her non-attendance at Court on 10 July 2024, her lack of
of Court processes and of the requirements to refute the OC’s
claim. She stated also:
psychological mess and did not know how to help myself I had escaped to
Queensland and could not face the challenge of
attending court let alone
presenting coherent arguments because of the huge anxiety that overwhelmingly I
could not face my declining
mental health let alone address issues that were
crippling me I was suffering from anxiety and depression which severely impaired
my ability to manage day-to-day tasks I experienced amount loss of appetite,
composure and self-confidence leading me emotionally
incapacitated while I had
diligently prepared several legitimate claims against the owners corporation the
prospect of developing
A defence appeared
overwhelming.
19 With respect to any defence to the
OC’s claim, the second Jones affidavit stated:
My debt to the
[OC] is a small claim. The [OC] has had three different managers in a short
period ... I raised issues with [managers
of the OC] about the correctness of
fee invoices issued to me. My understanding is that the ‘benefit
principle’ applies
and that I should not have been charged for certain
items for which I receive no benefit. Neither manager applied. ... Proceedings
at VCAT are ongoing...
20 The first Mermelstein affidavit stated
that Jones relied upon
to assert that the Court did not have
21 The second Mermelstein affidavit exhibited
correspondence of Jones’s treating psychologist, Dr Ho, dated 11 May 2025.
Ho reported that Jones was being treated and managed for depression and
anxiety upon her GP’s referral under a mental health
care plan dated 26
February 2025. Dr Ho opined that she concurred with the GP’s diagnoses. Dr
Ho went on to observe that Jones
showed symptoms associated with severe anxiety
and depression which was in the context of an apparent breakdown in November
leading to voluntary in-patient admission.
22 The OC opposed the second application and relied
broadly on three grounds:
a) The second
application was an abuse of process which ought be dismissed with
b) Jones had waived her right to challenge
the jurisdiction of the Court having submitted to it in making the first
application.
c) Buckley was decided incorrectly and
ought not be followed.
LEGISLATION
AND RE-HEARINGS
23 Applications for re-hearing
are governed by the MCA as well as the
Magistrates’ Court General Civil
Procedure Rules
24 Section 110(1) of the MCA provides that if a
final order is made by the Court in a civil proceeding against a person who did
appear in the proceeding, that person may, subject to and in accordance with
the Rules, apply to the Court for an order that the
order be set aside and that
the proceeding be re-heard.
25 Section 110(5) of the
MCA provides that if an applicant under this section fails to appear at the time
fixed for the hearing of
the application and the application is struck out, the
applicant can re-apply only if the applicant first obtains the leave of the
26 Rule 46.08(3) of the Rules provides that
if an application is struck out because the applicant failed to appear at the
for hearing of the application, a further application for re-hearing
is taken to be an application for leave to re-apply under section
110(5) of the
Question 1: Whether
default judgment was entered regularly or
irregularly?
27 Judgments regularly obtained are
not generally set aside unless the party seeking to aside the judgment has a
meritorious
to one side the jurisdiction question, parties appeared to accept the OC’s
default judgment obtained under rule 21.02(a)
of the Rules was regularly
obtained. The complaint was validly served pursuant to the Court’s orders
for substituted service
made 19 January 2024, which was evidenced by an
affidavit of service dated 23 February 2024.
Question 2: Whether
default judgment ought to be set aside?
turn firstly to Jones’s non-appearance at the hearing of the first
application.
30 Based on the second Jones affidavit
and second Mermelstein affidavit, including the exhibited opinion of Dr Ho, I am
on the evidence before the Court that Jones had seriously compromised
mental health from and beyond at least November 2023. I consider
that evidence
is a sound basis to explain:
a) the delay of
first application; and
b) Jones’s failure to
either appear on 10 July 2024 or attend to the filing of a further and better
affidavit although given
an opportunity by the Court to do
31 Next, I turn now to the merits of the
application to set aside the default judgment (again, leaving to one side the
32 In summary, the OC
submitted that the application must be refused because the second Jones
affidavit: did not depose to any defence
to the claim; did not dispute her
indebtedness to the OC; and there was no evidence of a defence on the
must reject that submission for the following reasons.
34 Whilst Jones had acknowledged indebtedness to
the OC in the sense of deposing to ‘my debt’ in the first Jones
it was also plain that she was in dispute with the OC on various
grounds including as to:
a) In the first
and second Jones affidavits, disputing and taking issue with each successive
manager of the OC as to correctness of
OC fees, part payments and outstanding
b) In the second Jones affidavit,
asserting that the ‘benefit principle’
to the calculation of
amounts claimed by the OC such that she had been erroneously charged for items
for which she received no benefit;
second Jones affidavit, asserting that her dispute with the OC is the subject of
proceedings at VCAT, which are ongoing.
35 Because of these matters, I am
satisfied that Jones does have an arguable defence or at least some prospects of
success in defending
the OC’s claim. In these circumstances, the
appropriate course, had she proceeded to file a notice of defence to the
statement of claim, would have been to either strike out or stay the
proceeding in this Court. That would allow the ‘OC dispute’
raised by her to be heard and determined at VCAT being the accepted specialist
forum for disputes between OCs and lot owners
under Division 1 of Part 11
– OC disputes – Applications to
36 Next, in submitting the application ought
to be refused, the OC contended it would suffer specific prejudice if that
That was because enforcement proceedings were commenced and a warrant
of seizure and sale was now attached to the title of Jones’s
were costs consequences and expenses for the OC.
37 Whilst that may be so, that is outweighed in my
view by the prejudice and potential for injustice to the lot owner, which is
substantial given the consequences of there being a caveat on her property
and given she has raised disputes that are squarely ‘OC
under Division 1 of Part 11.
38 Moreover, as the
OC did not challenge the assertion that VCAT proceedings are on foot, therefore
the OC must be taken to be on
notice that Jones was in dispute with it over the
calculation of fees and levies.
39 It would be a
substantial injustice to allow a judgment to stand – and to be enforced
– when there is an arguable defence
and the amounts sought to be recovered
are disputed. That is further amplified by the matters set out in the second
Jones affidavit
relating to the reasons for Jones’s non-appearance on 10
Question 3:
Whether the second application is an abuse of
40 The OC submitted that the bringing
of the second re-hearing application is an abuse of process because her case was
doomed to fail,
given the acknowledgement of the debt and the lack of any
arguable defence.
41 In support of that proposition,
the OC relied upon the authorities of
Guss v Magistrates’ Court of
Co Pty Ltd v Christodolou &
my mind, those cases are distinguishable from the present case given the reasons
for Jones’s non-appearance and the circumstances
of the strike out order
of the first application. Therefore, essentially for the reasons already stated
with respect to Question
2, I must reject that submission.
43 Section 110(5) of the MCA clearly establishes
that an applicant who fails to appear at the time fixed for the hearing of the
application
may re-apply with leave of the Court.
44 For reasons stated, that leave is granted.
45 Moreover, as stated, the OC’s submissions
simply do not address the fact that Jones has, as already found on the face of
the first and second Jones affidavits, raised arguable defences to the statement
of claim and/or, she is in dispute with the OC at
46 The OC further submitted that reliance upon
decision was ‘not new evidence’ nor a ‘new
legal argument’ in the sense that the subject legislative provisions
the OCA are of long-standing. Thus, it would have been open to Jones as a lot
owner to make the same arguments as the lot owner
47 It is not necessary to deal with this argument
because of my findings that Jones has shown – separate to any jurisdiction
arguments – an arguable defence or, a defence on the
Question 4:
Whether the lot owner waived her right to challenge the Court’s
48 In reliance on various
authorities, it was submitted by the OC that Jones, having made the first
application, waived her right
to object to
my mind, it is not necessary to decide that point given my findings that leave
ought to be granted – and is granted –
for the second application
for reasons separate to the jurisdiction question.
50 I turn now to the
5: Whether Parliament intended that VCAT has exclusive jurisdiction regarding
recovery of money owed by a lot owner as a
matter of statutory construction of
, the Magistrates’ Court has concurrent
and s 30 of the
SUBMISSIONS BY
submitted that
correctly decided the position with respect to the
from lot owners upon a final fee notice.
52 A proper
construction of the OCA was that only VCAT was able to deal with OC claims to
recover money from lot owners and the Court
lacked jurisdiction.
53 It was also said that either the default
judgment was entered irregularly (because the Court lacked jurisdiction) and
must be set aside and the proceeding struck out. In the alternative,
if entered regularly, then the default judgment must still be
set aside and the
proceeding struck out for lack of jurisdiction.
SUBMISSIONS BY THE
54 The OC submitted that most significantly,
the lot owner owed a debt to the OC as pleaded in the Statement of Claim,
namely: ‘By
reason of the forgoing the Defendant is indebted to the
Plaintiffs in the sum of $11,666.04 as at the date of the Final Fee
$11,666.04 was, incontrovertibly, a debt or liquidated demand owed to the OC by
the lot owner in respect of which the
OC had been granted default judgment under
rule 21.02(a)(i) of the Rules upon proof of valid service.
55 Thus, the lot owner’s application seeks to
deprive this Court of its express jurisdiction conferred by s 100(1)(a) of the
MCA with respect to hearing and determining causes of action for debts or
liquidated demands.
56 Importantly, the lot owner in
effect, seeks to overturn a procedure that has existed in the State of Victoria
since the OCA was
enacted, that Act now being on its 20th revision. The relevant
provision (s 30) had been unchanged over those 20 revisions.
57 The OC further submitted that nowhere in the OCA
is the Court’s express jurisdiction abrogated. That is the consequence of
statutory construction of s 30 (and related
provisions).
58 To do so was to offend a fundamental
principle of statutory construction, namely that the presumption that a statute
does not restrict
access to the Court, such as by withdrawing or limiting a
conferral of jurisdiction, unless the withdrawal or limitation of conferral
unmistakeable’.
59 Further,
or alternatively, it was submitted that the
construction of s 30
is a misconstruction, in that the words ‘Subject to subsection (2)’
as contained s 30(1) simply
allowed for two distinct paths open to OCs to
recover money
60 Moreover,
there was no clear basis to pursue a ‘debt’ by way of application to
VCAT under the types of disputes set
61 Finally, in terms of extrinsic materials
available to aid in the interpretation of legislation as permitted by s 35 of
the Court’s attention was drawn to fact that information is
contained on the Consumer Affairs Victoria website which provides
a) charge penalty interest on
money owing if this is authorised by resolution. ...
b) take action to
recover debts in the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
or at the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (VCAT) (emphasis
62 According to the OC, the significance
of that in the OC legislative scheme was that the director of Consumer Affairs
was responsible
for enforcement of the OCA.
reject that submission as having no merit for the following
64 Firstly, it is misconceived to say that
the director has responsibility for enforcement. The director’s powers in
2 of Part 10 of the OCA are limited to receiving complaints and
referrals to conciliation.
65 Secondly, whilst the
list of extrinsic materials in s 35(2) of the ILA is not exhaustive, I am not
persuaded that information contained
on a website falls within, or is analogous
to the types of reports and instruments contained in that provision.
66 Pausing here, I will return to consider the
approved notices which are published by the director on the Consumer Affairs
later in these reasons.
67 Thirdly, there is
in any event no doubt that an OC does have power to recover debts in a general
sense in the Magistrates’
Court in accordance with ss 18 and 30(1) of the
OCA, a matter to which I will return.
LEGISLATIVE
FRAMEWORK OF THE OCA
68 The purposes of the OCA
are contained in s 1 which include (a) to provide for the management, powers and
functions of OCs; and
(b) to provide for appropriate mechanisms for the
resolution of disputes relating to OCs.
created and regulated by the OCA and have powers conferred by s
70 Part 3 ‘Financial Management’,
Division 1 ‘Financial powers’ contains the OC’s powers to
and set fees and charges payable by lot owners which are based on a
lot owner’s lot liability and/or lot
entitlement.
The time for
payment is a matter for the OCs determination.
71 The obligation of the lot owner to pay
outstanding fees and charges arises under s 28(1). Subject to some other
provisions, s 28(2)
provides that a lot owner is not liable to pay or contribute
to OC funds, a proportion of any amount required to discharge a liability
OC exceeding the lot owner's lot liability.
for the power of an OC to commence legal proceedings, s 18(2) provides that if a
matter is within the civil jurisdictional limit
of the Magistrates' Court and,
if authorised to do so by ordinary resolution, the OC may commence any legal
proceeding in (a) the
Magistrates’ Court; or (b) VCAT
73 The provision central to the jurisdiction
question is s 30 which is headed ‘Recovery of money owed’ and
(1) Subject to subsection (2), an owners corporation may recover any money
owed to the owners corporation in any court of competent
due to the owners corporation.
(2) Sections 31 and 32 and Division 1 of Part 11 apply to the recovery of
money owed to the owners corporation by a lot owner.
74 Also central to the dispute are the
provisions referred to in s 30(2) that apply to recovery of money owed to the OC
by a lot owner.
75 Those are: firstly, the fee
notice provisions being ss 31 and 32; and secondly, Division 1 ‘Owners
corporation disputes’
contained in Part 11 which is headed
‘Applications to VCAT’.
76 A fee notice
under s 31(1) in approved form must be given to a lot owner by the OC. The fee
notice must inform a lot owner that:
outstanding fees are due within 28 days of
the notice; interest may apply; and it must also include dispute resolution
information
applicable under the rules of the
77 A final notice under s 32(1) in approved form
may be given to a lot owner if money owing is not paid 28 days after the date of
the fee notice. There are requirements regarding information to be provided in
the final notice including: confirming the obligation
to pay the overdue fees
and charges and interest immediately.
78 Additionally, s 32(2)(c) requires that the final
notice inform the lot owner of the following: that the OC ‘intends to take
action under Part 11 to recover the amount due if the overdue fees and charges
and interest owing are not paid within 28 days’
of the final notice being
79 The fee notice provisions contain
two key differences. Firstly, the fee notice is mandated to be given by the OC,
whereas the final
notice may be, but is not required to be given (subject to an
important proviso to which I will return). Secondly, the final notice
notify the lot owner of the OC’s intention to ‘take action under
80 I now turn to the provisions
contained in Division 1 of Part 11.
Division 1, an OC dispute includes: ‘an alleged breach by a lot owner ...
of an obligation imposed on that person by
this Act or the regulations or the
rules of the OC’.
application regarding such a dispute may be brought either by a lot owner or the
in determining an OC dispute, s 165(1) provides that VCAT may make any order it
considers fair including one or more of the
(c)(i) an order for the payment of a sum of money found to be owing by one
party to another party;
(ca) an order requiring a lot owner to pay to the OC reasonable costs incurred
by the OC in recovering an unpaid amount from the
lot owner (other than costs in
the proceeding);
83 Under s 165(4), VCAT’s power to
award costs under s 109 of the
1998 (Vic) (
84 Finally, mandatory considerations
apply to the making of an order by VCAT in an OC dispute under s 167(1) of the
OCA. These are:
(a) the conduct of the parties;
(b) an act or omission or proposed act or omission by a party;
(c) the impact of a resolution or proposed resolution on the lot owners as a
(d) whether a resolution or proposed resolution is oppressive to, unfairly
prejudicial to or unfairly discriminates against, a lot
owner or lot owners;
(e) any other matter VCAT thinks relevant.
MAGISTRATES’ COURT ACT
85 For present
purposes, the Court’s civil jurisdiction is conferred by
s 100(1)(a)
the MCA with respect to hearing and determining of ‘... any cause of
action for damages or a debt or a liquidated demand
if the amount claimed is
within the jurisdictional limit ...’
CONSIDERATION
86 It is plain that recovery by an OC of
money owed by a lot owner is an OC dispute, thus, a matter that VCAT has
hear and decide.
87 To reiterate,
therefore, the jurisdiction question, is this: whether Parliament intended that
VCAT has exclusive jurisdiction regarding
the recovery of money owed by a lot
owner as a matter of statutory construction of the OCA; or, whether the
Magistrates’ Court
has concurrent jurisdiction to hear and decide such
claims under
of the MCA and s 30 of the OCA.
88 Somewhat surprisingly, although the OCA has been
in operation for some twenty years, the jurisdiction question was not a matter
of reported judicial determination prior to the decision of
89 Of course, the interests of
justice are generally served by consistency of decision-making where identical
questions arise. However,
decisions of judicial officers are not binding upon
other judicial officers of the same Court.
was not the subject of appeal.
Notwithstanding this, the OC contends it was decided incorrectly and seeks to
have the jurisdiction
question fully ventilated in each of the cases presently
before the Court. It should be stated that, unlike in
, the Court
has had the considerable benefit of detailed submissions of Counsel and fully
developed arguments.
91 There was no challenge to
the correctness of the principles of statutory interpretation enunciated in
as follows:
The starting point for determining the meaning of a statutory provision is
its text, considered in light of its context and purpose.
The primary aim of statutory interpretation is
to construe the relevant provision(s) in a way that aligns with both the
language and
purpose of the statute as a whole.
Where the words of a statute are plain and
unambiguous, they should be given their ordinary and grammatical meaning.
The hierarchy of provisions may also be
important. For example, the phrase "subject to" is a standard means of
establishing which
provisions are dominant and which are subservient. The
subservient provisions, therefore, operate only to the extent that they are
inconsistent with the dominant provisions.
further relevant principle is that when a statute confers a power subject to
qualifications and conditions, general expressions
in the statute are to be read
as subject to those qualifications and conditions.
generalia specialibus non
(general provisions do not override specific ones) applies in
situations where the application of a general provision would undermine
nullify a specific provision. While this principle is typically applied to
provisions within the same statute, it may also be
applied by analogy to
provisions in separate statutes.
Finally, where
two statutes are the product of the one legislature, there is a general
presumption that there is no contradiction
92 Applying those principles of statutory
interpretation with respect to s 30, his Honour said:
First, I consider the meaning of s 30 is plain and
unambiguous. By s 30(1), it confers a general jurisdiction on the
Magistrates’
Court to hear proceedings where ‘any monies are owed to
an owners corporation’. This would include any general commercial
involving an owners corporation and a third-party debtor. However, where a
proceeding relates to the ‘recovery of money
owed to the owners
corporation by a lot owner’, the conditions in s 30(2)
at a later point, his Honour went on to say:
effect of s 32(2)(c) and s 163(2) is that fee recovery proceedings against lot
owners may only be commenced in VCAT if the amount
remains outstanding 28 days
after the notice has been given. As Division 1 of
refers exclusively to
VCAT and the orders it may make, it simply cannot follow that the Magistrates'
Court has concurrent jurisdiction.
To my mind,
that submission is only open if the phrase ‘subject to sub-section
(2)’ in s 30(2) is disregarded contrary
to principles of statutory
interpretation set out previously. Moreover, it is not that s 30(2) imposes
requirements when the proceeding
is brought before VCAT. Rather, when the Owners
Corporation is recovering money owed by a lot owner (as opposed to any other
s 31, 32, and Division 1 of
for reliance by the OC upon
of the MCA, his Honour was not persuaded
that took the jurisdiction question further. That was said to be because the
general jurisdiction conferred by
was broadly equivalent
to s 30(1) of the OCA. Applying the ‘specific over general’ rule of
construction, s 30(2) should
prevail over both s 30(1) and
the correctness of the principles of statutory interpretation set out in
was not disputed, it was said nevertheless that the resulting
analysis led to a consequence which offended an important presumption
statutory construction. The presumption was that legislation is not to be
interpreted to withdraw or limit a conferral of jurisdiction
on Courts, unless
the implication appears clearly and
unmistakably.
96 Although
the presumption enunciated by Dixon J in
Magrath & Ors. v Goldsbrough
referred to the power of superior
there is little doubt
the presumption extends to inferior courts. Herzfeld & Prince in the text
Interpretation
the following helpful commentary as to operation of the presumption:
It is presumed that when a legislature confers
absence of expressed words or reasonably plain intendment to the
contrary, a conferral of jurisdiction or grant of power does not
alter the usual procedure of the court or the ordinary incidents of its
to superior courts. It can be
applied even to inferior courts of limited jurisdiction created by statute where
the question is whether
a newly conferred jurisdiction or newly granted power is
to be subject to the court's ordinary procedure and other ordinary incidents
its jurisdiction
example of the presumption applying to an inferior court’s jurisdiction
was the South Australian case of
Integrated Waste Services Pty Ltd v Harvey
Mullighan J held that clear words would be needed to oust the jurisdiction of
the Magistrates’ Court conferred by
Magistrates’ Court Act 1991
concerned jurisdiction regarding certain summary offences (which s
9 of the SA Act granted jurisdiction to hear), in circumstances
where another
piece of legislation, namely the
Environment, Resources and Development Court
) established a different court (the ERD Court) and granted to
it jurisdiction to hear summary offences. Section 7 of the ERD Act
used language
such as “the [ERD] court will deal”. Despite that, the court held
that such words were not sufficiently
clear as to exclude jurisdiction of the
Magistrates’
that case concerned criminal rather than civil jurisdiction, there is no
suggestion in the authorities to say that the presumption
operates differently.
99 Here, the OC maintains that the OCA’s
grant of powers upon VCAT did not exclude or alter the Magistrates’
‘ordinary incidents of jurisdiction’, namely,
determining causes of action for debts or liquidated
100 Certainly,
the OCA (first enacted in 2006) contains no express words regarding a withdrawal
or alteration of the Court’s
civil jurisdiction conferred by s 100(1) of
(first enacted in 1989).
Shergold v Tanner
plurality stated that the presumption against ouster of jurisdiction (per Dixon
reflected general principles regarding implied repeal of an
earlier statute. The plurality endorsed the following explanation of
Saraswati v The Queen
It is a basic rule of construction that, in the
absence of express words, an earlier statutory provision is not repealed,
or derogated from by a later provision unless an intention to that
effect is necessarily to be implied. There must be very strong
support that implication, for there is a general presumption that the
legislature intended that both provisions should
operate and that, to the extent
that they would otherwise overlap, one should be read as subject to the
Attorney-General
, the plurality then referred to the analysis in
as follows:
, Kitto J expressed the
question as being whether the two items of legislation could stand or live
together. In the same case, Fullagar
J spoke of "contrariety",
Taylor J of "direct conflict", and Windeyer J asked whether the two
statutes were clearly and indisputably
contradictory displaying such repugnancy
that they could not be reconciled. Later, in
Travinto Nominees Pty Ltd v Vlattas
Gibbs J used the expression "could stand together" (citations
seems to me, distilling these principles, that the following considerations
apply to the jurisdiction question:
the legislature intended both statutes (s 100(1) of the MCA and provisions of
the OCA, in particular, s 30) to stand or live
together or whether there is such
repugnancy or contrariety that they could not be reconciled;
the OCA provisions contain a clear and unmistakeable implication to alter or
remove the Court’s jurisdiction;
the requisite ‘very strong grounds’ exist to infer that the
Court’s jurisdiction to hear and decide ‘debt
and liquidated
demand’ claims under s 100(1) of the MCA is altered, or derogated from, by
104 Having set out those additional
principles, I return to the text of the OCA.
105 Certainly, it was incontrovertible that –
under ss 18(2)(a) and 30(1) – an OC has a general power to recover any
owed to the OC, in any court of competent jurisdiction as a debt due to
the OC. Specifically, such a cause of action may be commenced
by an OC in the
Magistrates’ Court,
being authorised to do so by ordinary resolution.
106 The OC submits that it is plain from s 18 that
it may proceed in this Court against a lot owner for money owed. That is because
s 18(2) provides that, 'if a matter is within the civil
of the Magistrates' Court
and an [OC] is authorised to do so by ordinary
resolution, the [OC]
may commence any legal proceeding in (a) the
Magistrates' Court...
' (emphasis added).
reject that submission with respect to s 18. The purpose of s 18 (as substituted
by Act No 4 of 2021) was to reduce the burden
for an OC regarding authorisation
to litigate. Whereas formerly a special resolution was required to authorise an
OC to bring litigation,
under the amendment, a special resolution was required
to bring litigation, subject to subsection (2). Section 18(2) meant that an
ordinary (not a special) resolution was required to bring litigation under the
Magistrates' Court jurisdictional limit, or at
108 Moreover, that construction offends
established principles of statutory construction as it considers the text of s
18(2) in isolation
from its context in the OCA more broadly and all of the
provisions, in particular s 30(2) and Division 1 of Part
109 As stated, there is no question that an OC
may litigate in the Magistrates’ Court to recover money owed to the OC by
contractors
or service providers or other third-party debtors (as his Honour
OC argued that, in the same way, it could bring a recovery action in the
Magistrates’ Court for money owed by a lot
owner (while acknowledging that
the notice provisions apply). That was because Parliament intended the two
statutes to work harmoniously
together and, in no way, had derogated from the
111 Pausing, as for s 100(1) of the MCA, a
preliminary issue arises with respect to the jurisdiction question. That is,
whether ‘recovery
of money owed’ by a lot owner under the OCA is, or
ought properly be, construed as a ‘debt or liquidated demand’.
112 Under the OCA statutory regime, the basis for
recovery by an OC of money owed by a lot owner arises this way:
a) The OC has exercised statutory functions and
powers under Part 2 of the OCA.
b) The OC has levied
lot owners with fees and charges, the setting of which must be based on the lot
liability and lot entitlement
of the lot owner under ss 23, 23A and 24; and has
determined the times for payment of such fees and
c) Lot liability is a defined term under in
s 3 and means a number specified in the plan as the lot liability for that lot,
the proportion of the administrative and general expenses of the OC
which the lot owner is obliged to pay.
entitlement is also defined in s 3 and means a number specified in the plan as
the lot entitlement for that lot, expressing
the extent of the lot owner's
interest in any common property affected by the
e) The obligation of the lot owner to pay such
fees and charges arises under s 28(1).
f) The OC is
empowered to charge (or waive) interest, if money is outstanding after the due
date and authorised by resolution at a
general meeting, under s
g) The OC is authorised by ordinary resolution
under s 18(2) to commence proceedings (subject to the notice
provisions).
113 The fact that the recovery of money
owed by the lot owner arises under statute is not, of itself, inconsistent with
the Court’s
demand claims.
114 A ‘debt’ is ‘a
liquidated sum in money presently due, owing and payable by one person, called
the debtor, to
another person, called the
of a ‘liquidated sum’ is said to be: whenever the amount to which
the plaintiff is entitled ... can be ascertained
by calculation or fixed by any
scale of charges or positive data it is ...
liquidated.
the OCA, the provisions set out above provide a mechanism to calculate or
ascertain a specific amount that is due and payable
by a lot owner. Accordingly,
that amount is a liquidated sum and is thus a debt within the scope of s 100(1)
of the MCA.
116 Accordingly, to that extent, no
contrariety arises in the bringing of a cause of action to recover money owed by
a lot owner under
the OCA in the Magistrates’ Court.
117 I turn now to construction of s 30 and to
examine the intended inter-relationship of ss 30(1) and 30(2). As for
interpretation
of the phrase ‘subject to’, the following commentary
is instructive:
The effect of the provision was
correctly described by Cooke J in
Harding v Coburn
[1976] 2 NZLR 577
as being ‘a standard way of
making clear which provision is to govern in the event of conflict. It throws no
light, however,
on whether there would in truth be a conflict without it’.
See also Megarry J in
C & J Clark Ltd v Inland Revenue
Commissioners
[1973] 1 WLR 905
: ‘Where there is no clash, the phrase does
nothing: if there is collision, the phrase shows what is to prevail. The phrase
provides no warranty of universal
collision.’
was submitted there simply was no clash or collision arising between s 30(1) and
s 30(2). That was because each subsection
could – and ought – be
construed without the words ‘subject to’.
119 I reject that argument. On a plain reading of
the text of s 30, by reason of the words ‘subject to subsection 2’,
the OC’s general power to recover any money in a court as a debt due to
the OC under s 30(1), is altered or bound by –
or conditional upon –
the application of other legislative provisions within the OCA and specifically,
the provisions referred
to in s 30(2) as being
applicable.
120 Thus, the potential for collision
within s 30 arises due to the very requirement that when recovering money owed
by a lot owner
(as opposed to a third-party debtor), there are additional
specific legislative requirements that apply, namely: the notice provisions
ss 31 and 32 and Division 1 of Part 11.
further apparent difference in language arises between the two subsections of s
30. The phrase ‘recovery of money owed
to the OC’ in subsection (1)
is replicated in s 30(2). Yet, the accompanying phrase ‘as a debt
due’ appears only
in s 30(1) and is not contained in s 30(2) with respect
to recovery of money owed by a lot owner.
one sense, the eschewing of the words ‘as a debt due’ in s 30(2) may
not be of great weight in terms of an assumption
of legislative intent
(especially as s 30(2) is specific and s 30(1) is general).
123 Yet, the High Court has confirmed that the
primary object of statutory construction is to construe the relevant provision
it is consistent with the language and purpose of all the provisions of
the statute and that the context, the general purpose and
policy of a provision
and its consistency and fairness are surer guides to its meaning than the logic
with which it is
constructed.
process of construction must always begin by examining the context of the
provision that is being construed
. Context should be regarded in its widest
124 Applying
those principles, the absence of the words ‘as a debt due’ in s
30(2) may be significant in the broader context
of the OCA as a whole.
125 Returning to the language of s 30(2), it is
necessary to examine closely the provisions stated to apply to the recovery of
owed by a lot owner.
126 It is clear the OC
accepts some aspects of s 30(2) apply to recovery of money owed by a lot owner
when coming to this Court, namely,
the notice provisions of ss 31 and 32. That
is evident from the notices being pleaded in the statement of
127 Thus, to this point, it appears that a
harmonious reading of s 30(2) and the Court’s general jurisdiction under
is achievable by reason of the OC giving a fee notice to the lot owner
(and, optionally, a final notice – a matter to which
I will return), prior
to the commencement of proceedings.
128 Pausing, in
, his Honour was not taken to extrinsic materials by the parties
and did not consider them to be of assistance. However, in my view,
Explanatory Memorandum (
) and the Second Reading speech (
provide some
guidance relevant to the jurisdiction
30 of the EM confirms the OC’s general right of recovery of money owed in
a court of competent jurisdiction. Where
recovery is for money owed by lot
owners, that is ‘subject to’ the application of
the specific
procedure in the fee notice provisions
for money owed by lot owners
the language of cl 30 – in referring to a ‘specific procedure in the
fee notice provisions’ applying
to recovery of money owed by lot owner
– arguably supports the OC’s contention that s 30(2) is capable of
standing harmoniously
with the general jurisdiction under s 100(1) of the MCA.
131 Again, it was said that construction was
correct because it accorded with principles of statutory interpretation (s 30(1)
dominant or general, whereas s 30(2) was subordinate).
132 However, importantly, the OC’s
construction of s 30(2) requires that – in litigating in the
Magistrates’ Court
for recovery of money owed by the lot owner –
either some provisions referred to in s 30(2) do not apply,
do apply, but in a selective sense. I refer to subsection 32(2)(c) as well
as to provisions within Division 1 of Part 11 (‘Applications
133 It is at this point, therefore,
that the potential conflict, repugnancy or contrariety referred to
, arises such that the two statues may not be capable of being
reconciled for the purposes of the Magistrates’ Court having
MA 46 Pty Ltd v Paglia Properties
Delaney J had to
consider an apparent intersection of rights of parties under two different
legislative regimes. His Honour described
the task helpfully as follows:
To determine whether there is an inconsistency
requires a comparison of the
ual language of each statute to see
whether they stand together or whether the later statute has abrogated the
earlier statute. When
comparing two intersecting statutory provisions it is to
be assumed that Parliament normally intends both statutes to work harmoniously
together so that each operates within its respective field of application; this
position is only displaced by clear and unmistakeable
implication. It is
with these principles in mind that the question of the asserted inconsistency
... is to be approached (omitting
citations).
135 Accordingly,
I turn now to consider the language and construction of subsection 32(2)(c) as
well as provisions within Division
1 of Part 11; and, to examine whether or not
harmony is able to be achieved in the sense referred to by Delaney J.
136 In my view, there are four matters that
potentially displace the presumption that the statutes were intended to work
(such that the Magistrates’ Court has concurrent jurisdiction),
with respect to recovery of money owed by lot owners. I consider
those matters
I. The requirements that the final notice be
in approved form and inform the lot owner of the OC’s intention to
action under Part 11’ if fees remain unpaid after 28 days.
II. The requirement that Division 1 of Part 11
applies to the recovery of money owed by a lot owner pursuant to s 30(2).
III. Under Division 1 of Part 11, the operation of
s 165(1) and the considerations contained in s 167(1) including fairness,
oppressiveness,
prejudice and discrimination.
IV. Under Division 1 of Part 11, the requirement
under s 165(4) that ‘VCAT’s power to award costs under s 109 of the
Act 1998 is not affected’.
turn to each of those matters in turn.
I. The requirements that the final
notice be in approved form and inform the lot owner of the OC’s intention
action under Part 11’ if fees remain unpaid after 28
138 The fact that lot owners must be
informed that the OC will take action under Part 11 (which is headed
‘Applications to VCAT’);
yet find themselves defending actions in
the Magistrates’ Court is contradictory and difficult to reconcile.
139 Final notices must be in approved forms.
Pursuant to s 200 of the OCA, the Director of Consumer Affairs must approve and
each approved form.
140 The approved form
of the final notice (published on the Consumer Affairs website) states:
‘If payment is not received within
28 days after the date this final
notice is given, the owners corporation intends to take action under
Owners Corporations Act 2006
to recover the amount due.
This includes
applying to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT)
an order requiring you to pay’ (emphasis
141 The fact that the approved form (as
currently published) states that taking action under
applying to VCAT’ is indicative of no more than the uncertainty that
has existed for lot owners for the past twenty years and
led to the jurisdiction
question before the Court now. It also is at odds with the language of the Note
contained at the foot of
in the OCA (
142 Clause 32 of the EM does not assist
as it simply confirms the final notice must inform the lot owner that the OC
intends ‘to
take action under
’ to recover the amount due if
the overdue fees, charges and interest owing are not paid within 28
143 Returning to the text of the OCA, the Note
at the foot of
states that
provides that
an application to
by the OC for an order requiring a lot owner to pay an amount payable
by the lot owner to the OC can only be made if the amount is
not paid within 28
days after the final notice is given under
144 A note at the foot of a provision forms
part of the Act if the Act was passed after 1 January
the Note expressly articulates the link between the operation of s 32 and
applications to VCAT. Importantly, the Note does
not state an alternative such
as ‘or a court of competent
146 The OC answers the apparent
conflict in taking action in the Magistrates’ Court, contrary to that
prescribed stated intention
in this way (in addition to the argument referred to
previously that s 30(2) is subordinate to s
147 It was said that the giving of a final
notice under s 32 was not a mandated step; thus, it was not required before
recovery action in the Magistrates’ Court for money owed
against a lot owner. Further, s 162 provides that VCAT
decide OC disputes.
148 However, this submission is
misconceived. The word ‘may’ is used in s 162 in the permissive
sense with respect the
grant of VCAT’s powers by the legislature. Also,
the contention does not address the apparent contradiction that – although
the final notice is not a mandated step (unless commencing at VCAT) – s
30(2) states that ss 31 and 32 and Division 1 of Part
11 ‘applies’
to recovery of money owed by a lot owner.
149 Pausing here, reliance upon the word
‘may’ in ss 32 and 162 in support of the OC’s construction of
absent consideration of the whole of the OCA and of the provisions
in Division 1 of Part 11 – is at odds with modern principles
of statutory
construction regarding context and purpose to which I have already referred.
150 To reiterate, and as the plurality observed in
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border
starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning of a statutory provision is
the text of the statute whilst, at the same time,
regard is had to its context
and purpose. Context should be regarded at this first stage and not at some
later stage and it should
be regarded in its widest sense. This is not to deny
the importance of the natural and ordinary meaning of a word, namely how it
ordinarily understood in discourse, to the process of construction.
Considerations of context and purpose simply recognise that, understood in
its statutory, historical or other context, some other
meaning of a word may be
suggested, and so too, if its ordinary meaning is not consistent with the
statutory purpose, that meaning
must be rejected
151 Yet it was said that the language of the
OCA was nevertheless insufficiently clear and unmistakeable to displace the
presumption
against ousting the Court’s jurisdiction to hear and decide an
OC’s claim for recovery of money owed by a lot owner.
152 I am of the view that the legislative
requirement that the OC inform the lot owner of an intention by way of the final
to ‘take action under Part 11’ which is headed
‘Applications to VCAT’ is directly contradictory to then initiating
a complaint in the Magistrates’ Court.
OC seeking to remedy this practically may opt to add a sentence such as:
‘This includes applying to VCAT or
a court of competent
seeking an order requiring you to pay’. However, for an
OC to amend or add to the wording of the approved form has the consequence
it is no longer the approved form under the OCA and is contrary to the Note, s
163(2) and, arguably, the legislative regime
as a whole under Division 1 of Part
154 Next, I turn to a further inherent conflict
that is not easily reconciled with the OC’s construction of s 30. A
consequence
of the OC’s interpretation is this. Because a final notice
does not have to be given, the OC could sue a lot owner in the
Magistrates’
Court for money owed as soon as 28 days elapsed on a s 31 fee
notice (and, indeed, at any time after any final fee notice was issued).
Whereas, in contrast, a VCAT application to recover money cannot be initiated
– by ss 32 and 163(2) – until after 28
days had elapsed on the final
155 To my mind, that consequence appears
repugnant to a purposive reading of the OCA which was intended to under s 1
“appropriate mechanisms” for the resolution of
disputes’. Moreover, the need for clarity and for parties to know
they stand was emphasised by the Attorney-General in the Second Reading Speech
as follows:
In keeping with this scheme, the
process for collection of owners corporation fees from lot owners is clearly set
out in the bill,
all parties will know where they stand
will be a mandatory 28-day notice upon failure to pay fees. A second and final
28-day notice is discretionary, but the owners
corporation cannot go to VCAT
unless this final notice is given (emphasis
requirements of s 32(2)(c) and 163(2) are thus very difficult to reconcile with
the Magistrates’ Court having concurrent
sought of money owed by the lot owner.
II. The requirement that Division 1 of
Part 11 applies to the recovery of money owed by a lot owner pursuant to s
157 The heading to Part 11 is
‘Applications to VCAT’. Headings to Parts of Acts form part of the
Pursuant to s 30(2),
Division 1 of Part 11 applies to the recovery of money owed to a lot
158 Within Division 1, numerous provisions
refer to the powers (and parameters to powers) of VCAT as follows: s 162 VCAT
and determine ... ; s 163 Who may apply to VCAT ...; s 164 VCAT may
dismiss ... ; s 165 what orders can VCAT make ... ; s 166 If
VCAT determines
..., VCAT may make an order ... ; s 167 What must VCAT consider ... ; and so on.
159 Accordingly, the only possible construction of
s 30 as urged by the OC is that all the provisions within Division 1 apply to a
proceeding in the Magistrates’ Court, as though the reference to VCAT in
all these instances is to be interchangeable with
160 Although the EM is
an aid only, the EM is silent regarding the prospect of such a course being
adopted by a court of competent
as defined within the
Clause 163 refers to who
may apply to VCAT in relation to an OC dispute and so
161 As stated previously, the purpose under s
1(b) of the OCA is to provide for appropriate mechanisms for the resolution of
relating to OCs.
162 The Attorney-General
identified in the Second Reading one issue as ‘critical’ to all OCs
which was the need for a
comprehensive dispute resolution system and then went
Dispute resolution options are limited to
services available for resolving neighbourhood disputes, or, if a dispute
relates to the
OCA, regulations or rules, applying for a formal order from the
Magistrates’ Court. These options are too limited for the diverse
disputes and parties operating in today’s complex owners corporation
environment.
163 Reference
by the Attorney-General to ‘the diverse range of disputes’ in the OC
environment and to the obtaining of
a formal order from the Magistrates’
Court being ‘too limited’ is highly significant in the present
context. The
Second Reading articulates explicitly the legislature’s
awareness of the multiplicity of statutory bases upon which, in combination,
money may be owed by a lot owner or may be the subject of
164 Again, examining the text of the
provisions with Division 1 of Part 11, the breach of the obligation of the lot
owner to pay money
owed is, as stated, a dispute that VCAT may hear and decide.
However, the task of VCAT is expressed very broadly in s 162 as follows:
and determine a dispute or other matter arising under this Act or the
regulations or the rules of an owners corporation that
affects an owners
corporation (an owners corporation dispute) including a dispute or matter
relating to – ... (b) an alleged
breach by a lot owner ... of an
obligation imposed on that person ... to pay money
165 Again, this much broader expression of the
task of VCAT is, to my mind, consistent with the language in s 30(2) in which
‘as a debt’ do not appear in connection with recovery of
money owed by a lot owner (although they do in s 30(1) to recovery
of money owed
by third-party debtors).
166 For these reasons,
having regard to the express and unambiguous language contained in Division 1 of
Part 11 (including but not
limited to the heading), these provisions point to a
clear and unmistakeable implication to alter or remove the Court’s
with respect to recovery of money owed by lot owners.
III. Under Division 1 of Part 11, the
operation of ss 165(1) and 167(1) including with respect to considerations of
fairness, oppressiveness,
prejudice and
discrimination
167 Notwithstanding my stated
findings regarding the language and provisions as a whole in Division 1 of Part
11, it is appropriate
to deal with certain specific provisions in further
168 In s 165(1) there is a reference to the
making of orders that requires close examination. It is stated that, in
determining an
OC dispute, VCAT
may make any order it considers fair
including an order for the payment of a sum of money found to be owing by one
party to another party (emphasis
169 Of course, it is well-established that the
grant of power to make any order that the Tribunal considers fair does not
the Tribunal from an obligation to apply the law and not merely be
that extent, putting aside the difficulties referred to in the language overall,
the requirement regarding fairness in s 165(1)
causes no obvious contrariety.
171 Additionally, under s 167(1), in making an
order regarding an OC dispute, VCAT must have regard to specific considerations
(a) the conduct of the parties;
(b) an act or omission or proposed act or omission by a party;
impact of a resolution or proposed resolution on the lot owners as
(d) whether a resolution or proposed resolution is oppressive to, unfairly
prejudicial to or unfairly discriminates against, a lot
owner or lot owners;
(e) any other matter VCAT thinks relevant (emphasis added).
172 Clause 167 of the EM confirms that
VCAT in making an order is required to consider the conduct of the parties,
their acts or omissions,
impact of a resolution or proposed resolution on
the lot owners as a whole
, including whether it would be oppressive or
unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminate against, a lot owner, as well
other matter VCAT thinks relevant (emphasis
course, questions of fairness, oppressiveness and prejudicial or discriminatory
are not generally matters that arise for judicial consideration
in a cause of action in the Magistrates’ Court for recovery
of a debt or
liquidated demand. Such considerations are more commonly within the remit of
administrative tribunals and decision-makers.
Meringnage v Interstate
Enterprises Pty Ltd
is authority for the proposition that because in Victoria, there is no
strict separation of powers at the State level, State courts
exercise administrative power as well as State
judicial power (and, conversely, State tribunals are not precluded
from exercising
judicial power).
175 Nevertheless, it seems to
me that the requirement under s 167(1)(c) that VCAT must consider, in making an
order, the impact of
a resolution or proposed resolution ‘on the lot
owners as a whole’ does create a contrariety with judicial consideration
of a claim for debt or liquidated demand under s 100(1). The Court may find
itself be in the unusual position of having to consider
interests of non-parties
(being other lot owners).
176 Moreover, an ordinary
resolution is required to authorise the OC to bring litigation to recover money
against a lot owner. Hence,
if challenged, it is difficult to see how or on
what basis the Magistrates’ Court would look behind the making of a
resolution.
To that extent, a repugnancy appears to arise to alter the
Court’s jurisdiction.
IV. Under Division 1 of Part 11, the
requirement under s 165(4) that ‘VCAT’s power to award costs under s
109 of the VCAT
Act 1998 is not
177 There is a fundamental
difference between a judicial exercise of awarding costs and VCAT’s power
to award costs under s
109 of the VA.
principles that a Court is to apply were very helpfully articulated in
Sandpiper Developments Pty Ltd v Main Beach Developments Qld Pty Ltd (No
by Garde J as follows (omitting citations):
The relevant principles as to costs are well known. The court has a
broad discretionary power to make orders as to costs. The court’s
discretion is unfettered but is
exercised judicially upon facts connected
with the litigation and not by reference to irrelevant or extraneous
considerations
. Although costs are in the discretion of the court
the ordinary rule is that, in the absence of sound reasons to the contrary, a
successful litigant should receive his or her costs
. The purpose of an order
for costs is to compensate the successful party and not to punish the
unsuccessful party (emphasis
179 By contrast, the starting point with
respect to costs under s 109(1) of the VA is that each party is to bear their
own costs in
the proceeding.
180 Further, the
Tribunal may only order that a party pay all or part of the costs of another
party in a proceeding ‘if it is
satisfied that it is fair to do so’,
having regard to the factors set s 109(3).
181 Thus, s 165(4) of the OCA would require the
Magistrates’ Court to award costs in a way contrary to well-established
governing a judicial award of costs.
182 In this way, the Magistrates’
Court’s jurisdiction with respect to questions of costs – arising in
recovery of money owed by a lot owner – is clearly and
unmistakably altered and, arguably, withdrawn.
183 In summary, the inconsistencies or
contrarieties that displace the presumption the two statutes were intended to
work harmoniously
– such that the Magistrates’ Court has concurrent
owner) – are these:
a) The plain language of
s 30(2) - which states that ss 31 and 32 and all of the provisions of Division 1
of Part 11 (‘Applications
to VCAT’) apply.
b) The express and unambiguous language contained
in Division 1 of Part 11 (including but not limited to the heading).
c) The contradictory and irreconcilable practical
consequences that flow from the requirements contained s 32(2)(c) combined with
the content of Note at the foot of s 32 and 163(2) – when read together
and in the broader context of the Act.
apparent withdrawal or alteration of the Court’s costs jurisdiction with
respect to OC disputes by way of the requirement
under s 165(4) of the OCA that
VCAT’s power to award costs under s 109 of the VA is not
e) The required considerations under s
167(1) of the OCA that appear to alter the ordinary incidents of the
Court’s jurisdiction.
184 Therefore, having
examined closely the language and broader context of these provisions and upon a
purposive reading of the OCA
in accordance with the principles referred to
previously, I conclude these matters are directly contradictory or repugnant to
a conclusion
that the Magistrates' Court has jurisdiction under s 100(1) of the
MCA and/or under s 30(1) of the OCA with respect to recovery of
money owed by a
lot owner to an OC.
185 These matters conflict in
an unreconcilable way with the purpose and intention of the legislature. They
create a clear and unmistakeable
inference that the Court’s broad
respect to claims for recovery of money owed by a lot owner under the
186 In other words, there is a clear and
unmistakeable implication to alter or remove the Court’s jurisdiction with
to claims for recovery of money owed by a lot owner under the
187 Moreover, the construction contended for by
the OC has the undesirable effect of creating uncertainty and irreconcilable
contradictions,
and of increasing confusion for lot owners and inevitably, OCs
(who are, in effect, collectives of lot owners who must make resolutions
empower litigation). These matters constitute further very strong grounds to
displace the presumption that the legislature intended
both statutes to operate,
such that the Magistrates’ Court has concurrent jurisdiction to determine
actions to recover money
from lot owners under the OCA.
188 Finally, notwithstanding my conclusion that the
Court lacks jurisdiction to hear and determine the substantive proceeding, the
Court retains the authority to consider and determine questions concerning its
own jurisdiction, and to make such orders as are necessary
or incidental to that
determination, given that the proceeding has been commenced in this
189 I will hear from the parties as to next
Magistrate M A Hoare
8 July 2025
Owners Corporations Act 2006
[2024] VMC 12
Wilson v Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
[2001] VSC 290
Plaintiff submissions
[2], [9], [12].
the OCA. The so-called ‘benefit principle’ provides that lot owners
of lots that benefit more pay more (as regards
calculation of levies and fees).
Owners Corporation PS407621Y v Grundl (Owners Corporations)
[1998] 2 VR 113.
[2002] VSC 78.
Plaintiff submissions
Paragraph 19 of the SOC dated 9
October 2023.
Shergold v Tanner
[2002] HCA 19
(2002) 209 CLR 126
Plaintiff submissions
Consumer Affairs Victoria,
Fees – owners corporations
(Web Page) Late payment of fees and
s 163(1)(b)
Ibid [38]-[39].
[1932] HCA 10
(1932) 47 CLR 121
’), per Dixon J cited in
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
(Lexis Nexus,
ed, 2023) [5.58]-[5.59] (‘
Perry Herzfeld and
Thomas Prince,
Interpretation
(Thomas Reuters Australia, 2
ed, 2020) [9.670].
Ibid [9.680].
[1999] SASC 82
Magistrates’ Court
[1961] HCA 32
(1961) 106 CLR 268
v Commissioner for Public Employment
[2006] HCA 5
225 CLR 130
per Gleeson J
Provided the claim does not
exceed the jurisdictional limit of $100,000.
Rothwells Ltd v
Nommack (No 100) Pty Ltd
[1990] 2 Qd R 85 [86] cited by Randall
AMD Resources Ltd v TRS Management Pty Ltd
v Union Steamship Co of New Zealand Ltd
[1923] HCA 21
(1923) 32 CLR
by quoting from the then current edition of Odgers on
Pleading cited by Randall AsJ in
AMD Resources Ltd v TRS Management Pty
(n 20) [12.4].
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
SZTAL v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
91 ALJR 936
[14] per Kiefel CJ, Nettle and Gordon
Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative Assembly, 20 July 2006
(Hansard) (‘
Second Reading’
), Explanatory Memorandum,
Owners Corporations Bill (‘
Interpretation of
Legislation Act 1984
(n 38) 5, 30.
[2020] VSC 695
[2017] HCA 34
347 ALR 405
91 ALJR 936
[14] per Kiefel CJ, Nettle and Gordon JJ.
Second Reading
Second Reading
165(1)(c)(i).
Christ Church Grammar
School v Bosnich & Anor
[2010] VSC 476
[2020] VSCA 30.
[2024] VSC 581
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (413 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter