URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2009/2786.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:32:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mickelburough v Victoria Police (General) [2009] VCAT 2786 (19 February 2009)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
GENERAL LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. G361/2008
General List – freedom of information – exempt documents
apparent from their nature without identifying or specifying
each document
– documents capable of being edited to remove exemption –
information relating to the personal affairs
of a person – information
obtained in confidence – disclosure likely to impair the ability to obtain
similar information
– general public interest override –
of Information Act
(1), 35(1)(b) and
Peter Mickelburough
Victoria Police
Member D. O’Halloran
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
6 February 2009
DATE OF ORDER
19 February 2009
Mickelburough v Victoria Police (General)
[2009] VCAT 2786
1. The decision of the respondent is affirmed.
D. O’Halloran
APPEARANCES:
For Applicant
Mr J. Pizer of Counsel instructed by Editorial Legal Counsel of Herald and
Weekly Times Pty Ltd.
For Respondent
Mr R. Niall of Counsel instructed
by Victorian Government Solicitor.
applicant is a journalist in the employment of the Herald and Weekly Times Pty
Ltd (HWT). On 25 January 2008 the Editorial Legal
Counsel of HWT on behalf of Mr
Mickelburough wrote to the Freedom of Information officer at the office of the
respondent. The correspondence
requested (in part) access to
complaints made against staff and recruits at the Victoria Police
letter dated 19 February 2008 the respondent declined to provide access to the
requested documents, citing sections 25A(5),
(9) and 35(1)(b) of the
Freedom of Information Act
applicant sought an internal review of the respondent’s decision. The
request was refused.
applicant, Mr Peter Mickelburough, has made application to the Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal (the Tribunal) seeking
to review the
respondent’s decision. The application itself refers to the date of the
decision by the respondent to refuse
the request for an internal review.
However, it is clear from the evidence and submissions presented at the hearing
that it is the
decision of 19 February 2008 that the applicant seeks to
THE REQUEST
stated, the applicant’s request is contained in its correspondence of 25
January 2008. The initial paragraph sets out the
request for access to
(emphasis added) made against staff and recruits at the
Victoria Police Academy. The balance of the letter refines the request but
remains clear that the request is for complaints and the results of any
investigations of those complaints.
request is refined to limit the complaints to those made to the Ethical
Standards Department, the Victoria Police Academy or the
Office of the Chief
Commissioner and lodged between 1 January 2005 and 30 June 2007.
request is further refined to include but not limit the request to complaints
of the public or suppliers
(of) good(s) and services to the Academy and complaints of bullying, harassment,
assault, sexual assault
and discrimination made by recruits, former recruits,
the families of recruits or former recruits, Academy staff or former staff,
members of the public and suppliers of goods or services to the Academy.
applicant, in the letter of request, anticipated the issue of documents being
exempt and advises that the names of individuals
and material that identifies
individuals or other exempt material may need to be
THE DOCUMENTS
the compulsory conference on 3 October 2008 Deputy President Coghlan viewed
three sample complaints. When the proceeding did not
resolve, the Deputy
President ordered;
than seven days prior to the date
fixed for hearing, the respondent must lodge with the Tribunal in a sealed
envelope marked “Confidential”
and for the attention of the member
hearing the appeal the documents for which exemption is claimed.”
letter, 17 November 2008, the respondent requested clarification of Order 5 and
suggested that the aforementioned three sample
complaints be lodged at the
Tribunal in order to satisfy Order 5.
applicant in a letter dated 25 November 2008 insisted that it was consistent
with the nature of the review that all of the documents
in dispute be lodged
with the Tribunal.
Ultimately,
the parties signed consent orders to the effect that the aforementioned three
sample complaints to be produced to the
Tribunal be disclosed to counsel for the
applicant, subject to the usual undertakings by counsel as to confidentiality.
letter dated 29 January 2009 the respondent filed the aforementioned three
sample complaints at the Tribunal, in what the respondent
said, was compliance
with Order 5. At no time did the applicant agree that Order 5 had been
satisfied. Indeed, it was the applicant’s
submission that every one of the
requested documents needed to be viewed by the Tribunal for a proper
determination to be made.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
respondent maintains that the requested complaints are of such a nature that it
is apparent that all of the requested documents
are exempt documents and in this
regard the respondent relies upon section 25A(5) to refuse disclosure under the
Act. Section 75A(5)
states relevantly:
(5) An agency or Minister
may refuse to grant access to the documents in accordance with the request
without having identified any
or all of the documents to which the request
relates and without specifying, in respect of
each document, the
provision or provisions of this Act under which that document is claimed to be
an exempt document if-
(a) it is apparent from the nature of the documents as described in the
request that all of the documents to which the request
is expressed to relate
are exempt documents; and
(b) either-
(i) it is apparent from the nature of the documents as so described that no
obligation would arise under
in relation to any of those documents to
grant access to an edited copy of the document; or
When making its submission that the requested documents are
‘exempt’ documents, the respondent relies upon
section 33(1)
section 35(1)(b) of the Act;
33. Document affecting personal privacy
(1) A document is an exempt document if its disclosure under this Act would
involve the unreasonable disclosure of information relating
to the personal
affairs of any person (including a deceased person).
35. Documents containing material obtained in confidence
(1) A document is an exempt document if its disclosure under this Act would
divulge any information or matter communicated in confidence
by or on behalf of
a person or a government to an agency or a Minister, and-
(a) the information would be exempt matter if it were generated by an
agency or a Minister; or
(b) the disclosure of the information under this Act would be contrary to
the public interest by reason that the disclosure would
be reasonably likely to
impair the ability of an agency or a Minister to obtain similar information in
the future.
respondent submits that the ‘exempt’ documents cannot be amended by
deletion of material to make them no longer exempt.
In this regard the
respondent relies upon
of the Act;
25. Deletion of
exempt matter or irrelevant material
(a) a decision is made not to grant a request for access to a document on
the ground that it is an exempt document or that to grant
the request would
disclose information that would reasonably be regarded as irrelevant to the
(b) it is practicable for the agency or Minister to grant access to a copy
of the document with such deletions as to make the copy
not an exempt document
or a document that would not disclose such information (as the case
requires); and
(c) it appears from the request, or the applicant subsequently
indicates, that the applicant would wish to have access to such
the agency or Minister shall grant access to such a copy of the document.
EVIDENCE AND SUBMISSIONS
Tribunal has had the luxury of viewing the three sample complaints referred to
above. The Tribunal has viewed no other documents,
the subject of the
applicant filed a witness statement and gave evidence at the hearing. The
evidence given at the hearing confirmed that the applicant
made the request and
application to the Tribunal in the course of his employment with the Herald and
Weekly Times Pty Ltd. Further,
the applicant confirmed any information disclosed
would be used, at least in part, in the course of that employment. While not
the Tribunal is of the view that it is a reasonable presumption that the
use would include newspaper publication.
Jude McCulloch provided the Tribunal with a detailed statement and gave evidence
on behalf of the applicant at the hearing.
The Professor agreed that
confidentiality was an important aspect of the investigation process concerning
complaints and that it
was best practice for the Police to provide
confidentiality when dealing with a complaint. The Professor also agreed that a
to provide confidentiality might deter other people from making
complaints. However, the Professor gave evidence that the removal
of material
identifying parties would be enough to overcome any difficulties that would
otherwise arise.
the other hand, during the course of cross-examination the Professor did say
that she would want “details of peoples complaints”
removed, in
addition to personal identifying material. The Tribunal was left with the
distinct impression that the Professor was
of the view that in order to maintain
the strength of complaints taken in confidence a lot more than simple personal
identifying
material would need to be edited out prior to disclosure. This would
of course give rise to the issue of whether a meaningful result
is achieved,
more of which will be discussed later.
Importantly,
the Professor agreed that it was essential for the proper investigation of a
complaint that the officer complained of
should not become aware of the
complaint. The Professor agreed that disclosure of the complaint to the relevant
officer would hamper
the investigation. The Professor did not say how the simple
removal of personal identifying material would achieve a satisfactory
The respondent’s concern is that the details of the circumstances of the
complaint could lead the relevant officer
becoming aware of the complaint.
thrust of the respondent’s submission is that the information contained
within the complaint and the fact of the complaint
itself is all so intertwined
that the only editing that could take place to remove material that was exempt,
would lead to a result
that had no meaning in terms of the applicant’s
respondent filed two detailed witness statements from Inspector Philip Green
(Green) and Senior Sergeant Sean Carroll (Carroll),
both members of the Victoria
Police. Importantly, Green was attached to the Equity and Conflict Resolution
Unit of the Human Resources
Department of Victoria Police and Carroll is working
in the Disciplinary Advisory Unit of the Ethical Standards Unit of Victoria
Police. The Tribunal views these roles importantly as it places them in an
excellent position to assist the Tribunal. Both officers
were called to give
evidence at the hearing.
primary theme of both officers evidence was that their significant experience
and positions held within Victoria Police allowed
them to say that the documents
requested by the applicant contained both sensitive and personal information.
Further, that the complaints
and the information within was communicated in
confidence. Finally, that the policies and structures of the Victoria Police,
in particular, the Ethical Standards Department, the Victoria Police Academy
and the office of the Chief Commissioner, meant that
the complaints would be
handled in the strictest confidence.
officers gave evidence that there are several reasons why it was important that
complaints and the information contained in them
be obtained in confidence.
First, it was important for the integrity of all the investigation processes
within the Victoria Police
that information be collected and kept, in
confidence. Second, in confidence protects complainants, promotes personnel
working effectively
together and affords natural justice to persons the subject
of the complaint. Third, “disclosure absolutely dries up future
complaints.”
Both Green and Carroll were of the view that the risk of complaints drying up if
there was disclosure is “real” and as
stated, the Professor agreed
that disclosure, ‘might’ deter people from making complaints.
respondent submitted that the nature of the requested documents, the complaints,
invoked the provisions of section 25A(5). The
submission of the respondent is
that the nature of the documents, complaints, is such that first, they contain
information relating
to the personal affairs of a person. The respondent submits
that a broad definition of ‘personal affairs, must be adopted when
considering this issue. Second, the documents, complaints, contain information
obtained in confidence. Finally, it is the submission
of the respondent that
this information is so intertwined with the document that it would not possible
to edit the document and obtain
a meaningful result in accordance with the
applicants’ request.
for the applicant attacked this submission arguing that the respondent is
advocating a class of documents that can be considered
exempt without
considering their content. The applicant submits that the onus is upon the
respondent to demonstrate that the documents
are exempt or contain exempt
that this onus cannot be satisfied without a proper consideration of all of the
information contained within the documents.
applicant accepts that the requested documents probably or at least possibly
contain information relating to the personal affairs
of a person. But the
applicant submits, one, that this can not possibly be known without a close
examination of each and every one
of the requested documents, and two,
information capable of identifying a person can be edited out, so that the
document no longer
contains exempt material. Again, the applicant submits that
the editing process cannot be assessed without examining the content
of each and
every requested document.
25A(5) may be invoked if two conditions are satisfied. First, if it is apparent
from the nature of all of the documents described
in the request that they are
exempt documents, and second, it is apparent from the nature of the documents
described in the request
that there would be no obligation, under
provide access to an edited version of the documents.
provides essentially that where it is practicable to edit a document so that
it no longer contains exempt information, then the relevant
agency should
provide access to the edited document.
issue of practicability, as raised by
, has two essential elements.
First, the editing has to be practicable from a resources point of view and
second, the editing must
result in a document that is meaningful in terms of the
request made by the
25A(5) is peculiar in that it contemplates a right to refuse to disclose
documentation without having to identify any or all
of the documents and without
specifying the precise basis on which the document is said to be exempt. The
refusal is founded upon
it being apparent from the ‘nature’ of the
documents requested that they are exempt, as distinct from identification
precise ‘content’ of the documents being exempt.
is not to say that the documents contemplated by section 25A(5) do not contain
exempt content. Rather that the nature of the
document makes it clear that the
content is exempt and that it cannot be made to be no longer exempt by
the submissions of the applicant to the contrary, the Tribunal is satisfied that
parliament intended by the enactment of 25A(5)
that there be the right to refuse
access to a particular class of documents that are apparent from their nature to
be exempt documents.
The Tribunal is satisfied that the wording of section
25A(5) is clear, unambiguous and provides for the ability to refuse access
“without having identified any or all of the documents to which the
request relates and without specifying, in respect of each
document, the
provision or provisions of (the) Act under which that document is claimed to be
an exempt document.”
respondent argues that the relevant class or nature of document, to which
section 25A(5) applies, is invoked by
sections 33
and 35 of the Act.
conditions need to be satisfied for
to be invoked. First, the
information contained within the document must relate to the personal affairs of
a person and second, the
disclosure must be unreasonable.
applicant’s request states that the names of persons or material that
identifies individuals and other ‘exempt material’
(not defined),
may need to be deleted.
first issue is whether the removal of information is likely to lead to a
meaningful result contemplated by the request (as described
above). The second
and more critical issue is whether the disclosure of any remaining material
either directly or indirectly identifies
a particular person whose affairs are
simple removal of a names, dates places etc, in an effort to remove the
exemption assumes an extremely narrow definition of ‘information
to personal affairs’. The authorities are clear that material arising out
of a person’s work performance can
relate to the personal affairs of a
. The Tribunal
adopts a broad definition of personal affairs that extends beyond a name or
simple personal identification.
the basis of the evidence given by the two police officers the Tribunal is
satisfied that even in the absence of the person’s
name, the material
concerning work performance will aid in the identification of the
Tribunal is satisfied that the nature of the requested documents, (complaints
made against staff and recruits at the Victoria
Police Academy), leads one to a
conclusion that they are exempt as they contain information relating to the
personal affairs of a
person. Further, the Tribunal is satisfied that the
information contained within the requested documents does not lend itself to
editing to achieve a meaningful result for the party requesting the
second component of
, as to whether the disclosure is unreasonable,
involves an evaluation of the competing interests in disclosure and
non-disclosure
of the information sought. On the one hand, there is the object
of the Act to extend as far as possible the right of the community
access to information and on the other hand the right to personal privacy of an
authorities have identified numerous relevant considerations and it is necessary
for the Tribunal to balance the competing interests.
Consideration
needs to be given to the purpose for which the information is sought, the nature
of the information and the circumstances
in which the information is
identity and motive of the applicant and the extent of dissemination of the
requested material is also relevant
. The extent to which
the information is already available to the public is relevant
. Whether any
public or important interest would be promoted by release of the information is
any event, the applicant maintains that without examining the content of all the
requested documents it is not possible to conduct
a proper evaluation of the
competing interests. The Tribunal does not agree. Given the evidence provided by
the witnesses, the Tribunal
is aware of the nature of the requested information
and is in a position to determine whether or not disclosure is
unreasonable.
information has been requested, a least in part, with the clear intention of
disseminating the details to the public at large
by way of newspaper articles.
Disclosure in these circumstances would be to the public, not just to the
applicant. The Tribunal is
satisfied that there is likely to be widespread
dissemination of the requested material if disclosed.
applicant submits that its motivation is not simply to satisfy idle curiosity.
The applicants’ submission that disclosure
is in the public interest is
founded on a desire to insure governmental authorities are held accountable for
their actions and to
promote a corruption free police force. Further, that
disclosure of the documents will advance or promote fully informed public debate
on the environment of recruits at the Academy; whether there is an atmosphere of
bullying, cronyism or misogyny at the Academy; the
nature of any misconduct at
the Academy and whether police are held accountable for that alleged
misconduct.
respondent submitted that the privacy of the individuals personal affairs
outweighs any public
this case, the Tribunal should also consider that the material was obtained in
the context of clear procedures assuring all
parties of confidentiality and that
the material is unlikely to have been provided if the complainants were aware
that the material
was likely to be disclosed at a later stage.
balancing the various considerations, the Tribunal is critically aware of the
nature of the information sought, the circumstances
in which the information is
obtained and the likely dissemination of any disclosed information. The Tribunal
accepts the importance
of obtaining this information ‘in confidence’
as detailed within the evidence of Green and Carroll. The officers’
evidence on this point was given passionately and with grave conviction. On the
basis of their evidence, the Tribunal is satisfied
that it is absolutely
critical to the collection of information concerning complaints that all
information, including the complaint
itself, is collected in confidence. It is
critical because the disclosure of such complaints or the information contained
would present “a real risk (to the) general sources of information
Tribunal is satisfied that the disclosure of the complaints would not, on
balance, serve a greater interest than the interest
of protecting personal
exempt documents pursuant to
of the Act and any editing via
of the Act would render the documents meaningless.
Tribunal now turns to the additional submission of the respondent regarding
section 35 of the Act.
are also two conditions that need to be satisfied for section 35 to be invoked.
First, disclosure of the document would divulge
information or matter
communicated in confidence, and second, the disclosure of the information would
be contrary to the public interest
by reason that the disclosure would be
reasonably likely to impair the ability of the agency to obtain similar
information in the
information has been communicated in confidence is a question of
applicant submits that in order to make the factual assessment of whether all
the information has being communicated in confidence,
each and every document
forming part of the request must be examined. The respondent submits that it is
clear from the evidence presented
by Green and Carroll that the Victoria Police
have in place detailed and thorough polices concerning in-confidence, which are
almost without exception. Professor McCulloch agreed with the importance
of these polices. It is, the respondent submits, a matter
of fact, based upon
this evidence that the complaints and information contained within, are
communicated and maintained in confidence.
The Tribunal accepts the
respondent’s submission that the complaints and information contained
within is information or the
matter communicated in confidence as contemplated
by section 35 of the Act.
on the evidence of Green and Carroll, referred to above, the Tribunal is also
satisfied that the disclosure of the complaints
is reasonable likely to impair
the ability of the police to obtain similar information in the future. The
Tribunal is satisfied that
this risk is real.
Tribunal is satisfied that the complaints cannot be edited in such a way as to
section 25.
First, the evidence of Green and Senior Carroll was to the
effect that it was the strict policy and the strict procedure followed
force that all aspects of all complaints were to be treated in confidence.
Professor McCulloch agreed that in confidence was
an important aspect of the
investigation process concerning complaints and the adoption of the
in-confidence approach was best practice.
If that is the case, which the
Tribunal, based on the evidence, accepts that it is, all aspects of the
complaint have been obtained
in confidence and the editing out of information
obtained in confidence would result in a blank document. This is not a
result in terms of the request. Second, it is information of the
complaint itself that police witnesses also wanted kept in confidence,
knowledge of a complaint being made may give the officer complained of a chance
to escape detection. Any release of any information
concerning the complaint
would result in this undesired result.
such, the Tribunal is satisfied that the exemption provided for in section 35 of
the Act cannot be overcome by deletion of exempt
material as provided for under
section 25.
Public Interest Override
applicant submits that the Tribunal should exercise its general public interest
override, as provided by
section 50(4)
, to determine that public interest
requires that access to the document should be granted. The respondent opposes
this submission
on the basis that the Tribunal should confine itself to the
question of whether the respondents’ decision to refuse to process
request as a preliminary matter should be affirmed.
Section 50(4)
On the hearing of an application for review the Tribunal shall have, in
addition to any other power, the same powers as an agency
or a Minister in
respect of a request, including power to decide that access should be granted to
an exempt document (not being a
document referred to in section 28, section 29A,
section 31(3)
section 33)
where the Tribunal is of opinion that the
public interest requires that access to the document should be granted under
is nothing within
section 50(4)
that prevents the Tribunal from considering that
section in terms of the exemption determined in accordance with section 35.
that the Tribunal has already determined that the documents requested are
exempt pursuant to
of the Act, this is somewhat of an academic
discussion. However, in the event that the Tribunal is mistaken with regard to
the application
, the Tribunal proposes to consider
section 50(4)
in so far as the public interest may be argued to overcome the exemption
provided for by section 35 of the Act.
applicant’s submission with regard to the
section 50(4)
public interest
override is based upon the history of inquiries relevant to the Police
2004, an inquiry uncovered alleged systemic bullying within the Academy and the
report is said to have led to the removal of a
Chief Inspector and two officers.
The formal report has not been made available to the public.
2007 following complaints, a further inquiry allegedly uncovered examples of
cronyism, bullying and misogyny at the Academy. The
formal report has not been
made available to the public.
applicant’s submissions in regard to the public interest have been
detailed in paragraph 45 above. The applicant argues
that the submissions
concerning the need for a fully informed public debate regarding the Police
Academy are so strong that they
should override the exemption conferred by
section 35 of the Act.
Tribunal is satisfied that there is a public interest in promoting a full and
frank discussion concerning allegations and complaints
involving the Police
Academy. However, this does not automatically lead to the conclusion that the
public interest requires
Tribunal is satisfied that there is a greater public interest in the information
not being disclosed. The Tribunal is satisfied
that it is vital for the conduct
of internal investigations within the Victoria Police that the information and
complaints be obtained
and held in confidence. If complaints were to, in effect,
dry up, this would be a significant attack on the public interest which
evidence which I accepted would be an attack that far outweighs any gain that
might occur by disclosure of the complaints
and information obtain in
confidence.
Tribunal is satisfied that the application of
section 50(4)
in this case does
not override the exemption provided for under section 35.
these reasons I affirm the decision of the respondent.
D. O’Halloran
19 February 2009
Oral evidence of
Inspector Green at
Freedom of Information Act
Honeywood v Department of Human Services
[2006] VCAT
Beauchamp v Department of Education and Training
[2006] VCAT 1653
Gunawan v Directorate of School Education
(1994) 6 VAR
v Department of Education and Training
[2006] VCAT 1653
Police v Marke
[2008] VSCA 218
and Metropolitan Transit Authority
(1988) 2 VAR
Police v Marke
[2008] VSCA
Scholes v Australian Federal Police
(1996) 44 ALD
Vaughan v Department of Sustainability and Environment
[2004] VCAT 1562
(2004) 21 VAR
Penhalluriak v Department of Labour and Industry
(unreported, County
Court of Victoria, Judge Lazarus, 19 December
Statement of Senior Sergeant Sean Carroll, paragraph 39, signed 9 December
[1985] VicRp 86
[1985] VR 869
Secretary to the Department of Justice v Osland
[2007] VCSA 96 at para.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (158 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter