URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2024/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PCJ [2024] VMHT 19 (20 September 2024)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2024] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan hospital
Mode of hearing:
Online videoconference
Tribunal members:
Matthew Carroll (Legal Member)
Naomi Hayman (Medical Member)
George Jiang (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online audio from the health service
With online audio
Case manager
With online video
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal varied the
treatment order to a community treatment order expiring on
22/01/2025.
This statement of reasons:
After the hearing
your treating team requested a written explanation of the Tribunal's decision. A
copy of this statement of reasons
will be given to your treating team as well as
to you. While the statement of reasons was requested by your treating team,
it concerns you it is addressed to you.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because your community
treatment order had been changed to an inpatient treatment order. The Tribunal
have a hearing to decide whether or not an order should remain in
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the
Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental health and wellbeing
principles (‘principles’).
Most of the discussion in your hearing
focused on whether you needed to spend more time in hospital or should be
discharged, in this
context the Tribunal identified the following principles
were particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
restriction
The Tribunal must also give proper consideration to your
rights under the
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’). Compulsory treatment engages and limits a
number of human rights protected under the Charter including
freedom from medical treatment without consent, and where a person is being
treated in hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your
rights protected under the Charter, and whether limits on them are reasonable,
the Tribunal
must thoroughly examine three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your medical file. Both you and your treating
team spoke to and answered questions from the Tribunal in
the hearing. This
statement of reasons does not summarise all that information, but the next
section refers to the information the
Tribunal relied on to make its decision
and explains why.
The Tribunal must have regard to your views and
preferences. As already noted, the discussion in your hearing was focused on
you needed to spend more time in hospital. At the very least you wanted
leave from the ward to be able to smoke, but understandably
your strong
preference was to be discharged. At different points in the hearing you said you
would accept treatment in the community,
and you would do so in order to be
discharged from this admission, and so as to not be readmitted in the
4. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the four questions that need to be answered under the
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
As you know the Tribunal had read the report
prepared by your treating team which included a summary of symptoms observed
were admitted to hospital in July and August of this year. This
included changes in your thought form (in particular disorganisation),
content of your thoughts (including paranoia), fluctuations in your mood with
significant irritability, and disturbances to your
perception (auditory
hallucinations). The Tribunal respected your preference to not discuss these
matters in detail.
The Tribunal accepted the evidence of your treating
team and was satisfied you experience symptoms of mental illness that cause a
significant disturbance in your thoughts, mood and perception.
(b) Does your mental illness mean you need to be treated now,
to try and prevent your mental health or physical health seriously
deteriorating;
or to prevent serious harm to you or someone else?
Both admissions this year happened after there
had been an interruption to your treatment. Prior to your July admission there
been a gap in treatment of a number of months, in August it had only been
two weeks. These interruptions to treatment led to a relapse
of the symptoms
described above, and of a severity that required lengthy hospital admissions
– 13 days in July and nearly four
weeks in August. Based on this pattern
of admissions the Tribunal was satisfied that you needed immediate treatment to
serious deterioration in your mental health.
(c) Will you receive immediate treatment if you are on a
treatment order?
While there have been times in the past when you
have avoided treatment even when a treatment order was in place, at the time of
hearing the Tribunal was satisfied that you would receive immediate
treatment if you were on an order. Over the past four weeks this
treatment had
been in the inpatient setting, and it was confirmed that the mobile support team
(MST) was ready to resume providing
support and treatment whenever you left
(d) Is there a less restrictive means than a treatment order
that would enable you to receive immediate treatment?
You told the Tribunal you would accept treatment
in the community in order to get out of hospital, and not be readmitted. You
explained that you were experiencing side-effects that you had not
disclosed, that the current dose of your medication was ‘horrific’,
and you would prefer to be left alone. Based on this we formed the view that
you were motivated to continue with treatment while
a treatment order was in
place (primarily to avoid hospital admissions), but if it were not, you would
most likely stop treatment.
The Tribunal was satisfied that voluntary treatment
was not possible at the time of the hearing and therefore there was no less
restrictive
means than a treatment order to enable you to receive
5. Decision
Given the Tribunal decided that all of the
compulsory treatment criteria applied to you the Tribunal confirmed a treatment
Treatment in hospital or in the community
An inpatient
treatment order places the greatest limits on your rights protected under the
Charter. For this reason, the Act says
that the Tribunal can only make an
inpatient treatment order if it is satisfied that a person cannot be treated in
the community.
It was clear from the notes in your medical file that
there was a strong expectation you would be discharged from hospital the day
before your hearing (Monday). TD confirmed this was the case, but explained that
following a review by your MST psychiatrist on Monday
morning your discharge was
placed on hold and was now likely to be at the end of the week. CM explained
that while she had not been
present at the review, she understood the concern
was that you appeared to have ongoing thought disorder, in that you had
engaging in the review. From your perspective the review had happened
early in the morning, you were woken up to participate, you
also said you had
not been expecting it.
In response to questions from the Tribunal, CM
confirmed that whatever day you were discharged from hospital the MST was ready
resume supporting your treatment in the community. TD explained that the
primary contribution of any further time in hospital would
be to allow the depot
you had the previous day to take further effect. TD also acknowledged there was
a downside to further time
in hospital given how frustrating it was for
The Tribunal gave weight to the assessment that had been undertaken
the previous day, but also took into consideration the factors
you said impacted
the review. Your ability to participate in this hearing was also relevant. The
Tribunal also took into consideration
that MST was ready to resume supporting
you in the community, and no further supports or interventions would be
undertaken if you
remained on the inpatient unit for longer. The Tribunal also
formed the view that your frustration about remaining in hospital had
potential to undermine your relationship with your community treating team.
This meant that while there may be some risk associated
with a discharge from
hospital, there was also a risk associated with remaining there.
balance the Tribunal decided you could be treated in the community and varied
your inpatient treatment order to a community treatment
Length of the Treatment Order
As your hearing was triggered
by your community treatment order being varied to an inpatient treatment order,
the Tribunal did not
have to make a decision about how long your order should
last. The Act sets the duration of your order as the amount of time remaining
on your order at the time of the hearing. This means the duration of your order
is unchanged and it will expire on 22 January 2025.
Your treating doctor must
revoke your treatment order at any time if they believe the treatment criteria
no longer apply.
Date of determination: 27-08-2024
[Signed by the legal member.]
Matthew Carroll
member, on behalf of the Tribunal division.
Date: 20 September
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143 Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
Section 5 What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (491 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter