URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2025/689.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Reynolds v Qube Logistics (SA1) Pty Ltd [2025] VSC 689 (6 November 2025)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
PERSONAL INJURIES LIST
CHRISTOPHER REYNOLDS
QUBE LOGISTICS (SA1) PTY LTD AND
AUSTRALIA NARACOORTE PTY LTD
(ACN 010 807 986)
DATE OF HEARING
27 October 2025
DATE OF RULING
6 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Reynolds v Qube Logistics (SA1) Pty Ltd
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VSC 689
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE — First defendant’s application for
leave to amend their defence — Choice of laws —
Explanation for
delay — Leave granted —
Aon Risk v ANU
[2009] HCA 27
(2009) 239 CLR 175
I.C. Formwork Services Pty Limited v Moir
[2020] ACTCA 44
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE — Plaintiff’s application that
the first defendant lost legal client privilege — No inconsistency
maintenance of legal client privilege — Application rejected —
Section 122(2)
Evidence Act
Secretary to the Department of Justice
[2007] VSCA 96
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR 1
Viterra Malt Pty Ltd v Cargill Australia
[2018] VSCA 118.
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
A Ingram KC with
Carbone Lawyers
For the First Defendant
R Kaye QC with
Hall & Wilcox
For the Second Defendant
F Spencer KC with
Colin Biggers & Paisley
HER HONOUR:
Amended defence
27 October 2025, I heard the first defendant’s application for leave to
file and serve an amended defence in the form of
the document dated 2 October
2025. The application was opposed by the plaintiff and not opposed by the second
defendant. I granted
leave to the first defendant to amend and indicated at the
time that I would subsequently provide reasons.
plaintiff was employed by the first defendant as a truck driver to transport
various products between South Australia and Victoria.
The plaintiff lived on
the Victorian side of the border with South Australia but would start and
complete his shifts in South Australia.
He was injured in an incident occurring
at the premises of the second defendant in Hyman, South Australia, on 13 August
he fell while egressing from the cabin of his truck.
is not in dispute that the plaintiff has an accepted WorkCover claim under the
Victorian legislation, resulting in receipt of weekly
payments of compensation
and an impairment benefit. He has issued this damages proceeding following a
grant of a serious injury certificate
from the employer’s Victorian
WorkCover insurer pursuant to
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 2013
plaintiff’s statement of claim relevantly pleads:
15. The plaintiff has suffered a serious injury within the meaning of
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
the Plaintiff is entitled to institute and prosecute this proceeding for the
recovery of damages for pain and suffering and loss
of earning capacity.
its defence, the first defendant responds:
15. Save that the First Defendant admits that the plaintiff is entitled by
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation
to bring this proceeding, the First Defendant does not plead to
paragraph 15 of the statement of claim as it raises no allegations
law which is relevant to this proceeding.
pleadings do not otherwise address the applicable law nor address the way in
, Division 1
Choice of Law
of the WIRC Act bears upon the
plaintiff’s claim.
large part the proposed amended defence addresses the issue of the applicable
law governing the plaintiff’s claim against
the first defendant, namely,
whether it is governed by Victorian or South Australian law. It seeks to deny
paragraph 15 and positively
plead employment ‘connected with’ South
Australia, and that South Australian law governs the damages claim against the
employer. Some other amendments addressing particulars of contributory
negligence and responding to the claim for breach of statutory
duty are also
a result, the proposed amended defence squarely raises the question of choice of
laws and alleges that, pursuant to s 319(1) of
the WIRC Act and s 87(1) of
the equivalent South Australian
legislation,
the substantive law of
South Australian governs whether or not a claim for damages in respect of the
injury can be made against the
employer, and if it can be made, governs the
determination of the claim.
first defendant relies on three affidavits of its solicitor respectively sworn
on 15, 16 and 23 October 2025 (together the
Koutrouzas affidavits
report of a circumstances investigator which was exhibited to an affidavit of
the investigator sworn on 16 October.
first defendant’s explanation, as set out in the Koutrouzas affidavits, is
that she turned her mind to the question of employment
connection in relation to
Victoria or South Australia prior to the grant of a serious injury certificate.
At this time, she formed
the view that the relevant employment was connected
with Victoria, and set out the matters that she relied on in forming that view.
She deposed to additional information in a circumstance report that became
available after the grant of a serious injury certificate,
but did not at that
time revisit the question of connection with the state of Victoria or South
Australia. The question was next
raised with her in correspondence dated 4
September 2025. Having set out the steps taken on receipt, including seeking
advice from
counsel, the solicitor has proposed the amendments which plead that
South Australian law governs the plaintiff’s claim against
the employer.
36.01 of the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2025
provides that the Court may give leave to amend any document in the proceeding
for the purpose of determining the real question
in controversy. Rule 25.04
provides that leave of the Court or consent of a party is required to withdraw
an admission contained
in a defence. The first defendant seeks to withdraw an
admission that the plaintiff is entitled to bring the proceeding by compliance
with s 328 of the WIRC Act.
question of the applicable law is a matter that the Court will be required to
grapple with regardless of whether or not the parties’
pleadings having
properly exposed that issue. As such, in my view the issue raised is one that is
necessary to decide in order to
properly determine the issues in dispute between
the plaintiff and the first defendant. The proposed amendment could not be said
to be futile and was not submitted to be so. The defendant referred to
Formwork Services
the argument that there is a real issue in the choice of law question.
fact of acceptance of a claim for statutory benefits under the Victoria scheme
is not determinative of the applicable choice of
law. Section 319 of the WIRC
Act provides:
(1) If there is an entitlement to compensation under a statutory workers
compensation scheme of a State in respect of an injury to
or not compensation has been paid)
, the substantive law of that state is the
substantive law that governs–
(a) whether or not a claim for damages in respect of the injury can be made;
(b) if it can be made, the determination of the
the plaintiff relied on
Aon Risk Services v
to submit that the
application should be refused because the consequent delay and additional costs
that would be incurred if the
amendment was permitted, together with an
unsatisfactory explanation for the lateness of the application (in effect an
explanation
that amounts to a late ‘change of mind’ as to the
application of Victorian law),
makes clear however, that it is the
opportunity for a party to raise a claim or defence, and how those matters are
to be framed,
that is relevant when seeking a just resolution of the dispute.
my view it is relevant that the matter raised late by the defendant is not a new
defence in a partisan sense, but an issue that
the court would in any event be
required to grapple with in determining the claim. In other words, the
application to amend exposes
a controversy that has always lain underneath the
plaintiff’s claim: a question as to the applicable substantive law by
the claim is to be determined. That issue is not conclusively determined
by the actions of a claims agent in managing the claim,
although the steps
taken, and the reasons for them, may well have a bearing upon the determination
by the court.
words ‘real issues in the proceeding’ obviously refers to the issues
raised perhaps unclearly in the pleadings at
the time of the application to
amend. The real issues may also extend beyond the pleadings... but as is
explained in these reasons,
to be regarded as a real issue and for the amendment
therefore to be necessary, the relevant dispute or controversy must exist at
time of the application.
Honour goes on to say:
need for amendment will often arise because of some error or mistake having been
made in the drafting of the existing pleading
or in a judgment about what is to
be pleaded in it. But it is not the existence of such a mistake that founds the
grant of leave
under rules such as r 501(a), although it may be relevant to
show that the application is bona fide. What needs to be shown for leave
amend to be given as the cases referred to above illustrate, is that the
controversy or issue was in existence prior to the application
for amendment
being made. It is only then that it is
for the court to allow
it properly to be raised to enable a determination upon it.
my view the amendment is one that has always been in existence between the
parties, and so is properly raised and necessary for
the court to determine in
the resolution of the real issues in dispute. It can be distinguished from a new
claim or a new but previously
available defence that would not have been in
contemplation or before the court but for a late amendment.
plaintiff also submitted that the previous admission in the defence of an
entitlement to bring the proceeding in accordance with
the gateway provisions in
the Victorian legislation meant that the court could make a consent order as to
the applicable law or connection
with the jurisdiction. This is what occurred in
Di Paolo v Salta Constructions &
However, the circumstances
in that case were quite different. The declaration made with the consent of the
parties was in a proceeding
concerning an entitlement to statutory benefits in
accordance with
Accident Compensation Act 1985
precursor to the present s 37. It was that consent order that meant it was not
in dispute that Victorian law applied to
the employer concerning the
plaintiff’s separate damages claim notwithstanding the fact that the tort
occurred in Western Australia.
Here, there is no consent position between
plaintiff and employer, and, even if there were by paragraph 15 of the Defence,
made clear in
is that even if the parties consent to an
order that the employment is connected with Victoria, such an order can only be
the relevant court is satisfied that such an order is appropriate
before making it. The Court of Appeal said:
Our analysis was not assisted by Safe Labour’s submission that adoption of
the applicant’s preferred interpretation would
encourage forum shopping.
This submission ignores the fact that, before the substantive law of a
by a worker, the worker must obtain a judicial
determination in accordance with
of the AC [Accident Compensation] Act or
its equivalent that claim has a connection with that jurisdiction. While such a
determination
may be made by way of a consent order, the relevant court must be
satisfied that such an order is appropriate before making
the present circumstances, even if the first defendant was not entitled to amend
its defence and withdraw an admission that the
plaintiff was entitled to bring
the proceeding governed by substantive law in Victoria, the court would not be
bound to act on that
agreed position unless satisfied itself as to the
applicable law.
as the explanation for delay is also relevant, I accept that the first
defendant’s solicitor, although turning her mind
to the issue prior to the
commencement of proceedings, did overlook the potential significance of later
information until shortly
prior to the trial. Although this explanation may not
be sufficient to explain the late raising of other partisan positions or
to a defence, the subject matter of the proposed amendment as
explained above renders it in this case appropriate to grant leave.
these reasons, in my view it is appropriate that the first defendant have leave
to amend its defence notwithstanding the lateness
of the application. The
summons seeks other consequential relief that the plaintiff’s claim be
summarily dismissed or struck
out. Alternatively, it seeks determination of a
preliminary question of the applicable law that governs the plaintiff’s
against the first defendant. It is appropriate that the Court consider
this issue as a preliminary question. I will hear from the
parties as to the
precise form of the preliminary question or questions, the timetabling of that
preliminary question, and any discovery
or other interlocutory steps to be
determined prior to hearing that matter.
a consequence of the leave to amend it has been necessary to vacate the trial
date. I have reserved the question of costs.
Legal client
plaintiff also raised a question for determination arising from the Koutrouzas
affidavits. In particular from the affidavit dated
9 October 2025 in which, at
paragraph 20, Ms Koutrouzas deposes:
The letter dated 4 September 2025 caused myself and my colleagues at Hall &
Wilcox to revisit the state of connection issue and
to seek advice from Counsel
on the issue (over which the First Defendant does not waive privilege).
Revisiting the issue ourselves
and in conjunction with Counsel, including
reviewing the information in our possession, we realised that the information
that the Plaintiff’s employment is connected to South Australia
and not to Victoria, under s 37 of the WIRC Act. I now appreciate
the relevance
of the previously obtained information to state of connection (s 37 WIRC Act)
plaintiff also relies on recent discovery of a file note from April 2024 by an
unknown author at the solicitors’ office
to the effect ‘
domicile and share of work in Vic – then covered by first def Vic system
rather than SA’
plaintiff submitted that by the affidavit and file note the first defendant has
lost privilege over the opinion of the solicitor
as to the question of
applicable law.
relevant principles not in dispute can be briefly summarised as follows.
(a) The question of loss of legal privilege is governed by
Evidence Act
(Vic) which states:
Loss of client legal privilege – consent and related matters
(2) Subject to subsection (5), this Division does not prevent the adducing of
evidence if the client or party concerned has acted
in a way that is
inconsistent with the client or party objecting to the adducing of the evidence
because it would result in a disclosure
of a kind referred to in
section 118
(b) The provision reflects the common law
for waiver of privilege and
may inform an analysis of the factual circumstances, but the words of the
statute prescribe the applicable
(c) A party can act in a way inconsistent with the maintenance of
confidentiality of privileged information expressly or by implication.
(d) The disclosure of the existence of legal advice and its effect may, but does
not necessarily, amount to inconsistency resulting
in loss. In
Secretary to the Department of
the fact of legal
advice having been obtained and the conclusion or recommendation of that advice
was said not to constitute a waiver
of privilege.
(e) Questions concerning the purpose of disclosure and the consequences of
limited (rather than full) disclosure are relevant in
ascertaining whether an
inconsistency arises.
plaintiff’s written submissions filed 27 October 2025 contend that the
relevant paragraph discloses the solicitor’s
state of mind and the
instructions provided by the defendant which both support a material change in
advice as to the applicable
law, leading to the amendment to the pleadings.
Koutrouzas paragraph and the file note are therefore submitted to be conduct
inconsistent with the maintenance of privilege. This
is because the substance of
paragraph [20] discloses a material change in legal advice and a statement of
earlier legal advice, disclosure
of which is conduct inconsistent with the
maintenance of privilege.
first defendant submits that there is no inconsistency in the conduct of the
solicitors acting for the first defendant that give
rise to loss of privilege.
They argue this on the basis that the Koutrouzas affidavit does not refer to any
advice of the solicitor
given to the client, does not disclose the substance of
any advice, and the purpose of disclosure as to ‘revisiting’
issue was to explain the timing of the application to amend. Further, the
disclosure highlights when various information was
received by the solicitors,
which bore upon an explanation for the timing and need for amendment. Further,
when the fact of legal
advice goes to an explanation for the timing of a
proposed amendment close to the time of trial, it is undesirable that a
of the existence of legal advice would necessarily amount to conduct
resulting in a loss of privilege over the content of that advice.
accept the submissions of the first defendant. Paragraph [20] of the Koutrouzas
affidavit refers to revisiting a legal issue in
light of additional information.
It does so for the purpose of explaining any delay in seeking to amend the
defence filed. It addresses
information that was obtained but overlooked in
significance at an earlier time, as well as a recent consideration, aided by
of Counsel.
The question
of legal advice available to the first defendant is relevant to the merit and
timing of the amendment application, but
the content of that legal advice, or
the state of mind of a legal advisor or their client, is not in issue in the
substantive dispute
before the Court. In other words, the determination of the
applicable law will be on the basis of the facts and circumstances relevant
the legislative test of ‘connection’.
no inconsistency arises between disclosure of the fact of the current [or
changed] advice and the maintenance of client
legal privilege. The case is
distinguishable from cases where the client’s knowledge of, or reliance
on, legal advice and the
maintenance of privilege are inconsistent with each
other in light of the cause of action before the
this case there is an express maintenance of legal client privilege. The
plaintiff has not established that the actions of the
first defendant’s
solicitor in making the affidavit of 9 October 2025 is an action, by
implication, inconsistent with the express
maintenance of the privilege.
argument was directed to the separate recent discovery of the file note from
2024. The note itself states little more than
a paraphrase of some
considerations relevant to the applicable law. The note is ambiguous as to
whether it expresses an opinion or
a statement. I am not persuaded that
discovery of the note is inconsistent with the maintenance of confidentiality of
the first defendant’s
legal opinion provided to the client.
has not been lost by paragraph [20] of the Koutrouzas Affidavit nor discovery of
the April 2024 file note.
I.C. Formwork Services Pty
Limited v Moir
[2020] ACTCA 44
356 FLR 111
[44], [50].
Empasis added.
[2009] HCA 27
(2009) 239 CLR 175
[2015] VSCA 230.
Ibid [105].
Plaintiff, ‘Outline of
Plaintiff’s Submissions in Respect of the First Defendant’s
Application to Amend its Defence’,
filed 27 October 2025 [5].
Although a matter to be
determined prior to trial, s 131A makes
applicable to production of
documents including by way of pre-trial discovery.
Mann v Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
[2010] HCA 24
241 CLR 320.
The parties addressed the
privilege argument on the basis of whether the solicitors legal advice had been
lost. The parties did
not address the related question of loss of
counsel’s advice referred to as this had not been raised prior to oral
and I have put that question to one side.
See, for example, cases
discussed in
Viterra Malt Pty Ltd v Cargill Australia Ltd
[2018] VSCA 118
[47]– [50].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (190 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter