URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Singh v Securecorp [2025] VMC 2 (12 March 2025)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
No. MAG-CI-240027219
GURMEET SINGH
Magistrate M J Richards
DATE OF HEARING
10 December 2024; Defendant’s submissions
provided 16 December 2024; Plaintiff’s submissions provided 21 January
Defendant’s reply submissions provided 23 January 2025.
DATE OF DECISION
12 March 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Singh v Securecorp
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VMC 2
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION - Rejected claim - Plaintiff driven to work
by a co-worker - Co-worker parked in Yarra Park carpark in
surrounds of MCG -
Plaintiff was injured when he fell on way to sign on as a security guard at MCG
- Whether injury arose out of
or in the course of employment - Whether injury
deemed to arise out of or in the course of employment - Preliminary ruling -
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
Section 39(1)
Section 46(1)(b).
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr S Pinkstone
Zaparas Lawyers
For the Defendant
Ms B McKenzie
Lander & Rogers
HIS HONOUR:
Introduction
Singh (the plaintiff) was employed as a security guard with Securecorp (the
defendant) on a part-time basis. Depending on
the number of shifts he was
allocated, the plaintiff worked 10 to 20 hours per week.
28 May 2023, the plaintiff was rostered to work as a security guard at the
Melbourne Cricket Ground (the MCG). The plaintiff was
driven to work by a
co-worker who parked his car in the Yarra Park carpark outside the MCG having
entered through Gate 7. Whilst
walking through the carpark to the MCG to
commence work, the plaintiff slipped and injured his left leg.
plaintiff completed a claim for compensation on 12 June 2023 (ADCB 5-7) alleging
that he slipped and injured his left leg and
knee in the MCG carpark near Gate 7
on 28 May 2023 at 11.00am. The plaintiff also alleged a psychological condition.
The plaintiff
stated that he was doing his required duties at the time.
13 July 2023, Allianz Australia Workers’ Compensation (Victoria) Limited
(Allianz) rejected the claim for compensation (DCB
referred to a circumstance investigation report from the Seca Group dated 9 July
2023 in the rejection notice and relied on
the following information:
the defendant
advised that the plaintiff had stated that on 28 May 2023 ‘after getting
out of the car, the plaintiff walked
approximately 500 metres before falling
with his left knee hitting the ground. The plaintiff stood up and continued to
walk to the
MCG to commence work’;
the defendant
advised that the plaintiff had not started his shift when the injury
referred to section 46(2) of the Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 2013 (the WIRC Act) and stated that
travelling for the purposes
of a worker’s employment does not include travelling to and from the
worker’s place of employment.
considered that the plaintiff’s injury did not arise out of or in the
course of his employment.
plaintiff has issued these proceedings.
Pinkstone of Counsel appeared for the plaintiff. Mr B McKenzie of Counsel
appeared for the defendant.
proceeding was heard on 10 December 2024. The plaintiff gave evidence. Mr
Anthony Saitta, the Security Event Manager for the defendant,
evidence. The Amended Plaintiff’s Court Book (APCB) dated 9 December 2024
was tendered (Exhibit 1). The Amended Defendant’s
Court Book (ADCB) was
tendered (Exhibit A). A diagram headed ‘Parking - Yarra Park’ was
tendered (Exhibit B).
were in agreement that:
the plaintiff
had sustained an injury to his left knee on 28 May 2024 as a result of slipping
in the Yarra Park carpark of the MCG;
as a result, the
plaintiff had been incapacitated for employment from 30 May 2023 to 12 November
issue to be determined by the Court was whether the injury had occurred in
compensable circumstances.
The Plaintiff’s case:
Evidence-in-chief of the Plaintiff:
plaintiff said he worked part-time as a security guard for the defendant. His
primary job was working as a security guard for
Wilson Security.
plaintiff mainly worked at the MCG for the defendant but could work anywhere.
The plaintiff said he had worked as a security guard
at AFL, cricket, and soccer
plaintiff said the defendant would send him an email 2 to 3 days before he
worked asking if he was available for a shift as a
security guard at the MCG.
The plaintiff said he could accept or reject the offer of work.
plaintiff said he would normally drive his car to the MCG or go with a friend,
who was a co-worker, in his car.
28 May 2023, the plaintiff went to the MCG in the co-worker’s car. The
co-worker parked his car in the MCG carpark near Gate
7. The plaintiff said he
would drive from time to time. The plaintiff said the defendant told them to
enter the carpark through Gate
plaintiff was referred to an email sent by Mauro Crea, the Major Events Manager
of the defendant, to its employees dated 21 September
(year unknown). The email
‘Re: Week 3 Finals Match Info – Collingwood v
concerning parking at the MCG. The email
Please find info regarding tomorrow’s event.
Regarding parking: it will be through the following Gate at a cost of $10
(card only)
and you may be asked to show your security licence and/or
text confirmation of shift to gain entry as it is closed to public.
(Disregard this email if you are not
plaintiff said this was an email he had received from the defendant and that he
would have received it the night before his shift.
The plaintiff said he
understood from the email that Gate 5 was open to the MCG carpark.
plaintiff was referred to an email sent by Mauro Crea to the employees of the
defendant dated 13 May 2023. The email was headed
‘Round 9 Match info -
Coll v GWS’
concerning parking at the MCG
Please find info regarding tomorrow’s event.
Additional Venue Information added to the Employees info doc.
that the pre-parking for Yarra Park is not happening anymore with payment at the
Gate as per usual.
The opening times of the following Gates
are listed below at a cost of $10
(card only)
(Disregard this email if you are not
plaintiff said he received the email, and it was telling him where to park at
the MCG. If the shift was to start at 11.30am, the
email said that Gate 7 was
open at 10.30am. similarly, If the shift was to start at 2.30pm, the email said
that Gate 3 was open at
plaintiff could not remember if he worked at the MCG on 13 May 2023.
plaintiff was referred to an email sent by Mauro Crea to the employees of the
defendant dated 25 December 2023. The email was
‘BDT Match Info
concerning parking at the MCG. The email
Please find info regarding tomorrow’s event.
Regarding parking: it will be through the following Gate at a cost of $10
(card only)
and you may be asked to show your security licence and/or
text confirmation of shift to gain entry as it is closed to public.
plaintiff could not remember receiving the email.
plaintiff said he received a similar email to those he had been referred to
above prior to going to work on 28 May 2023.
plaintiff was referred to an email sent by Mauro Crea to the employees of the
defendant dated 27 May 2023. The email referred
‘Round 11 Match Info
- Richmond v Port Adelaide (Yartqpuulti)’
to be played on Sunday, 28
May 2023. The email had a number of attachments and stated:
Please find info regarding tomorrow’s event.
Additional Venue Information added to the Employees info doc.
Beanies are only given to guards working in the following
of the Venue 9staff entry, Bus Turning, Entrance A, Entrance E)
Gate including Gate Leaders
Arena/Interchange
opening times of the following Gates are listed below at a cost of $10
(Disregard this email if you are not
plaintiff said he received the email.
plaintiff said he was working at the player’s change room in the MCG
stadium on 28 May 2023 and started work at 11:30am.
The plaintiff said his
friend paid $10 and had entered Gate 7 to park in the MCG carpark. The plaintiff
said Gate 3 was closed at
the time they parked.
plaintiff said he could have caught a train to the MCG on 28 May 2023. However,
the plaintiff said it was easier to go to the
MCG by car.
plaintiff was shown a diagram headed “
Parking - Yarra Park’
(Exhibit B - ADCB 19). The diagram was a map of the area around the MCG. The
plaintiff indicated that his co-worker had entered the
carpark at Gate 7 which
was situated on Brunton Avenue. His co-worker parked the car in the carpark and
the plaintiff was walking
towards the MCG when he fell.
plaintiff was referred to an index under the heading “
Employee Info
” (DCB 18). The index table included the following:
Parking - Yarra
Procedures;
Customer Service
Emergency Evac
Cloak Room;
plaintiff said this information had been emailed to him by the defendant when he
commenced employment.
plaintiff said there were four steps to complete before commencing his
Step 1 - The
plaintiff had to go to the ‘Sign On Location’ which was the
Sign On Window’
at Gate 1A (ADCB 21). The plaintiff would
sign on and then wait for his staff entry ticket to be sent to his mobile phone
Step 2 - The
plaintiff would then use the staff entry and go the Muster Room (ADCB 21) where
he would have his security licence scanned,
and photo taken (ADCB 23);
Step 3 - The
plaintiff would then go to the Control Room which had the staff uniforms and
radios to be collected (ADCB 23-24);
Step 4 - The
plaintiff would then complete the Crowd Control Register and obtain his Crowd
Control Number. The plaintiff would then
go to where he was to
plaintiff said he completed the four steps every time he worked as a security
guard at the MCG. On 28 May 2023, the plaintiff
said he started work at 11.30am
and had to complete the four steps before 11:30am. The plaintiff said he would
have got to the MCG
plaintiff said he fell in the carpark as he was walking to the “
at Gate 1A to sign on. Gate 1A was near Gate 1. The plaintiff
said he was walking through the carpark towards the stairs leading to
the MCG. The plaintiff said this was the only way to get to Gate 1A. As he was
walking, he plaintiff’s left leg slipped,
and he fell to the ground. The
plaintiff said his co-worker helped him. He then completed the four steps to
sign on and commenced
his shift. The plaintiff said he got medical treatment
inside the ground.
28 May 2023, the plaintiff said he was working as a security guard outside the
player’s change room. The plaintiff said he
worked there most of the time.
He was sometimes sent to a different area.
plaintiff initially said he always went by car to the MCG. The plaintiff then
said he may have caught a train or tram to the MCG
if he had been working for
Wilson Security in the city. The plaintiff said he was working in Elizabeth
Street for Wilson Security
a couple of times a month but had no idea how many
times he would have gone to the MCG by train or tram.
plaintiff said he was living at Manor Lakes at the time. The plaintiff said he
might have been working 2 days a fortnight for
the defendant leading up to his
injury. The plaintiff said it would take about 45 minutes to drive to the MCG by
car from Manor Lakes.
The plaintiff said he would normally enter the carpark at
the MCG through Gates 3, 5, 6 and 7 because of the emails sent to him by
defendant about parking at the MCG.
Cross-examination of the
plaintiff said he and his co-worker would take turns to drive to the MCG.
plaintiff said his co-worker picked him up from the Williams Landing train
station on 28 May 2023.
plaintiff was referred to the email of the defendant dated 21 September sent to
their employees working at the MCG at the Collingwood
v GWS football game the
next day (APCB 65). The plaintiff agreed the email stated carparking would be
through Gate 5 which would
be open at 06:00 and that Gates 3, 6 and 7 were
otherwise closed.
was put to the plaintiff that the information concerning parking had been
initially sent to the defendant by the MCG and that the
defendant had then sent
the information to its employees. The plaintiff said he did not know.
plaintiff was referred to the email of the defendant dated 25 December 2023 sent
to employees working at the Boxing Day cricket
test the next day (APCB 67). The
plaintiff agreed the email stated carparking would be through Gate 3 which would
be open at 07:30,
Gate 5 would be open at 08:00 and Gate 7 would be open at
05:30. It was put to the plaintiff that the defendant was telling the employees
plaintiff was referred to the email of the defendant dated 27 May 2023 sent to
employees working at the Richmond v Port Adelaide
football game the next day
(ADCB 39). The plaintiff agreed the email stated carparking would be through
Gate 7 which would be open
at 07:00, Gate 3 would be open at 10:00 and Gate 5
would be open at 10:30. Gate 6 was closed.
plaintiff agreed he started work at 11.30am on 28 May 2023 and that the email
said Gates 7, 3 and 5 would be open to enter the
carpark by then.
plaintiff was referred to the diagram headed
“Parking - Yarra
(ADCB 19). The plaintiff agreed that he would have to pay $10.00
by credit card to enter the carpark. The plaintiff agreed that, if
entered the carpark through Gate 3, the MCG event staff would then have directed
him where to park in that area. The plaintiff
said the MCG event staff would
always tell people where to park and that people would follow their directions.
The plaintiff agreed
that he would also have been told where to park if he had
entered the carpark through Gate 5 or Gate 7.
plaintiff agreed that his co-worker was driving when he entered the carpark on
28 May 2023. The plaintiff was asked whether he
had discussed with his co-worker
which gate they should use to enter the carpark. The plaintiff said his
co-worker had received the
same email he had received the day before and that
his co-worker knew Gates 7, 3 and 5 were open.
plaintiff agreed the security guards employed by the defendant could enter the
carpark through Gates 7, 3 or 5.
plaintiff agreed the public could also enter the carpark through Gates 7, 3 or
plaintiff was asked whether his co-worker could have entered the carpark through
Gates 3 or 5 on 28 May 2023. The plaintiff said
he could not remember.
plaintiff said, after his co-worker parked his car on 28 May 2023, he got out of
the car and was walking towards the MCG and fell
on the grass. The plaintiff
could not remember how far he had walked before the fall but thought he might
have walked approximately
ten metres. The plaintiff said he was going to sign on
at Gate 1A before the fall. The plaintiff said Gate 1A was on the other side
plaintiff was shown the diagram headed “
Sign On Location”
which depicted a red arrow indicating the “
Sign On Window”
Gate 1A (ADCB 20). The plaintiff said he was heading towards the stairs at Gate
7 of the MCG and was going to walk up the stairs
and walk around the MCG to Gate
1A. The plaintiff said the stairs were not shown on the diagram.
was put to the plaintiff that he could have stayed at ground level and walked in
a clockwise direction towards Gate 1A. The plaintiff
disagreed and said everyone
would been walking at ground level towards him. It was put to the plaintiff that
he could have walked
in an anticlockwise direction around the MCG towards Gate
1A. The plaintiff said this have involved walking for longer and walking
plaintiff said he could not remember receiving any additional venue information
from Mr Crea. It was put to the plaintiff that
Mr Crea had attached a pdf
document headed “
Employee Info 2023 V4.pdf”
to the email
dated 27 May 2023 regarding the Richmond v Port Adelaide (Yartapuulti) football
game on 28 May 2023 (ADCB 39).
was put to the plaintiff that evidence would be given that the email dated 27
May 2023 attached the additional venue information
(ADCB 18-38). The plaintiff
said he could not recall.
plaintiff said he understood the signing on process for work with the defendant.
plaintiff said when he signed on at Gate 1A, he would wait for a staff entry
ticket to be sent to his phone scan, and he would
then be sent a code (ADCB 22).
The plaintiff would then enter the Muster Room (ADCB 21) where he would present
his security licence
and have his photo taken and then go to the Control Room
(ADCB 23). The plaintiff would collect his uniform and then complete the
Control Register and get his Crowd Control Number (ADCB 25).
plaintiff said he would get a yellow polo shirt and jacket to wear which he
would return at the end of the shift (ADCB 26).
plaintiff was asked whether he finished work at 5:30pm on 28 May 2023. The
plaintiff said he could not remember.
plaintiff was asked whether he spoke to Mel Brown, the Human Resource Manager of
the defendant on 19 June 2023. The plaintiff
said he could not remember.
plaintiff was referred to the following email:
Meet...-neenu_meet@yahoo.com-
Monday, June 19, 2023 11:21 AM
-mel.brown@securecorp.com.au-
: Fw: Gurmeer SINGH
Thanks for your email.
Regarding about calling...
I haven’t received anyone call except you.
You call me on Friday.
Before I haven’t received any call.
Also I emailed to HR department 3 time about my incident.
And incident report on site as well same day 28/5/23 at MCG, they suggest
me submitting you incident online.
I fill incident report.
PLEASE CHECK ATTACHED PICTURES.
And first aid team also check me and they tell me if you have pain, check
When I called to Anthony, he said already tell him so someone call me form
SEE CHECK ATTACHED ALL EMAILS AND PICTURES
(ADCB 56-57)
plaintiff said he did not remember the email but might have sent it.
was again put to the plaintiff that he had spoken to Ms Brown about the incident
on 28 May 2023. The plaintiff agreed.
plaintiff said he could not remember receiving an email from Ms Brown but said
she must have sent him something.
plaintiff was referred to the following email and the first two dot points which
On Mon, 19 June 2023 at 4:26 pm, Mel Brown –
mel.brown@securecorp.com.au-
Hi Gurmeet,
Thank you for returning my call earlier. It was nice to speak with
Just to recap our conversation;
You informed
me that you sustained an injury 28 May 2023 after travelling with your friend to
the MCG. At about 11:00am, you parked
in the Gate 7 parking whish is a common
parking area used by staff and spectators.
After getting
out of the car, you walked approximately 500 metres before falling with your
left knee hitting the ground. You immediately
stood up and continued to walk to
the MCG to commence work and did not any pain initially.
(ADCB 56-57)
plaintiff denied telling Ms Brown that Gate 7 was a common parking ground area
used by staff and spectators.
plaintiff said he did not know how many metres he had walked from the car before
plaintiff was referred to the following
Meet...-neenu_meet@yahoo.com-
Monday, June 19, 2023 5:42 PM
To Mel Brown
-mel.brown@securecorp.com.au-
Anthony Saitta
-anthony.saitta@securecorp.com.au-
RE: Gurmeet SINGH - 19/6/2023
Only few things need to correct please
carpark the walking distance between 100m -
(ADCB 55-56)
was put to the plaintiff that he had sent the email to Ms Brown and Mr Saitta in
response to the earlier email from Ms Brown to
correct some of the details in Ms
Brown’s email. The plaintiff agreed that he must have sent the email to Ms
Brown. The plaintiff
said he did not remember how many metres he had walked
before falling.
was put to the plaintiff that his earlier evidence to the Court was that he had
walked about ten metres before falling. The plaintiff
said he did not know how
many metres he walked before falling.
was put to the plaintiff that the $10.00 parking fee that he and his co-worker
had paid to enter the MCG carpark was the same parking
fee that members of the
public would pay to enter the MCG carpark. The plaintiff said he did not know
how much members of the public
paid to enter the MCG carpark.
plaintiff agreed that when he worked at the MCG, he would put on his security
uniform on at the MCG and leave his security uniform
at the MCG when he finished
work. The plaintiff agreed that he did not take any equipment or paperwork from
plaintiff said he did not do any work at home.
plaintiff agreed that he was working at Docklands for Wilsons Security, another
employer, during the period up to 28 May 2023.
The plaintiff was not sure when
he started work at Docklands. The plaintiff said he was working in Elizabeth
Street in the city before
working in Elizabeth Street, the plaintiff said he would get a V-Line train from
Wyndham Vale to the Southern Cross Station.
working at Docklands, the plaintiff said he would then catch a tram to the MCG
if he was working at the MCG. The plaintiff said
he would catch public transport
to get home.
plaintiff said it was more convenient to drive and park at the MCG instead of
catching a train and tram.
plaintiff said it was his choice to drive and park at the MCG and agreed that
the defendant left it to him as to how would get
was put to the plaintiff that the defendant did not care how he got to the MCG.
The plaintiff said he thought the choice was to
drive to the MCG because he had
the option of using the carpark.
plaintiff said the defendant would email their employees about the choice of the
plaintiff was referred to the email from Mr Crea dated 27 May 2023 (ADCB 39). It
was put to the plaintiff that the email said
nothing about driving to the
carpark at the MCG and any requirement about the defendant’s employees
having to drive to the
MCG and park in the carpark.
plaintiff was referred to the match day information concerning the Richmond v
Port Adelaide game on 28 May 2023 (ADCB 48-49).
It was put to the plaintiff that
he would have received the match day information by email from the defendant.
The plaintiff said
he could not remember if he received the match day
information.
was put to the plaintiff that the match day information (ADCB 48-49) was sent as
an attachment to the email from Mr Crea dated
27 May 2023 to the
defendant’s employees (ADCB 39)
plaintiff said he only received the email and did not remember receiving the
attachment. The plaintiff said he just saw the email.
Defendant’s case:
Evidence-in-chief of Mr Anthony Saitta:
Saitta said he was employed by the defendant as the Security Event Manager at
Saitta was referred to the email from Mr Crea dated 27 May 2023 (ADCB 39). Mr
Saitta said the email included the employee information
Employee Info 2023 V4.pdf
(ADCB 18-38)
Saitta said the employee information was sent to all employees as an attachment
to the email. The information was sent so that
the employees would understand
what was involved in working at the MCG.
Saitta said the match day information concerning the Richmond v Port Adelaide
game at the MCG on 28 May 2023 (ADCB 48-49) was sent
to the defendant by the
MCC. The defendant had then attached it to the email sent by Mr Crea to the
defendant’s employees.
Saitta said all contractors working at the MCG would have information sent to
them by the MCC. The information used to be forwarded
physically but all
information was now sent as an attachment to an email.
Saitta was asked whether the defendant’s employees were sent information
was specifically
related to the venue on the day, such as what was open. The plaintiff was sent
information about what was happening
on the day so that they could access the
information on their shift and tell patrons attending the game.
Saitta said the email sent by Mr Crea on 27 May 2023 (ADCB 39) had the attached
information and advised the employees about the
gates to the carpark at Yarra
Park and what time they would open. Mr Saitta said the information about the
opening times had been
provided to the defendant by the MCC and the defendant
had passed that information on to their employees. The employees had the choice
to pay the entry fee of $10.00 and use the carpark if they wanted to drive to
Saitta said, whilst the defendant provided the information about parking to
their employees, the defendant encouraged their employees
to use public
transport. However, the employees had the choice to drive if they wanted
Saitta said the defendant would get a monthly schedule concerning the Yarra Park
carpark, but the schedule could change depending
on conditions and the size of
the event. Mr Saitta said it was up to the MCC as to how they managed the Yarra
Park carpark. The MCC
decided which gates would be open and which gates would be
Saitta was referred to the diagram headed
‘Parking-Yarra Park’
(ADBB 19). The diagram depicted various gates by which the carpark could be
entered from the surrounding streets. Mr Saitta said Gate
7 was entered from
Brunton Avenue. On 28 May 2023, the employees had been told that Gate 7 was open
at 7:00, Gate 3 (entered from
Wellington Parade) was open at 10:00, Gate 5
(entered from Punt Road) was open at 10:30 and Gate 6 (entered from Punt Road)
was closed.
Mr Saitta said that information was provided to the employees so
that they knew that Gate 7 was open early if they wanted to use
the carpark. If
the employees used Gate 7, they would be directed by the MCC event staff and
told where to park. Mr Saitta said the
State Government owned Yarra Park and the
defendant had no control over the carpark.
Saitta said the defendant did not direct their employees to drive to the MCG and
use the Yarra Park carpark. Mr Saitta said he
did not know whether the plaintiff
drove to the MCG.
was put to Mr Saitta that the plaintiff had fallen after entering the carpark
though Gate 7 and parking. Mr Saitta was asked what
options were there to get to
Gate 1A at the MCG from that area, Mr Saitta said the plaintiff could walk
through the grass carpark
towards Gates 6 and 7 at the MCG and walk up the
stairs from the lower to the upper concourse and walk clockwise along the
Avenue side. Alternatively, the plaintiff could walk in an
anticlockwise direction on the concourse passing Gates 5, 4, 3 and 2
Saitta was referred to four photographs under the heading ‘
Saitta said the
‘Securecorp Sign On Window Gate 1A’
staff entry to the ‘
Securecorp Muster Room’
were depicted in
the photographs (ADCB 21). Once an employee had presented at Gate 1A and had his
staff entry ticket sent to his phone
Sign On Procedures - Step 1
22), he would enter the Muster Room for the sign on procedure.
the Muster Room, the employee would have his licence scanned with the Sign on
IDeye, have their photo taken and receive details
Procedure - Step 2
) (ADCB 23). The employee would be briefed by the Team
Leader or Supervisor. The employee would collect their uniform and other
which they would return at the end of their shift (
Procedures - Step 3) (
ADCB 24). The employee would then fill out the Crowd
Control Register and collect a Crowd Control Number (
Sign On Procedures -
) (ADCB 25). The employee would then go to their
Cross-examination of Mr Saitta:
Saitta agreed the defendant provided security services and had a contract to
provide those services at the MCG.
Saitta agreed the plaintiff was employed by the defendant as a security guard
and that it was necessary for him to travel to the
MCG to work as a security
Saitta agreed that each time the plaintiff, or any other employee worked at the
MCG, they would have to go to Gate 1A to obtain
a ticket to enter the venue
before every shift.
Saitta agreed that Gate 1A was a specific entry point for the defendant’s
staff to enter before their shift commenced at
Saitta said the employee information (ADCB 18-38) was emailed to all the
defendant’s employees before every game at the MCG
regardless of whether
the employee was working at the game or not.
Saitta was asked whether the same information document was emailed every time.
Mr Saitta said the same information was sent. The
information assisted the
defendant’s employees in getting to work and understanding what was
happening at the MCG.
Saitta agreed the plaintiff would have to travel through the precinct around the
MCG to get to Gate 1A. Mr Saitta said there was
no other way to get to Gate
was put to Mr Saitta that the Gate 7 entrance to the Yarra Park carpark was
normally used by the plaintiff and other employees
on the day they worked. Mr
Saitta said he could not say as it depended on where they had driven from.
Saitta said Gate 7 was not necessarily used by the defendant’s staff and
other gates would also be used by the staff.
Saitta was referred to the email sent by Mr Crea dated 13 May 2023 to the
defendant’s staff concerning the Collingwood v
GWS game (APCB 66). It was
put to Mr Saitta that the email was indicative of the emails sent to the
defendant’s staff the day
before a game concerning parking at Yarra Park.
The email stated that Gate 7 was open at 10:30am. It was put to Mr Saitta that
staff were starting work at 11:30am, they would have to use Gate 7 to enter
the carpark.
Saitta said the plaintiff was a casual part-time employee who was offered work
at the MCG. The defendant would check the availability
of staff about a week
before the game and roster on staff to work. All staff who had accepted a shift
would receive an email the
day before the game with attached information
including information about carparking.
Saitta said if there was a big event at the MCG there might not be access to the
carparks. Mr Saitta said other options were then
laid out in the email.
Saitta did not agree that the majority of the defendant’s staff would
travel to the MCG by car. Mr Saitta said a lot of the
defendant’s staff
did not have a car. Mr Saitta said there was also other parking around the MCG
that could be used. Mr Saitta
said he would often park in Wellington Parade in
the street.
was put to Mr Saitta that the defendant clearly authorised staff to use the
carparks at the MCG. Mr Saitta disagreed and said the
defendant simply gave the
staff the option to park at the MCG. Mr denied that the staff were encouraged to
use the carparks at the
MCG. Mr Saitta agreed that the staff were provided with
an email from the defendant before each game which included information about
the carparks. Mr Saitta agreed that the defendant did not provide any other
option about getting to work in the emails but said that
the defendant did not
tell staff about how to get to and from work.
Saitta said the defendant encouraged staff to use public transport even though
information about public transport was not included
in the emails.
was put to Mr Saitta that Gate 7 was the gate most often used by staff because
it was close to Gate 1A. Mr Saitta said Gate 7 was
the predominant gate used
because it was open most of the time.
Re-examination of Mr
Saitta said staff could catch a train to Jolimont Station and walk along a path
to the MCG without needing to walk through the
grass area of the Yarra Park
Saitta was shown the diagram of the MCG and the Yarra Park area headed
‘Parking - Yarra Park’ (ADCB 19). Mr Jolimont
said Jolimont Station
was next to Wellington Parade and was situated between Gate 2 and Gate 3.
Richmond Station was next to Brunton
Avenue to the right of Gate 7. Mr Saitta
said people could walk to the MCG from the train stations and could also catch a
was the extent of the viva voce evidence.
Non-Disputed
plaintiff stated that much of the evidence of the plaintiff and Mr Saitta was
not the subject of challenge or controversy. The
plaintiff generally agreed with
the following factual summary as set out by the defendant in their
submission:
the plaintiff
commenced as a part-time security guard with the defendant on 21 October 2021.
The plaintiff’s “
was with Wison Security,
with whom he resumed work as a security guard in November 2023;
plaintiff’s hours of work with the defendant were determined on an as
needed basis for events with start and finish times
varied. The
plaintiff’s availability for work would be checked by the defendant one or
two weeks prior to the event. The plaintiff
would indicate whether he was
available for the job and accept the particular shift being offered;
the plaintiff
would start work at a time agreed beforehand. The plaintiff’s finishing
time on a particular day would be determined
by his supervisor;
for at least all
of 2023, including 28 May 2023, the plaintiff was employed at the MCG, located
in Yarra Park, East Melbourne;
once security
guards, such as the plaintiff, arrived at the MCG, there was a detailed signing
in procedure set out at steps 1 to 4
(ADCB 22-25) which formed part of the
Employee Info 2023 - V4 Information Pack”
provided to the
plaintiff. The signing in procedure involved going to MCG Gate 1A and then to
the staff entry, both of which were
shown on the
diagram (ADCB 20). Once entering the staff entry, the
plaintiff would travel to the muster room where he would put on the uniform
supplied by the defendant, collect a crowd control card and sign in that crowd
control card number in the Crowd Control Register;
the plaintiff
would go back to the muster room and leave his uniform and any equipment there
after completing his shift;
plaintiff’s duties in 2023 prior to, and including 28 May 2023, were
standing, or sitting outside the changing rooms and
ensuring unauthorised
persons did not enter the changing rooms;
on 28 May 2023,
the plaintiff was driven to work by a co-worker, who was also a security guard,
who parked in the Yarra Park carpark;
the plaintiff
and the co-worker had driven in together on previous occasions. Sometimes the
plaintiff drove his car and gave his co-worker
a lift. On other occasions the
co-worker would drive his car and give the plaintiff a lift. They both lived in
the same general area
of the Western suburbs;
the $10 parking
fee was determined by the MCC, which had its own MCC event staff running the
parking at Yarra Park;
the plaintiff or
the co-worker, paid the parking fee, depending on who was driving;
the $10 parking
fee was the same for the public using the carpark;
Yarra Park was
owned by the Victorian Government and the MCC as a trust. The defendant did not
own Yarra Park or the MCG;
the email from
the defendant to the plaintiff and other security guards dated 27 May 2023 (ADCB
39) stated that Gate 7 was open at
7:00am, Gate 3 was open at 10:00am and Gate 5
was open at 10:30am;
the plaintiff
and the co-worker had entered Yarra Park by other gates, such as Gates 3 or 5,
from time to time;
the entry to
Gate 7 was from Brunton Avenue and the entry to Gates 3 and 6 was from Punt
Road. Once the gates were entered, drivers
were directed to specific areas
within the Yarra Park carpark by MCC event staff. This could be anywhere within
the carpark. The
parking fee was paid to the MCC event staff on entry and was
not reimbursed by the defendant;
there were other
examples of emails indicating gates that were open or closed (APCB 65-67). The
information came from the MCC. The
MCC decided which gates would be open or
Gate 7 was the
gate typically used by staff of the defendant and other contractors and
suppliers to the MCG. Gate 7 was also used
by disabled staff or disabled members
of the public;
there was other
public parking in the immediate vicinity of the MCG, including Wellington Parade
which Mr Saitta had used. The plaintiff
could also have parked in East Melbourne
or the CBD.
Submission on behalf of the
defendant denied that the injury to the plaintiff’s left knee on 28 May
2023 was compensable under the WIRC Act. The incident
the course of employment’
within the meaning of s.39(1) of the WIRC
deemed to be
such within the meaning of s.46(1)(b) of the WIRC Act.
was submitted that the injury might have been compensable under the
‘journey’ provisions of the
Accident Compensation
. However, those provisions had been abolished by amendment as of 1
December 1992.
Further Facts set out by the Defendant based on
the evidence:
incident occurred at about 11:00am and the plaintiff was due to start work at
plaintiff had driven from Williams Landing on the day of the incident and was
dropped back there after the incident by his co-worker.
where the plaintiff indicated he fell within the Yarra Park carpark, there were
various options available to the plaintiff to
go to Gate 1A of the MCG.
travelling from the carpark within Yarra Park, it was necessary to cross grassed
areas. If public transport was used, there was
no need to traverse the grass of
Yarra Park as there were pathways all the way around the MCG.
plaintiff did not have to do any work for the defendant at home or take any
equipment to or from home. There was no suggestion
that the plaintiff was
bringing any equipment with him when he was travelling to the MCG.
transport was available to and from the MCG as shown on the diagram headed
Parking – Yarra Park”
plaintiff had used public transport (train) to get from his home in Manor Lakes
to and from work with Wilson Security in either
Elizabeth Street or
couple of times a month, the plaintiff also used public transport (tram) to get
from either the city or Docklands, having worked
for Wilson Security, and then
gone to work at the MCG for the defendant. At the end of the shift at the MCG on
such occasions, the
plaintiff would then use public transport to get home.
defendant took no interest in whether security guards such as the plaintiff
drove to Yarra Park and parked there or used public
transport. At times when
there were going to be difficulties with parking in Yarra Park, the defendant
would provide specific information
in such emails (as the 27 May 2023 email),
but these occasions were rare and it was always up to the staff to use public
if they desired.
defendant’s reason for providing the parking information to security
guards, such as the plaintiff, was to help them get
to work on time and
understand what was going on in the
and specifics
regarding the event, being a football match.
plaintiff agreed that it was his choice and that it was more convenient to drive
in with his co-worker to work at the MCG on this
day, rather than to catch
public transport.
plaintiff’s co-worker was driving on this day, and the co-worker chose
which gate to enter at Yarra Park when they arrived.
The co-worker then parked
where he was directed to park by the MCC event staff.
Principles Regarding “In the Course of Employment”:
the claim for compensation had been rejected, the plaintiff had the legal and
evidentiary onus regarding the threshold issue of
any original entitlement to
compensation under the WIRC Act (
Green v Victorian Workcover Authority
defendant referred to this Court’s decision in
Kourtis v Wheelers Hill
Primary School
[2020] VMC 10
(5 May 2020)
) and the review of the
and the following at
“The essential enquiry remains whether, at
the time of the incident, there was the relevant nexus: “...between the
activity and the work or service that the employee is employed to
perform, with most specifically referring to that activity as being
to the work or service.” [requoting Justice Kyrou in
Reed Stockfeeds
Pty Ltd v Lindhe
[2008] VSC 304
defendant anticipated that the plaintiff may seek to rely on the following
Lukey v Mercy
Public Hospitals
[2012] VMC 18
(25 May 2012)
VWA v Jones
Lange Lasalle
[2012] VSC 412 (Beach
Nicolaides v
Coles Supermarkets Australia Pty Ltd (unreported, County Court of Victoria,
Misso J, 8 October 2013)
defendant submitted that caution should be exercised in relation to trying to
closely compare fact situations from one case to
Lonie v Gryph
Investments Pty Ltd (unreported), Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Magistrate Wright, 15 June 2015 at [56]
). The defendant submitted that there
were significant factual differences between those cases and the present
there was to be any drawing of parallels, the defendant submitted that there
were more significant similarities between the facts
of this case and those in
O’Dea v L’Oreal Australia Pty Ltd (unreported, Magistrates’
Court of Victoria, Magistrate Wright, 15 February
Application of the Law to the Facts of this
defendant submitted the incident occurred while the plaintiff was on his way to
work for the defendant, in the sense of a “
expression was understood prior to 1992 amendments). However, the defendant
stated that the plaintiff was far from
in the course of
employment”
in terms of both time and place. The Court was referred to
the following:
the 30-minute
gap between the time of the incident (11:00am) and the time the plaintiff was to
start work (11:30am);
the significant
distance (in excess of the length of the MCG) as shown by the plaintiff’s
diagram (Exhibit B) between where
the plaintiff parked and fell and where he was
to commence the signing on process (stadium Gate 1A) and then enter the staff
was submitted that the defendant did not require or encourage the plaintiff
drive or be a
passenger in a vehicle driven by his co-worker and park at Yarra Park;
enter Yarra Park
from any particular gate (there being three gates identified in the email dated
27 May 2023, all of them open when
the plaintiff arrived just before 11:00am;
once within
Yarra Park, follow a particular route to the point where he was to sign on,
there being four such routes.
defendant submitted that, on the evidence, there were various options available
to the plaintiff to go to Gate 1A at the MCG from
where he indicated he
he could have
walked along Brunton Avenue in a clockwise direction around the MCG;
he could have
walked up the stairs at Gate 7 at the MCG and along the concourse in a clockwise
direction to Gate 1A;
he could have
walked in a counterclockwise direction around the MCG to Gate 1A (although this
was a longer distance).
defendant also submitted that:
there was no
suggestion of any particular urgency for the plaintiff to be at work;
there was no
written or oral direction by the defendant for the plaintiff to drive and park
at Yarra Park;
the high point
of the plaintiff’s case was to say that it was
because the defendant was stating what gates were
open and when they would be open at Yarra Park;
despite this,
the plaintiff had used public transport to get to and from work at the MCG on
days when he had been working for Wilson
Security and the plaintiff generally
used public transport to get to and from work with Wilson Security;
the plaintiff,
or his co-worker, paid the MCC staff for the parking, without reimbursement from
the defendant;
the parking fee
paid was the same fee as paid by the public;
the plaintiff
was in a carparking area that was available to disabled members of the public,
staff of the defendant and other contractors
and suppliers to the MCG;
the plaintiff
was free to choose how he got to work;
having parked in
Yarra Park, there were a number of options in terms of getting to his actual
place of employment.
defendant submitted that
could be distinguished as it was not
necessary for the plaintiff to traverse the grass area of Yarra Park if he had
used public transport.
Furthermore, the defendant did not own either Yarra Park
or the MCG.
defendant submitted that
could be distinguished as there was
no designated carpark. The whole of Yarra Park was open to be used, subject to
particular gates
being open or closed at the direction of the MCC. The defendant
had no control over Yarra Park.
defendant submitted that
Jones Lang Laselle
could be distinguished on the
basis that, in this case, the plaintiff was far from either the sign in window
or the staff entry when
he fell. The site of the plaintiff’s fall could
not be likened to the ground floor foyer of the building in that case, where
Williams (the worker) was at the time of the incident, as it was not the only
means of accessing the workplace.
defendant submitted the present case was more akin to
referred to paragraphs
of Magistrate Wright’s
this case, the incident was not one which occurred
“in the course of
employment”.
Section 46(1)(b) of the WIRC Act:
46(1)(b) of the WIRC Act states that an injury is deemed to arise out of or in
the course of employment if the injury occurs:
the worker is having regard to the nature of the worker’s employment or
any specific task which may require
the worker to travel, travelling for the
purposes of the worker’s employment”.
defendant referred to paragraphs
for a discussion of this provision.
the evidence, the defendant submitted:
the plaintiff
was not required to travel for the purposes of employment;
plaintiff’s employment was solely as a security guard and, for many
months, had worked as a security guard at the changing
room of the MCG;
indication of other work for the defendant was associated with Covid-19 in
on the day of
the incident, there was no suggestion that there was a specific task requiring
the plaintiff to travel, other than getting
went without saying that the
provisions had
previously been abolished.
Submission on behalf of the
Further facts set out by the Plaintiff based on the evidence:
document headed
“Employment Info 2023 - V4”
(ADCB 18) and had
the defendant’s letterhead. What followed was a table, the first item of
which read “
Parking - Yarra Park”.
next document was headed
“Parking - Yarra Park”
and had the
defendant’s letterhead (ADCB 19). Within the area of Yarra Park depicted
on the document, the location of the entry
points to Gate 3, Gate 4, Gate 5,
Gate 6, and Gate 7 were indicated.
next two documents were headed
“Sign On Location”
20-21). Both documents were on the defendant’s letterhead and depicted a
diagram of the MCG and photographs of Gate 1A
and the Muster Room.
four steps of the
“Sign On Procedures”
were set out on four
separate pages bearing the defendant’s letterhead (ADCB 22-25).
email from the defendant dated 27 May 2023 was sent to the plaintiff the evening
prior to the day he was injured (ADCB 39). The
attachments to the email included
Employee Info 2023 V4.pdf”
plaintiff gave evidence that he received an email from the defendant the night
before each shift. The plaintiff said the purpose
of the email was because of
the carparking. The plaintiff said he and his co-worker parked in Gate 7 on the
day of the incident because
the defendant sent him the email.
plaintiff said he was expected to arrive 15 minutes prior to the commencement of
his shift. Mr Saitta agreed the plaintiff was
required to complete a number of
steps prior to the commencement of his shift at 11:30am. The Court should
therefore infer that the
plaintiff was required to be physically present at Gate
1A (the sign on location) by around 11:15am and that he was only injured
time prior to that time.
Saitta agreed the plaintiff had to travel to the MCG precinct for the purpose of
providing security services to the client (MCG)
of the defendant.
nature of the plaintiff’s employment, and the specific tasks he was
required to perform, required him to travel to the MCG
precinct and through the
surrounding grasslands (Yarra Park) to Gate 1A. Mr Saitta agreed the plaintiff
was always required to sign
on at Gate 1A and that there was no other way to get
to Gate 1A other than through the MCG precinct.
Saitta agreed that entering the carpark through Gate 7 necessitated the
plaintiff walking over the Yarra Park grasslands towards
Saitta agreed that prior to each shift, the defendant sent the plaintiff an
information pack which referred to parking in Yarra
Park and provided specific
information on parking at Yarra Park.
Saitta agreed that prior to each shift, the defendant sent the plaintiff an
email with information referring to parking in Yarra
Park. No other carparking
location or area or public transport information was mentioned.
Saitta said the purpose of providing this information was to facilitate workers
arriving at work on time”
and to assist with what to do
at the precinct”.
was put to Mr Saitta that the defendant authorised parking and encouraged it. Mr
Saitta did not agree with the word “
encouraged”
and instead
said the documents sent to the plaintiff provided “
but that it was ultimately up to the individual employee as to how they got
Saitta agreed Gate 7 was most commonly used to enter the Yarra Park carpark as
it was the closest to Gate 1A.
Application of the Law to
the Facts of this Case:
plaintiff referred to
Henderson v The Commissioner of Railways (Western
[1937] HCA 67
and the passage from Dixon J at
“...To be in the course of employment, the
acts of the workman must be part of his service to the employer. But the
lies in the application of this conception. For the service consists
in more than the actual performance of the work which the workman
is employed to
do. It includes the doing of whatever is incidental to the performance of the
work. ... Where the accident arises
shortly before the beginning of actual work
or shortly after its cessation, or in an interval when labour is suspended, and
at or near the scene of operations, the question whether it arises in
the course of employment will depend on the nature and terms
of the employment,
on the circumstances in which work is done and on what, as a result, the workman
is reasonably required, expected
or authorised to do in order to carry out his
actual duties.”
plaintiff stated the ‘
Henderson Principle
’ required the
incident to be “
sufficiently incidental”
to employment in the
sense that the worker was doing something which he was reasonably required,
expected, or authorised to do to
carry out his duties.
plaintiff submitted the plaintiff was either directed, instructed, or at least
encouraged to use the Yarra Park carparking areas.
Employee Info
2023 - V4 Information Pack”
provided to the plaintiff dealt
specifically with (car) parking and the use of Yarra Park. No other parking
areas were referred to
in those documents and there was no reference to the use
of public transport. The documents were emailed to the plaintiff prior to
was submitted that, even if the Court was to accept that the defendant was only
advising of an “
as suggested by Mr Saitta, it was odd
that the defendant’s emails and information did not refer to other
carparking options,
other carparking locations, other modes of public transport
or public transport routes.
respect to the contention of the defendant that the plaintiff could have used
more than one gate to enter Yarra Park, the plaintiff
submitted that the
defendant repeatedly sent information to its staff about the use of the Yarra
Park carpark gates. Gate 7 was used
more because it was the closest to the MCG
Gate 1A. The emails at APCB 65-67 concerning which gates were open often
depended on factors
such as the game start time.
was submitted that the Court should find that the plaintiff was doing something
which he was required, expected, or authorised
to do to carry out his duties,
when injured. The plaintiff was required to travel to a particular area (Gate
1A) in a particular
location (the MCG precinct) and was repeatedly provided
documentary information on carparking at Yarra Park only. It was submitted
the evidence of Mr Saitta was that the defendant provided this information to
facilitate workers getting to work on time. What
the plaintiff was doing when
injured was sufficiently incidental to his employment as a security guard at the
MCG. The plaintiff’s
use of Yarra Park to access Gate 1A into the MCG was
an activity he was reasonably expected to do to carry out his duties, in terms
'Henderson Principle’.
defendant has agreed that the plaintiff’s shift on 28 May 2023 commenced
at 11:30am. Prior to that time the plaintiff was
expected to arrive at the MCG
precinct and travel to Gate 1A and complete steps 1 to 4 as set out in the
defendant’s information
pack. It was submitted that the Court should infer
that the plaintiff was injured a short time prior to the commencement of his
was submitted that the absence of a lease by the defendant over the MCG precinct
should not detract from the fact that the plaintiff,
when injured, was
traversing the grasslands of the precinct which, on the evidence of Mr Saitta,
was something he had to do to access
Gate 1A as required. The incident occurred
while the plaintiff was using a permitted (if not expected or encouraged) means
to a designated access point of the MCG and on a spot where the
plaintiff happened to be by virtue of his employment, and not as
a member of the
public. It was further submitted that the defendant’s lack of ownership or
control of the Yarra Park grasslands
where the incident occurred was immaterial.
The plaintiff was proceeding across the Yarra Park grasslands directly to Gate
he had to do to access Gate 1A.
was submitted that the plaintiff’s arguments essentially mirrored the
reasoning employed by Beach J in
Jones Lang Lasalle
was submitted that the plaintiff’s case was supported by the facts and
reasoning of Judge Misso in
. In that case, the plaintiff was
injured after having completed his duties for the day. The plaintiff was
traversing a loading bay
on the way to his vehicle which had been parked in a
section of the shopping centre carpark which was designated for employees of
shopping centre. Judge Misso referred to the facts and applied the reasoning of
Jones Lang Lassalle
. It was submitted that the sufficiently
incidental link found by Misso J was, in substance, that the plaintiff was
traversing the
loading bay by virtue of his employment to get to his vehicle in
the shopping centre carpark.
was submitted that the defendant’s assertion that the position in this
case was analogous to
should be rejected.
the reasoning of the Court was based on the rejection of
the plaintiff’s evidence as to the timing of the injury (at
) and the plaintiff’s reason as to why she was crossing
the school grounds at the time she was injured (at
submitted that the Court made a finding of fact that the plaintiff was engaged
in the activity of going to collect her daughter
from school when she suffered
was submitted that
could be distinguished, if need be, on the
grounds that the plaintiff in that case was not sent emails prior to each shift
which specifically
set out carparking information at Yarra Park.
the comments of Kyrou J in
Reed Stockfeeds Pty Ltd
plaintiff submitted that a slight nexus or even a very slight nexus may, in the
circumstances, be sufficient to satisfy the
sufficiently incidental
was submitted that the present case sat comfortably with the reasoning of
Magistrate Wright in
. In that case, the plaintiff tripped outside
of her workplace at the Mercy Hospital after she completed her shift. The area
which the plaintiff was walking when injured was a “
under a licence agreement contemplated by a lease between the
Austin Hospital and Mercy Hospital. The Mercy Hospital did not own or
control over the shared area save for a right under the licence agreement to use
it to access the Hospital. Magistrate Wright
found that the plaintiff was not on
the (employer) Mercy Hospital premises when she was injured but was on the
shared area”
which was the subject of the lease/licence
agreement. Magistrate Wright held that “
it was necessary for an
employee, patient or visitor to use the “shared area””
enter or leave one of the two doors to or from the Mercy Hospital. At
His Honour held:
I find that crossing the shared area
was an activity sufficiently connected with the employment.... There was simply
no other alternative
for her to access and egress the Mercy premises to and from
the public street”.
Magistrate Wright went on to say:
same basis, it was sufficiently “incidental” to her employment in
that the use of the shaded area to access
and egress the Mercy (by crossing the
“shared area”) was an activity Mrs Lukey was “reasonably
expected to do in
order to carry out her actual duties” in terms of the
Henderson principle. The fact that the activity involved what was not
task or activity as such does not exclude it from entitlement to benefits
Shane v Kelly’s Bakery (Magistrates Court,
unreported,
Garnett M, delivered 19 September 2011
Park v Peach
[1967] VicRp 60
not the subject of direct evidence from the plaintiff or Mr Saitta, it was
submitted that the Court should infer that the defendant
had entered into a
licence agreement or similar with the MCG (or possibly the MCC) in order for it
to occupy and/or exert control
over part of the stadium and/or forecourt (and
patrons) and in order for its employees to be permitted to carry out security
throughout the MCG stadium and/or forecourt. It was submitted that the
plaintiff had no other alternative than to cross the Yarra
Park grasslands
forming part of the MCG precinct to access Gate 1A which he was required to do
in order to commence his shift. The
plaintiff was therefore engaged in an
activity he was reasonably expected to do to carry out his actual duties. This
was analogous
with the facts in
. It was further submitted that the
plaintiff was encouraged, even if tacitly, to use the Yarra Park carpark by the
emails sent to
the plaintiff by the defendant the night before each shift. It
was submitted that Mr Saitta agreed the emails were sent to facilitate
getting to work on time.
if the Court was not satisfied that the plaintiff was “
“instructed”
to use the carparking at Yarra Park, it
was submitted that the plaintiff was clearly permitted or encouraged to do so
and, when injured,
and was engaged in an activity that he was reasonably
expected to do to carry out his duties at the MCG. It was submitted that the
plaintiff could only do this by traversing the precinct.
was submitted that it was not the point that:
the plaintiff
was not directed to drive to the MCG and could have caught public transport;
the defendant did not own or have control over either
the MCG or Yarra Park;
given the decisions of
. Neither Mr
Nicolaidis nor Mrs Lukey were provided with specific documentary information
on company letterhead specifying where
to park their vehicles.
conclusion, the plaintiff submitted that the combination of factors referred to
above supported a nexus (even if fairly described
as light) between injury and
employment sufficient to satisfy the “
Henderson Principle”
the circumstances.
Alternative Argument:
Alternatively,
the plaintiff submitted that he was injured at his actual workplace. It was put
to Mr Saitta in cross-examination that
the MCG did not have an address as such
and was, in fact, a “
Mr Saitta was unable to give
an address for the MCG and agreed it was a “
submitted to define the plaintiff’s workplace as only including the
concrete stadium was an unduly restrictive definition.
The Court could infer
that the plaintiff had fallen and injured his leg outside of Gate 1A whilst
endeavouring to sign on and that
the injury had been at his workplace and in the
course of his employment. It was submitted that there was no reason to limit the
workplace of the MCG to the concrete stands and concourse. It was submitted that
it would be reasonable to find on the balance of
probabilities that the
workplace was the entire MCG “
This included the
surrounding Yarra Park area as depicted in the diagram headed “
- Yarra Park
(ADCB 19). Mr Saitta agreed that the plaintiff had no choice
but travel through that area to enter the MCG.
46(1)(b) of the WIRC Act:
Alternatively,
the plaintiff submitted that, having regard to the plaintiff’s job as a
casual security guard at the MCG, the
Court should find that there was a
requirement to travel to the MCG “
purpose of providing security services
at the MCG.
finding that the plaintiff’s injury was deemed to have occurred in the
course of employment was open to the Court. It was
submitted that the s46(2)(b)
of the WIRC Act did not apply because the plaintiff was not travelling to his
place of employment, but
was injured whilst walking through the precinct which
he had to do for the purposes of providing security services at the
Defendant’s reply to the Plaintiff’s
Submission:
plaintiff’s
“alternative argument”
that the plaintiff
was injured
“at his actual workplace”
should be rejected for
the following reasons
the use of the
expression “
does not somehow magnify or expand the
circumstances of the plaintiff’s employment, particularly the place where
the plaintiff
performed his duties for the defendant;
plaintiff’s submission that they generally agreed with the factual matters
set out in the defendant’s submission (referred
to in paragraph 118 of the
judgement);
the further
factual matters as previously set out by the defendant.
plaintiff’s reliance upon s.46 of the WIRC Act should be rejected for the
following reasons:
it again relied
on the vague notion of a
and then, seemingly, the
“travelling”
within that
the matters set
out on behalf of the defendant referred to in paragraph 188 of the
plaintiff’s initial submission concerning s.46(1)(b) of the WIRC
Discussion:
thank the parties for their helpful submissions.
was not overly impressed by the plaintiff as a witness and found some of his
answers in cross-examination to be somewhat evasive
and contradictory.
found Mr Saitta to be a credible and straightforward witness.
cross-examination it was put to Mr Saitta that the defendant clearly authorised
their staff to use the Yarra Park carpark when
working at the MCG.
Saitta disagreed. I accept his evidence that the defendant simply gave their
staff, including the plaintiff, the option of parking
at the Yarra Park carpark
and that the plaintiff, was not encouraged to use the Yarra Park carpark as the
only means of getting to
accept the evidence of Mr Saitta that the defendant did not tell the plaintiff
how to get to and from work at the MCG.
line with the Court’s decision in
, I do not accept that, at
the time of the plaintiff’s incident, there was the relevant nexus between
the plaintiff’s
activity and the work that the plaintiff was employed to
perform. The activity was not incidental to the plaintiff’s work or
the evidence, I find that:
the plaintiff
was free to choose how he got to work at the MCG;
there was no
oral or written direction by the defendant for the plaintiff to drive and park
at the Yarra Park carpark;
the defendant
did not otherwise require or encourage the plaintiff to drive or be a passenger
in a vehicle driven by his co-worker
and park at the Yarra Park carpark;
the defendant
did not otherwise require or encourage the plaintiff to enter the Yarra Park
carpark from any particular gate;
the email dated
27 May 2023 identified three gates being open as entry to the Yarra Park
carpark, all of which were open when the
plaintiff arrived just before
the information
provided by the defendant concerning what gates would be open to the plaintiff
did not equate to the defendant requiring
or encouraging the plaintiff to use
the Yarra Park carpark;
once within the
Yarra Park carpark, the defendant did not require or encourage the plaintiff to
follow a particular route to where
he was to sign on;
there were a
number of different routes that the plaintiff could have followed to where he
was to sign on once within the Yarra Park
the plaintiff
had used public transport to get to and from work at the MCG in the past despite
being provided information as to what
gates would be open to enter the Yarra
Park carpark;
the defendant
did not reimburse the plaintiff or his co-worker for parking at the Yarra Park
the particular
area of the Yarra Park carpark used by the plaintiff and his co-worker on the
day of the incident was not reserved
for employees of the defendant and was open
to members of the public;
there were other
public parking areas available to the plaintiff to park in the vicinity of the
the defendant
had no control over what gates would be open or closed to the Yarra Park
the defendant
did not own or lease the Yarra Park carpark or MCG;
a number of the
defendant’s staff did not park at the Yarra Park carpark.
mindful that each case must turn on their own set of facts, I accept the
defendant’s submission that the present case
was akin to the decision of
and the comments of Magistrate Wright at
“28. The Henderson (also known as the Henderson
and Speechley) principle requires a consideration as to whether the worker was
doing something which he or she was reasonably require, expected, or authorised
to do ‘in order to carry out his (or her) actual
the Court of Appeal (at para 16) said that this is
an essentially factual issue which must be considered in all the circumstances.
This will include the nature of the employment and the activity undertaken at
the time of the injury and its relationship to the
work which the employee was
engaged to perform. At para 16 the court stated: -
‘What must be shown is that the injury was suffered in the course of
activities done as part of the work which the employee
was engaged to
30. Counsel for the plaintiff did not dispute that principle. Rather, he
said that there was sufficient nexus by reason of the requirement
Level 3 carpark doors (general or staff) for entry and egress.
31. In the present case I do not accept there was such a necessary nexus
with the employment, having regard to all the circumstances.
32, Although an exact site for the fall was not stated by Ms O’Dea
in her evidence, it was somewhere between the general entry
doors and her car
which was parked 20 to 30 metres away. She did not state the angle at which she
approached those doors. The only
stated nexus was the requirement to use those
doors for entry to the Myer store.
33. She was not carrying any work item or object. There was no evidence
that the carpark in the vicinity was controlled by Myer, let
alone her employer
L’Oreal. There was no restriction on any person using any of the carpark
spaces on Level 3. She could have
parked the vehicle on any floor and in any
carpark space to use the Level 3 entry. She used the carpark space near the
doors purely
as a matter of convenience, rather than as a requirement,
authorisation or expectation of her employer.
34. I agree with counsel for the defendant that this case is no different
from one involving a place of employment with only one entry/exit
worker injured when approaching that door in a public access area such as a
footpath (not controlled or owned) by the
35. In such a case the injury would have occurred on a journey not covered
by the provisions of the Act. I do not believe that this
case is any
different.”
do not accept the plaintiff’s analysis and reliance on the decisions in
Jones Lang Lasalle
. I accept the
submission of the defendant that:
could be distinguished on the basis that, in this case, the
plaintiff was far from either the sign in window or the staff entry when
fell. The site of the plaintiff’s fall could not be likened to the ground
floor foyer where Ms William (the worker in
Jones Lang Lasalle
it was not the only means of accessing the workplace;
could be distinguished as there was no designated carpark. In this case, the
whole of the Yarra Park carpark was open to be used,
subject to gates being open
or closed at the direction of the MCC. The defendant had no control over the
could be distinguished as it was not necessary for the plaintiff to traverse the
grass area of the Yarra Park carpark if he had used
public transport. The
defendant did not own the Yarra Park carpark or MCG.
do not accept the plaintiff’s submission that, even if the Court was not
satisfied that the plaintiff was directed or instructed
to use the Yarra Park
carpark, the Court should find that the plaintiff was clearly permitted or
encouraged to do so by the defendant.
On the evidence, I do not accept that the
defendant encouraged the plaintiff to:
drive or be a
passenger in a vehicle driven by his co-worker and park at Yarra Park;
enter the Yarra
Park carpark from any particular gate;
particular route to the point where he was to sign on, once within the carpark.
do not accept the plaintiff’s submission that the plaintiff had no other
alternative than to cross the Yarra Park grasslands
forming part of the MCG
precinct to access Gate 1A. On the evidence, I find that the plaintiff did have
other alternatives to access
Gate 1A and did not have to necessarily cross the
Yarra Park grasslands.
on the evidence and my findings, I also do not accept the plaintiff’s
submission that it was not to the point that:
the plaintiff
was not directed to drive to the MCG and could have caught public transport;
the defendant
did not own or have control over either the MCG of Yarra Park.
was no requirement, authorisation, or expectation by the defendant for the
plaintiff and his co-worker to park in the Yarra
Park carpark on the day of the
incident. The plaintiff was not doing something which he was reasonably
required, expected, or authorised
to do to carry out his duties.
do not accept the alternative argument of the plaintiff that the plaintiff was
injured at his actual workplace on the basis that
the plaintiff’s
workplace was the entire MCG “
The plaintiff was
employed as a security guard at the MCG stadium. I accept the defendant’s
submission that the plaintiff’s
use of the expression
does not expand the circumstances of the
plaintiff’s employment from the place where the plaintiff performed his
the defendant i.e., the MCG stadium. The submission is not supported
by the non-disputed facts referred to in paragraph 118 of this
judgment and by
the findings of this Court.
respect to section 46(1)(b) of the WIRC Act, the Court makes the following
is helpful to refer to Magistrate Wright’s discussion in
“18. .... Prior to late
1992 workers were covered under the Act for injuries sustained while travelling
between the place o
residence and the place of employment. That general
entitlement was abolished by Act 10191 in 1992.
19. However, that protection was maintained for certain journeys and
certain workers by way of the provisions in s.83. The Second
Reading Speech
stated as to the relevant provision that ‘motor vehicle accidents,
however, which occur in the course of work,
for example while driving a truck or
taxi, will still be compensable under Workcover’.
20. The saving provisions as to journeys in s.83 were tightened by Act 50
of 1994 making it clear that ‘for the purposes of
s. 82(1) and
82(2)’ that s.83 would be relevant.
21. I find that Ms O’Dea is not covered by s.83(1)(b). there must be
regard to the nature of her employment or specific task
the worker to travel to determine whether a worker is ravelling
for the purpose of her employment.
22. She was not travelling to various clients or their premises for the
purposes of selling cosmetics. She had in fact only worked
at the same premises
(Myer Southland) for about one and a half to two years prior to the fall. There
was no specific task, and the
nature of her employment did not require her to
travel other than between her place of residence and place of employment. She
not travelling for the
(in that regard) of her
employment.”
Court makes the following findings:
the plaintiff
was not required to travel for the purposes of employment;
the plaintiff
was employed solely as a security guard by the defendant and, for many months,
had worked as a security guard outside
the changing room at the MCG;
on the day of
the incident, there was no suggestion that there was a specific task requiring
the plaintiff to travel, other than getting
Accordingly,
the Court does not accept the plaintiff’s submission that, having regard
to the plaintiff’s job as a casual
security guard at the MCG, it should
find that there was a requirement for the plaintiff to travel to the MCG
for the purpose of providing security services at
Furthermore,
based on the Court’s findings, the Court does not accept the
plaintiff’s submission that section 46(2)(b)
of the WIRC Act did not apply
because the plaintiff was not travelling to his place of employment. The Court
does not accept that
the plaintiff’s submission that the plaintiff was
injured whilst walking through the MCG “
had to do for the purposes of providing security services at the MCG.
plaintiff has not discharged the onus of proof. The Court is of the view that
the plaintiff was not injured in compensable circumstances.
proceeding will be dismissed.
parties are invited to provide the appropriate orders.
Magistrate M J Richards
Dated 12 March 2025
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (519 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter