URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clayton v State of Victoria No.3 [1998] VADT 30 (29 October 1998)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LIST
Application under section 109 of the
Equal Opportunity Act
COMPLAINT NUMBER No. 99 of 1998
COMPLAINANT Mr Eric Clayton
RESPONDENT State of Victoria (Victoria Police)
BEFORE Mr John Wolters, Senior Member
WHERE HELD Melbourne
DATE OF HEARING 14 October 1998
DATE OF DECISION 29 October 1998
DECISION Complaint struck out
CATCHWORDS Equal opportunity - application under s109
Equal Opportunity
; victimisation - ss96,97 of that Act - complaint made to Commission
under Federal
Race Discrimination Act
1992 - whether capable of
constituting victimisation under the Victorian Act.
APPEARANCES
COMPLAINANT In person
RESPONDENT Ms Jane Patrick of counsel
REASONS FOR DECISION
On 8 October 1997 the complainant lodged
with the Equal Opportunity Commission (the Commission) a complaint under the
Equal Opportunity Act
' or 'the Victorian
appropriate) claiming victimisation against the respondent.
On 15 May 1998 the Commission informed the Tribunal that it considered the
complaint to lack substance and that the complainant on
2 January 1998 had
required the Commission to refer his complaint to the Tribunal. The Commission
accordingly referred the complaint
to the Tribunal pursuant to s108(3) of the
enclosing the original complaint form and the complaint documentation.
At a preliminary conference on 22 June 1998 the Tribunal directed the
complainant to serve and file particulars of complaint within
28 days. On 20
July 1998 the complainant filed his particulars of complaint.
On 31 July 1998 the respondent sought clarification of paragraphs 1 and 4 of
the particulars from the complainant and on 12 August
1998 it applied to the
Tribunal for an order pursuant to s109 of the
Equal Opportunity Act
that the complaint be struck out on the basis that it was frivolous, vexatious,
misconceived or lacking in substance.
The Tribunal commenced its s109 hearing on 17 August 1998 when it ordered the
parties to file and serve any written submissions they
wished to rely on at the
s109 hearing. On 14 September the respondent lodged written submissions.
On 14 October 1998 the Tribunal heard oral submissions from the parties. Ms
Jane Patrick of counsel appeared on behalf of the respondent,
the applicant in
these proceedings. The complainant appeared in person.
The legislation
The relevant provisions of the
Equal Opportunity Act
or 'the 1995
' as appropriate) are as follows:
Prohibition of victimisation
A person must not victimise another person.
What is victimisation?
(1) A person victimises another person if the person subjects or threatens to
subject the other person to any detriment because the
other person, or a person
associated with the other person-
(a) has made a complaint against any person;
(b) has brought any other proceedings under this
against any person;
(c) has given evidence or information, or produced a document, in connection
with any proceedings under this
(d) has attend a preliminary conference under
(e) has otherwise done anything in accordance with this
in relation to
any person;
(f) has alleged that any person has contravened a provision of
unless the allegation is false and was not made in good faith;
(g) has refused to do anything that would contravene a provision of
or because the person believes that the other person or the associate has
done or intends to do any of those things.
(2) It is sufficient for sub-section (1) (f) that the allegation states the
act or omission that would constitute the contravention
without actually stating
, or a provision of this
, has been contravened.
(3) In determining whether a person victimises another person it is
irrelevant-
(a) whether or not a factor in sub-section (1) is the only or dominant reason
for the treatment or threatened treatment as long as
it is a substantial
(b) whether the person acts alone or in association with any other
The application under section 109
De Vos v City of Kingston
(ADT of Vic, 3 January 1997 at pp 9-11),
the Tribunal's predecessor, t9he Anti-Discrimination Tribunal, discussed the
to be applied in determining applications under s44C of the 1984
and also under s109 of the 1995
. The Anti-Discrimination Tribunal said-
'Section 109 of the
Equal Opportunity Act
and Section 44C of the
Equal Opportunity Act
permit a respondent to apply to have a
complaint struck out on certain grounds. A respondent cannot apply to have a
complaint struck
out after the hearing of the complaint has commenced or when
the complaint is in the process of being conciliated. The grounds on
application may be made are that the complaint is frivolous, vexatious,
misconceived or lacking in substance.
The hearing of an application to strike out a complaint must commence within
a time specified in the
. Under s44C of the 1984
, the hearing must
commence within 7 days of the making of the application. Under s109 of the 1995
, the hearing must commence within 14 days after the making of the
application. An application to strike out a complaint made under
either of these
Acts must be heard expeditiously.
On an application under either of these Acts to strike out a complaint, the
Tribunal must give the parties an opportunity to make
written and oral
submissions, but otherwise its procedure is in its discretion. Some of the rules
governing the final hearing of
complaints do not apply to the hearing of an
application to strike out a complaint (compare s44C(3) of the 1984
s109(4) of the 1995
). For example, the provisions relating to the hearing of
complaints and governing the joinder of parties and the entitlement to give
evidence do not apply to strike out applications (1984
ss52-55; 1995
ss144, 145 and 147).
Section 109 of the 1995
makes it clear that certain provisions of the
apply equally to hearings of complaints and hearings of applications to strike
out complaints. For example, on both kinds of proceedings,
the Tribunal is
required to act fairly (s141), is not bound by rules of evidence (s142), may
make a technical amendment to a complaint
(s146), may receive oral evidence
(s148), and may retain documents (s149).
Section 44C of the 1984
has been discussed extensively by the Court of
Appeal of the Victorian Supreme Court in
State Electricity Commission of
Victoria v Rabel
(18 December 1996, Tadgell, Ormiston and Phillips JJA). The
judgements in that case make it clear that Their Honours regarded the
propositions they set out as applying equally to s109 of the 1995
of the 1984
We (the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal) summarise those propositions as
Section 44C and s109 permit the making of
an interlocutory application at a preliminary stage. The procedure to be adopted
in determining
such an application is in the Tribunal's discretion. In
determining the procedure to be adopted, the Tribunal must bear in mind that
proceeding is not the full hearing of the complaint, and that the
the proceeding to be determined expeditiously. At the Tribunal's discretion, the
proceeding may be determined on the pleadings
and submissions alone, or also by
allowing the parties to put forward affidavit material, or to give oral
evidence. The procedure
that the Tribunal adopts is in its discretion and will
depend on the circumstances of the particular case.
If on a strike out application a
complainant indicates to the Tribunal that the whole of the complainant's case
is contained in the
material then put before the Tribunal by the complainant,
the Tribunal is entitled to determine the application by asking whether,
the material before it, there is a question of real substance to go to a full
However, if a complainant
indicates that there is other evidence he or she can call to support his claim
and the Tribunal on the application
does not permit that evidence to be called,
the Tribunal cannot determine the application on the basis that the
complainant's material
contains the whole of his or her case (
, judgement of Phillips JA at pp17-20; with which Tadgell and Ormiston
JJA agreed).
An application to strike out a
complaint is similar to an application to the Supreme Court in civil proceedings
for summary dismissal
of those proceedings (see for example Rules of Supreme
Court order 23.01 and Williams, Civil Procedure in Victoria, volume 1, pp
3415-29). Both are applications designed to prevent abuses of process. However,
it is a serious matter for the Tribunal, on an interlocutory
proceeding which
will generally not involve the hearing of oral evidence, to deprive a litigant
of the chance to have his or her
complaint heard in the ordinary course
Rabel's case
, judgement of Tadgell JA pages 1 and
The respondent bears the onus of showing
that the complainant's case ought not be allowed to proceed.
To succeed on the application, the
respondent must show the complainant's case is obviously hopeless or could on no
reasonable view
justify relief. The Tribunal's power to strike out a complaint
should be exercised consistently with the objectives of the
In dealing with an application to strike
out a complaint, a clear distinction must be drawn between the complaint or
claim itself
and the evidence which is to be given in support of it. A complaint
cannot be struck out as lacking in substance because it does
not in itself
contain the evidence that supports the claims it makes (
Rabel's case
judgement of Tadgell JA at page 3).
for determining whether a complaint is frivolous, vexatious, misconceived or
lacking in substance under s109 and s44C is
different from that applied in other
Anti-Discrimination jurisdictions, where similar words are used but in a
different legislative
context. It is similar to that applied by the Supreme
Court in civil proceedings in determining whether proceedings are frivolous,
vexatious or an abuse of process under Order 23.01 of the Supreme Court Rules. A
complaint can be struck out under s109 or s44C if
it is obviously unsustainable
in law or in fact. This will include, but is not limited to, a case where a
complaint can be said to
disclose no reasonable cause of action, or where the
respondent can show a good defence sufficient to warrant the summary termination
of the complaint (
Rabel's case
, judgement of Ormiston JA pages
The Tribunal must be cautious before
striking out a complaint. The Tribunal must be satisfied that the claim is
obviously untenable,
undoubtedly hopeless, before it can be struck out
Rabel's case
, judgement of Ormiston JA pp
The Tribunal should not apply
technical, artificial or mechanical rules in coming to a view about the case
that a complainant wishes
to advance (
Rabel's case
, judgment of Tadgell
JA at p3).'
Two additional comments should be made by this
Tribunal. First, if the material before the Tribunal shows that there is a
between the parties as to a fact in issue and the material does not
assist the Tribunal to resolve the dispute, then it would be
difficult for the
Tribunal to be satisfied that the complaint is so lacking in substance that it
should be struck out.
Second, if the respondent has satisfied the Tribunal that the complaint is
frivolous, vexatious, misconceived or lacking in substance
in respect of any
element essential for the complainant to prove in order to substantiate the
complaint at a full hearing, then the
complaint should be struck out.
In his original statement of complaint, the
complainant alleges that two incidents involving him had been reported to
Victoria Police
at its Fitzroy station and that no action was taken because he
had made complaints against them under the
Equal Opportunity Act
The first incident reported occurred on 16 March 1997 when he walked from his
place of residence at 36 Nicholson Street Fitzroy along
Nicholson Street. He
alleged that he saw a resident waiting for him who stalked him along Princess
Street. The complainant took two
photographs of the person and was then
assaulted and yelled at by that person. The complainant told him that he would
call the police
and walked into the reception of St Vincent's Hospital for
protection, where he was followed by the alleged stalker, who yelled at
asked the receptionist of the hospital to call security and was then led to
The second incident reported to Fitzroy police occurred on 1 April 1997, when
Carla Rose, a resident from room 4 at 36 Nicholson Street
Fitzroy allegedly
stalked him along Nicholson Street and onto Victoria Parade. The complaint
alleges that no action was taken by
The particulars of complaint then allege in paragraph 1 that the complainant
lodged with the Commission a complaint of discrimination
against Victoria Police
early in 1997, a complaint that related to 'an action by (the respondent's
Fitzroy station) into unlawful
entries by (staff of the Brotherhood of St
Laurence) into the complainant's room 14/36 Nicholson Street Fitzroy' on 24
December 1996.
The complainant alleges that as a result of the disclosure of the
complainant's medical history to the police the unlawful entries
investigated.
Paragraph 2 sets out the provisions of the
that were allegedly breached
by the respondent while paragraph 3 refers to discrimination and victimisation.
Although sections 6,
7 and 8 of the
are listed, and there is a reference to
discrimination, the complaint appears to be one of victimisation only. Sections
are also listed, but these, although in the headings to division 2 of
there is a reference to discrimination, also apply to contraventions of
, which includes ss96 and 97.
Paragraph 4 recalls an alleged event, unrelated to the original statement of
claim, at the Fitzroy delivery centre of Australia Post
when a member of the
staff of Australia Post called the complainant 'Darragh', the complainant's
former family name, following which
the complainant saw a police car drive away
from the centre.
Paragraph 5 then refers to 'the respondent's breach of confidentiality' with
regard to Australia Post being 'a wry act of victimisation
against the
complainant for lodging a complaint under the
. Paragraph 6 refers to an
alleged Victoria Police database giving wide ranging access to information on
citizens while paragraph
7 deals with the alleged denial by the respondent to
the Commission that any of its employees knew the (complainant's) pseudonym
Paragraphs 8 and 9 then deal with the two incidents that are detailed in the
original statement of complaint. There are differences,
however. The particulars
relating to the first stalking and assault allege not that the matter was
reported to Fitzroy police station
but to Victoria Police Ethical Standards.
They further allege that the stalker, a co-resident at the complainant's rooming
was discreetly moved out of he house after the report to Ethical
Standards. The particulars then allege that the stalker being moved
attempt to cover up the crime', encouraging copy cat crimes against the
complainant.
The particulars relating to the second stalking also have the complainant
deciding to 'advise Ethical Standards of the stalking incidents'
rather than, as
alleged in the original statement of complaint, reporting them to Fitzroy police
station. In addition, the complainant
claims that the alleged stalker had
stalked him since 1996, that he photographed her on this occasion and that he
advised Ethical
Standards because he had lodged a complaint with the Commission
in relation to discriminatory practices by Victoria Police, and in
Fitzroy police. At the hearing the complainant told the Tribunal that paragraphs
10 and 11 of the particulars served as
background only, were not directly
related to the present complaint, and in fact formed part of another complaint
against the respondent.
The complaint therefore wholly concerns one of victimisation because of a
complaint made to the Commission early in 1997 arising out
of events in
February, March and April 1997. The complaint made to the Commission, which the
respondent produced as part of the affidavit
of Ms Shelly Deborah Freeman
(Exhibit "A") was not a complaint under the Victorian
Equal Opportunity
but under the Federal
Disability Discrimination Act
Sections 96 and 97 of the Victorian
respectively prohibit and define
victimisation. Although s97(1)(a) defines victimisation as the subjection or
threatened subjection
to detriment where 'a complaint' has been made against a
person, 'complaint' is defined in s4 as a complaint lodged under section
. All the remaining provisions in s97(1)(b) to (g) are phrased in the
context of the
, its parts and divisions. Although s97(2) makes it
unnecessary for an allegation of a contravention of the
(s97(1)(f)) to refer
or the provision of the
, the allegation must nevertheless in fact
be in relation to a contravention of a provision of
In the present case, and this was not refuted by the complainant, the
complaint was under the Federal
Disability Discrimination Act
Furthermore, at the time of the alleged occurrences there was no other
complaint, including a complaint under the Victorian
, by the complainant
against the respondent in respect of the incidents at the rooming house at 36
Nicholson Street. This prevents
the complainant bringing a victimisation
complaint under ss96 and 97 of the
and makes the whole of the present
complaint misconceived.
For the reasons given above the Tribunal concludes that the application by
the respondent should succeed and that the whole of the
complaint against the
respondent should be struck out as misconceived. The Tribunal makes no order as
On application by the respondent under section 109 of the
Opportunity Act
), on reading the complaint and the material
filed by the respondent in relation to the application under section 109 of the
, and on hearing Ms Jane Patrick of counsel for the respondent and the
complainant in person, this Tribunal does order-
that pursuant to section 109 of the
the complaint is struck out; and
is no order as to costs.
Dated this 29th of October 1998.
Mr John Wolters
Senior Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (37.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter