URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2006/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
07-052 [2006] VMHRB 7 (12 October 2006)
In the review of P
An involuntary patient at
Community Mental Health Service
Date of Hearing:
12 October 2006
Dr I Freckelton
Dr T Gidley
Involuntary patient –
Mental Health Act 1986
(1)(d) – risk to health and safety of self and others –
consent - levels of insight -
– early review
The case came before the Board by way of review of P’s community
treatment order. P was diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder
but was of the
view that he had bipolar disorder. P was first the subject of involuntary
admission in 1970. Since that time he has
had many admissions. Most latterly, he
was admitted to Thomas Embling Hospital between 19 May 2003 and 15 August
P in the past had received a sentence of three and a half years imprisonment,
with two to serve for intentionally causing serious
harm to a neighbour who had
been agisting his cattle on P’s property. He had also previously been
found guilty of assaulting
Dr WL maintained that P continues to have poor insight into his illness and
into the need for medication and that this means he is
likely to stop taking it
if he has the opportunity by being released from involuntary status. Dr WL
identified a risk of self-harm
if P deteriorated in mental health, noting that P
on an earlier occasion mutilated his own testicle. He also drew to the
attention P’s history of polysubstance abuse, including
significant periods of heroin usage since 1987.
Ms Shalit on P’s behalf submitted that he accepted that he had a mental
illness however he wishes to be treated voluntarily
in the community by a
private psychiatrist and agrees to such a form of treatment. He was receiving
drug and alcohol treatment from
a private specialist in the area. As a secondary
proposition, it was put by Ms Shalit that if the Board did not discharge
community treatment order, then it should order Dr WL to revise
P’s treatment plan so that he could be transferred to private
(1) The Board concluded that P continues to appear to be mentally ill by
reason of his continuing to have a schizoaffective disorder
characterised by a
significant disturbance of mood and thought.
[1997] VMHRBD (Vic) 485 at 499 the Board articulated as a
test for the involuntary treatment of a person for their health and safety
“(a) such detention is necessary to prevent a significant
deterioration, because of the mental illness, in the person’s
health within the short or medium term; (b) such detention is necessary to
prevent a significant deterioration because of
the person’s mental
illness, in the person’s mental health within the short or medium term; or
(c) such detention is
necessary to secure treatment for the person’s
currently existing mental illness to address its significant disturbance of
person’s thought, mood, perception or memory.”
(3) The Board was of the view that continuation of P’s community
treatment order is necessary to prevent relapse in his illness
and return of
primary psychotic symptomatology as occurred earlier in 2003 and as has occurred
on a number of other occasions. It
was satisfied that if he is not on a
community treatment order for the present he will suffer a deterioration in
mental state within
the short or medium term. A community treatment order is
necessary to prevent the significant disturbance of P’s mood, thought
perception occasioned by his mental illness.
(4) The Board was influenced in this approach by the reality that P has on
occasions engaged in violent conduct – principally
directed toward others
but also toward himself. It did not over-emphasise these matters because in
general, it is important therapeutically
that embarrassing and unfortunate
incidents engaged in by persons who later appear before this Board be able to be
consigned to the
past. It is unhelpful for patients’ recovery for
regurgitation of prior matters unless they provide ongoing assistance in
the future. However, when earlier matters have been very serious (for
instance dangerous), when they have occurred in a particular
context, and when
they have taken place reasonably recently, they provide a context within which
risk can be evaluated. This is so
in respect of P both in regard to the 2003
stabbing and in the context of his having engaged in other threatening and
violent conduct
previously when mentally ill.
(5) P contended that there is a realistic alternative to his being on a
community treatment order, namely that he receive treatment
from a private
psychiatrist. That has occurred before and may well in due course constitute a
plausible option. However, before this
occurs a suitable therapist will need to
be identified, a therapeutic relationship established and transitional
arrangements commenced.
It is important that P not fall between cracks and
deteriorate in mental state by reason of any form of administrative confusion
which results in a hiatus in his care. It is to explore this option that the
Board ordered an early review in this matter, thereby
enabling P, with
assistance from his clinical team, to explore the feasibility of setting in
place suitable alternative treatment
arrangements.
(6) P as yet has only limited insight into the nature of his episodic mental
illness, its symptomatology, the consistency of antipsychotic
required to reduce the symptoms of his illness, and the precipitants to its
relapse. In such circumstances, as yet, on
balance, he lacks the ability to
consent to the treatment required for his illness.
(7) In 01-039
[2000] VMHRB 1
(27 September 2000) the Board reflected on the
relevance of insight in the context of ability to provide consent. It identified
spectrum of insight and a series of understandings that can be present if a
patient is highly insightful. In relation to P, it was
apparent that he has a
measure of insight into having a mental illness and into his needing treatment
for it. However, he disputes
not only the kind of illness that he has but also
the symptoms that it produces in him. This is important because it impacts upon
the treatment that he accepts that he needs for the illness. He has real
reservations about the psychotic and delusional aspects
of his illness and
therefore for his need for medication which addresses symptoms other than the
mood component of his illness. In
this context, the Board concluded that his
insight is limited and not such as to enable him to provide consent to the
treatment that
he requires for his mental illness.
Review of involuntary status – The Board found the continued treatment
of P as an involuntary patient was necessary –
The Board ordered an early
P was represented by Ms Barbara Shalit, of Mental Health Legal Centre Inc.
Date of Decision:
12 October 2006
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
Waiora Community Mental Health Service
HEARING NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
12 October 2006
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER REVIEW:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: Dr I Freckelton
Community Member: Dr D Sisely
Psychiatrist Member: Dr T Gidley
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 12 October 2006:
Patient’s mother: MP
Patient’s partner JP
Patient’s solicitor: Ms Barbara Shalit, of the Mental Health Legal
Doctor: Dr WL
Case Manager: KS
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary
patient subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
However, it
ordered an early review of the community treatment order to which he is subject
by 12 April 2007 to assess the feasibility
of voluntary private treatment being
arranged for his mental illness.
The Board therefore confirmed the community treatment order for the
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
12 October 2006
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P continues to be treated as an involuntary patient subject to a
community treatment order.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
on Involuntary Status dated 15 September 2006 prepared by Dr WL and presented to
Plan of P dated 4 May 2006, prepared by Dr KS and presented to the Board.
4. Oral evidence at the hearing.
, if the Board is satisfied that a person subject to a community
treatment order does not satisfy the criteria specified in
, the Board must
discharge the person from the community treatment order. Therefore, the Board
considered:
P appears to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness requires immediate treatment and whether that treatment can
be obtained by making P subject to a community
treatment order; and
because of P’s mental illness, involuntary treatment of P subject to a
community treatment order is necessary for his
health or safety (whether to
prevent a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for
the protection of members
of the public; and
P has refused or is unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P can receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less
restrictive of his freedom of decision and action.
, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
The Board was informed by Ms Shalit that P wishes to have his community
treatment order discharged. He accepts that he has a mental
illness, but is of
the view that it is bipolar disorder, not schizoaffective disorder. He wishes to
be treated voluntarily in the
community by a private psychiatrist and agrees to
such a form of treatment. He is receiving drug and alcohol treatment from a
specialist in the area. As a secondary proposition, it was put that if
the Board did not discharge P’s community treatment
order, the Board
should order Dr WL to revise P’s treatment plan so that he could be
transferred to private care.
Evidence of P
P told the Board that he had received treatment for
his illness for lengthy periods from private practitioners. He agreed that he
had received a sentence of three and a half years imprisonment, with two to
serve for intentionally causing serious harm to a neighbour
who had been
agisting his cattle on P’s property. He also served some additional amount
of time in prison for breaching the
terms of a community based order. He
maintained that he had then been required to pay $365,000 to his victim by way
of compensation
although he contended that he had not done him any serious harm
P denied having been non-compliant with prescribed medication in prison and
said that he was not sure why he was transferred from
the Melbourne Assessment
Prison. He denied that he had ever believed that there was a conspiracy against
him at Port Phillip Prison,
as recorded in several of his records. He said he
had last used heroin around Christmas 2005.
P rejected the proposition that at times he had denied having any form of
mental illness. He said that he was currently feeling well
and would like to be
transferred to a private psychiatrist. He said he was prepared to take oral
medication but did not like the
injections that he was being given. He did not
think that he had ever had delusional thinking and postulated that he was
well perhaps because of the medication but more likely simply because
he has become more stable. He felt that he had not latterly
had the violent mood
swings that he had experienced in the past. He has also substantially moderated
his drinking habits, which at
times had seen him drinking two bottles of spirits
a day. Now he just has a few beers.
Evidence of treating team
Dr WL informed the Board that P is a man with
schizoaffective disorder, although at different times P has been diagnosed with
disorder, depression and polysubstance abuse symptomatology. He
expressed the view that his condition is characterised by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood and perception, including paranoid delusional
ideation. He said that P was first the subject of involuntary
admission in 1970.
This was to Mont Park. Since that time he has had many admissions. Most
latterly, he was admitted to Thomas Embling
Hospital between 19 May 2003 and 15
August 2003. He is on a community treatment order, which is due to expire on 2
Currently, P is being prescribed zuclopenthixol by way of fortnightly
injections. He also takes sodium valproate each night.
Dr WL said that on most recent examination P’s mental state was stable
and he did not exhibit obvious signs of psychosis of
affective disturbance.
However, he noted that while P was a prisoner at the Melbourne Assessment Prison
he needed to be transferred
to Thomas Embling Hospital due to non-compliance
with taking his prescribed antipsychotic medication. He was discharged from the
forensic system on a community treatment order. In 2003, P presented with
delusional beliefs relating to his neighbour and the police.
He believed police
had bugged his telephone and that his neighbour had interfered with property on
P’s farm. P was alleging
that his neighbour had engaged in sexual congress
with his dog. However, this is now denied by P who says that at the time police
were tampering with his lawnmower, cutting chains and leaving his cattle to
wander at large. They were putting dead animals over
Dr WL maintained that P continues to have poor insight into his illness and
into the need for medication and that this means he is
likely to stop taking it
if he has the opportunity by being released from involuntary status. This would
precipitate another relapse
and probable involuntary treatment as an inpatient.
He observed that it has been P’s often stated perception that his
does not help him much, most latterly on examination on 3 June
Dr WL identified a risk of self-harm if P deteriorated in mental health,
noting that P on an earlier occasion mutilated his own testicle.
He also drew to
the Board’s attention P’s history of polysubstance abuse, including
significant periods of heroin usage
since 1987. He also noted a report from
Thomas Embling Hospital, which referred to P having stabbed his neighbour six
times in the
chest and having received a significant period of imprisonment as a
result. He has also previously been found guilty of assaulting
threatening to use blood-filled syringes against them and using a firearm
As to P’s personal circumstances, Dr WL said that P is not married but
has a partner. He lives in his own flat and helps to
care for his elderly mother
and manage her estate. His father and brother both have died. He is beginning to
activate his social
life after serving a period of imprisonment. He has worked
in his family business and worked for a packaging firm during a time when
married. He has been a small investor since 1992 and works some hours as an AA
support person.
It is planned that P remain on his current medication for the present.
Submissions on behalf of patient
Ms Shalit submitted on behalf of P that the Board should focus upon P’s
current condition. He denies aspects of what is said
to be his past history and
this should be consigned to the past and to the extent to which it is regarded
as having a continuing
relevance viewed as equivocal.
She emphasised that P has co-operated with treatment and is prepared to
continue to receive treatment as recommended by a private
psychiatrist. She
denied a significant history for P of non-compliance with treatment. She argued
that P has previously effectively
engaged in a therapeutic relationship and
contended that he should be encouraged to do so again by being given autonomy to
re-establish
such a relationship. Alternatively, the Board should intervene to
mandate the transition to such a relationship via a reformulation
treatment plan.
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board considered the exclusionary criteria in
and decided that
these were not relevant in this case.
The Board customarily regards this provision as requiring a three step
It should be
satisfied that the person has recently exhibited symptoms usually associated
with a recognised mental illness;
In determining
what is a recognised mental illness the Board should consider both expert
evidence and the widely recognised diagnostic
It should be
satisfied that the symptoms which the person has recently exhibited are evidence
of the fact that the person appears
to have some recognised mental illness and
are not solely indicative of any of the matters listed in
or explicable by
some reason other than the existence of a recognised mental illness (
AB (1988) 1 MHRBD (Vic) 40 at 50; see also
Re the Review of
RJS (1994) 2 MHRBD 199 at 204)
Absolute contemporaneity of exhibited symptomatology was not
required for the provision to be made out; otherwise the episodic and
fluctuating clinical reality of mental illness would be ignored. The question is
whether the person, in the present tense “appears
to be mentally
ill”. Moreover,
provides that a person “is mentally
ill” if they have a mental illness with the requisite attributes. Although
appropriate for the Board, where it can, to regard the issue of appearance
of mental illness within a longitudinal context, namely
taking into account the
patient’s history of symptomatology, the use by the legislature of the
present tense means that there
is a need for reasonable recency of manifestation
of symptoms of mental illness. To the extent that the Board can look beyond the
absence of current significant disturbance of thought, mood, memory or
perception, it must be satisfied that this does not derogate
from the ongoing
existence of the illness for the person. For instance, absence, or apparent
absence, of symptomatology may arise
from the efficacy of suitable
pharmacotherapy which the patient has latterly been taking.
Although P has improved in mental state recently, the Board was satisfied
that this is because of the depot antipsychotic medication
which he has been
prescribed, as well as the mood stabilising drugs which he has been taking. The
Board concluded that P continues
to appear to be mentally ill by reason of his
continuing to have a schizoaffective disorder characterised by a significant
disturbance
of mood and thought. Before the Board, P continued to make
assertions about the events leading to his imprisonment and the circumstances
which he was required to pay large amounts of compensation to his victim, which
lacked plausibility and appeared to be illustrative
of continuing delusional
ideation. Moreover, his treatment records showed examples of ongoing impairment
of his thinking and revisionism
in respect of aspects of his history. While
there is some possibility of these matters constituting no more than
rationalisation
and reconstruction of the past, as engaged in by many people,
the Board concluded that in fact these were exemplary of symptomatology
P’s mental illness.
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
The Board concluded that P’s mental illness requires ongoing
antipsychotic treatment, currently in depot form to assure compliance,
as mood stabilising medication. Such treatment is being obtained by virtue of
his involuntary status on a community treatment
Because of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment
of P subject to a community treatment order necessary for his health
(whether to prevent a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or
otherwise) or for the protection of members
of the public?
[1997] VMHRBD (Vic) 485 at 499 the Board articulated as a
test for the involuntary treatment of a person for their health and safety
“(a) such detention is necessary to prevent a significant
deterioration, because of the mental illness, in the person’s
health within the short or medium term; (b) such detention is necessary to
prevent a significant deterioration because of
the person’s mental
illness, in the person’s mental health within the short or medium term; or
(c) such detention is
necessary to secure treatment for the person’s
currently existing mental illness to address its significant disturbance of
person’s thought, mood, perception or memory.”
In this matter, the Board concluded that P needs to receive treatment as an
involuntary patient on a community treatment order for
his health and safety and
in particular to prevent a deterioration in his mental condition. In addition,
it concluded that such a
measure is necessary for the protection of others.
The Board was of the view that continuation of P’s community treatment
order is necessary to prevent relapse in his illness
and return of primary
psychotic symptomatology as occurred earlier in 2003 and as has occurred on a
number of other occasions. It
was satisfied that if he is not on a community
treatment order for the present he will suffer a deterioration in mental state
the short or medium term. A community treatment order is necessary to
prevent the significant disturbance of P’s mood, thought
and perception
occasioned by his mental illness.
The Board was influenced in this approach by the reality that P has on
occasions engaged in violent conduct – principally directed
toward others
but also toward himself. It does not over-emphasise these matters because in
general, it is important therapeutically
that embarrassing and unfortunate
incidents engaged in by persons who later appear before this Board be able to be
consigned to the
past. It is unhelpful for patients’ recovery for
regurgitation of prior matters unless they provide ongoing assistance in
the future. However, when earlier matters have been very serious (for
instance dangerous), when they have occurred in a particular
context, and when
they have taken place reasonably recently, they provide a context within which
risk can be evaluated. This is so
in respect of P both in regard to the 2003
stabbing and in the context of his having engaged in other threatening and
violent conduct
previously when mentally ill.
P contended that there is a realistic alternative to his being on a community
treatment order, namely that he receive treatment from
a private psychiatrist.
That has occurred before and may well in due course constitute a plausible
option. However, before this occurs
a suitable therapist will need to be
identified, a therapeutic relationship established and transitional arrangements
It is important that P not fall between cracks and deteriorate in
mental state by reason of any form of administrative confusion
which results in
a hiatus in his care. It is to explore this option that the Board ordered an
early review in this matter, thereby
enabling P, with assistance from his
clinical team, to explore the feasibility of setting in place suitable
alternative treatment
arrangements.
Has P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness?
P as yet has only limited insight into the nature of his episodic mental
illness, its symptomatology, the consistency of antipsychotic
required to reduce the symptoms of his illness, and the precipitants to its
relapse. In such circumstances, as yet, on
balance, he lacks the ability to
consent to the treatment required for his illness.
[2000] VMHRB 1
(27 September 2000) the Board reflected on the
relevance of insight in the context of ability to provide consent. It identified
spectrum of insight and a series of understandings that can be present if a
patient is highly insightful. In relation to P, it is
apparent that he has a
measure of insight into having a mental illness and into his needing treatment
for it. However, he disputes
not only the kind of illness that he has but also
the symptoms that it produces in him. This is important because it impacts upon
the treatment that he accepts that he needs for the illness. He has real
reservations about the psychotic and delusional aspects
of his illness and
therefore for his need for medication which addresses symptoms other than the
mood component of his illness. In
this context, the Board concluded that his
insight is limited and not such as to enable him to provide consent to the
treatment that
he requires for his mental illness.
Is P unable to receive adequate treatment for the mental
illness in a manner less restrictive of his freedom of decision and
Because P has limited insight into the matters referred to above, because he
has some ongoing symptomatology of his illness, and because
he has relapsed in
the reasonably recent past in the context of non-compliance with prescribed
medication, the Board concluded that
there is no realistic option for the
present to treat P in a way less restrictive of his freedom of decision and
action than for
him to remain an involuntary patient subject to a community
treatment order. It was influenced to exercise caution by the dangerous
previously engaged in by P.
However, the Board accepted that transition of P’s treatment to a
suitable regime incorporating private psychiatric care might
feasible. At present, specifics of such arrangements have not been raised as a
practical option. However, should they
be provided to the Board at a future
hearing, should transitional arrangements have been trialled, and should P
continue to remain
in ostensibly good mental health, it may well be possible for
P to be treated as a voluntary patient and thus be discharged from
his community
treatment order.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient’s treatment plan, the
Board must be satisfied that the requirements of
met. The Board considered each of the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
The Board was satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making and reviewing P’s treatment plan.
Section 35A(1)(b)
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
The Board was satisfied that P’s treatment plan is capable of being
implemented by his approved mental health service.
Therefore, the Board was satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has
complied with
in making, reviewing or revising the plan, and the plan is
capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
As a result, as all the
criteria were met and the treatment required
for P can be obtained through him being subject to a community treatment order,
Board made the determination set out on page 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (66.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter