URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VRAT/2008/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:38:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Riley (HAR) - App 06 2008 [2008] VRAT 5 (13 June 2008)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
Appeal No 6 of 2008
In the matter of an Appeal
MR KERRY O'RILEY
AGAINST THE CONVICTION AND PENALTY OF A $2,000 FINE IMPOSED BY THE
HARNESS RACING VICTORIA STEWARDS FOR BREACHING AUSTRALIAN HARNESS
RACING RULE
JUDGE NIXON
, His Honour
Mr P. Beaumont,
Mrs D. Davies, Adviser
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT MELBOURNE ON FRIDAY 13
JUNE 2008 AT 9.57 A.M.
MR W. ALSTERGREN appeared on behalf of Harness Racing Victoria
MR M. CALAZ (with leave) appeared on behalf of Mr O'Riley.
J U D G M E N T
HIS HONOUR: On 7 December 2007, the horse Resia Springfield, trained by
Mr Kerry O'Riley raced in and won the PETstock "Part of Your
Family" Pace final
at the harness meeting at Ballarat. The horse was successful in Race 1 on the
programme. Dr Dewe was the on-course
veterinarian on the night and she swabbed
the horse after the race and the urine sample taken from the horse was duly
analysed at
Racing Analytical Services Laboratory. The urine sample was shown
to contain Ketamine. The reserve and control samples were analysed
Australian Racing Forensic Laboratory and that laboratory confirmed the presence
of Ketamine in the reserve urine sample and
as was the position following
analysis of the control sample at Racing Analytical Services Laboratory,
Ketamine was not detected
in the control sample.
After a lengthy enquiry, which was adjourned to enable the control
sample to be retested and other tests to be conducted, Mr O'Riley
was charged
under Rule 190, sub-rule(1) and (2) of the Rules of Harness Racing which are
couched in these terms.
Rule 190, sub-rule(1) "A horse shall be presented for a race free of
prohibited substances", Rule 190, sub-rule(2) "If a horse is
presented for a
race otherwise than in accordance with sub-rule 1, the trainer of the horse is
guilty of an offence".
The stewards provided particulars which alleged that the horse had been
presented for Race 1 at the Ballarat meeting when it was
not free of the
prohibited substance Ketamine. At the adjourned enquiry on 16 April 2008,
Mr O'Riley was found guilty of breaching Rule 190,
sub-rule(1) which resulted in him being guilty of an offence
because he was the trainer of the horse. The stewards fined Mr O'Riley
and pursuant to Rule 195, Resia Springfield was disqualified from the race.
Mr O'Riley appealed and I heard evidence on 13 June at which time I
reserved my decision and having discussed the evidence and submissions
Mr Alstergren on behalf of the stewards and by Mr Calaz with my advisers, I now
give my reasons for my decision to allow
this appeal.
I add that I have been greatly assisted by my advisers and although the
decision is mine and mine alone, for the record they both
agree that Mr
O'Riley's appeal should be upheld. Mr O'Riley is an A Grade trainer who has
held a licence for some 40 years. He
is a man of good character who has an
impeccable record in the Harness Racing industry. From start to finish, he has
denied using
Ketamine so far as Resia Springfield was concerned and indeed
denies ever using this S8 drug at any time. His good character over
such a long
period of time is a factor to take in to account in his favour and indeed an
important factor, as it raises the presumption
in law that Mr O'Riley is
incapable of committing this offence, although, of course, good character cannot
change proven facts and
the presumption lasts only up to the point that despite
a person's previous good character, the Tribunal of fact is satisfied to
requisite standard that the offence had been proved.
The law adds that a person of good character is less likely to tell
lies than a person of good character, hence his evidence given
to the Stewards
Inquiry is to be viewed in that light. Mr Dunshea, who chaired the Stewards
Inquiry acknowledged that Ketamine was
a most unusual drug to find in a urine
sample. Dr Cust, a Harness Racing Victoria veterinary consultant, gave evidence
to that effect
at the inquiry. Dr Cust described Ketamine as a dissociative
anaesthetic and I adopt Mr Dunshea's summary of Dr Cust's evidence
that he could
see little benefit in the use of Ketamine in a racehorse.
Dr Cust added that in general, it was not the sort of substance that a
veterinarian would prescribe and then leave with a client.
Indeed, as an S8
drug, a veterinarian must store Ketamine in a locked drug cupboard to ensure it
is properly secured. Ketamine
is, of course, a prohibited substance under the
rules of harness racing. While Racing Analytical Laboratory does not do, nor is
it required to do, quantitative tests,
Dr Vine estimated in general
terms, the level of Ketamine in the urine sample was, and I quote his words, "A
very low level". Dr
Cust when asked at the enquiry about the reaction time if
the drug was administered intravenously, said that he had received information
that it would be thirty seconds if administered in that way, or if administered
intramuscularly, two to four minutes.
Dr Cust referred to the fact that Ketamine had been, and could be used
in drugs manufactured for humans and it was common knowledge
that it was a
product used in the manufacture of drugs such as "Ice"; hence in an endeavour to
avoid the manufacture of such drugs
for human consumption Ketamine had been
re-scheduled as an S8 drug. In the course of the Steward's Inquiry and again at
the Appeal,
a number of different issues were raised by or on behalf of Mr
O'Riley. I do not propose to deal with each and every issue which
apart from the following.
So far as the issue of the leaking bottles was concerned, I accept Dr
Vine's evidence that there was only minor leakage and that
minor leakage is not
uncommon, but in any event, minor leakage does not cause any significant
analytical issue. Professor Chapman,
a pharmacist as well as a veterinarian,
pressed the argument on behalf of Mr O'Riley that Ketamine is very heavily
metabolised in
the body into Norketamine in particular and other metabolites and
that Racing Analytical Services had not tested for the presence
of metabolites.
A test for metabolites would, Professor Chapman asserted, prove unequivocally
whether or not Ketamine had passed
through the horse's body.
While agreeing that the presence of metabolites would confirm that the
drug had actually been through the body of the horse, Dr
Vine pointed out that
the rules of harness racing only require the detection of the parent drug.
Those rules do not require the
analyst to detect metabolites. In any event,
Racing Analytical Services could not test for metabolites because they did not
any reference standards available.
Mr Dunshea who conducted a very fair inquiry adjourned the inquiry
stating, and I quote his words,
"We would be remiss in our obligations to you (that is Mr O'Riley) if
we don't try and explore those avenues and see if we can source
some sort of
reference sample that possibly can be run against the sample collected on the
At the resumed inquiry, Dr Vine acknowledged that Norketamine was
available commercially and whilst it could be obtained, Racing
Services, and I quote his words, "Didn't have any at the moment". Consequently,
without any reference standard, there
was no test for metabolites ever
conducted. While I accept Dr Vine's evidence and find no blame attributable in
the circumstances
to Racing Analytical Services, I strongly recommend that a
reference sample be obtained so that if the presence of Ketamine in urine
arise again, then the appropriate testing as suggested by Professor Chapman can
be performed.
Contamination was the critical issue in this appeal, and a
consideration of all the evidence failed to satisfy me that it could
out as a cause of Ketamine being present in the urine. I reached that
conclusion despite the fact that the control sample
which, as I said had been
re-tested, did not contain Ketamine and whilst acknowledging that the purpose of
the control fluid was
to attempt to provide a means of detecting potential
contamination that could occur during the collection of the sample. Dr Dewe,
veterinarian who took the urine sample from the horse, said in evidence that she
used Ketamine routinely in her employment at the
Ballarat Veterinary Clinic to
anaesthetise horses.
On the day in question, she had used Ketamine in both the morning and
in the afternoon in the course of two surgical procedures.
I found Dr Dewe to
be an honest witness. Whilst she could not specifically recall meeting Mr
O'Riley or swabbing Resia Springfield,
she recounted her normal procedure on
those occasions when she was required to attend a meeting in her professional
capacity. She
said that she would leave work early and return home where she
would shower, change her clothes and then drive to the racecourse.
Whereas she
wore overalls at work, she changed to more formal clothes before she went to the
course. I accept that she followed
the normal procedure on this occasion.
In December 2007, EI restrictions were still in place, which meant that
she was required to, and I accept did, dip her feet and
wash her hands in a
disinfectant provided by the club upon her arrival on course. Having done that,
she returned to her car and
drove it to a parking area. As one of my advisers
said, "What if there were traces of Ketamine on the steering wheel of the car?"
There was an issue raised as to the cleaning of the pan, an issue as to whether
Dr Dewe had properly rinsed her hands when she entered
the course and an issue
as to the condition of the public urinal described by Dr Dewe at the Inquiry as
the "dirty urinal" where
the swab was taken, as the horse would not urinate in
the swab box. Members of the public at times had access to the public urinal.
Dr Dewe acknowledged that she did not use gloves while swabbing the
horse. Whilst I cannot point to any particular source of any
contamination and do not make any such finding, given the offence seriousness
the standard of proof required is commensurate
with that level of seriousness,
and the seriousness of the consequences to the person in the position of the
Appellant. The onus
is on the stewards to prove the charge to the requisite
standard and in this case, which I consider is exceptional, I am not satisfied
that the stewards have discharged that onus. A consideration of all the
circumstances led me to that conclusion and Dr Cust, in
addition to stating
that Ketamine was a most unusual drug to be present in the urine of any racing
horse added, "I can't make head
of tail of it myself".
I do not make any adverse findings so far as
concerned, and I am satisfied that she did her best in busy and difficult
circumstances, but having considered all the
evidence I cannot rule out
contamination. In future, I do recommend that those who take swabs wear gloves
for that purpose using
a fresh pair of gloves on each occasion. Surgical-type
disposable gloves are readily available at low cost and I consider it would
prudent for the veterinarian to wear gloves when taking a swab. I also
recommend that, where possible, a horse remain in the
swabbing stall for that
purpose rather than be moved to an area where members of the public have access.
The Appeal will be allowed,
the charge will be dismissed and the ancillary
orders made by the Stewards set aside.
HIS HONOUR:
It is not part of the reasons or anything but I do congratulate you Mr
Alstergren on presenting a very fair case on behalf of the
stewards and you, Mr
Calaz particularly as you're not a lawyer as I understand, a very good defence
on behalf of Mr O'Riley and you
both deserve great credit for the way the case
was presented.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (41.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter