URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2024/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:44:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
UPK Pty Ltd at IPLC (Deidentfied) [2024] VicLiqComm 11; (30 July 2024)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application under
section 153
Control Reform Act 1998
by UPK Pty Ltd for an internal review of a decision
by a delegate to refuse an application for the approval of a person as a
namely HTU, for the premises trading as IPLC, located in
Melbourne’s south east.
Commission:
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair
Ms Susan Timbs, Commissioner
Mr Steven Brnovic, Commissioner
Appearances:
GTU, on behalf of UPK Pty Ltd
Sgt Andrew Dobson, on behalf of Victoria Police
Mr Michael Majewski, Counsel Assisting the Commission
Date of Hearing: 8 April 2024
Date of Decision: 30 July 2024
Date of Reasons: 30 July 2024
The Commission has determined to affirm the decision of the
Delegate and refuse the application.
James O’Halloran
Deputy Chairperson
Original Application
28 June 2023, UPK Pty Ltd (
) applied to the Victorian Liquor
Commission (
) for the approval of HTU as a nominee, within the
meaning of the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
, for the licensed premises trading as
IPLC, located in Melbourne’s south east (
), under section
Original Application
owner of the Premises is GTU. She is the sole director of the Applicant company
which acquired the Premises in November
is GTU’s husband. He has worked at the Premises ever since the Applicant
commenced the business.
HTU, three other staff members work at the Premises. These staff members assist
with the selling and stocking of liquor on
the Premises, and with the handling
of deliveries.
Applicant advised that the purpose of applying to the Commission to approve HTU
as the nominee for the Premises was so that he
could run the business due to
GTU’s other competing priorities, including childcare
responsibilities.
23 August 2023, a copy of the Original Application was served on the Chief
Commissioner of Police (
Victoria Police
) in accordance with section
23 September 2023, Victoria Police informed a delegate of the Commission
) that it objected to the Original Application under section
54(4), on the ground that HTU is not a suitable person to be the nominee
his criminal history (
8 December 2023, the Delegate refused the Original Application on the basis that
the Delegate was not satisfied that HTU was a
suitable person to be a nominee of
the Applicant (
Original Decision
Application for
Internal Review
4 January 2024, the Applicant made an application for internal review of the
Original Decision (
Review Application
12 January 2024, the Applicant provided additional information about HTU’s
criminal history.
2 February 2024, Victoria Police confirmed that it maintained its objection.
13 March 2024, a directions hearing was held in relation to the Review
Application, with GTU appearing as sole director of the
Applicant, and with Sgt
Andrew Dobson appearing for Victoria Police (
the Directions Hearing, the Commission invited:
(a) the Applicant to provide any supporting material for the Review Application;
(b) Victoria Police to provide any supporting material for maintaining its
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
2 of Part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under section
152, the Original Decision is a reviewable
decision, and the Applicant is
eligible to apply for review of that decision. The Review Application was made
under section 153.
to section 157(1), the specific task of the Commission regarding the Review
Application is to make a fresh decision that:
(a) affirms or varies the Original Decision; or
(b) sets aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.
effect, the Commission, on internal review, stands in the shoes of the original
decision maker and, subject to Division 6 of Part
2 of the LCR Act, must
(a) grant the application;
(b) refuse to grant the
application.
Determination of application for a nominee of licensee
to section 54(4), the Chief Commissioner of Victoria Police may object to the
application for a nominee of a licensee on
the ground that the person is not a
suitable person to be the nominee of the licensee.
54(5) states that:
An objection must –
(a) be made to the Commission in writing within 21 days after the day on
which a copy of the application was given to the Chief Commissioner;
(b) state the reasons for the objection.
an application is a contested application, pursuant to
section 54(6):
After the end of the period specified in
subsection (5)(a) (or that period as extended under section 174), the Commission
the application if satisfied that the person is a suitable person to
be the nominee of the licensee or permittee.
54(7) provides that the Commission must consider any objection made under
section 54(4).
54(8) provides that section 44(3) applies to the determination of an application
under this section.
44(3) states
limiting the reasons why a person is not a suitable person to hold, or carry on
business under, a licence
a person is not a suitable person to
hold, or carry on business under, a licence
if the person
or, if the person is a body corporate, any director of the person has, within
the preceding 3 years—
(a) been convicted, whether in Victoria or elsewhere, of an offence of
without a licence or of supplying adulterated
or of an offence against any law relating to customs or excise; or
(b) engaged in activities involving the trading in or marketing of
in a manner contrary to the provisions of this Act.
Exercising the internal review power
172D(3) and 172U(3)(b) require the Commission, in exercising its internal review
function, to have regard to the objects
of the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines in respect of the regulation of liquor issued by the Minister. The
objects are
set out at section 4(1) as
The objects of this Act
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
4(2) further provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament
that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or
imposed by this Act
must be exercised and performed with due regard to harm
minimisation.
3(1) defines “harm” as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol,
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury or
property damage.
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker;
(b) may consider further information, material or
Conduct of an inquiry
172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit,
and is bound by the rules of natural
Other sections of the LCR Act relevant to this
Obligations of a general licensee
to section 8(1), a general licence authorises the Applicant to supply liquor for
consumption on and off the licensed premises,
and to supply liquor to a person
who makes an off-premises request.
LCR Act outlines specific obligations for licensees, including the Applicant,
regarding the supply and consumption of liquor.
For example, pursuant to section
108, the Applicant must ensure that:
(a) liquor is supplied or consumed only in
accordance with the Licence and the LCR Act;
(b) liquor is not supplied to intoxicated persons; and
(c) drunken and disorderly persons are prevented from being on the
for non-compliance with these obligations are clearly defined, with
contraventions leading to substantial penalty
obligations are some examples demonstrating how the LCR Act prescribes rules
aimed at ensuring harm minimisation and proper
controls over the consumption and
selling of alcohol. In addition, they demonstrate how a licensee needs to ensure
that necessary
controls are in place such that the supply of liquor at a
licensed premises will minimise harm, including by ensuring that the supply
would contribute to, and not detract from the amenity of community life.
Obligations of a nominee
54 provides the following:
(9) A person approved as nominee under this section is liable as if he or
she were the licensee or permittee.
(10) A person ceases to be a nominee on ceasing to manage or control the
licensed premises in circumstances in which that cessation
is, or is likely to
be, permanent.
to section 54(9), were the Commission to determine HTU is suitable to be a
nominee of the Applicant, who holds a general
licence, he would be liable as if
he were a licensee.
Assessing suitability
some exceptions, the LCR Act does not provide guidance as to what constitutes a
suitable person to hold a liquor licence (see
above paragraph 22).
Commission must assess suitability against the objects of the LCR
noting that harm
minimisation is the primary regulatory object and therefore the primary
consideration in liquor licensing decisions
(although not to the exclusion of
the other objects).
assessing suitability, the Commission can also be guided by principles applied
in previous decisions. These include ensuring that
the public have confidence in
the liquor industry,
effluxion of time of actions that impact on a person’s
suitability.
Commission must be satisfied that HTU has the ability to manage a licensed
premises in a manner that promotes harm minimisation
and complies with a
nominee’s obligations under the LCR Act.
Material before the Commission
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the information,
material and evidence before the Delegate at first instance,
which included the
(a) Original Application attaching the following –
Certificate
of completion of RSA Program for HTU, dated 23 August 2021.
Certificate
of completion for New Entrant Training for HTU, dated 30 May 2023.
licence no. XPTAY (
(b) Questionnaire for HTU, dated 28 June 2023.
(c) Objection report from Victoria Police, dated 20 September 2023.
(d) Email submission of the Applicant in reply to the Victoria Police objection,
dated 20 November 2023.
(e) Email correspondence from Compliance Division with details of the
Applicant’s compliance history, dated 5 December 2023.
Commission on review also considered the following materials:
(a) Original Decision and Reasons of Delegate, dated 8 December 2023.
(b) Review Application received by the Commission on 4 January 2024.
(c) Email submission of the Applicant, dated 12 January 2024.
(d) Letter from Victoria Police, dated 2 February 2024.
(e) Pre-hearing material lodged by Victoria Police on 4 April 2024 relating to
HTU, including the following –
of Charges for offences in Melbourne’s south east on 28 November 2016 from
the Police Brief (undated).
for Sentence of His Honour Judge O’Connell in the 2019 County Court
of immediate suspension and disciplinary inquiry into the private security
individual operator licence then held by HTU, dated
7 February 2017.
Prosecution
Brief of Evidence for the offence in Melbourne’s south east on 8 January
2022 (variously dated).
Record of HTU, dated 4 April 2024.
Statement of OL, dated 28 March 2024.
Statement of NC, dated 29 March 2024.
(f) Pre-hearing material lodged by the Applicant on 4 April 2024 relating to
HTU, including the following –
Submissions
on the circumstances of the offences at Melbourne’s south east on 28
November 2016.
Psychological
report of SL, Consultant Psychologist, dated 20 March 2019.
reference of WL, dated 20 March 2019.
reference of CTL, dated 19 March 2019.
reference of QH, dated 20 March 2019.
reference of EQT, dated 19 March 2019.
sheet of Corrections Victoria Case Management Workbook 1 (undated).
sheet of LINCS Course (undated).
Submissions
on the circumstances of the offence in Melbourne’s south east on 8 January
of LR about the circumstances of the 2022 Offence (undated).
letter to BN, dated 4 April 2022.
Intervention
Order against NC, dated 17 October 2022.
of CCTV footage (undated).
Public Hearing
8 April 2024, a public hearing was held in relation to the Review Application
appeared in her capacity as sole director of the Applicant and gave oral
evidence at the Hearing. HTU attended the Hearing and
gave oral evidence for the
Dobson appeared on behalf of Victoria Police. OL and NC attended the Hearing and
gave oral evidence as witnesses for Victoria
Police (NC’s attendance was
via audio-visual link).
Issues for determination on
the purposes of the Review Application, in assessing whether HTU is suitable to
be a nominee of the Applicant, it is necessary
to consider HTU’s
suitability, taking into account his character, the passage of time (including
HTU’s conduct insofar
as it is relevant to the obligations and
responsibilities of a nominee and his character), and whether or not HTU being
as a nominee would affect the public confidence in the licensing
framework, having regard in particular, to the harm minimisation
objectives of
the LCR Act.
Whether HTU is suitable to be the nominee of the
Section 44(3)
reference to section 44(3) (see above paragraph 22), there is no indication that
HTU has been convicted of liquor related offences
within the last three years.
addition, based on all the material before it, the Commission is not satisfied
that HTU has engaged in activities involving the
trading or marketing of liquor
contrary to the LCR Act within the last three years.
that basis, the Commission cannot say that HTU is automatically unsuitable to be
a nominee of the Applicant.
HTU’s character
Criminal history
regard to HTU’s criminal history, Victoria Police submitted that he is
unsuitable to be the nominee of the Applicant,
and that the Commission should
refuse the Review Application.
Victoria Police also submitted that
HTU “does not possess the character traits required of a person that is
fit and proper and
suitable to be a nominee.”
part of materials lodged by Victoria Police, the Commission had before it the
prosecution brief relating to an incident involving
HTU and NC, who owned a
local supermarket next to the Premises. The brief included the statement of
alleged facts as follows (in
(a) On 8 January 2022, NC left work in his car and experienced trouble whilst
driving in Melbourne’s south east, discovering
a deflated tyre.
(b) NC returned to work to check the CCTV, which showed HTU approaching his car,
parked at the rear of the Premises, kneeling by
the front passenger side tyre
for about 20 seconds before returning to his store.
31 January 2023, the Dandenong Magistrates’ Court found HTU guilty of
tampering with a motor vehicle
(the 2022 Offence
). HTU was not convicted
and sentenced to a six-month adjournment. HTU was represented at that plea
hearing. At the Hearing of the
Review Application, HTU gave evidence denying
having tampered with NC’s car. He said that he only pleaded guilty on the
of his lawyer.
there was an informed plea and a finding of guilt, the Commission accepts that
HTU committed the 2022 Offence.
Reasons for Sentence of His Honour Judge O’Connell from the 2019 County
Court matter described the circumstances of the
offending as follows:
(a) On 28 November 2016, HTU along with five other men travelled to the victims'
house in Melbourne’s south east.
(b) As the victims noticed HTU and his accomplices outside, HTU, alongside his
accomplices, verbally abused the occupants. Following
the verbal exchange, HTU
struck one of the victims with a cricket bat, first to the back of the head and
then again to the side of
the head as he tried to get up.
(c) HTU and his accomplices forcibly entered the house and proceeded to assault
its various occupants.
(d) After the incident, upon police arrival, HTU denied any involvement in the
offenses. He claimed to have been at a party, then
out buying alcohol, and
joined the group unwittingly. He said he was merely having fun at the park at
the time of his arrest.
case against HTU and his accomplices was argued on the basis of joint liability,
with each member holding responsible for the
collective actions agreed upon for
engaging in criminal activities.
the Hearing, HTU gave evidence about the circumstances leading up to his
offending in November 2016. He said that his friends experienced
harassment from
three young men at a restaurant, and that this included sexist and abusive
remarks at the female staff. HTU said
that these men became confrontational when
asked to stop, and that they escalated their actions by vandalising his
car. According to HTU, Victoria Police was notified of the
incident but no action was taken against the men. Subsequently, HTU confronted
the men at their home, and the incident culminated in a physical
altercation.
22 March 2019, HTU pleaded guilty to three charges of causing injury recklessly,
one charge of aggravated burglary, three charges
of common assault, and four
charges of damaging property intentionally (
the 2016 Offences
of his sentence, HTU completed a Community Corrections Order (
included 300 hours of unpaid community work and 150 hours treatment and
rehabilitation.
Commission finds that Victoria Police’s concerns regarding HTU’s
criminal history are justifiable. The nature of the
offending is very serious,
and this is reflected in maximum penalties of actual terms of imprisonment for
the offences that he committed.
HTU either deliberately inflicted harm (i.e.,
the 2016 Offences), or placed others in harm’s way (i.e., the 2022
Such actions demonstrate HTU’s poor judgment and lack of
self-control, which are inconsistent with the behaviours expected
of a licensee
(and nominee) whose focus ought to be on harm minimisation.
Commission notes that a person’s criminal history alone does not, and
ought not, of itself, disqualify someone from ever
being suitable for the
purposes of the LCR Act. On that basis, the Commission must consider HTU’s
suitability having regard
to all the circumstances and material before
Whether HTU has reformed or rehabilitated
relation to the 2016 Offences, the Applicant provided various supporting
documents that HTU relied on when he was sentenced by
the County Court in 2019.
This included a report of SL, a consultant psychologist, dated 20 March 2019.
to SL’s report, HTU “described genuine remorse for his
In addition,
based on HTU’s reporting of the incident, SL stated that he was there
“to support his friend”, that
“he had no intention of harming
anyone, committing any violence or being involved in any criminal
behaviour”, and that
he “was attempting to de-escalate the
situation”.
terms of his prospects of reoffending, SL reported that “HTU is considered
a low risk”.
reported that “he does not exhibit an antisocial attitude nor have other
risk factors associated with general offending,
such as an antisocial peer
terms of HTU’s mental state, SL reported the
“He exhibits moderate depressive symptoms, as
well as some anxiety, both of which appear to be worsening as noted by
neurovegetative
disturbances resulting in recent accidents, anhedonia even on
his wedding day last week, and general withdrawal from normal social
and friendships. This requires intervention to prevent any worsening of his
mental state, which is already
compromised.”
concluded that that HTU had been involved in what appeared to be
“isolated, uncharacteristic behaviour”, and that his
rehabilitation
prospects would be much greater if here were to engage a psychologist to address
some of his personal issues.
SL’s report, the Applicant’s documents included several character
reference letters in support for HTU from 2019.
In summary, the letters
described HTU as remorseful, indicated that his actions were out of character,
and highlighted his dedication
to his Sikh faith.
Commission recognises the Applicant’s efforts in providing SL’s
report and the character references for HTU. Besides
the supporting materials,
HTU and GTU gave evidence at the Hearing about how he has improved since the
2016 Offences. HTU said that
the CCO “changed his life”. He said
that the community work involved picking rubbish off the streets and removing
As for the treatment and rehabilitation that was part of his sentence,
he said that this involved classes/sessions/lessons on “controlling
described HTU as being “very responsible now”, and that “he
thinks more before reacting
HTU discussed
strategies, such as religious meditation, which he found helpful to this
He said that he is
“not short-tempered” any longer, and that – if he were
confronted with the same circumstances
leading up to the 2016 Offences –
he would focus on his family
Commission notes that SL’s report and the character references are around
five years old. The Commission would have been
assisted with more up-to-date
evidence as to HTU’s character and progress regarding his psychological
treatment and rehabilitation.
evidence at the Hearing was that HTU did not engage a psychologist in accordance
with SL’s recommendations.
HTU said that “nobody told [him] that [he] needed to go back to a
psychologist”. The Commission considers that HTU’s
failure to follow
up with treatment demonstrates a lack of insight into his past actions, and that
he is yet to fully take responsibility
for wrongdoing and its consequences.
HTU gave evidence that he had engaged in counselling with BN in 2022, and that
this was in relation to management of stress
and anxiety arising from conflict
with NC after the 2022 Offence, he did not provide any reports from BN. There
was some inconsistency
in the evidence of HTU and GTU regarding whether HTU
attended counselling.
balance, the Commission is of the view that the Applicant has not provided
sufficient evidence to demonstrate his rehabilitation
and reform such that he
would be able to comply with his responsibilities as a nominee in accordance
with the LCR Act.
Effluxion of Time
Commission notes that there has been approximately eight years since the most
serious offending committed by HTU (i.e., the 2016
Offences). It acknowledges
the ‘cycle of suitability’ concept adopted by the Commission in
An Application by PJ Rahme
, in which the Victorian Commission for
Gambling and Liquor Regulation stated that suitability is a “temporal
concept and the
effluxion of time can reduce the effect of actions that impact
suitability”.
the Hearing, OL and NC gave evidence about HTU’s conduct between 2022 and
2023, when he was purportedly in charge of the
owns and operates a massage clinic located next to the Premises. In her
evidence, she said that, on one occasion, a young male
was sitting at a table in
front of the Premises and caused a disturbance outside of her
She said that she
complained to the Applicant’s
who told her that the
customer had been supplied with “one can of
According to OL,
the staff member said that the customer “had been drinking somewhere
else” and that this is “why
her evidence, OL also described an incident where a number of people purportedly
caused a disturbance outside of her business.
She described approximately 20
people entering the Premises and consuming alcohol both inside and out in the
OL described this
group’s behaviour as very disruptive as they were loud, stood outside the
front of her massage clinic, revved
their car engines, and honked their car
horns. She stated that one of the intoxicated individuals from the group
confronted her aggressively,
yelling at her and intimidating her to the extent
that she felt threatened. OL said that she retreated to her massage clinic,
herself inside and called the
Commission notes that the Applicant was issued with an infringement notice under
section 108(1)(a)(i) for allegedly permitting
undue detriment to the amenity of
the area, including unwarranted noise and disturbance on 19 March 2022.
the Hearing, NC provided additional evidence about the incident of 19 March
2022. According to NC, the Applicant held an inauguration
event tor the Premises
that day, with over 40 people attending. NC said that they were all drinking
alcohol at the front of the Premises
from morning until the late afternoon, and
that they were “abusing and swearing at people walking past as well as
alcohol to pedestrians passing in the street”. NC believed that
most of the people were friends and relatives of HTU.
the above incidents, OL gave evidence that, in late 2022 or early 2023, the
Premises had loud music that disrupted her business,
leading her to call the
police when requests for reducing the volume were initially heeded but then
She said that the noise
escalated to physical banging noises against the wall, which frightened her
staff and customers, leading
to further police
She said that it sounded
like a person hitting the wall out of anger.
OL gave evidence that police had
applied for an intervention order in relation to the banging noise, which had
been going on for
She said that, after police attended, she has not since heard any banging
against the wall.
his evidence, NC described several violent incidents concerning HTU when he was
purportedly in charge of the Premises. He said
that, on 22 July 2022, HTU
purportedly assaulted him at the rear of his shop and stole half of his gold
NC also described having witnessed HTU purportedly engaging in physical
altercations outside the Premises on two occasions, including
someone with a metal rod”.
gave the following evidence to describe his interactions with
provoking us all the time. Even
after, you know, intervention order being placed. So, what he was doing whenever
he saw me going towards
[bin area at the back of the shops]
standing inside his shop. And he was provoking me and my wife like, so that he
can attract my attention, and you know I kept
to walk, because of this and I can
go, and you know attack
I protect myself not to go with the fight, and he
provoked me six, seven times, and it was almost like eight month
from last eight month, and it was just everywhere, at that
“I was always scaring, not to go any fight with him at all
. Because the people he was surrounding all the time, 10, 12 people
all the time, drinking in his shop. Sometime he's vomiting outside
So it was - for me, it's not to go fight with him. But when he keep harassing me
for eight months, even that's why I sold my
his evidence, NC stated that he had sold his business in December 2022 and
relocated from his home for his safety. He stated that
the stress and fear from
his experiences with HTU purportedly left him unable to work for over a year.
there were competing claims made at the Hearing, the evidence of OL and NC was
consistent in describing a relatively recent
pattern of issues involving HTU,
which contributed to unsafe and disruptive conditions around the Premises,
affecting neighbouring
businesses and their owners' sense of safety and
well-being. In circumstances where HTU was purportedly operating the Premises
these issues arose, the Commission is not satisfied that HTU would
currently be able to ensure that necessary controls are in place
liquor under a general licence within the prescribed rules of the LCR Act.
Public confidence
is important that the public have confidence in the liquor industry and
confidence in the administration of the liquor
Criminal offending
cannot be condoned, and both the public and the Commission expect licensees (or
their nominees), to be fully aware
of this and to actively take measures to
reduce the risk of harm associated with the supply of alcohol.
criminal history is relevant to his understanding of the need to comply with
laws designed to protect the public and is
therefore relevant to the question of
his suitability for the purposes of the Review Application.
addition, the incidents between early 2022 and 2023 suggest that HTU had
continued to demonstrate poor judgment and a lack of self-control.
inconsistent with the behaviours expected of a licensee (and nominee), whose
focus ought to be on harm minimisation.
Commission acknowledges HTU’s submissions at the Hearing, where he
expressed confidence that, should the Review Application
be granted, he would
not repeat his past conduct or engage in conflict with neighbouring
businesses.
Nevertheless, the
Commission is of the view that the incidents described by OL and NC, together
with HTU’s lack of sufficient
insight into his criminal offending and
little evidence of reform or rehabilitation since his conviction in 2019, do not
favour of the community having confidence in HTU being able to fulfill
the obligations of a nominee. The Commission does not consider
that approving
HTU as the nominee in this case would promote the objects of the LCR
Decision on review
the reasons set out above, the Commission is not satisfied that HTU is currently
suitable to be a nominee under the LCR Act. While
there may come a time when he
could potentially be found suitable, the Commission does not believe, on the
scope of evidence before
it, that time has yet
regard to the matters outlined above, the Commission has determined to affirm
the Original Decision.
The preceding 85 paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Decision of Mr James O’Halloran (Deputy Chair), Ms
(Commissioner) and Mr Steven Brnovic (Commissioner)
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
Transcript, p9.
Transcript, p25.
Transcript, p16.
Transcript, p13.
Section 157(2) to (5) further
prescribe the manner in which the Commission is to undertake internal
Sections 54 and 157.
Sections 54 and 157.
Section 157(2).
See section 108.
For example, breaches
related to improper supply and consumption of liquor attract a penalty of 60
units, while allowing intoxicated
or disorderly conduct results in a penalty of
See section 4.
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2012] VSCA 325.
Danz Management v
Director of Liquor Licensing (Occupational and Business Regulation)
Patrick Rahme at OMG
Bar and Function Premises (Liquor-contested application)
[2013] VCGLR
GTU gave evidence at the
Hearing to the effect that, instead of tampering with NC’s car, HTU was
only bending down to collect
coins. She said that, by the time Victoria Police
arrived to investigate the incident several months later, the Applicant’s
CCTV storage had reached its capacity. This was the reason the Applicant
provided as to why it could not provide footage showing
that HTU did not tamper
with NC’s car.
Transcript, pp81-82. See
also the Applicant’s pre-hearing submissions on the circumstances of the
2016 Offences.
Psychological report of SL,
dated 20 March 2019, p5.
Transcript, p30.
Transcript, pp79-80.
Transcript, pp82-83.
Transcript, p91.
Patrick Rahme at OMG Bar
and Function Premises (Liquor-contested application)
[2013] VCGLR 39.
Transcript, p114-122.
HTU said that the male
customer “seemed to be alright” when he stepped into the Premises.
The customer’s behaviour
then became “inappropriate”,
including taking off his t-shirt. He then sat in front of the store.
HTU said that OL came out of
her business and had “a bit of [an] argument” with the customer.
HTU said that the customer
was served “a can of bourbon and coke”.
HTU disagreed that he had
told OL at the time that the customer was intoxicated because “he had been
drinking somewhere else”.
HTU also said that, prior to supplying him with
the can of bourbon and coke, he did not query with the customer if he had been
GTU said that she and HTU
were shooting an advertisement for the Premises, and that this included people
“coming in and drinking
and eating food”. HTU said that they were
not drinking outside of the Premises.
HTU said that, while police
had been called due to a complaint that the group of people outside of the
Premises were intoxicated,
he disagreed that they were intoxicated.
HTU said that, while music
was being played, it was not loud. He added that the loud music that OL
complained of had likely come
from the business next door, which is a
HTU said that
other staff members were hanging up metal signage on the wall of the Premises,
suggesting that this was the cause of the ‘banging
Transcript, p117-121.
GTU explained that the
Premises’ CCTV depicts NC as being the responsible person and that,
conversely, NC has had a grudge
against HTU and his running of the Premises.
HTU said that NC “was
assassinating [his] character in a really bad manner”, and purportedly
telling “his part
of the story”, rather than “the actual
truth”. He also said that NC was purportedly “attacking [him] in a
religious manner”, and that this purportedly included saying that HTU
“had a turban on his head, and he can’t sell
liquor”. HTU
added that NC purportedly “was saying other bad words, and that customers
would inform him that NC was purportedly
threatening to “bash him”.
He said that this made him feel depressed and anxious, and that purportedly this
had been referred to BN for management of anxiety and stress under a
mental health care plan.
HTU and GTU denied these
allegations.
Transcript, p139.
Transcript, p134.
Galafaro v Director
of Liquor Licensing
[2009] VCAT 919
Buzzo Holdings Pty Ltd
& Anor v Loison
[2007] VSC 31.
Transcript, p95.
Patrick Rahme at
OMG Bar and Function Premises (Liquor-contested application)
[2013] VCGLR 39
Danz Management v Director of Liquor Licensing (Occupational and Business
Regulation)
[2010] VCAT 536.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.36 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter