URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bacon v Wackenhut Australia Pty Ltd [1998] VADT 8 (24 August 1998)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LIST
No. 86 of 1997
Margaret Bacon
COMPLAINANT
Wackenhut Australia Pty Ltd
FIRST NAMED RESPONDENT
Michael Carmody
SECOND NAMED RESPONDENT
REASONS FOR DECISION ON AN APPLICATION UNDER SECTION 109 OF THE
OPPORTUNITY ACT 1995
BEFORE: Ms Cate McKenzie
Deputy President
DATE OF DECISION: 24 August 1998
CATCHWORDS: Equal Opportunity- application to strike out
complaint-conflicting version of events-
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
The Proceeding
On 29 January 1996 Ms Bacon lodged with the Equal Opportunity Commission
("the Commission") a complaint under the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
claiming discrimination on the ground of sex in the area of her employment (the
first complaint). That complaint was against the
first Respondent to this
complaint (Wackenhut) and against Mr Michael Arthur. The complaint was
subsequently withdrawn against Mr
Arthur. The first complaint was referred to
the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal (ADT) on 17 October 1996. On the application of
it was struck out in part by a decision of the Tribunal dated 18 June
On 3 May 1996 Ms Bacon lodged a second complaint with the Commission against
Wackenhut and the second named Respondent Mr Carmody
(the second complaint).
That complaint was also lodged under the
. It claimed victimisation in the
area of employment. On 3 April 1997 the Commission, acting under s117 of the
, referred the complaint to the ADT. The Commission referred the complaint to
the ADT on the basis that conciliation had been unsuccessful
and acted on the
Complainant's requirement that the complaint be referred.
By letter filed with the ADT on 1 June 1998, Mr Carmody applied to have the
complaint struck out. He did so on the basis that the
complaint was frivolous
and vexatious and "a distortion of the facts to gain personal advantage" by Ms
Bacon. I take this to mean
that, no more than a repetition of the contention
that the complaint is frivolous or vexatious.
There is conflicting material before the Tribunal as to the current status of
Wackenhut. Some of the material indicates that Wackenhut
continues to exist.
Some of that material indicates that it now has no assets. Until proper evidence
of the status of Wackenhut is
presented to the Tribunal, the Tribunal proceeds
on the basis that Wackenhut continues to exist and that Mr Carmody's application
to strike out the complaint is made by both Respondents.
The ADT commenced to hear the application on 15 June 1998. Mr Carmody and Ms
Bacon relied on all the material that they had previously
placed before the
Tribunal. This has made the Tribunal's task more difficult, because that
material related to both the first and
second complaints. Mr Carmody's
application is unclear as to whether it applies to the second complaint alone or
to the first and
second complaints together. For the purposes of this
proceeding, I treat his application as applying to the first and second
complaints.
The ADT fixed the hearing date of oral submissions on this application as 20
July 1998. Before that date, on 1 July 1998, the
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
) and the Tribunals and Licensing
Authorities (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1998 (the Miscellaneous Amendments
Act) came into operation.
Their effect is, among other things, to establish the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT) and to confer on that
the jurisdiction previously exercised by the ADT under the
Opportunity Act 1995
. In my view, clause 9(2) of Schedule 2 of the Miscellaneous
Amendments Act applies to this proceeding. The effect of clause 9(2)
this application is to be taken to have been commenced before VCAT, that
anything done by the ADT or the parties in relation
to the application has
effect as if done by or in relation to VCAT, and that VCAT has the procedures,
powers, functions and duties
that the ADT had under the
Equal Opportunity Act
before 1 July 1998.
Before 20 July 1998, Mr Carmody wrote to the Tribunal indicating that he did
not intend to appear to make oral submissions but that
he wished to know what
the Tribunal's final decision would be. Ms Bacon appeared at the hearing on 20
July 1998 and made oral submissions.
I first set out the legislation relevant to this case. I then summarise the
material before me. Finally I deal with the arguments
raised by the parties.
The Legislation
The legislation applying to the first complaint is set out in the decision of
the ADT on the application to strike out the complaint
dated 18 June 1997. I now
set out the provisions of the Act applying to the second complaint- the
complaint of victimisation.
Prohibition of victimisation
A person must not victimise another person.
What is victimisation?
(1) A person victimises another person if the person subjects or threatens to
subject the other person to any detriment because the
other person, or a person
associated with the other person-
(a) has made a complaint against any person;
(b) has brought any other proceedings under this Act against any person;
(c) has given evidence or information, or produced a document, in connection
with any proceedings under this Act;
(d) has attend a preliminary conference under Part 7;
(e) has otherwise done anything in accordance with this Act in relation to
any person;
(f) has alleged that any person has contravened a provision of Part 3,5 or 6,
unless the allegation is false and was not made in good
(g) has refused to do anything that would contravene a provision of Part 3,5
or because the person believes that the other person or the associate has
done or intends to do any of those things.
(2) It is sufficient for sub-section (1) (f) that the allegation states the
act or omission that would constitute the contravention
without actually stating
that this Act, or a provision of this Act, has been contravened.
(3) In determining whether a person victimises another person it is
irrelevant-
(a) whether or not a factor in sub-section (1) is the only or dominant reason
for the treatment or threatened treatment as long as
it is a substantial
(b) whether the person acts alone or in association with any other
Applications under Section 109
De Vos v City of Kingston
(ADT of Vic, 3 January 1997, at pp 9-11),
the ADT set out the principles applying to applications under s109-
"Section 109 of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
and Section 44C of the
Opportunity Act 1984
permit a Respondent to apply to have a complaint struck out
on certain grounds. A Respondent cannot apply to have a complaint struck
after the hearing of the complaint has commenced or when the complaint is in the
process of being conciliated. The grounds on
which the application may be made
are that the complaint is frivolous, vexatious, misconceived or lacking in
substance. The hearing
of an application to strike out a complaint must commence
within a time specified in the Act. Under s44C of the 1984 Act, the hearing
commence within 7 days of the making of the application. Under s109 of the 1995
Act, the hearing must commence within 14 days
after the making of the
application. An application to strike out a complaint made under either of these
Acts must be heard expeditiously.
On an application under either of these Acts
to strike out a complaint, the Tribunal must give the parties an opportunity to
written and oral submissions, but otherwise its procedure is in its
discretion. Some of the rules governing the final hearing of
complaints do not
apply to the hearing of an application to strike out a complaint (compare
s44C(3) of the 1984 Act and s109(4) of
the 1995 Act). For example, the
provisions relating to the hearing of complaints and governing the joinder of
parties and the entitlement
to give oral evidence do not apply to strike out
applications (1984 Act ss52-55; 1995 Act ss144, 145 and 147). Section 109 of the
1995 Act makes it clear that certain provisions of the Act apply equally to
hearings of complaints and hearings of applications to
strike out complaints.
For example, on both kinds of proceedings, the Tribunal is required to act
fairly (s141), is not bound by
rules of evidence (s142), may make a technical
amendment to a complaint (s146), may receive oral evidence (s148), and may
documents (s149).
Section 44C of the 1984 Act has been discussed extensively by the Court of
Appeal of the Victorian Supreme Court in
State Electricity Commission of
Victoria v Rabel
(18 December 1996, Tadgell, Ormiston and Phillips JJA). The
judgements in that case make it clear that Their Honours regarded the
propositions they set out as applying equally to s109 of the 1995 Act and s44C
of the 1984 Act. I summarise those propositions as
Section 44C and s109 permit the making of
an interlocutory application at a preliminary stage. The procedure to be adopted
in determining
such an application is in the Tribunal's discretion. In
determining the procedure to be adopted, the Tribunal must bear in mind that
proceeding is not the full hearing of the complaint, and that the Act requires
the proceeding to be determined expeditiously.
At the Tribunal's discretion, the
proceeding may be determined on the pleadings and submissions alone, or also by
allowing the parties
to put forward affidavit material, or to give oral
evidence. The procedure that the Tribunal adopts is in its discretion and will
depend on the circumstances of the particular
If on a strike out application a
Complainant indicates to the Tribunal that the whole of the Complainant's case
is contained in the
material then put before the Tribunal by the Complainant,
the Tribunal is entitled to determine the application by asking whether,
the material before it, there is a question of real substance to go to a full
However, if a Complainant
indicates that there is other evidence he or she can call to support his claim
and the Tribunal on the application
does not permit that evidence to be called,
the Tribunal cannot determine the application on the basis that the
Complainant's material
contains the whole of his or her case (
, judgement of Phillips JA at pp17-20; with which Tadgell and Ormiston
JJA agreed).
An application to strike out a
complaint is similar to an application to the Supreme Court in civil proceedings
for summary dismissal
of those proceedings (see for example Rules of Supreme
Court Order 23.01 and Williams, Civil Procedure in Victoria, Volume 1, pp
3415-29). Both are applications designed to prevent abuses of process. However,
it is a serious matter for the Tribunal, on an interlocutory
proceeding which
will generally not involve the hearing of oral evidence, to deprive a litigant
of the chance to have his or her
complaint heard in the ordinary course
Rabel's case
, judgement of Tadgell JA pages 1 and
The Respondent bears the onus of showing
that the Complainant's case ought not be allowed to proceed.
To succeed on the application, the
Respondent must show the Complainant's case is obviously hopeless or could on no
reasonable view
justify relief. The Tribunal's power to strike out a complaint
should be exercised consistently with the objectives of the Act.
In dealing with an application to strike
out a complaint, a clear distinction must be drawn between the complaint or
claim itself
and the evidence which is to be given in support of it. A complaint
cannot be struck out as lacking in substance because it does
not in itself
contain the evidence that supports the claims it makes (
Rabel's case
judgement of Tadgell JA at page 3).
for determining whether a complaint is frivolous, vexatious, misconceived or
lacking in substance under s109 and s44C is
different from that applied in other
Anti-Discrimination jurisdictions, where similar words are used but in a
different legislative
context. It is similar to that applied by the Supreme
Court in civil proceedings in determining whether proceedings are frivolous,
vexatious or an abuse of process under Order 23.01 of the Supreme Court Rules. A
complaint can be struck out under s109 or s44C if
it is obviously unsustainable
in law or in fact. This will include, but is not limited to, a case where a
complaint can be said to
disclose no reasonable cause of action, or where the
Respondent can show a good defence sufficient to warrant the summary termination
of the complaint (
Rabel's case
, judgement of Ormiston JA pages
The Tribunal must be cautious before
striking out a complaint. The Tribunal must be satisfied that the claim is
obviously untenable,
undoubtedly hopeless, before it can be struck out
Rabel's case
, judgement of Ormiston JA pp
The Tribunal should not apply
technical, artificial or mechanical rules in coming to a view about the case
that a Complainant wishes
to advance (
Rabel's case
, judgment of Tadgell
JA at p3)."
I make one further comment. If the material before
the Tribunal shows that the parties are in dispute as to a fact in issue, and
not assist the Tribunal to resolve this dispute, then it is hard to see how
the Respondent will have satisfied the Tribunal that
the complaint is frivolous.
Rather, it should proceed to a full hearing, where the dispute can be resolved
by the giving and testing
of evidence.
3. The material before the Tribunal
In relation to these two complaints, the Tribunal has before it-
The complaints;
Particulars of Complaint and Defense;
A large amount of correspondence
between the parties and the Tribunal, including copies of correspondence between
the parties and
the Commission;
Correspondence between the parties and
the Tribunal in relation to this application;
Oral submissions by Ms
The material before the ADT on the application to strike
out the first complaint is summarised in its reasons for decision dated 18
1997. It struck out of the complaint the allegation that Wackenhut had failed to
provide Ms Bacon with a motor vehicle and the
allegation that Mr Gluning (one of
Wackenhut's managers) had spoken to Ms Bacon in severe and derogatory terms. It
did this on the
basis that it was not open to the Tribunal to infer
discrimination on the basis of sex from the material before the Tribunal. The
Tribunal did not strike out the other two allegations in the complaint. The
first of these was that, although Ms Bacon was a manager
of Wackenhut, she was
treated by Wackenhut as a supervisor rather than a manager, whereas male
managers were not treated like this.
The second was that Ms Bacon was required
to wear a company uniform, whereas other male Wackenhut managers were not.
In her Particulars of Complaint, which were filed with the ADT after its
decision on the application to strike out the first complaint,
Ms Bacon gives
further details of her allegations concerning her status and concerning the
requirement to wear a uniform. She states
that she was told that male managers
were not required to wear a uniform. She repeats the allegations in her second
complaint concerning
conversations with Mr Carmody of 1 and 3 May 1996. I deal
with these later. She claims general damages for anxiety, stress and
humiliation,
an apology and any other order that the Tribunal thinks fit.
Particulars of Defense were filed after the ADT's decision on the application
to strike out the first complaint. I treat these as
relating to both complaints.
I treat them as relating both to Wackenhut and to Mr Carmody. They allege that
Ms Bacon is constructing
arguments "to suit her desired outcome". They assert
that the allegations against Mr Arthur state that they occurred at a time when
Wackenhut had not acquired the business of Protection Management International
Pty Ltd (PMI), the company that was Ms Bacon's former
employer when she worked
at Melbourne Airport in the security screening area. They admit that, on one
occasion, Mr Rogerson (General
Manager of Wackenhut) referred to Ms Bacon as a
supervisor, but asserts that Mr Rogerson apologised to Ms Bacon for this
They assert that this apology was accepted by Ms Bacon. They assert
that Ms Bacon was only told that she may have to wear a uniform
consulted about its design, and that second line managers, both male and female,
adopted this uniform in June 1997. They
deny the other allegations in Ms Bacon's
complaints, and deny discrimination and victimisation.
I now turn to the second complaint. On a reading of this complaint as a
whole, it is clear that it impliedly refers to the first complaint.
I therefore
treat the first complaint as providing background and explanation for the
material contained in the second. The complaint
asserts that, in response to an
inquiry made by Ms Bacon to Mr Carmody in relation to her position, Mr Carmody
said that she was
"holding the EOC over his head" and proceeded to "yell" at her
for approximately 18 minutes. This conversation is alleged to have
occurred by
telephone on 1 May 1996. It is clear from the complaint that the conversation
concerned Ms Bacon's role, status and salary.
On Friday 3 May 1996, another
conversation is alleged to have occurred between Ms Bacon and Mr Carmody. She
describes him as speaking
to her in a "derogatory tone". She asserts that she
told him not to speak to her as though he were "on a parade ground" and that
"had had enough of him and his accusations and his attitude". She then asserts
that they continued discussion on a "more rational
level". She asserts that
these events would not have happened unless she had, some months earlier, lodged
a complaint with the Commission.
I summarise what I take to be Mr Carmody's response. This summary is based on
all the material before me. He denies victimisation.
He asserts that Ms Bacon
has made this complaint as part of a "personal agenda in relation to her
retirement". He asserts that, from
1995 onwards, Wackenhut had discussions with
Qantas concerning the restructuring of its screening and corporate security
responsibilities
at Melbourne Airport. The restructuring involved these tasks
being combined into a single section, with one manager at its head.
that the new structure was implemented from 9 April 1996. Ms Bacon, he asserts,
acted as manager of this combined section
but, although she was invited to do
so, did not apply for the permanent position when it was advertised. She was
offered a supervisor's
position in the control room operations area, but also
declined to apply for this. On 31 May 1996, her employment ceased. He asserts
that, on the occasions when the restructuring was discussed with her, she raised
allegations of victimisation and mentioned the Equal
Opportunity Commission. Mr
Carmody asserts that Ms Bacon has for a long time been confrontationist and
uncooperative with Wackenhut
management. She denies this assertion. She also
denies that there is any "personal agenda" in relation to her claim.
Should the complaint be struck out?
I have said that I deal with this application on the basis that it is
applying to have both complaints struck out. I deal first with
On this point, the application fails. The additional material filed with the
Tribunal since the first application was made does not
strengthen Wackenhut's
case to such an extent that a second application to strike out this complaint
should succeed. There is still
a dispute between the parties, and this dispute
should proceed to a full hearing where evidence can be given and tested.
I deal now with the second complaint. This is the first time on which the
Respondents have applied to strike out this complaint. All
that the material
before me shows is that the parties are in vigorous dispute as to almost all the
facts in issue. The matter should
proceed to a hearing, where evidence on those
facts can be given and tested.
The Respondents contend that both complaints are vexatious in that they are
made to pursue a "personal agenda" of the Complainant.
The Respondents assert
this, and the Complainant denies it. There is nothing in the material before me
that would lead me to conclude
that Ms Bacon is pursuing this complaint for a
purpose other than having her rights under the Act adjudicated. The Respondents
application
must also fail on this point.
I conclude that this application fails. Both parties were unrepresented and
there is no order as to costs.
The Particulars of Complaint and Particulars of Defense are not in a state
that will make it easy for the parties or the Tribunal
to understand what the
issues between the parties are, or the chronology of events which each party
asserts. The Particulars of Complaint
are somewhat confusing because they still
refer, it seems to me, to aspects of the complaint that the ADT struck out in
its decision
of 18 June 1997. The Particulars of Defense are somewhat confusing,
because they consist in large part, of correspondence between
the Respondents
and the Commission rather than themselves setting out, in clear and simple
terms, the Respondents answers to the
Complainant's allegations, and any
chronology of events on which they rely. I consider it appropriate to refer the
matter to a further
Compulsory Conference.
On an application under Section 109 of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
reading the complaints referred to in the reasons for decision as the first and
second complaints, and the other material
filed with the Tribunal by the
parties, and on hearing Ms Bacon in person, THIS TRIBUNAL DOES ORDER-
That this application is
That there is no order as
That the proceeding is to be listed
for a Compulsory Conference according to the Tribunal's usual
Dated this 24
day of August 1998.
Ms Cate McKenzie
Deputy President
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (38.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter