URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2025/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:36:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
QJF [2025] VMHT 4 (18 March 2025)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
. The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2025] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan hospital
Mode of hearing:
Videoconference
Tribunal members:
Troy Barty (Legal Member)
Robert Chazan (Psychiatrist Member)
Katherine George (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from the health service
With online video
With online video
Legal representative, Mental Health Legal Centre
With online video
Family member
With online video from the health service
Tribunal’s decision
The Tribunal made an inpatient
treatment order with a duration of 26 Weeks expiring on
14/08/2025.
This statement of reasons
After the hearing
you requested a written explanation of the Tribunal's decision. A copy of
statement of reasons will be given to your treating team as well as to
you and your legal
representative.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because your treating team
applied for another treatment order, you also applied to have your treatment
revoked (cancelled) and your community treatment order had been changed to
an inpatient treatment order. The Tribunal had to have
a hearing to decide
whether or not to make a treatment order.
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the
Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental health and wellbeing
principles (‘principles’).
Based on the information provided in
your hearing and our understanding of your circumstances, the Tribunal
identified the following
principles were particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
autonomy – your rights, dignity and autonomy are to be promoted and
protected. Your independence and being able
to maintain a good quality of life
is important. The Advance Statement of Preferences you recently made indicates
that you value
being able to do physical exercise, training and hobbies. Lucy
emphasised that being discharged from hospital would maintain your
dignity and
restriction – mental health services should be provided in the least
restrictive way, with the aim of promoting your recovery
and full participation
in community life. You and Lucy emphasised that being out of hospital was a
priority for you.
decision making – In your Advance Statement of Preferences you said that
you don’t like high doses of medication
and respond poorly to medication.
carers – You listed your three sisters as contact persons in your Advance
Statement of Preferences. Your mother attended
the hearing, and we heard that
the treating team had met with one of your sisters as well. We read that you
usually enjoy spending
time with your family and that they are supportive of
The Tribunal must also give proper consideration to your
rights under the
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’). Compulsory treatment engages and limits a
number of human rights protected under the Charter including
freedom from medical treatment without consent, and where a person is being
treated in hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your
rights protected under the Charter, and whether limits on them are reasonable,
the Tribunal
must thoroughly examine three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your file. We had your Advance Statement of
Preferences. You, your mother and your treating team spoke to
and answered
questions from the Tribunal in the hearing. Your legal representative also made
submissions on your behalf. This statement
of reasons does not summarise all
that information, but the next section refers to the information the Tribunal
relied on to make
its decision and explains why.
The Tribunal must have
regard to your views and preferences. From what you told the Tribunal and the
materials we read we understood
that while you find some medication helpful to
lower your anxiety, you don’t like high doses of medication. You told us
you had been in hospital for three and a half weeks and you were feeling
exhausted. You were frustrated that you were admitted to
hospital, as you were
not a danger to the community and it was not justified. You were ready to go
to be in hospital any longer. You wanted to
have a private psychologist and focus on your health for the next couple of
months. You
would listen to the advice of your private psychologist, but you
acknowledged that you find it hard to trust people in the mental
professions.
The Tribunal must also have regard to the views of your
carer. From what your mother told the Tribunal and the materials we read,
family want what is best for you and they want you to be safe. Your mother said
that you were now much calmer than before you
came to hospital, and in relation
to when you should leave, and where you would live when you left hospital, she
was accepting the
advice of the treating team.
4. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following
summarises what the Tribunal decided in relation to the four questions that need
to be answered under the compulsory
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
At the hearing, you told us that you agree that
you had mental health symptoms. You said you had a troubled upbringing, not from
your family did but as a result of others. When asked whether you
needed any mental health support you said you did, but not for
the reasons
stated. When we discussed that other people describe some of what you experience
as delusions, you said that some of
your abusers when you were a child were
members of a treating team, and you were not surprised that they defended them.
us you acknowledge interactions with mental health services since 2007
and that you have been diagnosed with schizophrenia in the
past. She said from
your perspective the current admission was a disproportionate response to your
current circumstances, and your
experiences were related to your past trauma.
The treating team told us that you have not had mental health treatment
for years, and when you are not treated adequately you have
delusions which
include beliefs about the CIA and joining the army. In the days before your
admission people around you were concerned
report said that you experience a disturbance in your thoughts. It said you
experience persecutory
delusional content and some grandiose delusions. For
example, you were very worried about being poisoned, your memory being wiped,
that you had been hypnotised and that there had been false allegations made
against you. The report included information about the
treating team's
observations of you while you were in hospital. That included documenting your
statements about experiencing abuse
when you were a young person, being selected
because of your high IQ, and the involvement of high-profile people in your
abuse. During
the hearing the treating team told the Tribunal they had not
dismissed your history of trauma, but their opinion, as contained in
and in medical records, reflected their view that you experience symptoms of
mental illness.
The Tribunal acknowledged that you do not agree with
the treating team’s opinion that some of your thinking and beliefs are
delusional, but ultimately it accepted the medical evidence and records which
describe your history of mental health episodes and
your symptoms when your
mental health deteriorates, which include well-systematised delusional beliefs.
The Tribunal accepted that
you experience significant disturbances in your
thoughts. This criterion is met.
(b) Does your mental illness mean you need to be treated now,
to try and prevent your mental health or physical health seriously
deteriorating;
or to prevent serious harm to you or someone else?
When you spoke with us at the hearing you said
that being brought to hospital was not justified as you were never a threat to
community. You said circumstances follow you and make things difficult for
you. You said the whole experience had been exhausting.
Lucy told the Tribunal
that you wanted a broad range of treatment to prevent a deterioration in your
health, that you were now accepting
the depot, and you were happy to attend the
clinic to have the injection.
The treating team’s report said that
you had a history of not taking antipsychotic tablets and that without treatment
your mental
health deteriorates. This affects not only your mental health, but
you make decisions and act in ways that are out of character and
not the way you
behave when you are well. The report said that when your mental health
declines, you isolate yourself and your ability
to look after yourself at home
also deteriorates. In the past, you said that you wanted to learn to shoot and
kill people, which
led to concerns that you could harm someone and that there
would be serious consequences for you too. You had recently ended your
agreement and wanted to relocate because you were suspicious of your treating
team, and the treating team were worried this
would lead to homelessness.
The Tribunal was satisfied that when you don’t have adequate
treatment, your mental health deteriorates, and your behaviour
changes. You
behave in ways and make decisions that are harmful to you. As a result, the
Tribunal was satisfied that you need treatment
now to prevent a serious
deterioration in your mental health and to prevent serious harm to yourself.
(c) Will you receive immediate treatment if you are on a
treatment order?
The treating team wanted to continue to provide
treatment. While you had been in hospital they had started a long-acting
medication, and the report said they would be happy to help you with
other resources including access to a psychologist in the community.
indicated that they wanted to use a depot medication to ensure that you received
consistent treatment.
It was clear the treatment would be provided if the
Tribunal made a treatment order.
(d) Is there a less restrictive means than a treatment order
that would enable you to receive immediate treatment?
During the hearing we discussed the opinion of
those around you that your mental health had improved since you came to
hospital. You
spoke about feeling drained by the whole experience. When asked
whether things had been going wrong or you had any difficulty managing
before you came to hospital, you said you were not sure what behaviour would
have been disturbing and that circumstances
follow you and make things
difficult. It was clear that your main focus was to get out of hospital, and
you were clear that you
did not want to stay any longer. In relation to your
accommodation when you left hospital, you said that you could go to your
You told the Tribunal that you were recently in
psychiatrist
and private psychologist in 2017 and 2018. Your preference was to
see the private psychologist rather than seeing the treating team
after you left
hospital. You said that you had to cancel an appointment with the psychologist
when you were hospitalised. You would
like to see them and would take their
recommendations. You told us you had received two depots while you had been in
hospital. Your
mother said you were much calmer than you were before you came
to hospital. She said you were normally a pleasant person but that
changes when
your symptoms recur. Your mother said she was accepting of the treating
team’s advice.
Lucy told the Tribunal that you were happy to
attend the clinic to have the injection. She said that while you had been
to have medication in the past, you had not outright refused
treatment. She noted that in the past you had engaged with a private
psychiatrist and private psychologist and that you were willing to accept
assistance on your own terms. You demonstrate insight,
acknowledge the
importance of having support, and you have family support as an additional
The treating team’s report said that voluntary treatment
had not worked in the past. Based on what had occurred over the last
their view was that a treatment order was the only way to ensure your received
treatment. The report said you had trialled
different medication in the past but
had stopped taking the medication. The treating team’s view was that
compulsory treatment
would enable you to recover and improve the chance of you
returning to your previous level of functioning.
The Tribunal
acknowledged that your priority was to leave hospital, and it was clear you
believed you did not need to be there. We
also accept that you would prefer
treatment from a private psychologist, however it was clear that relationship
was not established
at the time of the hearing. The Tribunal was satisfied that
you needed treatment, care and support and that without the right level
treatment and support in the past, your mental health and your quality of life
had deteriorated significantly. We took into account
that you had recently
commenced injectable medication which required monitoring, and that at the time
of the hearing there was no
clear discharge plan. We gave weight to your goals
to return to doing the sorts of things that were important to you in the longer
term, such as work, exercise and hobbies. Your recovery was important, and the
Tribunal concluded that a treatment order was the
least restrictive way for
treatment to be provided.
5. Decision
Given the Tribunal decided that all of the
compulsory treatment criteria applied to you the Tribunal made a treatment
Treatment in hospital or in the community
inpatient treatment order places the greatest limits on your rights protected
under the Charter. For this reason, the Act says
that the Tribunal can only
make an inpatient treatment order if it is satisfied that a person cannot be
treated in the community.
Lucy said that an inpatient treatment order was
excessive and disproportionate to your needs. You made it clear that you did not
to be in hospital and would leave if you could.
Your treating team
said that at the time of the hearing community treatment was not possible
because they needed time to see that
the medication was working as planned and
they were talking to your family and you about where you would live when you
left hospital.
The treating team still had some concerns about you acting on
your delusions and their view was that you needed to be in hospital,
for a few more weeks.
The Tribunal decided to make an inpatient
treatment order. We accepted the information before us that your mental state
had deteriorated
seriously before you came into hospital and that this had
disrupted your life and raised concerns from those around you. The Tribunal
an inpatient treatment order to allow the medication to be monitored for its
effectiveness, and so that discharge plans could
be put in place that would
avoid a rapid relapse and re-hospitalisation.
Length of the
Treatment Order
The Act sets a maximum duration of six months for
treatment orders. Your treating team requested a treatment order to run for 26
Taking into account that you had a long-term condition and had
only just recommenced treatment after a long period, the Tribunal considered
that you would need a treatment order for the foreseeable future. We made a
26-week order to support your recovery so that you could
level of functioning.
Twenty-six weeks is the longest this treatment
order can last. Your treating doctor must revoke your treatment order at any
if they believe the treatment criteria no longer apply.
determination: 14-02-2025
[Signed by the legal member]
Presiding member, on behalf
of the Tribunal division.
Date: 18 March 2025.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143 Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
Section 5 What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (545 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter