URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2025/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Connell v Silson [2025] VMC 16 (8 October 2025)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
No. R11527022
SEAN O’CONNELL
LISA SILSON
ATTORNEY-GENERAL FOR VICTORIA
Magistrate M H Thomas
DATE OF HEARING
19 September 2025
DATE OF DECISION
8 October 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
O’Connell v Silson
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VMC 16
CRIMINAL LAW – Extradition – Murder – s 83 and s 88
Service and Execution of Process Act 1992
(Vic) – Jurisdiction of the Magistrates’ Court of
APPEARANCES
For the Applicant
Sarala Fitzgerald
Victoria Police
For the Respondent
Felicity Gerry KC, with
Joanna Davidson, and
Louis Andrews
Women’s Legal Service Victoria
For the Intervenor
Sarah Keating
Victorian Government Solicitor’s Office
1 On the 21st July 2025 the Deniliquin
Local Court issued a number of warrants for the arrest of Ms Silson. Relevantly,
one of those
warrants was in relation to the crime of
2 Ms Silson was subsequently arrested in
Victoria pursuant to the NSW warrant and brought before this Court under
Service and Execution of Process Act
(hereinafter
The issue to be determined
3 Ms Silson has sought that this Court
exercise the power under
and remand her on bail to
4 At the original hearing of this matter I
expressed a preliminary view that this Court, when determining how to proceed
was (by virtue of
), bound by
and accordingly could not order Ms Silson be remanded on
5 At the conclusion of the hearing on the 19th
September 2025 I indicated that I had formed the view that this preliminary view
in fact incorrect. Rather, I have formed the view that s88(1)
does not pick up
as s88(1) adopts State laws with
respect to the decision whether to grant bail under s83(8)(a) (such as
thresholds and relevant considerations)
and does not extend to adopt State laws
restricting a Court’s jurisdiction to grant bail under those State laws.
The following
are my reasons in coming to this conclusion.
Relevant Legislation
6 Section 83 of the
entitled “Procedure after
apprehension”.
7 Section 83(8) of the
relevantly provides as follows:
“....if the warrant or a copy of the warrant is produced, the
magistrate must order:
(a) that the person be remanded on bail.....;or
(b) that the person be taken in custody or as otherwise as the magistrate
specifies, to a specified place in the place of issue of
the warrant
8 Section 88 of the
entitled “Law applicable to grant etc. of
9 It relevantly provides as
(1) Despite
subsection 68(1)
Judiciary Act 1903
the law of a
state with respect to the granting of bail applies in relation to a power under
this Division to grant bail to:
(a) a person apprehended in that State
as if the person had been apprehended under, or by the authority of, a law of
that State.
(2) The law of a State with respect to bail and matters related to bail
(including enforcement of bail) applies in relation to a person
who has been
remanded on bail in that State under this Division as if the person has been
remanded on bail to appear before a court
of that State.
10 Other relevant provisions of
include the following:
(11) The magistrate may suspend an order under paragraph 8(b) for a specified
(12) On suspending the order, the magistrate must order the person be
(a) on bail; or
(14) For the purposes of a proceeding under this section:
(a) the magistrate may adjourn the proceeding and remand the person on bail,
or in such custody as the magistrate specifies for the
adjournment
dealing with
persons under restraint also sets out that a magistrate may bail a person in
various circumstances.
Section 13(2)
states as follows:
Only the Supreme Court, or a court on committing the person for trial, may
grant bail to a person accused of murder.
Position and relevant
submissions of the parties
The submissions made on behalf of Ms
13 On behalf of Ms Silson the submission
was made that the provision in Section 88(1) of the
to the effect
that State law applied “with respect to the granting of bail” did
not pick up provisions which would have
the effect of removing the power of a
Magistrate to grant bail. Thus, it was said
not apply to prevent the grant of bail under s83(8)(a)
extradition warrant related to a charge of
14 It was further pointed out that the power
to grant bail in the context of an extradition warrant arises under the
itself, noting that the text of s88(1)
itself refers to
“a power under this Division to grant bail” and the power to grant
bail was set down in various circumstances
in both s83 and s84
15 In regard to the construction of the
words “with respect to the granting of bail” it was submitted, that
while these
words are capable of having a very wide import this does not mean
they must be given a wide meaning. Rather, it is submitted, the
protean and its particular meaning “must be ascertained by reference to
the nature and purpose of the provision in
issue and the context in which it
16 That read in the context of the provisions of
s83 and s84 and having regard to the purpose of the
, the words in
must be interpreted in a manner that the provision is not
inconsistent with the giving of power to the Magistrates Court to grant
17 Thus, it was submitted,
one should conclude that the words “with respect to the granting of
bail” in s88(1) mean with
respect to the thresholds and criteria with
respect to the decision whether bail ought to be granted. As was stated in the
submissions on behalf of Ms Silson:
“The purpose of s88 is to adopt frameworks to guide the making of
decisions about the granting of bail. It is not a provision
concerned with
18 This submission was reinforced with
reference to the relevant Law Reform Commission report and the explanatory
memorandum with
respect to the Bill.
19 Finally, it
was submitted that this Court was not bound by the decision of
Rose v Chief
Commissioner of Police
to conclude that by virtue of the interplay between
a person could not be extradited on
bail in relation to a charge of murder.
The submissions made on behalf of the Applicant
20 The Applicant submits that the words
“with respect to the grant of bail” is a phrase with a wide meaning
that should
not be read down. The Applicant points out that the phrase is a
“phrase capable of having a very wide
21 The Applicant submits that
is a law with “respect to the grant of bail” as
it confines the Courts that may grant bail where a person is accused
22 The Applicant further notes that the Law
Reform Commission considered it was appropriate that local bail laws apply
their constraints”.
significantly the Applicant relies on the decision of Hedigan J in
Chief Commissioner of Police
2000 VSC 281
and argues the following:
(a) That the decision
supports the proposition when exercising the power under s83
relation to extradition for murder the Magistrates Court has no power to grant
(b) That the Court is not bound by the decision
as the statements made by Hedigan J in relation to the application of
were not part of the ratio decidendi.
(c) Nevertheless, the Court should give significant
regard to those comments and what is said to be the reasoning process behind
The submissions made on behalf of the Attorney-General
24 As I apprehend it, the position on
behalf of the Attorney-General is that s83(8) of the
confers a power
on the Magistrates Court to grant or refuse bail independently of the power to
grant bail under
the power to grant bail arises under the
and not the
, the jurisdiction of the Magistrates Court is not subject to
26 Rather, s88(1) of the
simply picks up the statutory criteria in the
with respect to
the decision whether or not to grant bail. The submission on behalf of the
Attorney-General focuses on the words
in S88(1) which refers to the law of a
State with respect to the granting of bail. It is submitted that these words
demonstrate that
“only the statutory criteria under State law are picked
up and applied by section 88, so as to guide the grant or refusal of
27 A distinction is drawn on behalf of
the Attorney-General between the jurisdiction to grant bail (which is said to be
outside the
ambit of s88(1)) and the criteria for the grant of bail (which is
said to fall within its ambit). Accordingly, any restriction in
relation to the
power or jurisdiction to grant bail under the State Act would not be picked
28 Finally, it was contended that
does not stand for the proposition that s88(1)
picked up s13
rather that this was simply an assumption made by the parties in that
case so as to determine, if that was the case, whether the
Magistrates Court had
The decision in Rose v Chief Commissioner of
29 It is necessary to determine as a
preliminary question whether this Court is bound by the statements of Hedigan J
in relation to
the interplay between s88(1)
and, if not bound, should nevertheless consider and apply those comments in
determining the question before it.
Chief Commissioner of Police
[2000] VSC 281
Hedigan J heard a review under
in relation to an order that Mr
be extradited
for murder.
31 In that case His Honour considered
two issues. Relevantly one of the issues which fell to be determined was whether
the Magistrates
Court had jurisdiction under s83
in relation to an
extradition on murder.
32 The legal argument in
that case was
the Magistrates Court could not exercise the
power under s83(8)(a)
by virtue of
being picked
up by s88(1)
, whether the Magistrates Court thereby was precluded
from exercising jurisdiction to order extradition.
33 The argument was predicated on the assumption
was in fact picked up by s88(1)
. It appears
there were no submissions made in relation to whether this was in fact the
34 It was agreed by all the parties in the
present matter that the
ratio decidendi
of the decision did not include
any determination that in fact
was picked up by
s88(1) of the
. It was however submitted on behalf of the informant
that this Court should follow the obiter comments made in the decision in the
determination of that question.
35 Some of the
relevant passages of
are as follows:
15. “...It is common ground that the effect of
of that Act is that,
in the case of a charge of murder, only the Supreme Court, or a judge of it, and
the magistrate committing for
trial for murder, have the power to grant bail for
murder....”
“..Thus the contention was advanced that, having regard to the
provisions of
Service and Execution of Process Act
magistrate once he determines that the warrant is valid, must order that the
person be taken into custody or released on bail
I observe that the
magistrate has a choice and may select either option.”
16. “The submission in effect if this – that the consequence of
the limitation in the Victorian
as to what court or judicial
officer has power to grant bail on a murder charge is that, the extradition
magistrate not having the
power to admit to bail, the Magistrates Court has no
power to order extradition...”
It does not appear to have been in dispute that
magistrate at Moe dad not a committing Magistrate and could not lawfully have
granted bail by reason of
....There can be no doubt
that the Commonwealth Act was intended to operate in all States and Territories
and, as s88 indicates, to
permit State laws as to bail to have effect.
that effect surely must have been intended to relate to the grant or refusal of
bail, and not to impugn the jurisdiction to consider
and determine
extradition....The effect in my view, of s13 is merely to produce the self
evident effect, namely that the power to
grant bail is denied, not the
(emphasis added)
However, the consequence, in my view, is that the Magistrates Court is
not stripped thereby of jurisdiction to order extradition,
but only of the power
to grant bail.
(emphasis added)
36 It is clear that it was not a
necessary part of the process of reasoning to determine that the Magistrates
Court was so deprived
of power. This was merely assumed as part of the
37 Having regard to the foregoing, the
concession on behalf of the informant is rightly made.
the proposition that any restriction on the Magistrates Court’s power to
grant bail does to prevent it from ordering
extradition. It does not stand as
binding authority that s88(1)
picks up s13
deprive the Magistrates Court of exercising the power under s83(8)(a)
38 Thus, at its height, the obiter in
is to the effect that it can safely be assumed for the purposes of
argument that
would be picked up by s88(1)
that the power to grant bail in relation to murder (unless at the time of
committal) is denied.
39 Given the cogency of the
submissions before me I do not consider it in fact can be so safely assumed.
Statutory construction of the phrase “with respect to” in
the context of Section 88(1) SEPA
The process of statutory
construction
40 In the decision of
Project Blue Sky
Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
the plurality
stated as follows:
69. The primary object of statutory construction is to construe the relevant
provision so that it is consistent with the language
and purpose of all the
provisions of the statute. The meaning of the provision must be determined "by
reference to the language of
the instrument viewed as a whole".
Commissioner for Railways (NSW) v Agalianos
Dixon CJ pointed out
that "the context, the general purpose and policy of a provision and its
consistency and fairness are surer
guides to its meaning than the logic with
which it is constructed". Thus, the process of construction must always begin by
the context of the provision that is being construed.
70. A legislative instrument must be construed on the prima facie basis that
its provisions are intended to give effect to harmonious
goals. Where conflict
appears to arise from the language of particular provisions, the conflict must
be alleviated, so far as possible,
by adjusting the meaning of the competing
provisions to achieve that result which will best give effect to the purpose and
of those provisions while maintaining the unity of all the statutory
provisions. Reconciling conflicting provisions will often require
the court "to
determine which is the leading provision and which the subordinate provision,
and which must give way to the other”.
Only by determining the hierarchy
of the provisions will it be possible in many cases to give each provision the
meaning which best
gives effect to its purpose and language while maintaining
the unity of the statutory scheme.
71.Furthermore, a court construing a statutory provision must strive to give
meaning to every word of the provision. In
The Commonwealth v
. Griffith CJ cited
R v Berchet
to support the
proposition that it was "a known rule in the interpretation of Statutes that
such a sense is to be made upon the whole
as that no clause, sentence, or word
shall prove superfluous, void, or insignificant, if by any other construction
they may all be
made useful and pertinent". (
Construing the meaning of s88(1)
41 In order to properly determine the
parameters of the operation of s88(1) it is necessary to consider the operation
(and also s84
was the agreed position between the parties that in exercising the power under
section 83(8) of the
the Magistrates Court was exercising a distinct
power of bail rather than exercising a power under
43 As noted in the submissions on behalf of
the Attorney-General s88(1) refers to “...a power under this Division to
grant bail”.
This, it is said, and I accept, demonstrates that the power
to grant bail under s83(8) arises independently under the
derivatively from a State Bail law.
44 Accordingly,
any restriction upon the Magistrates exercise of that power arises by, and only
by, the mechanism of the application
of State laws through s88(1) of the
45 I am fortified in the position that
the exercise of the power under section 83
is distinct from the
exercise of the power to grant bail generally (and accordingly different
considerations may apply) given the
reasons of Hollingworth J in
[2020] VSC 719
46 As stated by Her Honour:
13. The bail applications were argued below as if the magistrate was
considering trial bail, rather than extradition bail.
22.It must also be remembered that these cases are concerned with whether or
not bail should be granted pending extradition to Queensland
applicants’ first appearance before the Queensland court. It is not the
function of this court (or the magistrate below)
to decide whether bail should
be granted until trial; that will be for the Queensland court to decide on any
bail application made
in that court.
The words “the law of a State with
respect to the granting of bail”
argued on behalf of the informant that the words “with respect to”
can have a wide meaning and extend such that
it simply requires a
“relevance or connection with the identified
48 However, as noted in the
submissions made on behalf of Ms Silson words such as “in respect
of” (which in my view is
synonymous with the expression “with
respect to”):
“...are ambulatory words and may be designed to cover a variety of
subjects and a variety of relationships between those subjects.
The nature and
breadth of the relationships they cover will depend on their statutory context
and purpose”
49 Contrary to the submissions made on
behalf of the informant, one should not assume that the phrase necessarily
connotes any law
with a connection to the identified subject namely the
“granting of bail”. In my view such an approach places too great
emphasis on the literal words at the expense of the context of those words and
the purpose of the legislation.
50 I accept the
submission made on behalf of Ms Silson and echoed on behalf of the
Attorney-General that there is nothing in either
the text of s88(1) nor the the
context or purpose of the
that suggests that State laws relating to
the jurisdiction of the Magistrates Court to grant bail under the exercise of
to grant bail under the
(as opposed to under the
) should be picked up by the words “with respect to the
granting of bail”.
51 I agree that the text
of s83(4),(8),(12) and (14) together with S84(5) and (6) unambiguously give the
power to grant bail to the
Magistrates Court under and pursuant to the
in various defined circumstances. The power is clear and independent
and is not derived from any power to grant bail under a State
Act. To put it
another way, the power and jurisdiction arising under those sections exist
without recourse to power or jurisdiction
derived from the
through the mechanism of s88(1).
52 Further,
pursuant to the words of s88(1)
the adoption of the State law is
predicated on the precondition that the Magistrates Court is exercising
power to grant bail
“...the law of a State with respect to the granting of bail applies
in relation to a power under this Division to grant bail.”
53 For s88(1) to operate the Magistrates
Court must already be exercising the jurisdiction whether to order extradition
on bail under
. Thus, State provisions which would have the
effect of removing the jurisdiction or power to grant bail under the
are not incorporated by the terms of s88(1).
54 Placing the words in Section 88(1) in the
context of other provisions of the Act it is important to note that Section
88(1) refers
to “the law of a State with respect to the granting of
bail” whilst Section 88(2) refers to “the law of a State
respect to bail and matters related to bail” a much wider
55 It appears therefore that there are 3
distinct notions contained in s88
ranging in width from narrowest to
(a) the law of a State with
respect to the granting of bail (s88(1))
(b) The law
of a State with respect to bail (s88(2))
of a State in relation to matters related to bail (s88(2))
56 It is important to note that the
latter two notions only apply where bail has been granted under the
However, the use of wider expressions in s88(2) suggests the expression in
s88(1) should be given a narrower rather than wider meaning.
As noted in Project
Blue Sky “a court construing a statutory provision must strive to give
meaning to every word of the provision”.
The words in s88(1) “with
respect to the granting of bail” thus cannot simply be synonymous with
being in “respect
view this distinction supports the position submitted on behalf of the Attorney
General. Had Parliament intended a wider
application in relation to s88(1) it
would have referred to “a law with respect to bail” rather than the
more limited
“a law with respect to the granting of
58 The question is what then follows
from the conclusion that the phrase “with respect to the granting of
bail” must carry
a more restricted meaning than “a law with respect
59 Considered in isolation I
accept it would be open to conclude that the phrase “with respect to the
granting of bail”
could cover not only any tests to be satisfied, or
criteria to be considered, in determining whether bail is to be granted but also
what pre-conditions must exist before bail may be granted.
60 But the phrase is not to be considered in
isolation. Rather, the text of the provision must be considered in the
legislative context.
Read contextually the picking of State laws with respect to
the granting of bail is predicated on the assumption that the Magistrates
in fact has power to grant bail. As stated in the section: “the law of a
State with respect to the granting of bail applies
in relation to a power under
this Division to grant bail”. The submission of the informant treats the
words relating to the
exercise of a power as if they were the equivalent to
whether there is a power.
61 The interpretation
urged on behalf of the informant appears contradictory, in that it is a
precondition to the adoption of the
State bail law under s88(1) that there is in
fact a power to grant bail being exercised under the
62 Having regard to the Law Reform
Service and Execution of Process
– Report No 40 I am
satisfied that it was specifically intended that a magistrate have a clear power
to order extradition on bail in order to ensure
flexibility to address all different circumstances that may arise.
63 In relation to the operation of s88(1) I have
had regard to the following passage from the Law Reform Commission report:
“Given the appropriateness of a flexible approach to that question, an
issue that arises is whether, as at present, the choice
as to the proper order
in the circumstances should be unguided in any way, or whether the relevant
officers should be directed to
have attention to the principles of a particular
law concerning the circumstances where non-custodial remand is
appropriate.”
64 In my view it is clear from the above
passage that s88(1) was intended to pick up State law as a guide to the decision
making process
as to whether extradition should be on bail (previously unguided)
rather than limit that power.
65 In rejecting the
adoption of separate Federal guidelines for the grant of bail on extradition the
Commission noted the following:
“There is no general federal law on the subject of bail
criteria which should guide a court’s decision
whether to remand in
custody or on bail pending continuation of the proceedings against the
“The commission has come to the view that it is not necessary to
establish federal procedure in this regard.
Such provisions would be
necessary if the laws of some or all of the States and Territories did not
provide an opportunity for persons
to obtain non-custodial remand on the
adjournment of proceedings against them.”
66 These extracts make it clear that in
no way was it intended that s88(1) would pick up State law such that it would
deprive the
magistrate of the power to extradite on bail. Indeed, the provisions
make clear that were that the case seperate federal bail laws
may need to be
promulgated.
67 While it was intended that State
laws be adopted including their constraints it is clear that this is a reference
to laws guiding
the determination of whether to grant bail (such as provisions
requiring applicant’s for bail to establish good cause for their
rather than laws trammelling the power/jurisdiction to consider the
68 Further, I accept that explanatory
memorandum supports the position that s88(1) was not intended to pick up States
laws to restrict
the jurisdiction/power to grant bail under the
opposed to guide the exercise of that power. The explanatory memorandum in
relation to s88 provides as follows:
“...provides that the law of a State with respect to the granting of
bail applies
in relation to the exercise of powers to grant
(Emphasis added)
69 I am satisfied that to conclude that
the words of s88(1) was intended to confine the jurisdiction under s83 or s84 of
would be contrary to the purpose of the legislation.
Further Considerations
70 It is also important to consider the
ramifications of adopting a wider interpretation of the phrase “the law of
a State with
respect to the granting of bail”. In one sense that phrase
could encapsulate many provisions of the
. As was pointed out by
Ms Keating on behalf of the Victorian Attorney-General, the interpretation
sought on behalf of the informant
does not provide any criteria for why
would be incorporated under that phrase and other provisions
would not. For instance
provides for an Appellate procedure
for the DPP to appeal the grant of bail to the Supreme Court which in salient
respects is inconsistent
with the review process set out in s86 of the
71 On behalf of the informant it was
submitted that:
“It creates no absurdity that the practical result of that interaction
is that bail decisions for the most serious charge of
murder are required to be
made in the State where the offence was allegedly committed.”
72 It should however be borne in mind, as
pointed out in
, that the exercise of the power under s83(8)(a) of
is only concerned with whether bail should be granted pending
extradition to the first appearance before the interstate court. It
function of the court considering s83(8)(a) or (b) to decide whether bail should
be granted until trial, that will be
for the interstate Court to decide. Once a
person is extradited from Victoria there is no role for the Victorian courts to
73 Further, it is important to bear in mind
does not preclude the grant of bail by the
Magistrates Court under
in all circumstances. Rather,
in relation to the grant of bail until trial it limits the power of the Court to
do so to except where
it is committing for trial. Thus, to apply
to restrict
the exercise of the power to grant bail under the
it is necessary to
apply part of
while ignoring the words “....or
a court committing a person for trial...” because such words are
impossible of application
to an exercise of power under s83
supports the position that s88(1) does not unequivocally “pick up”
74 For the reasons articulated I conclude
that when considering whether to exercise the power under section 83(8)(a) or
, section 88(1) of the
does not apply
as it is not in the relevant sense a law with respect to the
granting of bail. Thereby, the Magistrates Court is not precluded from
exercising the power under s83(8)(a) of the
in relation to an
interstate charge of murder.
Paragraphs 9 and 10 of
submissions dated the 15th September 2025.
R v Khazaal
[2012] HCA 26
(2012) 246 CLR 601
per French CJ
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (246 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter