URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2006/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
07-008 [2006] VMHRB 3 (7 July 2006)
In the review of P
An involuntary patient at
Clinic – Inner West Mental Health Service
[2006] VMHRB 3
Date of Hearing:
Board Members
Involuntary patient –
Mental Health Act 1986
Treatment Plan –
– wishes of patient –
– patient’s health and well-being –
alternative treatment –
- risks of treatment
The matter came to the Board by way of a review pursuant to
Act, which requires the Board to conduct a review of an extension of a community
treatment order within 8 weeks after the
order is extended. The community
treatment order was extended for the period 2 May 2006 to 1 May 2007. In
addition, at a previous
Board hearing on 9 December 2005, the Board ordered that
an early review of P’s involuntary status be undertaken.
Mr Condliffe submitted that P wanted to be discharged from the community
treatment order, or in the alternative, wanted his treatment
plan to be revised.
Secondly, the administration of Depo Provera is a more significant concern. The
administration of this medication
causes pain in P’s back, weakens his
legs and he is concerned about the long-term effects. P has now developed
osteoporosis.
He has been receiving Depo Provera since August 2001, and it
is important to consider the length of time that it is used as treatment.
early 2001, P was convicted of a sexual offence at the lower end of the scale.
Public protection as a factor is out of balance
with the seriousness of that
offence. If the Depo Provera is causing long term damage to P, that amounts to
punishment.
In relation to
section 19A
of the Act, subsection (2) requires
that the wishes of the patient be taken into account and it is clear what
P’s wishes are
with respect to the medications. It is arguable that the
treatment does not meet the criteria for sub-paragraph (c) of sub-section
The current treatment is not promoting P’s health and well-being. The
previous decision of the Board weighed P’s
health and well-being against
the public risk, and this is not the test.
Mr Condliffe submitted that
section 19A(2)(d)
has not been considered in that alternate drug and behavioural
treatments have not been taken into account. There are also concerns
respect to sub-paragraph (e) that the current treatment does not take into
account the significant risks associated with the
treatment. Mr Condliffe
referred the Board to another decision of the Board: In the review of 06-041
(unreported 9 September 2005).
According to the Board in this case,
section 19A
requires that the Board examines the process by which the treatment plan is
produced and due consideration should be given to the
patient’s wishes.
Condliffe submitted that
section 8(1)(e)
is not satisfied, and P could be
treated in a voluntary setting.
(1) Although
Section 19A(2)(a)
requires that the authorised psychiatrist must
take into account
the wishes of the patient, it does not require that the
treatment plan reflect or accede to the wishes of the patient. The nature
involuntary treatment order is commonly that the treatment required for a
patient is not what the patient would choose for
himself or herself. The Board
notes the evidence provided at the hearing that the treating team has regular
conversations with P
treating team’s refusal or failure to accede to P’s wishes
relation to his treatment required an order to remedy the situation and it was
satisfied that P’s wishes were taken into
account in determining his
treatment and in developing his treatment plan.
(2) On the available evidence, the Board accepted that the treatment team was
in contact with P’s mother and that the treatment
plan took into account
her wishes. The requirement of
section 19A(2)(b)
(3) Although not defined in the Act, the Board concluded that by the use of
the words “health or well-being”,
section 19A(2)(c)
contemplates
consideration of a broader range of matters not confined to the physical and
mental health of the patient. Whilst satisfied
that it is the health or
well-being of the patient that is to be considered, “well-being” can
include a range of matters
relevant to that patient such as, but not limited to,
their health, safety and quality of life.
In the Board’s view
section 19A(2)(c)
allows the Board to consider a
range of matters including the whole of the treatment, the aim of the treatment,
the balance between
therapeutic and effective treatment and any negative side
effects, and how the planned treatment affects the patient’s mental
physical health, their safety and quality of life. That is, it was appropriate
to consider whether, on balance, the proposed
treatment as a whole had the
objective of promoting and maintaining a patient’s overall health or
well-being.
(4) In P’s case, this was complex given the history of his mental
illness, behaviours which had resulted in a criminal conviction
in the past and
the side effects of the medication, in particular the continuing use of Depo
Provera. The Board concluded that the
treating team had considered P’s
history and took into account past treatment, the opinions and recommendations
contained in
the report by Dr P of Forensicare, the serious physical side
effects of his current treatment and P’s physical and mental state
time. On the evidence before it, the treatment plan which included the continued
use of 300mg of Depo Provera weekly appropriately
weighed up the positive and
negative effects on P’s mental and physical health and well-being. The
Board was satisfied that
P’s treatment was designed only to promote and
maintain P’s health or well-being.
(5) This conclusion also led the Board to be satisfied, for the purpose of
section 19A(2)(d)
, that the treatment plan as implemented by the treating team
took into account alternative treatments for P, including attempts to
dose of Depo Provera, analysis of previous attempts to cease this medication,
and changes to his anti-psychotic medication.
(6) The evidence of the treating team was that they were cognisant of the
side effects and risks associated with the current treatment.
They had arranged
appropriate specialist referrals to monitor and advise on treatment for
P’s conditions and the Board was
satisfied that this met the requirement
that the authorised psychiatrist take into account the matters in
(7) The Board was satisfied that the treatment plan took into account all of
the matters required by
section 19A(2).
Accordingly the Board was satisfied
that the authorised psychiatrist had complied with
in preparing the
Treatment Plan.
Review of involuntary status – The Board found the continued treatment
of P as an involuntary patient was necessary.
P was represented by Mr P Condliffe, Barrister briefed by Ms B Shalit of
the Mental Health Legal Centre Inc.
Date of Decision:
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE DETERMINATION
Waratah Clinic-Inner West Mental Health Service
HEARING NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
7 July 2006
DECISION UNDER REVIEW:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: T Barty
Psychiatrist Member: Dr S Kwong
Community Member: J Gardiner
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 7 July 2006:
Legal representative: Ms B Shalit, Solicitor, Mental Health Legal
Barrister: Mr P Condliffe
Doctor: Dr C
Patient's Mother: KP
Interpreter (Oromo language)
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary
patient subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
The Board therefore confirmed the community treatment order.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
7 July 2006
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P continues to be treated as an involuntary patient subject to a
community treatment order.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
1. Clinical file of P.
on Involuntary Status dated 3 July 2006, prepared by Dr C and presented to the
Plan of P dated 6 July 2006, prepared by CTT and presented to the Board.
4. Oral evidence at the hearing.
if, having regard to the criteria specified in
, the Board
is not satisfied that the continued involuntary treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to an community
treatment order is necessary, the
Board must order that the person be discharged from the community treatment
order. Therefore, the
Board considered:
1. Does P appear to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by P being subject to a community treatment
of P's mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P necessary for his health or
safety (whether to prevent a deterioration
in his physical or mental condition
or otherwise) or for the protection of members of the public; and
P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of his freedom of decision and action?
, the Board must review the patient's treatment plan to
determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
2. The plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental
health service.
DISCUSSION:
Background:
P was admitted to Thomas Embling Hospital on 11 April 2001, following
criminal charges of assault and indecent assault. On 19 November
received a bond in the Melbourne Magistrates' Court and became subject to an
involuntary treatment order on the same date.
He was thereafter a resident at
AMHRU until 16 May 2005, when he transferred to Norfolk Terrace Community Care
Unit (CCU) on a community
treatment order.
The matter came to the Board by way of a review pursuant to
, which requires the Board to conduct a review of an extension of a community
treatment order within 8 weeks after the order is extended.
The community
treatment order was extended for the period 2 May 2006 to 1 May 2007. In
addition, at a previous Board hearing on 9
December 2005, the Board ordered that
an early review of P’s involuntary status be undertaken. This matter was
originally listed
for hearing on 23 June 2006. At that time the hearing was
adjourned to allow P to obtain legal representation
Submissions on behalf of P:
Mr Condliffe submitted that P wanted to be discharged from the community
treatment order, or in the alternative, wanted his treatment
plan to be revised.
P acknowledged that he has a mental illness, but was concerned about the
treatment he was receiving. There were
two main concerns. Firstly, that the
Clozapine was causing adverse reactions. P states that he vomits each day after
he takes this
medication. He has also suffered a loss of appetite and dizziness.
Secondly, the administration of Depo Provera is a more significant
concern. The
administration of this medication causes pain in his back, weakens his legs and
he is concerned about the long-term
P’s mother is willing to
take him to her home. P is in daily phone contact with his mother and they have
regular visits. They
have a good relationship. Clozapine is improving his mental
condition but is causing other problems. He has been receiving Depo Provera
since August 2001, and it is important to consider the length of time that it is
used as treatment.
In relation to
section 19A
, subsection (2)
requires that the wishes of the patient be taken into account and it is clear
what P’s wishes are with respect
to the medications. It is arguable that
the treatment does not meet the criteria for sub-paragraph (c) of sub-section
(2). The current
treatment is not promoting P’s health and well-being. The
previous decision of the Board weighed P’s health and well-being
the public risk, and this is not the test.
Mr Condliffe submitted that
section 19A(2)(d)
has not been considered in that alternate drug and behavioural
treatments have not been taken into account. There are also concerns
respect to sub-paragraph (e) that the current treatment does not take into
account the significant risks associated with the
treatment. Mr Condliffe
referred the Board to another decision of the Board: In the review of 06-041
(unreported 9 September 2005).
According to the Board in this case,
section 19A
requires that the Board examines the process by which the treatment plan is
produced and due consideration should be given to the
patient’s wishes.
There are concerns that P has not always understood what was happening, and
there is an acknowledged language difficulty. There is
also the length of time
that he has received the Depo Provera. In early 2001, P was convicted of a
sexual offence at the lower end
of the scale. Public protection as a factor is
out of balance with the seriousness of that offence. If the Depo Provera is
long term damage to P, that amounts to punishment. P has now developed
osteoporosis.
The Board should be guided by the United Nations principles.
Mr Condliffe submitted that
section 8(1)(e)
is not satisfied, and P could be
treated in a voluntary setting.
In his final submissions, Mr Condliffe
stressed to the Board the length of time that P had been treated with Depo
Provera, and that
he was not receiving specialised treatment for his complex
condition of schizophrenia with sexual disinhibition as the unit does
expertise in this area. Given that they do not have that expertise, he
questioned whether they have taken into account all
of the alternatives
available and the harm being done to P’s long term health, and how that is
weighed against the community
good or community safety. Why had P not been
referred to Forensicare or somewhere else for more frequent consideration? He
was being met. His concern was that the
doctor and the case manager can only point to limited sexually disinhibited
behaviour, and
that this apparently warranted an increase in medication and the
introduction of a new drug which also has long term effects. Mr
regards P’s health at severe risk because of his treatment. There has to
be more than a risk to the community, and
there has to be a more holistic
approach. P acknowledges his mental illness and the need for treatment, but the
Board should look
at that treatment. P could be treated in a less restrictive
environment and his mother can provide that.
of treating team:
In response to the Board’s questions, Dr C advised that he had been
P’s treating doctor since February 2006. He noted
that when P was at
Thomas Embling, the main concern was P’s sexually disinhibited behaviour,
which was part of his mental illness.
He decided that they needed to review the
treatment, namely Depo Provera and Haloperidol. One of the concerns was that the
was not resolving the symptoms. P exhibits behavioural
disorganisation, poor self-care, poor concentration and attention. The voices
and paranoia had been successfully treated but he was still quite disabled. The
second concern was the physical side effects. P has
continuing treatment for his
osteoporosis through the endocrinology clinic at the Royal Melbourne Hospital.
The treating team thought
that they could try alternate treatments and met with
P and his mother about Clozapine and started him on that medication in May
this year. They were trying to get further resolution and possibly obviate the
need for the Depo Provera if the sexually disinhibited
behaviour improved. They
explained that after some time on Clozapine they would consider withdrawing the
anti-psychotic medication
and the Depo Provera.
Since then, P has reported side effects and they have weekly or fortnightly
discussions about a return to the former treatment. They
are still negotiating
with P. P is unwilling to go back to injections or tablets. Vomiting is not a
well-known side effect of Clozapine.
He is also heavily constipated and this is
a known side effect.
When asked about the withdrawal of Depo Provera, Dr C said that the dose had
been reduced to 250mg and at that time there was a re-emergence
of sexually
disinhibited behaviour including touching staff members inappropriately.
CTT told that Board that she created a graph to monitor and record P’s
sexually disinhibited behaviour in the context of changes
to his medication.
Before the Depo Provera was introduced at Thomas Embling Hospital there were
many instances of sexually disinhibited
behaviour. After the introduction of the
medication there was a reduction in that behaviour. In 2002 the Depo Provera was
for 5 – 6 months. It was restarted at AMHRU because of an increase
in sexually disinhibited behaviour. He was touching his
genitals in public and
was over-familiar with other patients and staff (male and female). The graph
shows the effect of the Depo
Provera. CTT said that she attended the Forensicare
appointment because she had done the graph and was nervous about the reduction
in Depo Provera. The dose was reduced to 250mg late last year. In January or
February 2006 staff reported that P was walking around
with his fly undone and
he came to the office with only a doona wrapped around him. He stares at staff
and when he was at a friend’s
house, the police were called to ask him to
leave. He also touches himself inappropriately when speaking to others. It was
time that they increased the Depo Provera to 300mg.
Upon questioning from the Board, Dr C said that the onset of the
hyper-sexuality and the schizophrenia was at the same time and that
is why they
had tried Clozapine. They had tried anti-nausea tablets and P also vomited them
out. They had many discussions with P
Dr C told the Board that P has never acknowledged that he has a mental
illness, or that he needs treatment. The difficulty is his
wish not to be on any
treatment. P has made it clear that he believes that he would not become unwell
if treatment stopped.
On the question of whether P could be treated in a less restrictive manner,
in their experience P’s self care and organisation
still need a lot of
assistance. He needs a lot of supervision for his treatment. They are more
confident with injections because
there has been at least one example of P
attempting to hide the tablet.
CTT said that P has poor hygiene. He has been asked to stay away from a
restaurant and there is a long way to go with independent
living skills. They
are helping him with his budget and cleaning skills.
Upon questioning from Mr Condliffe, Dr C said that Depo Provera is not an
unusual treatment. It is established practice. He acknowledged
that they had
less experience than Forensicare in treating patients with that medication. Mr
Condliffe put to Dr C that Forensicare’s
recommendations made in the
report of 12 September 2005 indicated support for a gradual withdrawal of Depo
Provera and that Dr C’s
report indicates something to the contrary in that
it states: “Recent review by Forensicare support (sic) ongoing treatment
with anti-psychotic and Depo Provera.” Dr C said that the Forensicare
recommendation went on to say that any hint of sexually
inappropriate behaviour
should immediately result in P being recommenced on previous levels of Depo
Provera and this is what happened.
Mr Condliffe asked Dr C about review of P by
Forensicare and Dr C said that in his view an annual review by Forensicare was
appropriate.
Mr Condliffe made the point that the current treatment plan for P
does not address the plan to withdraw Depo Provera. When questioned,
that the involvement of the state trustee was an interim measure, and he did not
agree that P acknowledges that he has
a mental illness, because in every
conversation he clearly states that he does not have a mental illness.
Evidence of P:
P told the Board that he has had too many years on the medication. If he were
to be responsible for his own treatment he would live
with his mother. He needs
treatment. He has asked his mother about traditional medicine and his mother has
said that after some time
and if he is well they can use that.
When asked what treatment he requires, P said that he would like to take
tablets for his bones and his diabetes. If he is not on tablets
he gets unwell.
He would take Risperdal 3mg. He would take the Depo Provera if it was a tablet
but the injections hurt his bones.
The medication makes him feel unwell. He is sleeping all day. Neither drug
In response to CTT’s evidence that P was walking around with his fly
undone, P told the Board that his fly did not work. On
the occasion when he came
to the office wrapped in the doona, he stopped when the staff told him to do so.
In relation to the police
being called to his friend’s house, he said that
he went to visit the woman and she had taken drugs. She asked for money and
wanted to make trouble for him. He visits too often.
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to an community treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met. The
Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Section 8(1)(a)
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board considered the exclusionary criteria in
and has decided that
these were not relevant in this case.
Dr C’s report indicated that the diagnosis for P was Schizophrenia. His
report and his evidence indicated that P’s condition
was characterised by
a disturbance of thought, perception and mood. In the past his symptoms have
included formal thought disorder,
auditory hallucinations, disorganised
behaviour and sexually disinhibited behaviour. Dr C’s report stated that
these symptoms
had resolved with (or partially responded to) the treatment.
P’s legal representatives did not dispute that P had a mental illness.
In P’s evidence to the Board he stated that he
had a mental illness,
although Dr C told the Board that P repeatedly denies that he has a mental
The Board noted the evidence from P’s clinical file and the evidence
from Dr C and was satisfied that there was a documented
history of mental
illness. The
defines a person as mentally ill if they have a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory. If the person has
condition characterised by a significant disturbance of any one of those, they
satisfy the legal test of appearing to be mentally
On the evidence before it, the Board is satisfied that P has a mental
illness, and appears to be mentally ill.
Accordingly this criterion was met.
Section 8(1)(b)
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that
treatment be obtained by P being subject to an involuntary treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain
and suffering which it causes.
The Board was satisfied that P’s current medical condition is such that
he requires treatment, including the administration
of medication and monitoring
of his mental state. On the basis of his mental illness and the symptoms
experienced by P, he requires
treatment that can be obtained by being subject to
a community treatment order.
Accordingly this criterion was met.
Section 8(1)(c)
Because of P's mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P necessary
for his health or safety (whether to prevent a deterioration
in his physical or
mental condition or otherwise) or for the protection of members of the
Dr C’s evidence was that P is at risk of accidental injury and assault
by others due to his disorganised and disinhibited behaviour
if he becomes
unwell, and that he is at risk of re-offending if his mental state deteriorated.
The Board noted that P clearly expressed his dislike for the current
medication, and that in addition to treatment for his mental
illness, P requires
treatment for diabetes. Given his attitude to medication, the Board was
satisfied that if he were not subject
to the community treatment order, there
was a risk of deterioration in his mental state. The consequences of such a
deterioration
would be a risk to P’s physical health and safety, and the
safety of members of the public.
Accordingly this criterion was met.
Section 8(1)(d)
Has P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary treatment for
the mental illness?
In considering whether a person is in fact consenting to treatment, the Board
must be satisfied that the person is able to consent
to treatment. In
of 99-567 (unreported MHRBD 13 November 1998)
, the Board
expressed this as follows:
“To be able to consent a patient must be aware of the extent of
their illness and be aware of its nature to the extent they
can recognize those
aspects of behaviour that are symptomatic of the existence of that illness. In
addition they must understand
the changes in symptoms that the treatment is
intended to bring about.”
Although P stated in his evidence to the Board that he accepted that he had a
mental illness and that he needed treatment, on questioning
he displayed
considerable ambivalence to his current psychiatric medication and he lacked
understanding of what treatment would be
required to treat his condition.
P’s evidence reflected very limited insight into his condition. The Board
concluded that P
was not fully aware of the nature and extent of his illness,
nor the purpose of the treatment.
Accordingly the Board found that P did not have capacity to consent to the
necessary treatment and this criterion was satisfied.
Section 8(1)(e)
Is P unable to receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a
manner less restrictive of his freedom of decision and action?
On behalf of P, Mr Condliffe submitted that P could receive adequate
treatment in a manner that was less restrictive. It was submitted
mother was prepared to have P at home and that they enjoyed a close
relationship.
The evidence of the treating team also stated that P had regular contact with
his family and that he had reengaged well with his family.
The treating team
also stated however that P required considerable support and supervision. P
required monitoring of his mental state,
his treatment, including all
medication, and assistance with daily living skills.
The Board has accepted that P has very limited insight into his condition and
the need for ongoing treatment, and was concerned that
without the compulsion
that the community treatment order provides, he would not be able to receive the
treatment that he requires.
Accordingly the Board was satisfied that P would not receive adequate
treatment for his mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of his freedom of
decision and action.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient's treatment plan, the Board must be satisfied that the
requirements of
have been met. The Board considered each of
the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with sl9A in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
P’s legal representatives asserted that the treating team had not
complied with
section 19A
in that P’s wishes had not been taken into
account, the treatment being carried out was not only to promote and maintain
health or well-being and that alternative treatments had not been
considered.
Section 19A(1)
requires that the authorised psychiatrist must prepare, review
on a regular basis and revise as required, a treatment plan for each
Section 19A(2)
states that in preparing reviewing and revising a treatment plan,
the authorised psychiatrist must take into account six matters.
Relevantly,
these include:
- The wishes of the patient as far as they can be ascertained (sub-paragraph
- Whether the treatment to be carried out is only to promote and maintain the
patient’s health or well-being (sub-paragraph
- Any beneficial alternative treatments available (sub-paragraph (d)); and
- The nature and degree of any significant risks associated with the treatment
or any alternative treatment (sub-paragraph (e)).
If the Board is satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has
not complied with
section 19A
, it may order the authorised psychiatrist to
revise the treatment plan.
P’s Treatment plan dated 6 July 2006 listed P’s medication and
other matters principally relating to increasing independence
with activities of
daily living for P. It said that supervision of medication was to continue.
The submissions on behalf of P focussed on the serious side effects that P
was experiencing as a consequence of his medication and
in particular the long
term use of Depo Provera. P was concerned about the side effects of the Depo
Provera and the Clozapine and
it was submitted that alternate treatment methods
had not been properly considered, and additionally the requirement that the
treatment was only for the purpose of promoting and maintaining
P’s health or well-being was not met.
section 19A(2)(a)
requires that the authorised psychiatrist must
take into account
the wishes of the patient, it does not require that the
treatment plan reflect or accede to the wishes of the patient. The nature
involuntary treatment order is commonly that the treatment required for a
patient is not what the patient would choose for
himself or herself. The Board
notes the evidence provided at the hearing that the treating team has regular
conversations with P
treating team’s refusal or failure to accede to P’s wishes
relation to his treatment required an order to remedy the situation and it was
satisfied that P’s wishes were taken into
account in determining his
treatment and in developing his treatment plan.
On the available evidence, the Board accepted that the treatment team was in
plan took into account her
wishes. The requirement of
section 19A(2)(b)
With respect to
section 19A(2)(c)
and the question of whether the treatment
to be carried out was only to promote and maintain P’s health or
well-being, the
Board noted the submissions and concerns surrounding P’s
lengthy treatment with Depo Provera. It was submitted that the earlier
decision of 9 December 2005 in relation to P had imposed and/or given undue
weight to protection of members of the public as
a factor in this provision.
Although not defined in the
, the Board concluded that by the use of the
words “health or well-being”,
section 19A(2)(c)
contemplates
consideration of a broader range of matters not confined to the physical and
mental health of the patient. Whilst satisfied
that it is the health or
well-being of the patient that is to be considered, “well-being” can
include a range of matters
relevant to that patient such as, but not limited to,
their health, safety and quality of life.
In the Board’s view
section 19A(2)(c)
allows the Board to consider a
range of matters including the whole of the treatment, the aim of the treatment,
the balance between
therapeutic and effective treatment and any negative side
effects, and how the planned treatment affects the patient’s mental
physical health, their safety and quality of life. That is, it was appropriate
to consider whether, on balance, the proposed
treatment as a whole had the
objective of promoting and maintaining a patient’s overall health or
well-being.
In P’s case, this was complex given the history of his mental illness,
behaviours which had resulted in a criminal conviction
in the past and the side
effects of the medication, in particular the continuing use of Depo Provera. The
Board concluded that the
treating team had considered P’s history and took
into account past treatment, the opinions and recommendations contained in
report by Dr P of Forensicare, the serious physical side effects of his current
treatment and P’s physical and mental state
over time. On the evidence
before it, the treatment plan which included the continued use of 300mg of Depo
Provera weekly appropriately
weighed up the positive and negative effects on
P’s mental and physical health and well-being. The Board was satisfied
P’s treatment was designed only to promote and maintain P’s
health or well-being.
This conclusion also led the Board to be satisfied, for the purpose of
section 19A(2)(d)
, that the treatment plan as implemented by the treating team
took into account alternative treatments for P, including attempts to
dose of Depo Provera, analysis of previous attempts to cease this medication,
and changes to his anti-psychotic medication.
The evidence of the treating team was that they were cognisant of the side
effects and risks associated with the current treatment.
They had arranged
appropriate specialist referrals to monitor and advise on treatment for
P’s conditions and the Board was
satisfied that this met the requirement
that the authorised psychiatrist take into account the matters in
The Board was satisfied that the treatment plan took into account all of the
matters required by
section 19A(2).
Accordingly the Board was satisfied that
the authorised psychiatrist had complied with
in preparing the Treatment
Section 35A(1)(b)
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
The plan was being implemented by the mental health service. As there were no
apparent barriers to its implementation, the Board was
satisfied that the plan
is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
criteria were met, the Board made the determination set out
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (97.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter