URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/989.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Adspace Outdoor Pty Ltd v Yarra Ranges SC (Corrected) [2025] VCAT 989 (10 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. P130/2025
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. YR-2024/614
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
(Vic); Review of the refusal to grant a permit; Construct and put up
for display of an Electronic, Major Promotion, Sky sign; Yarra
Ranges Planning
Scheme; Commercial 1 Zone; Clause 52.05 ‘Signs’; Visual clutter and
visual disorder.
Adspace Outdoor Pty Ltd
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Yarra Ranges Shire Council
REFERRAL AUTHORITY
Head of Transport Victoria
SUBJECT LAND
East Ridge Drive (CM 2 PS544666)
CHIRNSIDE PARK VIC 3116
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
21 August 2025
DATE OF ORIGINAL ORDER
10 November 2025
DATE OF CORRECTION ORDER
13 November 2025
Adspace Outdoor Pty Ltd v Yarra Ranges SC (Corrected) [2025] VCAT 989
to clause 64 of Schedule 1 of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(Vic), the permit application is amended by including the following
permit requirement, in addition to an ‘electronic sign’
‘major promotion sign’:
Clause 52.05-11 – Construct or put up for display a ‘sky
No permit granted
application P130/2025 the decision of the responsible authority is
planning permit application YR-2024/614 no permit is
APPEARANCES
For applicant
Jane Sharp, of Counsel, instructed by Zoe Parlai, Spire.
They called the following witnesses:
David Song,
Director, Song Planning Pty Ltd.
Stan Zaslavsky,
Director, Eagle Vision.
For responsible authority
Neda Malekzadeh, town planner,
Yarra Ranges Shire Council, and
Berger, planning advocate, Hatch Planning Pty Ltd.
For referral authority
No appearance.
INFORMATION
Description of proposal
Construct and put up for display of an electronic, major promotion, sky
Nature of proceeding
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
(Vic) – to review the refusal to grant a permit.
Planning scheme
Yarra Ranges Planning Scheme.
Zone and overlays
Commercial 1 Zone (‘C1Z’).
Permit requirements
Clause 52.05-11: To construct or put up for display a sign in
clause 52.05-11, comprising:
Major Promotion
Key scheme policies and provisions
Clauses 11, 15, 34.01, 52.05, and 73.02.
Land description
The site is located on the eastern side of Maroondah Highway, on the
southern side of East Ridge Drive.
The site is on a common property area that forms part of the East Ridge
Drive Corporate Business Complex. That complex includes a
three storey
commercial building set back between 30-50 metres from Maroondah Highway.
The land on the northern side of East Ridge Drive is the Chirnside
Lifestyle Centre. It includes a range of commercial premises including
convenience restaurants and retail premises such as furniture sales.
Fletcher Road forms the northern boundary of the Chirnside Lifestyle
Land description
(continued)
The land on the eastern and western sides of Maroondah Highway is a
combination of C1Z and Mixed Use Zone (‘MUZ’). Much
of this land is
developed with commercial buildings and uses. The vacant strip of land along
the western side of Maroondah Highway
opposite the site is zoned MUZ. An
escarpment behind the MUZ rises up to a residential area to the west.
Tribunal inspection
An unaccompanied inspection was undertaken after the hearing.
Figure 1: Site and surrounding
WHAT IS THIS PROCEEDING ABOUT?
Outdoor Pty Ltd (‘applicant’) is seeking a planning permit to
construct and display a sign on the land at East
Ridge Drive (CM2 PS544666)
Chirnside Park (‘site’).
proposed sign comprises a single sided display panel that is 12.66 metres wide
and 3.85 metres high. It is to be mounted on a
pole so that the top of the
display panel will be 8.95 metres above the ground level. The sign is to be
illuminated using LED lighting
across the display panel area.
sign fits the definitions for an ‘electronic sign’, ‘major
promotion sign’ and ‘sky sign’
under clause 73.02 of the Yarra
Ranges Planning Scheme (‘Scheme’). A permit is required for all of
these types of signs.
Yarra Ranges Shire Council (‘Council’), refused to grant a permit
for the proposal. Its grounds of refusal relate
to the sign resulting in
excessive visual clutter, visual bulk, and a proliferation of signage, and that
the sign fails to satisfy
the policies and provisions at clauses 15.01-1S,
52.05-8, and 65 of the Scheme.
applicant has sought this review of the Council’s decision. The applicant
submits that:
Proposal is consistent with the decision guidelines of clause 52.05-8;
an appropriate outcome having regard to the commercial zoning and setting of the
subject land in an activity centre located
on a busy arterial road;
sign will improve the overall presentation of, and make a positive contribution
to, the Chirnside Park activity centre, adding
to the vibrancy and character of
the surrounding environment;
will not result in the proliferation of signage, unacceptable visual clutter or
a disorder of signage;
will not obstruct any significant viewlines, vistas or heritage buildings;
will not dominate the skyline;
will not have an unreasonable impact on the amenity of any property or the area
by way of light spillage or visual bulk; and
Proposal will not result in unacceptable traffic
support of its application, the applicant relies on the evidence of David Song
in relation to town planning, and Stan Zaslavsky
in relation to visual
Tribunal must decide whether a permit should be granted and if so, what
conditions should be applied.
key issues to be decided relate to:
Will any visual
impact of the sign when viewed from Maroondah Highway be acceptable?
Will any visual
impact of the sign when viewed from nearby residential areas be
acceptable?
find that the visual impact of the sign when viewed from Maroondah Highway will
contribute to excessive visual clutter and visual
disorder. For this reason, I
find that the proposed sign is unacceptable and that no permit should be
granted. My detailed reasons
PROCEDURAL ISSUES AND RULINGS
Amendment of permit application
the commencement of the hearing I confirmed with the parties that the proposed
sign is also a ‘sky sign’, in addition
to an ‘electronic
sign’ and ‘major promotion sign’. I granted leave to, and the
applicant sought an amendment
to the permit application to include the permit
requirement for a ‘sky sign’. I have included an order amending the
permit application accordingly.
Amendment VC294
the hearing, Amendment VC294 to all Victorian planning schemes was gazetted.
This amendment amends the sign provisions at clause
52.05 of the Scheme. The
amendments exempt specified signs from planning permit requirements and remove
default permit expiry dates
for most signs, except for major promotion signs and
promotion signs that promote matters not on the site.
am satisfied that the signs that were exempted from the planning permit
requirements as a result of Amendment VC294 do not include
the sign types that
comprise the proposal.
I have decided to refuse to grant a permit for the proposal, I have not sought
further submissions from the parties on any other
implications of Amendment
VC294 for this application.
WHAT ARE THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS?
regard to the purpose and decision guidelines of the sign provisions at clause
52.05, relevant considerations relate to, among
other things:
compatibility of the sign with the amenity and visual appearance of the area;
whether the sign
will contribute to excessive visual clutter or disorder;
the character of
impacts on views
and vistas;
the relationship
to the streetscape, setting, or landscape;
the effect of
the proposed major promotion sign;
the locational
principles that must be taken into account in relation to major promotion
site is within a commercial zone and within the Chirnside Park Major Activity
Centre. The site is adjacent to a more robust commercial
area where a range of
signs, including internally illuminated and pole/sky signs, are located. The
Fletcher Road and East Ridge Drive are typical
of the types of signs commonly seen in commercial areas, activity centres, and
highways. Major promotion signs are encouraged in commercial and
industrial locations in a manner that complements or enhances the
character of
this context, I am not persuaded by the applicant’s submissions that the
will improve the
overall presentation of, and make a positive contribution to, the Chirnside Park
activity centre, adding to the vibrancy
and character of the surrounding
environment; and
will not result
in the proliferation of signage, unacceptable visual clutter or a disorder of
this regard I am not persuaded by David Song’s evidence that he
‘do[es] not consider that the proposed sign will contribute
to or result
in ‘visual clutter’ or
Song’s reasoning includes that:
The sign will not overlap an existing sign or appear disorderly. It is separated
from existing signage.
acknowledge that the sign is physically separated from existing signage located
along Maroondah Highway to the north-east of East
Ridge Drive. However, when
viewed from a vehicle or from the footpath on the eastern side of Maroondah
Highway, when travelling
south-west, the sign will be viewed in the context of
the existing signage along the frontage of the Chirnside Lifestyle Centre,
between Fletcher Road and East Ridge Drive.
existing signage in this commercial area is extensive. The Council’s
written submission includes details of this signage.
In summary, this
the Chirnside
Lifestyle Centre Sign which is a business identification pylon sign;
a pylon sign for
McDonald’s which is a business identification sign;
a pylon sign for
KFC which is a business identification sign;
identification sign for Dan Murphy’s which consists of their logo on the
building façade;
a pylon sign for
Taco Bell which is a business identification sign; and
several business
identification signages incorporated within the building façade of
buildings that are visible from Maroondah
these signs are visible in Figure 2, below.
Chirnside Lifestyle Centre Sign is 12.5 metres high and has a sign panel that is
3.0 metres by 6.0 metres. The signage panel
includes smaller signs for 14
different businesses within the centre.
the hearing I asked David Song whether multiple signs being visible at once
could be visual clutter or disorder. David Song’s
oral evidence in
response includes, in summary, that when viewed from Fletcher Road there are no
overlapping of signs, the nearest
sign is about 50 metres from the proposed
sign, and the proposed sign does not stand high in the sky. David Song referred
Zaslavsky’s photomontage ‘view 2’, which he says
clearly assists in understanding the degree of signage separation.
the photomontage view 2 shows the proposed sign clearly separated from the other
signs in the Chirnside Lifestyle Centre, this
view is from the opposite
(western) side of the Maroondah Highway. I am not satisfied that this is the
most relevant view point.
The sign will be frequently and readily viewed by
drivers and passengers in vehicles travelling south-west on the Maroondah
on the same (eastern) side of the highway as the site. I consider the
view from the road reserve when travelling south-west to be
particularly
Zaslavsky’s photomontage ‘view 1’ is taken from the footpath
along the eastern side of Maroondah Highway.
This is shown at Figure 2, below.
Photomontage view 1 is the view that pedestrians will have when walking and
looking to the south-west.
It is not the exact view that the drivers and
passengers of vehicles travelling to the south-west. However, having viewed the
and surrounding area, I am satisfied that it is more indicative of the view
that will be seen from vehicles travelling south-west
along Maroondah Highway
than the photomontage view 2. Photomontage view 1 shows that the sign will be
visible sitting at the end
of the sequence of the many signs between Fletcher
Road and East Ridge Drive.
Figure 2: Photomontage View 1 of proposed
combination of the existing signs between Fletcher Road and East Ridge Drive
presents as a visually cluttered and disordered sequence
of signs. From my
observations, visual clutter and disorder is created by the multiple signs for
individual businesses on the Chirnside
Lifestyle Centre business identification
pylon sign, and the multiple smaller signs on the McDonald’s site. These
are clearly
visible in the photomontage view 1.
erection and display of an additional sign, of the size, height and electronic
nature of the proposed sign, will contribute to
and compound the visual clutter
and disorder of the existing signage along the eastern side of the Maroondah
degree of visual clutter and disorder will be further accentuated at night due
to the effect of the illumination of the proposed
sign along with most of the
signs along the Maroondah Highway frontage and many signs internal to the
Chirnside Lifestyle Centre.
The illumination of the various signs throughout
the Chirnside Lifestyle Centre accentuates their visibility and the degree of
clutter and disorder.
than complementing or enhancing the character of the area, the proposed sign
will contribute to and compound the visual clutter
and disorder of the existing
signage. This will be to the detriment of the amenity of the area. This is
inconsistent with the objective
and supporting strategy for urban design at
clause 15.01-1S which seeks to:
Ensure that development, including signs, minimises detrimental impacts on
, on the natural and built environment and on the safety and
efficiency of roads.
proposed sign also has an inappropriate relationship to its setting. The sign
sits in a landscaped area forward of a building
that is set back about 50 metres
from the Maroondah Highway. While the building is a commercial building
accommodating a number
of premises, such as a restaurant and café, it is
within a distinctive landscaped garden setting. This is visible in the
image at Figure 1. Due to its location, size, and height, the proposed sign
will dominate the landscape setting, including
blocking views of two palm trees
that are distinctive features of the landscaped garden viewed from Maroondah
Highway. It will also
draw attention away from the discrete business
identification signs, which are about 4 metres to the north-west of the proposed
for the commercial premises within the building.
these reasons, the proposed sign is not compatible with the amenity and visual
appearance of its immediate setting, and will cause
a loss of amenity to and
adversely affect the surrounding environment.
these reasons, the proposed sign is inconsistent with the purpose of the signs
provisions at clause 52.05 of the Scheme, which
To ensure signs are compatible with the amenity and visual appearance of an
area, including the existing or desired future character.
To ensure signs do not contribute to excessive visual clutter or visual
To ensure that signs do not cause loss of amenity or adversely affect the
natural or built environment or the safety, appearance
or efficiency of a road.
sign therefore results in an unacceptable planning outcome.
the reasons given above, the decision of the responsible authority is affirmed.
No permit is granted.
Sarah McDonald
Source: NearMap image dated 15
October 2025. The approximate location of the proposed sign is identified by a
The submissions and evidence
of the parties, any supporting exhibits given at the hearing and the statements
of grounds filed have
all been considered in the determination of the
proceeding. In accordance with the practice of the Tribunal, not all of this
will be cited or referred to in these reasons.
Applicant’s written
submission, [9].
Clause 52.05-8.
David Song’s written
evidence statement [7.16].
Stan Zaslavsky’s
evidence statement, Appendix A, View 1 – Proposed. The proposed sign is
identified by the yellow arrow
(added by VCAT).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (20.4 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter