URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2025/686.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Brown [2025] VSC 686 (7 November 2025)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
AT MELBOURNE
COMMON LAW DIVISION
ECI 2024 06273
R (ON THE APPLICATION OF THE
ATTORNEY‑GENERAL OF THE STATE OF VICTORIA)
ROHAN BROWN
DATES OF HEARING
27, 29 October 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT
7 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VSC 686
CONTEMPT OF COURT – Application by originating motion and summons
seeking orders that respondent guilty of 15 charges of contempt
comprising comments made by respondent in open court and by correspondence
– Respondent made abusive and disrespectful
comments to County Court judge
in court – Respondent sent numerous emails to court containing threatening
language and allegations
of impropriety and corruption – Correspondence
sent to judges’ chambers and court registries – Whether conduct
tendency to interfere with administration of justice or otherwise scandalise the
court – Contempt found proven.
Supreme Court (General Civil
Procedure) Rules 2015
, r 75.08.1;
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Act 2006
Evidence Act 2008
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v McRae
[1955] HCA 12
(1955) 93 CLR
R v Dunbabin; ex parte Williams
[1935] HCA 34
(1935) 53 CLR 434
(1995) 183 CLR 525
LCM Litigation Fund Pty Ltd v Coope
[2017] NSWCA 200
R v Slaveski
[2011] VSC 643
Prothonotary of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales v Katelaris
[2008] NSWSC 389
[1849] EngR 498
(1849) 1 MaC & G 116
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
Ex parte Attorney-General; Re Goodwin
(1969) 70 SR
[1969] NZLR 55
[1953] VicLawRp 49
McGuirk v University of New South Wales
[2009] NSWSC 1058
considered.
APPEARANCES
For the Applicant
Victorian Government Solicitors Office
For the Respondent
In person via audio-visual link
HIS HONOUR:
applicant, by originating motion and summons, has brought an application seeking
orders that the respondent be adjudged guilty
of contempt. The application is
concerned with 14 email communications by the respondent to the County Court and
the Supreme Court,
or to one of them, between 17 October 2023 and 2 October
2025, and to a comment made by the respondent to the presiding judge in
County Court in the course of a hearing of proceedings involving the respondent
on 3 April 2024.
circumstances
2023, the respondent commenced five proceedings in the County Court of Victoria
against the State of Victoria and related entities
alleging numerous torts and
other claims. By order made by Judge Manova on 21 June 2024, the
proceedings were consolidated into
one proceeding.
17 August 2023, the respondents in the County Court proceedings filed summonses
seeking orders that the proceedings be struck out
in their entirety. The
application was heard before her Honour Judge Tran on 3 October 2023. In
the course of submissions, Judge
Tran raised concerns with the respondent
concerning the manner in which emails, forwarded by him to the Court, had been
Her Honour observed that the emails contained statements about
people that could be interpreted as gratuitous/abusive or insulting
were not relevant to any issue in dispute in the proceedings. The judge
indicated her intention to make orders relating
to the manner in which the
respondent could correspond with the County Court email addresses.
4 October 2023, Judge Tran made a number of orders in that respect,
including orders identifying the manner in which the respondent
was required to
communicate by email with the Court. One of the orders made by her Honour was
as follows:
(10) Emails sent by Mr Brown to any County Court email address must not
contain abusive or threatening material. For the avoidance
of doubt, this order
does not prevent Mr Brown filing pleadings, affidavits or submissions which
include allegations of fact which
are relevant to the issues in dispute in the
proceeding, or give notice of an application to be made by him in the
proceeding.
The alleged contempts
the orders so made by Judge Tran, the respondent continued to correspond
with the County Court, the Victorian Government
Solicitor’s Office
(‘VGSO’) and others relating to his proceedings.
correspondence included an email by the respondent to the chambers of
Judge Tran at 4:11 pm on 17 October 2023, which stated:
[A]nd I remind Tran that my emails were inspired by the endemic corruption and
incompetence of the court.
Meanwhile I don’t pay much attention to orders made by corrupt low lives
such as tran.
email is the first communication by the respondent which in this proceeding is
alleged to constitute a contempt of court (‘alleged
contempt number
Subsequently,
on 3 April 2024, an interlocutory hearing in the proceedings took place before
her Honour Judge Manova of the County
Court. In the course of the hearing,
the respondent contended that counsel for the defendant in the County Court
proceedings had
ignored the fact (the respondent asserted) that certain emails
contained video footage of a police prosecutor assaulting the respondent
front of the County Court building on 4 October 2017. At that point,
Judge Manova sought to raise with the respondent that she
had twice viewed
the video and had been unable to see any assault take place in it. In the
course of that discussion by the judge,
the respondent made the remark, which
constitutes the second contempt of court alleged in this proceeding.
relevant passage in the transcript of the hearing on 3 April 2024 is as
RESPONDENT: ... the emails contain video footage of police prosecutor, Mark
Sontag, assaulting me out the front of the County on
4 October 2017 ...
HER HONOUR: Well, just stop, Mr Brown ...
RESPONDENT: I haven’t finished. I notice (indistinct words) ...
HER HONOUR: No, stop.
RESPONDENT: (Indistinct words) ...
HER HONOUR: I want to ask you about this video.
RESPONDENT: You fucking stop, you fuckin’ whore.
HER HONOUR: I want to ask you about this video, Mr Brown. I’ve received it
and I’ve watched it twice and I can’t
see any assault. At what time
does the assault occur?
remark made by the respondent in the above exchange, in which he called the
judge ‘you fuckin’ whore’, constitutes
the second contempt of
court alleged by the respondent in this proceeding.
21 November 2024, the originating motion was issued in this proceeding seeking
that the respondent be adjudged guilty of contempt
in respect of the first two
alleged contempts of court. The originating motion, and the affidavit in
support of it, were served
personally on the respondent in Hampton Park on 19
December 2024.
I have noted, on 21 June 2024, Judge Manova ordered that the five County Court
proceedings be consolidated into one proceeding.
the course of her Honour’s ongoing management of the proceeding, the
respondent, on 29 May 2025, sent an email to her Honour’s
chambers. The
email was also addressed to the Attorney‑General, and to Mr Matthew
Hocking of the Victorian Government Solicitor’s
Office. Copies of the
email were addressed to the chambers of the Chief Judge of the County Court, and
the chambers of Judge Tran
and Judge Clark. The ‘subject’
of the email was: ‘Manova You are a Whore’. The following is the
This is your reminder that you are a state funded whore.
You said you could see no assault in this footage. You are a LIAR, a criminal
and a state funded whore.
That is immutable fact you state funded whore.
respondent then attached an image underneath which were the words:
You should be in Dame Phillis Frost prison you whore.
communication is the third alleged contempt of court in this proceeding.
10 July 2025, the applicant in this proceeding filed an amended originating
motion which added a claim that the respondent be adjudged
guilty of contempt in
respect of the third alleged contempt.
18 August 2025, Judicial Registrar Burgess held a directions hearing in the
matter. The respondent failed to attend, and the judicial
registrar made an
order that the respondent appear in person at the next directions hearing listed
on 8 September.
directions hearing on 8 September 2025 was listed before her Honour,
Tsalamandris J. The respondent failed to appear at the hearing.
application of the applicant, Tsalamandris J issued a warrant in the
proceeding , pursuant to r 75.08.1 of the
Supreme Court (General Civil
Procedure) Rules 2015
, for the arrest of the respondent.
the meantime, the Attorney-General issued a proceeding in this Court seeking
relief against the respondent pursuant to the
Vexatious Proceeding Act
. Judicial Registrar Lorenz has presided over preliminary hearings
in relation to that proceeding.
16 September, the respondent was arrested by Victoria Police and presented to
Court pursuant to the warrant. Following a hearing
on the same date,
Tsalamandris J made orders, which included that the respondent be released
on his own undertaking that he appear
in person in this Court on 27 October
2025, and that he not send any emails to the County Court or Supreme Court email
which contain ‘abusive or threatening material’.
Her Honour also made other orders for the interlocutory processes for
hearing of the substantive application.
Subsequently,
between 28 September and 2 October 2025, the respondent forwarded the following
twelve emails addressed to Supreme
Court and County Court email addresses,
which are the subject of further charges of contempt.
28 September 2025 at 11:12 am, the respondent sent an email that was
addressed to the chambers of Judicial Registrar Lorenz of
this Court, and
which was copied to a number of email addresses that included: the chambers of
Justice Beale of this Court; the
chambers of the Chief Judge,
Judge Manova and Judge Tran of the County Court; the executive
associate to the Chief Justice of this
Court; the Attorney‑General;
Matthew Laxton of Victoria Police; and two email addresses of legal
practitioners Russell Kennedy.
The email contained the subject heading:
‘IMMUABLE (sic) FACT Christopher Beale is corrupt’. The email then
Dear Katherine,
Just so that we are abundantly clear.
When I was before you I clearly state the immutable fact that Christopher Beale
is corrupt.
I referred to when I was on 16th September 2016, in front of the corrupted low
life Beale.
The paperwork before Beale on that occasion clearly detailed a false
imprisonment which he was active in concealing, because he is
corrupt low
When I raised the issue of the false imprisonment he directed me not to talk
When I said this Katherine, you warned me that this might be contempt of court
Therefore, Katherine you have a few choices here.
charge me with contempt of court, for stating the immutable fact that the low
life Christopher Beale is corrupt.
check the transcript and apologise for assuming that I was wrong when I was
Beale’s victim.
sweep it under the carpet proving that you are every bit the criminal that Beale
The fact is that I called Diana Manova a whore after she said she saw no assault
in this video. Manova and Tran are criminal law
(sic) lives who conceal crimes
committed by cowardly state funded terrorists. Just as Beale did on 16th
September 2016, exactly
9 years before as a party of the systemic ongoing
criminality by the entirely corrupted state, appeared before you.
Clearly there is an assault in the video, clearly Manova is a low life who is
active in concealing and ignoring police criminality.
email again referred to Beale J as ‘criminal low life’ and to
the Court’s ‘corrupt systems’ and
then, relevantly, continued
as follows:
I won’t be changing my 100% fact-based view of Beale, Tran and Manova just
because you pull of (sic) further corruption Katherine.
Instead, I will just be
adding you to the list and eventually that list will be dealt with
accordingly.
I am not afraid of you and the consequences you may apply; police have tried to
kill me several times.
I expect this to be clarified immediately,. (sic) As you have had more than
adequate time to review the transcript and to confirm
that the low life
corrupted Beale acted precisely as I have said he had.
If you refuse to do the right thing, then you deserve to be punished, that is
how justice works Katherine. Not the way that Beale,
Tran and Manova have
immutably conducted themselves, supporting and assisting terrorists and acts of
(Alleged contempt number 4).
the following day, 29 September 2025, at 6:31 pm, the respondent sent an
email addressed to the ‘Supreme Court – General
List’ in the
following terms:
Hello General List,
What a peculiar name you have.
Perhaps as a survivor of 13 years of proven endemic corruption, exhibited by the
likes of Christopher Beale, Beach Priest, I no longer
place any weight on
anything you criminals have to say; fancy that.
So, do your worst, I do not care and what I have developed for the world will
ultimately expose you all for the low lives you immutably
All you have are threats and violence, I have a civilisational solution for all
of humanity.
In short General, or Ms List, whatever your name is, if you want to shut me up,
you will have to kill me.
Meanwhile as you will note the following explains why — if the foundation
is false — the courts “lawful standing”
dissolves ...
(Alleged contempt number 5).
1 October 2025, following receipt of the above emails, Tsalamandris J made
an order in chambers directing that this proceeding
be listed for mention at
2:15 pm on the following day, 2 October 2025, in court number 1.
2 October 2025, following a hearing at which the respondent did not appear, her
Honour adjourned the mention hearing to Monday
6 October 2025.
1 October 2025, the respondent sent three emails, each of which are alleged to
contain communications in contempt of court.
1 October 2025, at 1:07 pm, the respondent sent an email to the Supreme
Court – General List email address which included
the following:
Do you recall my undertaking that you are not an actual court, nor are you a
system of justice?
Rather that you are engaged in necromancy?
Your silence on the immutable fact, displayed in the transcript of 16th
September 2016, that the criminal lowlife, and sexually ambiguous
Christopher Beale concealed the fact that on that day the paperwork,
(applications and unchallenged affidavits) clearly present
imprisonment.
The fact is the Christopher Beale is a criminal who should be in Ararat prison.
Should the purported “Judicial Registrar” Lorenz remain silent,
given her false claim that my saying that may be contempt
of court, would show
that she should be in the Dame Phyllis Frost correction centre.
Meanwhile, I do not bow to criminals, I expose them; your silence and this email
with unfounded allegations, proves that you are
I sincerely hope that you burn in hell.
(Alleged contempt number 6).
1 October 2025, at 1:39 pm, the respondent sent a further email to the
Supreme Court – General List in the following terms:
It should not be too hard for you to show where Beale addressed the fact that my
application and affidavit stated that I had been
charges (sic) 12 days after
being remanded, a fact that was likewise made out in the police affidavit in
opposition to Bail.
Your non response of course is your acquiescence to this immutable fact.
So yes, tell me again how suggested that Christopher Beale ius (sic) a corrupt
criminal low life is contempt of court and not the
truth backed by immutable
evidence, which you have and may verify easily and quickly.
See, your entire rotten profession, top to bottom is corrupt, it is immutable
(Alleged contempt number 7).
1 October 2025, at 11:03 pm, the respondent forwarded a further email to
the Supreme Court – General List, and to an email
address of the Victorian
Government Solicitor’s Office, which stated that the Court had been sent a
‘lawful basis for
non‑attendance’. The respondent referred to
the matter handled by Beale J and to grievances which he had with two
members. He then stated:
Perhaps prior to addressing how I speak to people who are immutably a part of a
proven corrupted system, these immutable criminal
acts are dealt with
accordingly.
I am only responding under threat of violence and of being deprived of my
liberty, as I have been numerous times since at least 27th
of July 2012 ...
I do not hold that you are a lawful court of law, rather a criminal enterprise
acting under the colour of law. The fact of this system
being more concerned
with rude however truth based emails than it is about wilful misconduct in the
form of serious crimes and systemic
concealment, is all the evidence I need to
confirm the submissions in the attached documents, that you are not a lawful
any foundation in law.
(Alleged contempt number 8).
the following day, 2 October 2025, the respondent forwarded seven emails, each
of which are alleged to constitute a contempt of
2 October 2025, at 11:12 am, the respondent sent an email to the chambers
of Tsalamandris J, which was copied to a number of email
including: the chambers of Beale J; the chambers of Judicial Registrar
Lorenz; the chambers of Judge Tran; and the email
addresses of the
Attorney-General, of Mr R Kennedy (of legal practitioners Russell Kennedy)
and Mr Mark Sontag (of Victoria Police).
The email referred to an
appearance by the respondent before Beale J of this Court on
16 September 2016, and posed the question
why on that date his Honour did
not question the date of the arrest charges and the dates on the charges and
police submissions in
respect of the matter before him. Having posed that
question, the email then stated as follows:
Why, because like Mark Sontag Christopher Beale is a
corrupt low life who should be in prison.
The transcript speaks for itself: Christopher Beale is corrupt and is involved
in systemic corruption resulting in false imprisonment.
The Attorney-Generals since that time all know, the VGSO knows, My Anh Tran
Tran relied on dubious documents not before Beale for her part in this coverup.
(Alleged contempt number 9).
2 October 2025 at 11:18 am, the respondent sent an email addressed (among
others) to the chambers of Tsalamandris J, and copied
(inter alia) to the
chambers of Beale J, the chambers of Judicial Registrar Lorenz, the
chambers of Judge Tran, and the email addresses
of the Attorney-General,
Mr Kennedy and Mr Sontag. The email commenced with offensive
allegations about police lawyer, Mark Sontag.
Having done so, the email then
Why is Mark a practising lawyer and police officer, after being proven to be a
deliberate wilful and reckless perverter of the law?
Because you are all criminal low lives and perverters of the law.
email then made further offensive allegations about two other persons and
Since when does hypervigilance excuse systemic corruption as the little fake jew
worm says in this attached footage.
(Alleged contempt number 10).
2 October 2025, at 11:43 am, the respondent forwarded the following email
to the email address of the chambers of Tsalamandris
J, and which was
copied to the chambers of Beale J, the chambers of Judicial
Registrar Lorenz, the chambers of Judge Tran, and to
addresses of the Attorney-General, Mr R Kennedy and
Funny how you low lives get all bent out of shape over the content of emails
that you refuse to respond to or read in any case.
You are all 100% full of shit and should be euthanised, the lot of you.
(Alleged contempt number 11).
2 October 2025, at 11:45 am, the respondent sent an email addressed (inter
alia) to the chambers of Tsalamandris J, and copied
to the chambers of
Beale J, the chambers of Judicial Registrar Lorenz, the chambers of
Judge Tran and to the email addresses of the
Attorney-General, Mr R
Kennedy and Mr Sontag, which stated:
Just ignore the words that upset your weak minds and cowardly hearts, just like
you ignore the endemic corruption, you low lives.
(Alleged contempt number 12).
2 October 2025, at 11:56 am, the respondent sent an email to (inter alia)
the chambers of Tsalamandris J, and which was copied
to the chambers of
Beale J, the chambers of Judicial Registrar Lorenz, the chambers of
Judge Tran and to the email addresses of the
Attorney-General,
Mr Kennedy, and Mr Sontag. The email contained the
Magistrate Rohan Lawrence provides a masterclass on how to change the subject to
protect a corrupt little perverting grub lawyer.
TUICA v Brown: Scumbag police officer (terrorist) who is a
solicitor (sworn liar) proven perjury which is systematically concealed
court, Bar, Attorney General and VGSO.
(Alleged contempt number 13).
2 October 2025, at 12:06 pm, the respondent sent an email to the chambers
of Tsalamandris J, which was copied to the chambers of
Beale J, the
chambers of Judicial Registrar Lorenz, the chambers of Judge Tran and
to the email addresses of the Attorney-General,
Mr Kennedy, and
Mr Sontag. The email commenced:
Nothing you do changes the facts, it only goes to prove how entirely corrupted
this state is from top to bottom.
email then listed the names of seven County Court judges, three Supreme Court
judges, five magistrates, and four politicians and
then stated under that
Etc, etc, etc, etc, etc, all part of systemic coverup, all corrupt, all should
be in prison.
Lock me up, fine me, assault ,(sic) bash, falsely imprison me, it will only go
to further solidify my lawful position and your criminality.
I won’t stop until I pass, and I am not suicidal.
(Alleged contempt number 14).
2 October 2025, at 2:03 pm, the respondent sent an email to the chambers of
Tsalamandris J, copied to the chambers of Beale J,
the chambers of
Judicial Registrar Lorenz, the chambers of Judge Tran, and the email
addresses of the Attorney‑General, Mr
Kennedy, and Mr Sontag.
The email stated:
Just get Christopher Beale, the Application for bail, affidavit in support of
application for bail, the affidavit in opposition to
bail filed by police and
the transcript.
Then have the low life criminal, Christopher Beale explain using that paperwork
how it was a lawful imprisonment.
Not like Tran did relying upon documents that were not in court and did not
exist until they were created later to conceal this
easily confirmed crime.
Of course, you will all ignore this, because you are trying to incriminate me
for rude words while you conspire to defeat the administrative
course of public
justice protecting proven liars and perverters of the law in your profession.
Now, you have a choice.
(1) Choose justice and separate yourselves from these criminals.
(2) Join the list of these criminals that will one day be dealt with
accordingly.
Only (1) will cause me to change my trajectory, likewise yours.
(Alleged contempt number 15).
receipt of those emails, Tsalamandris J, on 6 October, made orders revoking
order number 1 of the orders that her Honour
had made on 16 September 2025.
Her Honour further ordered, pursuant to r 75.8.1 of the
Court Rules
, that the Court issue a warrant for the arrest of the
respondent, and listed the matter for mention in this Court on 8 October.
8 October, I made an order that the applicant be granted leave to file and serve
a summons alleging further contempt of court by
the respondent, in respect of
the alleged contempts of court numbered 4 to 15 inclusive.
15 October 2025, the applicant filed and served a summons seeking orders that
the respondent be adjudged guilty of contempt of
the Supreme Court in respect of
each of the alleged contempts of court numbered 4 to 15.
20 October, at a mention hearing attended by the respondent who appeared via
audiovisual link, I made an order that, pending the
hearing and determination of
the originating motion and applications for contempt, the respondent not send
any emails to the County
Court or the Supreme Court email addresses which
contained abusive or threatening material.
The basis of the claimed
the originating motion, and in the summons by the applicant seeking orders for
contempt in respect of alleged contempts number
4 to 15, the applicant specified
the basis upon which it contends that each of the 15 publications by the
respondent constitute a
contempt of court.
the amended originating motion it is contended that the first and third alleged
contempts, consisting of the email by the respondent
to the chambers of
Judge Tran on 17 October 2023, and the email by the respondent to the
chambers of Judge Manova on 29 May 2025,
were each intended, and/or had a
tendency, to interfere with the due administration of justice, in that the
emails: were abusive
of the judges and offensive to them in their role as
judicial officers; were abusive of the County Court and disrespectful of the
authority of the County Court; and, in respect of the email to
Judge Tran’s chambers, were knowingly in breach of the 4 October
order made by Judge Tran.
the amended originating motion, the applicant contends that, by calling
Judge Manova in Court a ‘fuckin whore’ in the
course of the
hearing before her Honour (alleged contempt number 2), the respondent’s
conduct was intended, and/or had a tendency,
to interfere with the due
administration of justice, in that the conduct: was abusive of, and offensive
to, the judge in her role
as a judicial officer; was disrespectful of the
authority of the County Court; and was disruptive and disturbed the
proceeding.
the amended summons seeking relief in respect of alleged contempts numbered 4 to
15, the applicant contends that the respondent’s
conduct in sending each
of the emails was intended to and/or had a tendency to interfere with the due
administration of justice in
that each email: was intended to influence, place
improper pressure on and/or threaten or intimidate a judicial officer in the
performance of his or her duties; and was abusive of, and disrespectful of the
authority of, the County Court and/or the Supreme
Court. It is contended that
each email had a tendency to: interfere with, and intimidate, a judicial
officer in the performance
of their duties; dissuade a judicial officer from
continuing to perform their duties in connection with proceedings involving the
respondent; and undermine the authority of the Supreme Court and/or the County
Court. It is further alleged that each of the emails
were sent by the
respondent in breach of the undertaking given by the respondent to the Court on
16 September 2025.
the course of oral submissions, counsel for the applicant made it clear that the
applicant did not rely on the proposition, that
alleged contempts numbered 1,
and 3 to 15 (inclusive) constituted a breach by the respondent of the order of
the County Court of
4 October 2023, and further alternatively, the undertaking
contained in the order of Tsalamandris J on 16 September 2025, as the
or determinative basis upon which it was alleged that those communications
constituted contempt of court. In particular, counsel
submitted that, in
determining whether the communications were each a contempt of court, the order
by Judge Tran, and the undertaking
contained in the order of
Tsalamandris J, are relevant in demonstrating an intention by the
respondent to interfere with the due
administration of justice.
that respect, counsel noted that the undertaking before Tsalamandris J was
recorded in the orders made by her Honour on 16 September.
In the course of the
hearing before her Honour on 16 September 2025, the judge informed the
respondent that such an undertaking
would be a condition of his release from
custody, so as to protect the recipients of the emails so far forwarded by the
from any future conduct to that effect.
Submissions by
the commencement of oral submissions, the respondent filed written submissions
setting out the basis upon which he resisted
the application in the present
case. After the applicant presented its case on the hearing of the application,
the respondent advanced
further submissions at the hearing of the
application.
Subsequently,
and after I had adjourned the matter in order to consider my decision, the
respondent emailed to the Court, and copied
to the email address of the
applicant, a ’letter of apology’ in which he stated that he accepted
responsibility for his
conduct and was prepared to face whatever consequences
the Court considered appropriate. Notwithstanding that communication, in
circumstances of the case, and particularly in view of the submissions which the
respondent previously relied on, both in writing
and at the hearing of the
application, it is appropriate that I treat the application as being defended,
and that I consider, in
respect of each alleged contempts of court, whether the
applicant has established its case.
central submission made by the respondent in his written submissions was that
the communications, that are the subject of each
of the 15 alleged contempts,
fall within the scope of lawful political expression and are to be assessed in
light of the protections
provided by the Commonwealth
Constitution
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
(Vic) (‘the
Charter’). The respondent submitted that each communication engaged
fundamental questions of equality, proportionality
and fair process. It was
further contended that the communications did not contain any threats of
violence or unlawful conduct,
but, rather, they reflected strong criticism and
frustration by the respondent at perceived administrative misconduct.
support of that submission, the respondent referred to and relied on a number of
provisions of the Charter, and other legislation.
He also referred to the
implied freedom of political communication that was explained by the High Court
Lange v Australian Broadcasting
Corporation
In addition, the
respondent relied on the decision of the High Court in
Kable v Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW)
support of the proposition that state courts may not be used as instruments of
executive policy, and on the decision of the High
Mabo v Queensland
in support of the
principle that the rule of law requires that legal standards apply equally to
all citizens and officials.
on those principles, the respondent submitted that the communications, relied on
by the applicant in this case, concerned governmental
and judicial integrity,
they are political in character, and they fall within the scope of the principle
of implied freedom of expression.
I shall discuss the principles, so relied on
by the respondent, later in these reasons, after I have first outlined the
principles of law concerning contempt of court.
respondent further submitted that relevant material has not been provided to
him, including CCTV recordings and related documents.
I interpolate that those
recordings and documents do not relate to the present application, but, rather,
appear to have some connection
with previous proceedings in which the respondent
was involved.
respondent further submitted that there have been examples of official or
comparable conduct by public officials which have not
been the subject of any
appropriate sanction. I note that the examples provided by the respondent do
not relate to any conduct in
Court, or any conduct by persons concerning
processes in Court, which could, as such, constitute a contempt of court.
respondent next submitted that there has been ‘extended delay’ in
the present case which has infringed ‘statutory
and constitutional
safeguards’. He submitted that there was a period of some 12 days between
his detention and being charged,
and that he spent a total period of 110 days in
custody. I interpolate that it is not apparent how that period is
calculated.
next submission made by the respondent was to the effect that the conduct of the
applicant in this case constituted an abuse of
process, and that the current
proceeding should be stayed unless and until the prosecution has made
‘full disclosure’
to the respondent of information sought by him.
In that respect, the respondent, again, relied on his contention that there had
been non-disclosure of ‘CCTV and related documents’, and he also
relied on the ‘extended detention and charge delay’,
‘comparable’ examples of official misconduct he had referred to, and
the proposition advanced by him that the
prosecution in the present case is
directed to penalise expressions by him critical of government.
documents referred to by the respondent apparently relate to previous incidents,
and proceedings, involving the respondent. The
respondent has failed to
demonstrate how those matters have any relevance to the issues in the current
proceeding.
respondent submitted that the communications by him do not constitute contempt
of court. He submitted that they were written
protests and complaints by him
concerning matters of public administration, they contained no threats of
violence or incitement,
and that the tone of the communications — though
‘passionate’ — mirrored accepted Australian idiom and fall
within the constitutional and Charter protection. Accordingly, it was submitted
that the communications could not objectively be
classified as
‘abusive’ or ‘threatening’.
further written submissions, the respondent submitted that as the alleged
conduct involved communications to the County Court judicial
officers and
registries, this Court lacks jurisdiction to punish for contempt of that Court.
submission is misconceived. As the superior court in the jurisdiction, the
Supreme Court has power not only to punish contempt
committed against
itself, but in the exercise of its inherent jurisdiction, it also has power to
deal with contempts committed against
courts of inferior jurisdiction, including
the County Court.
respondent further submitted that the County Court proceeding presided over by
Judge Tran, in fact, concluded on 28 July 2023,
so that there was no live
proceeding, or judicial function, capable of being ‘impeded’ and
thus the subject of a contempt
submission may also be readily addressed. As noted, the respondent issued a
number of proceedings in the County Court. In one
of those proceedings
(No 22‑04616), Judge Tran granted an application by the
defendant (the State of Victoria) for summary
However, that order did
not affect the other proceedings issued by the applicant in the County Court.
The proceeding, in which
Judge Tran made the order dated 4 October 2023,
restraining the respondent from forwarding emails to the County Court email
that contained abusive or threatening material, was made in a separate
proceeding (Cl-23-02495).
proceeding has remained on foot in the County Court. On 1 September 2025,
Judge Pillay of that Court made orders that the proceeding
be temporarily
stayed until the final determination of the proceeding in this Court brought by
the Attorney-General to have the respondent
declared a vexatious
The temporary stay of
the County Court proceeding does not mean that it has been brought to an end.
It is extant, albeit that it
is temporarily stayed.
respondent advanced further arguments in oral submissions at the hearing of the
proceeding. In that respect, it is relevant to
note that after the completion
of the presentation by the applicant of its submissions on the first day of the
hearing, I adjourned
the case for two days, to enable the respondent to prepare
any submissions which he wished to advance in response.
respondent commenced his oral submissions by contending that the transcript of
the proceeding on the first day of the hearing
before me was inaccurate. He
submitted that, as a consequence, the jurisdiction of the Court to hear the
contempt proceeding against
him was suspended, and that it should not proceed
until the transcript had been properly corrected.
do not accept that submission. The transcript of the hearing on the first day
did not record any evidence. It provided useful
assistance by recording the
arguments advanced on behalf of the applicant. Any error in it does not, and
could not, affect the validity
of this proceeding, or the right of the
respondent to have a fair hearing.
second proposition advanced by the respondent is that this proceeding should not
be considered in isolation, but in the context
of previous proceedings involving
the respondent, which commenced with charges against him in 2013, which were
dismissed by the Magistrates’
Court. The respondent submitted he was
arrested and detained in June 2016 without lawful warrant, and ultimately was
brought before
Beale J, who granted him bail. In addition, he submitted
that in May 2017, he was assaulted by a police prosecutor outside the
Magistrates’
Court, and that subsequently that prosecutor filed a false
statement depicting himself as the victim. The respondent also stated
August 2021, he was subject of a search warrant on him that was executed at
gunpoint in a public reserve.
am not persuaded that the matters, to which the respondent referred, are
relevant to the current proceeding. While those matters
might have engendered
in the respondent a feeling of grievance against the justice system, they are
not relevant to the issues in
the present case, namely, whether the respondent
performed the conduct that is the subject of each of the 15 alleged contempts of
court, and, if so, whether that conduct itself constituted a contempt of
respondent also relied on the doctrine of necessity as a defence to the
communications which he made to the Court, and which are
the subject of each of
the 15 alleged contempts of court. However, there was no basis, either in the
evidence adduced on this application,
or otherwise, which would support such a
defence to any of the communications which are the subject of the 15 alleged
contempts of
respondent submitted that each of the 15 communications constituted the product
of, or were expressions of, psychological harm
that he had suffered as a result
of the conduct by various organs of the State towards him. He submitted that if
the Victorian Government
Solicitor’s Office and the Attorney-General had
acted as model litigants in previous litigation, he would not have been involved
in proceedings that were before the County Court.
proposition does not constitute a valid defence in the present case. First, the
respondent did not provide any evidence at all
which would sustain the
proposition that he has suffered psychiatric harm, as he contended. Secondly,
he has not demonstrated how,
if he has suffered psychological harm, it in some
way might provide a defence in respect of the communications that he engaged in
and which constitute the 15 alleged contempts of court.
Contempt of court — legal
general, a contempt of court consists of conduct that interferes with, or which
has a real and definite tendency as a matter of
practical reality to interfere
with, the course of justice. The basic purpose of the principles of contempt
law is to protect and
uphold the integrity and independence of the court and to
maintain and vindicate public confidence in the judicial
R v Dunbabin; ex parte
Rich J explained
the purpose of the principles of contempt in the following terms:
Any matter is a contempt which has a tendency to deflect the Court from a strict
and unhesitating application of the letter of the
law or, in questions of fact,
from determining them exclusively by reference to the evidence. But such
interferences may also arise
from publications which tend to detract from the
authority and influence of judicial determinations, publications calculated to
the confidence of the people in the Court's judgments because the matter
published aims at lowering the authority of the Court as
a whole or that of its
Judges and excites misgivings as to the integrity, propriety and impartiality
brought to the exercise of the
judicial office. The jurisdiction is not given
for the purpose of protecting the Judges personally from imputations to which
may be exposed as individuals. It is not given for the purpose of
restricting honest criticism based on rational grounds of the manner
the Court performs its functions. The law permits in respect of Courts, as of
other institutions, the fullest discussions
of their doings so long as that
discussion is fairly conducted and is honestly directed to some definite public
purpose. The jurisdiction
exists in order that the authority of the law as
administered in the Courts may be established and
maintained.
the contempt proceeding is brought under Order 75 of the
Supreme Court
, it is, in reality, criminal in nature. Accordingly, each charge of
contempt must be proven beyond reasonable
order to establish a contempt of court involving a breach of an order of the
Court, the applicant must establish, first, that the
terms of the order were
clear and unambiguous, secondly, that the order was served on the alleged
contemnor or otherwise appropriately
brought to the contemnor’s notice,
thirdly, that the alleged contemnor had knowledge of the terms of the order,
and, fourthly,
that the alleged contemnor breached the terms of the
order to establish the fourth element, that the contemnor has breached the terms
of the order, it is not necessary to establish
that the alleged contemnor had
intention to disobey or breach the order. It is sufficient to establish that
the act or omission
by the contemnor, that is alleged to constitute the breach,
was wilful.
Witham v Holloway
McHugh J stated the applicable principles in the following terms:
Although criminal contempts take many forms, their characteristic attribute is
an interference with the due administration of justice
either in a particular
case or as part of a continuing process. Defiance of the court or its
procedures, publication of matters
scandalising the court, actions calculated to
prejudice the fair trial of a pending case, threats to parties or witnesses and
within the court are examples of criminal contempts. Civil
contempts, on the other hand, are concerned with failures to comply with
judgments or orders of the courts. But civil and criminal contempt overlap.
Thus, disobedience to the order of a court constitutes
criminal contempt when
the disobedience is contumacious. Defiance of the court’s order renders
criminal what would otherwise
be civil contempt. Where non-compliance with a
judgment or order goes beyond mere breach and involves misconduct, civil
also has ‘a penal or disciplinary jurisdiction [that is]
exercised by the court in the public
same principles apply, with appropriate modification, to a case of contempt
involving a breach by the alleged contemnor of an
undertaking made to the Court.
LCM Litigation Fund Pty Ltd v
Emmett AJA (with whom
Macfarlan and Simpson JJA agreed) stated the relevant principles as
The primary judge set out the legal principles by which the claim was to be
determined in a manner that was and is uncontroversial.
It was common ground
that it was necessary for LCM to prove the elements of the contempt alleged
beyond reasonable doubt. The primary
judge made reference to principles
concerning contempt by breach of an order of a court, which, with appropriate
adaptations, are
equally applicable to contempt by breach of undertakings made
to a court. With those adaptations, the relevant principles are:
1. the undertakings must have been given to a court;
terms of the undertakings must be clear, unambiguous and capable of
compliance;
alleged contemnor must have breached the terms of the
undertaking.
second alleged contempt in this case concerns an offensive remark made by the
respondent to Judge Manova in the course of a directions
hearing in the
County Court proceedings. The principles relating to contempt of the kind
alleged, in the face of the Court, are
not designed to serve to assuage the
injured feelings of the judicial officer in question, but to protect the
administration of
justice and to ensure that the authority of the Court is
appropriately vindicated and
R v Slaveski
contempt involving a number of intemperate outbursts by a litigant in the course
of court proceedings, Whelan J stated:
The reason why insulting and offensive behaviour before the presiding judge
constitutes contempt of court has nothing to do with
the personal dignity of the
judge, or his or her personal feelings. Such conduct is contempt because it
challenges the authority
of the Court, interrupts the Court’s proceedings,
and detracts from the capacity of the Court to conduct proceedings which
dispassionate and rational both in fact and in
appearance.
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v
that principle
was applied to an outburst by an accused person, directed at a jury, after the
jury had announced its verdict. In
holding that the respondent in that case was
guilty of contempt, Hoeben J stated:
The cases recognise that it is a contempt of court to threaten or take reprisals
against judges, witnesses and legal practitioners
involved in the judicial
process in relation to particular legal proceedings. As the extract from
makes clear, that principle applies equally to jurors.
Action taken by way of reprisal may constitute a contempt whether or not
proceedings
remain pending because such conduct may interfere with the
administration of justice as a continuing process by discouraging or influencing
participation of such persons in future legal
proceedings.
from the second alleged contempt, each of the other publications involved
communications by the respondent to the courts, to
particular judges, and to
others, relating to or commenting on proceedings that were or had been before
the courts. A consideration
of those communications involves the application of
principles relating to two species of contempt, namely, first, to communications
which are directed to influencing or affecting the decisions of the courts, and,
secondly, to communications which may, by scandalising
the Court, be calculated
to undermine public confidence in the integrity of the courts.
respect of the first category of communications, in some of the emails the
respondent did communicate with members of the County
Court while he was
involved in proceedings before that Court, and, in the case of the
communications with the Supreme Court, after
the commencement of the current
proceedings in this Court on 21 November 2024.
respect of that category of communication, it is well-established that it is a
contempt of court to make contact with a court,
by communicating with it
extra-curially, for the purpose of influencing or affecting the decision of the
Court in respect of a case
Re Dyce Sombre
Every private communication to a judge, for the purpose of influencing his
decision upon a matter publicly before him, always is,
and ought to be,
reprobated; it is a course calculated, if tolerated, to divert the course of
justice, and is considered, and ought
more frequently than it is, to be treated
as, what it really is, a high contempt of
second kind of potential contempt, arising from the communications in this case,
involves the species of communications that scandalise
the Court, by having a
tendency to undermine public confidence in, and the authority of, the
, the High Court was concerned with a newspaper article which, in
intemperate terms, impugned the reputation of the High Court and
its members,
referring to the Court as ‘... this pestilent Court’. The Court
concluded that the respondents in the case
were guilty of contempt. In his
concurring judgment, Dixon J stated:
It is necessary for the purpose of maintaining public confidence in the
administration of law that there shall be some certain and
immediate method of
repressing imputations upon Courts of justice which, if continued, are likely to
impair their authority. But
it must be done by judicial remedies, and judicial
remedies are necessarily by the Courts themselves. The Court, must, therefore,
undertake the task notwithstanding the embarrassment of considering what it
should do in relation to an attack upon itself. There
is no practicable
alternative. It can but do its best to disregard all considerations except
those which strictly relate to the
question whether the publication amounts in
law to a contempt. That question is whether, if permitted and repeated, it will
a tendency to lower the authority of the Court and weaken the spirit of
obedience to the law ... .
Gallagher v Durack
Court was concerned with public remarks made by the federal secretary of the
Builders Labourers Federation concerning a case
in which he was a party then
before the Federal Court. In refusing special leave to appeal a decision by the
Federal Court holding
the applicant guilty of contempt, Gibbs CJ, Mason,
Wilson and Brennan JJ stated the relevant principles in the following
The principles which govern that class of contempt of court which is constituted
by imputations on courts or judges which are calculated
to bring the court into
contempt or lower its authority had been discussed by this Court in
(1920) 28 CLR 419 and
R v Fletcher; Ex parte Kisch
[1935] HCA 1
R v Dunbabin; Ex parte Williams
was decided, and the
judgment of Rich J in the last mentioned case is consistent with what had
been said in the earlier decisions.
The law endeavours to reconcile two
principles, each of which is of cardinal importance, but which, in some
circumstances, appear
to come in conflict. One principle is that speech should
be free, so that everyone has the right to comment in good faith on matters
public importance, including the administration of justice, even if the comment
is outspoken, mistaken or wrong-headed. The other
principle is that "it is
necessary for the purpose of maintaining public confidence in the administration
of law that there shall
be some certain and immediate method of repressing
imputations upon Courts of justice which, if continued, are likely to impair
authority": per Dixon J in
R v Dunbabin; Ex parte Williams
53 CLR at p 447. The authority of the law rests on public confidence, and it is
important to the stability of society that
the confidence of the public should
not be shaken by baseless attacks on the integrity or impartiality of courts or
judges. However,
in many cases, the good sense of the community will be a
sufficient safeguard against the scandalous disparagement of a court or
and the summary remedy of fine or imprisonment "is applied only where the Court
is satisfied that it is necessary in the interests
of the ordered and fearless
administration of justice and where the attacks are unwarrantable
foregoing principles have on occasion been applied in cases in which the
communication in question was made in either a limited
form or to a limited
Ex parte Attorney-General; Re
a District Court
judge, sitting without a jury, found a verdict for the plaintiff in an action
for malicious prosecution in which
the respondent was the defendant.
Subsequently, the respondent sent letters to 13 registrars of District Courts of
New South Wales
accusing the judge of having made a malicious and unwarranted
attack on the respondent’s character and in doing so having been
by an ulterior motive. The Court of Appeal in New South Wales held that the
communication to the registrars was a contempt
of court. In their joint
judgment, Wallace P, Jacobs and Holmes JPA stated:
... it seems to us beyond debate that the letter of 4 August and its enclosure
goes much further than mere strong criticism, because
it is calculated to bring
the judge into contempt and so falls within the first class referred to by
Lord Russell of Killowen in
, that is to say, scandalising
Then the claim that the area of publication was insufficient to support the
Attorney-General’s application is unacceptable.
the material
constituting the contempt appeared only in affidavits and a notice of motion
filed in Court, and in the one case, the
New Zealand Court of Appeal and in the
other Sholl J found the publisher guilty of contempt and in each case a sentence
of imprisonment
was imposed. In the present case, the publication was made to a
substantial number of District Court registrars and such an area
of publication
is clearly sufficient to support contempt
proceedings.
to which the
Court referred in
, the Court of Appeal of New Zealand was
concerned with affidavits that were filed by the respondent, in contempt
proceedings, after
the conclusion of the proceeding. The Court adjudged the
respondent guilty of contempt in making and publishing the affidavits.
(with whom Turner and McGregor JJ agreed) stated:
... in our opinion, the affidavits, in particular, which make violent
accusations against the judges who heard the cases in which
the respondent was a
party, clearly impute the most improper motives to [the judges]. It is quite
impossible to regard these statements
as being within the widest limits of
legitimate criticism and, in our opinion, clearly have the tendency to lower the
authority of
the courts and to reflect on the integrity, propriety and
impartiality of the judges. We have no doubt whatever that this respondent
be convicted of contempt of court in respect of the statements made and
published by him.
, the respondent, who was involved in litigation before
Hudson AJ of the Supreme Court, provided to an officer of the Court two
which were held to constitute a contempt of court. In proceedings
for contempt before Sholl J, the affidavits were described as
matter likely and calculated to lower the authority of the Court and the judges
of it, to detract from the authority and
influence the decisions of the Court
and the judges of it, to reflect on the integrity, propriety and impartiality of
of the Court, and to reflect improperly and in contentious language
on the integrity and propriety of conduct of counsel and solicitors
against the respondent in the Court. Sholl J considered that the affidavits
contained ‘allegations of the grossest
kind against judges of this
accordingly considered that the communications constituted contempt, which had a
tendency to deflect the Court from a
consideration of the case, and which thus
came within the first class of cases of contemptuous material described by Rich
. Sholl J also considered that the affidavits filed by
the respondent were capable of amounting to contempt on a further basis.
Honour stated:
But even if I am wrong in the view which I have just expressed, the matter may
be looked at in another way. So looking at it, I am
of opinion that, for two
further reasons, the matter complained of in these affidavits is capable of
amounting to contempt of the
kind known as scandalizing the Court, as being
calculated to lower the authority of the Court and to lessen the confidence of
public in its judgments. In the first place — leaving out of account
for the moment publication to the general public by reason
merely of the
documents being placed on the Court file — it cannot be supposed that, if
a litigant were permitted once to make
with impunity such an attack upon the
Judge hearing his cause, and other Judges of the Court, by handing in an
affidavit (but not
reading it aloud), that litigant, or others who might
thereafter hear about it from him or by other means, would not be tempted
to repeat such conduct. In the long run such a practice would, of
course, tend to destroy the status and dignity of the Courts and
be greatly to
the disadvantage of the public in
consequence.
determining whether a particular communication to a limited class of persons
constitutes a contempt of court, it is important to
take into account the
particular circumstances of the communication. In
McGuirk v University of
New South Wales
was concerned (inter alia) with a claim by the applicant that the respondent had
committed a contempt of court by communications
which, it was alleged,
scandalised the Court. The communications comprised faxes sent to the presiding
judge’s own associates,
the Independent Commission against Corruption, the
ombudsman, the solicitor for the opposing party in the proceedings and two
of parliament. In the circumstances, James J was not satisfied
that the relevant communications constituted contempt of court.
In reaching
that conclusion his Honour stated:
In the present case, the faxes were sent only to the judge’s own
associate, the Independent Commission Against Corruption,
the Ombudsman, the
solicitor for the opposing party in the proceedings and to two members of
parliament.
The Independent Commission Against Corruption is a body and the Ombudsman is a
person one of whose principal functions is to receive
allegations of corrupt or
improper conduct. In my opinion, the court should be slow to find that a
complaint that a judge has been
corrupt sent to either the Independent
Commission Against Corruption or the Ombudsman is a contempt of court, however
the complaint is.
All of the Independent Commission Against Corruption, the Ombudsman and Ms
Bennett had had long experience of Mr McGuirk and of receiving
allegations of
misconduct from him and I consider that this can be taken into account in
determining whether there was a real risk
that the communications sent to them
would have had a tendency to lower the authority of Simpson J.
The conclusion I have reached is that I am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that the faxes relied on in the statement of charge,
although scandalising and
untrue, would carry a real risk as a matter of practical reality of having a
tendency to lower the authority
of Simpson J or impair public confidence in the
court. Consequently, I dismiss the charge of contempt by scandalising the
Breach of undertaking —
of the bases, on which the applicant relies in its summons, is that each of the
emails constituting alleged contempts numbered
4 to 15, were transmitted by the
respondent in breach of an undertaking referred to in the order of
Tsalamandris J on 16 September
2025. In a preliminary mention
hearing in this matter, I raised with the parties the question whether, in fact,
the respondent had
given to the Court, on that date, a binding undertaking which
could form the basis of a finding of contempt of court.
a consequence, on the hearing of the substantive application, counsel for the
applicant did not seek to rely on a breach of the
undertaking as the sole or
determinative basis for a finding of contempt of court in respect of each of the
alleged contempts numbered
4 to 15. Rather, counsel submitted that the
undertaking, recorded in the Court order, and the circumstances in which that
was made, were relevant as they made clear to the respondent that the kind
of communications with the Court, that he had engaged
in, were impermissible and
were in contempt of the Court.
position, taken by counsel for the applicant, was correct. For the following
reasons, I am not persuaded that in the hearing
before Tsalamandris J on 16
September 2025, the applicant did give an undertaking to the Court, which, of
itself, would be sufficient
to constitute the basis of a finding of contempt of
earlier mentioned, the respondent was arrested on 16 September 2025 pursuant to
the warrant issued by Tsalamandris J on 8 September
2025. Following his arrest,
the respondent came before Tsalamandris J on the same day. Her Honour made
an order containing a number
of directions concerning the future conduct of the
contempt proceedings. In the formal orders, in the preamble, it was noted that
the respondent had been arrested by Victoria Police and presented to Court
pursuant to the warrant, and that the respondent was ‘...
released on the
undertakings contained in orders 1(a) and 1(b) below’.
Honour then made the following orders (inter alia):
1 The respondent be released on his own undertaking that:
(a) He appear in person at the Supreme Court of Victoria at Melbourne on 27
October 2025 at 10:00am, and if required on the days
thereafter, for the hearing
and determination of the contempt charges contained in the amended originating
motion dated 10 July 2025.
(b) He not send any emails to County Court or Supreme Court email addresses
which contain abusive or threatening material.
transcript of the hearing before her Honour is in evidence in the current
proceeding. In the course of the hearing, after other
matters had been dealt
with, the judge stated that in circumstances, in which she was provided with an
undertaking (by the respondent)
that he would return to Court on the day of the
hearing and that he would not send any abusive or intimidating email
correspondence
to either the County Court or Supreme Court email addresses, she
would make the orders discussed in the hearing. Her Honour then
raised with
counsel and the respondent whether any other orders were sought or required.
Having done so, the following exchange
occurred between the judge and the
respondent:
HER HONOUR: Mr Brown, I’ll hear the contempt charges on the date that
I’ve listed it for, and I will release you now
on the undertaking that you
have provided — let’s make this clear — that you’ll be
here on 27 October in
RESPONDENT: Yeah. I’ll come on 27 October.
HER HONOUR: ... and every day thereafter that it proceeds and that you will not
— you undertake not to send any intimidating
or abusive emails to people
at either the Supreme Court or County Court?
RESPONDENT: Yes, I won’t. I’ll leave your little corrupt butterflies
alone, and they are corrupt ...
respondent then proceeded to allege that a particular judge of the Supreme Court
was corrupt. Tsalamandris J interrupted and
told the respondent that he
could have ‘whatever private thoughts’ he wished to, but that
referring to that judge as
being corrupt may itself constitute a contempt of
court. Following that exchange, the judge stated that she would adjourn the
on the undertakings given by the respondent, to which the respondent
answered: ‘Yep’.
question is whether, in those circumstances, the respondent gave a formal
binding undertaking to the Court, which was such as
might constitute the basis
of a finding of contempt of court in the case of a relevant breach of it.
I have noted, and as discussed by the Court of Appeal of New South Wales in
the principles, that
apply concerning contempt of court by breach of an order of a court, are
relevantly the same (with appropriate
modification) to an allegation of a breach
of an undertaking made by a party to a court.
stated by Donaldson MR in
an undertaking to
the Court ‘... is as solemn, binding and effective as an order of the
Court in the like terms’. In
a case such as the present, in which the
respondent was not represented, a question arises whether, objectively, it might
be properly
concluded that the respondent did give such an undertaking to the
Court. That is, the question is whether the respondent made an
undertaking to
the Court in circumstances in which he ought reasonably to have understood to be
providing a commitment that was as
binding and effective as an order of the
Court itself.
importance of that question is illustrated, in a different context, by the
decision of Barker J of the Federal Court in
Oswal v Burrup Holdings
Limited (No 2).
case, the applicant applied to the Federal Court for orders granting him access
to the books and records of the respondent.
The Federal Court made orders
granting the applicant access to those documents. The order provided that the
inspection by any person
of the documents would be subject to the previous
receipt by the solicitors for the respondent of a signed confidentiality
undertaking
by the person. The applicant provided a signed confidentiality
undertaking which was expressed to be given ‘to the Court’.
undertaking was never filed in the Federal Court. The respondent alleged that
the applicant breached the undertaking by disclosing
the content and substance
of certain documents to a national newspaper.
upholding the applicant’s no case submission, Barker J noted that, in
order that the conduct of the applicant constitute
a contempt of court, it must
be demonstrated not only that the applicant gave the undertaking, but that it
was received and accepted
concluded that in the circumstances, and based on a proper construction of the
terms of Court order, it could not be
concluded that the confidentiality
undertaking signed by the applicant had been given in terms that it was an
undertaking given to
the present case, in the course of the exchange between Tsalamandris J and
the respondent, the judge did tell the respondent that
he would be released from
custody ‘on the undertaking’ that he provided, which included not to
send any intimidating
or abusive emails to people at the County Court or Supreme
Court. However, there is nothing in the exchange between the judge and
respondent which would permit a conclusion that, in agreeing to such a course,
it might be reasonably concluded that the respondent
understood, or ought to
have understood, that he was thereby making to the Court a binding promise which
would have the force of
an order of the Court. The noun
‘undertaking’ is commonly used in ordinary parlance, in a sense
which is qualitatively
different than that in which the term is used in a court
proceeding. On balance, it could not be concluded that, in the relevant
exchange with the judge, the respondent ought reasonably to have understood that
he was thereby making to the Court a binding promise,
breach of which might
constitute a contempt of court.
the other hand, for the reasons submitted by the applicant, the order made by
Tsalamandris J on 16 September 2025, and the circumstances
in which that
order was made, are relevant, particularly to a consideration of the intention
with which the respondent, following
that date, made the communications that are
the subject of alleged contempts numbered 4 to 15.
I have noted, before Tsalamandris J made that order, her Honour stated
that she considered it appropriate to ensure that the respondent
refrain from
sending any abusive or intimidating emails to the County Court or to the Supreme
Court, in order that the courts were
protected from any future conduct that may
constitute a contempt of court. Tsalamandris J explained to the respondent
that the undertaking
by him, not to send any abusive or intimidating emails to
the County Court and Supreme Court, was a condition of his release. It
those circumstances, and in the context of the exchange between the judge and
the respondent to which I have earlier
that the intention of
the respondent, in sending the emails that were the subject of alleged contempts
numbered 4 to 15, should be
The respondent’s defences
– legal principles
fundamental submission made by the respondent, in written submissions in
response to each of the charges of contempt, is that
the communications in
question each constituted lawful political expression by the respondent, and are
to be assessed in light of
both the constitutional and Charter protections.
support of that proposition, the respondent referred to and relied on the High
Court decisions in
, the Court was concerned with proceedings for defamation by the
plaintiff, who was formerly the Prime Minister of New Zealand. In
response to
the claim, the defendant pleaded that its publication was subject to qualified
privilege. In considering that defence,
the High Court held that the
Commonwealth
Constitution
protects freedom of communication between people
concerning political or government matters which enables people to exercise a
and informed choice as
The Court explained
that the freedom of communication, which the
Constitution
protects, is not
absolute, but is limited to what is necessary for the effective operation of the
system of representative and responsible
government provided for by the
Constitution
. Thus, a law, which might restrict freedom of communication, is
legitimate if the object of the law is compatible with the maintenance
representative and responsible government, and if the law is reasonably
appropriate and adapted to achieving that legitimate
on those propositions, the Court concluded:
When a law of a State or federal Parliament or a Territory legislature is
alleged to infringe the requirement of freedom of communication
Constitution
, two questions must be answered
before the validity of the law can be determined. First, does the law
effectively burden freedom
of communication about government or political
matters either in its terms, operation or effect? Second, if the law effectively
that freedom, is the law reasonably appropriate and adapted to serve a
legitimate end the fulfilment of which is compatible with
the maintenance of the
constitutionally prescribed system of representative and responsible government
and the procedure prescribed
for submitting a proposed amendment
Constitution
to the informed decision of the people (hereafter
collectively "the system of government prescribed by the
Constitution
the first question is answered "yes" and the second is answered "no", the law is
the Court was
concerned with an appeal by a man who was convicted of an offence under
s 7(1)(d) of the
Vagrants, Gaming and Other Offences 1931
which provided that any person who in a public place or near a public place used
any ‘threatening, abusive or insulting
words’ to any person would be
liable to a fine or imprisonment. The High Court by a majority
(Gleeson CJ, Callinan and Heydon
JJ dissenting) held that the
conviction of the appellant for using insulting words in a public place should
be set aside.
reaching that conclusion, McHugh J held that the provision in question was
invalid because the word ‘insulting’ was
so wide as to be capable of
burdening communication about government or political matters and was not
reasonably appropriate and
adapted to achieving a legitimate end consistent with
the system of representative government enshrined by the Commonwealth
Constitution
. Gummow and Hayne JJ in their joint judgment (with whom
Kirby, in effect, agreed), having referred to the test expounded in
, construed s 7(1)(d) in a narrow manner, so as not to apply to
the words published by the appellant. Based on that narrow construction
s 7(1)(d), their Honours concluded that the provision was not
present case is concerned with statements by the respondent (in emails and in
Court) which are alleged to constitute a contempt
of court. As I have
discussed, the Courts have emphasised that the purpose of the principles of
contempt law is not to protect individual
judges or judicial officers personally
from criticisms and imputations against them. Rather, the fundamental purpose
of the principles
of contempt law is to protect and uphold the integrity and
independence of the Courts, and to maintain public confidence in the judicial
process and the system of justice.
the principles stated in
, it is clear that the principles of
contempt law, which I have outlined, are reasonably appropriate and adapted to
serve a legitimate
end, namely, the protection of the integrity of the system of
justice, the fulfilment of which is compatible with the maintenance
system of representative and responsible government prescribed by the
Commonwealth
Constitution
respondent has also relied on the decision of the High Court in
Director of Public Prosecutions
in support of
the proposition that State Courts cannot be used as instruments of executive
policy, so that the Court must remain independent
when evaluating communications
that are critical of government. The decision in
was concerned
with the validity of a New South Wales Act of Parliament which empowered the
Supreme Court of that state to make an
order for the detention of a specified
person in prison after the expiration of a sentence of imprisonment imposed on
that person.
The majority of the Court held that the legislation was invalid
because it reposed in the Court a power that was, in essence, the
antithesis of
the judicial process and which, in effect, rendered the Court an instrument of
executive government policy.
That principle does not have any application in a case such as the present. In
exercising its jurisdiction to hear and determine
proceedings based on a
contempt, the Court is not in any way acting or being used as an instrument of
administrative or executive
policy. Rather, as a matter of first principle, the
Court is performing a judicial function to protect the integrity of the justice
system and to vindicate public confidence in the courts.
contrary to the submission by the respondent, the principles of contempt law do
not involve the application of legal standards
which do not apply equally to
citizens and officials. The fundamental principles of contempt law apply to all
persons, whatever
their status. In that context, I should note that the four
‘comparative instances of official conduct’, referred to
respondent in his submissions, appear to describe conduct by persons which had
nothing to do with the justice system.
respondent has also relied on a number of provisions contained in the Charter
and more specifically, ss 8(3), 15, 21 and 24.
Section 8(3)
of the Charter provides that every person is equal before the law. As
discussed, that provision does not, relevantly,
preclude or affect the current
proceedings against the respondent for contempt of court.
Section 15(1)
of the Charter provides that every person has the right to hold an opinion
without interference, and sub-s (2) provides
that every person has a right
of freedom of expression. However, s 15(3) provides that those rights may
be subject to lawful restrictions
that are reasonably necessary to respect the
rights of others, and to protect (inter alia) public order. Plainly, s 15
and may not, qualify or exclude the fundamental principles of contempt
law, which, as I have discussed, serve the purpose of protecting
and preserving
the integrity of the judicial system.
21 of the Charter provides that every person has a right to liberty and
security. However, of course, that right is not unqualified
or absolute. Thus,
s 21(3) provides that a person must not be deprived of his or her liberty
except in accordance with procedures
established by law.
24 of the Charter provides that a person charged with a criminal offence, or a
party in a civil proceeding, has a right to
have the charge or proceeding
decided by a competent, independent and impartial court or tribunal after a fair
and public hearing.
In the present case, the proceedings for contempt have been
commenced by originating motion and summons. The applicant has set
out, in some
detail, the basis upon which the proceedings are brought. The Court is
competent, independent and impartial in determining
the proceeding brought by
the applicant.
the respondent has submitted that in each case communications by him did not
contain threats of violence or unlawful conduct,
and while they used and were
expressed in terms of strong criticism, the comments by the applicant were
directed at ‘perceived
administrative misconduct’. I shall address
that submission in considering whether the applicant has made out its case on
each of the individual alleged contempts in this case.
The principal issues
two principal issues in the present proceeding are:
(1) whether the respondent engaged in the conduct that is the subject of each of
the alleged contempts;
(2) whether, by doing so, the respondent was in contempt of court.
Whether respondent engaged in the
alleged conduct
the present proceeding, it was not in issue that the respondent engaged in the
conduct that is the subject of each of the 15 alleged
contempts of court.
emails, that constitute alleged contempt numbers 1 and 3, were each transmitted
from the email address ‘rohanmbrown@outlook.com’.
The affidavit of
service of the applicant’s solicitor in this proceeding dated 18 June 2025
notes that in the consolidated
proceeding in the County Court, the respondent
had filed a number of court documents with his email address listed as
‘rohanmbrown@outlook.com’
and that he had also contacted various
parties using that email address in the proceeding. In addition, the VGSO had
number of emails from that address, electronically signed by
‘Rohan Michael Brown’.
emails, that are the basis of alleged contempts numbered 4 to 15 inclusive, were
each transmitted from the email address ‘A1NowInfinity@outlook.com’.
In the hearing before Tsalamandris J on 16 September 2025, the respondent
himself provided that email address as the ‘best
email address’ by
which he was to be contacted. I note that by an email sent on 9 October 2025,
and which is evidence in this
proceeding, the respondent used the email address
‘rohanmbrown@outlook.com’ and stated:
Please note I have regained access to my former email address.
Evidence Act 2008
provides that if a document purports to
contain a record of an electronic communication, it is presumed that that
communication was
sent by or on behalf of the person by or on whose behalf it
appears that the document was sent or made, and that it was sent or made
day which appears on the document.
those circumstances, I am satisfied that the respondent did transmit each of the
emails that are the subject of alleged contempts
numbered 1, 3, and 4 to 15
(inclusive).
was not in issue in this application that the respondent, in the course of the
hearing before Judge Manova on 3 April 2024, spoke
the words that are the
subject of the second alleged contempt. The recording of that proceeding was
tendered in evidence in this
application. Having listened to it, there is no
doubt that the transcript (which was also tendered in evidence) accurately
the exchange that I have set out
and which contained the
remark made by the respondent to the judge, calling her Honour ‘you
fuckin’ whore’.
is not suggested by the respondent that in some way the expression by him was a
slip of the tongue or some unintended remark.
In his email to the chambers of
Judge Manova (and others) dated 29 May 2025 (alleged contempt number 3),
the respondent, in three
separate passages, accused her Honour of being a
‘state funded whore’ and in the concluding sentence of the email he
called her a ‘whore’. In his email to the chambers of Judicial
Registrar Lorenz dated 28 September 2025 (alleged contempt
number 4), which
was copied to others, including the chambers of Judge Manova, the
respondent admitted that he had called Judge Manova
because she said that she did not see any assault in the video that she viewed
in Court. More recently, in
an email to the Attorney-General and others dated 9
October 2025, the respondent made the same accusation about Judge Manova,
her as a ‘woman without virtue who performs immoral acts for
those circumstances, I am satisfied that the respondent not only spoke the words
that are the subject of alleged contempt number
2, but that he did so
consciously and deliberately.
Whether the publications
constitute contempt of court
making individual submissions concerning each of the alleged contempts, counsel
for the applicant commenced by submitting that
the real gravamen of the alleged
contempt in respect of each of the publications was that they were intended to
place improper pressure
or threaten to take reprisal on the Court, the judicial
officers and the officers of the Court, and that they thus had a tendency
interfere with the course of justice by threatening the Court’s judicial
officers and other officers of the Court in connection
with their roles in
administering justice.
considering that proposition, it is to be noted that the emails that constituted
contempts numbered 4 to 15, were transmitted by
the respondent over a period of
four days. As submitted on behalf of the applicant, in evaluating the import of
each successive
email, it is appropriate to take into account, as relevant
context, the emails which preceded
now turn to consider each of the 15 alleged contempts of court.
The first alleged contempt (email
dated 17 October 2023)
for the applicant submitted that the email dated 17 October 2023 was a knowing,
deliberate and intentional breach by the respondent
of the order of
Judge Tran dated 4 October 2023. Counsel submitted that the email
constituted a deliberate attempt by the respondent
to intimidate, defy and
influence the decision‑making of the judge and was calculated to divert
the course of justice. Accordingly,
it was submitted that the email had a
tendency to interfere with the course of justice and was intended to do so.
I have noted, Judge Tran made the orders of 4 October 2023 following a
directions hearing by her Honour on the preceding date,
in which her Honour
specifically raised her concern that any email sent by the respondent to the
County Court email address must
not contain abusive or threatening material.
Judge Tran noted that the respondent had sent communications to the Court
be interpreted as gratuitously abusive or insulting, and her Honour
stated that she intended to specify clearly the Court’s
expectations
concerning the use of various email addresses and the contents of the emails
sent to the Court. Accordingly, her Honour
made the orders dated 4 October 2023
in which she specified the precise email addresses to which correspondence
should be forwarded,
and her Honour (order number 10) directed that any emails
sent by the respondent to any County Court email address ‘must not
abusive or threatening material’.
Relevantly,
on 17 October 2023, the respondent sent to the chambers of Judge Tran, and
copied to others, an email which accused the
Court of being either incompetent
or deliberately corrupted. The email made a number of accusations, including
concealment of a
fraud, concealing serious offences, and supporting and
assisting terrorism. Following receipt of the email, the chambers of
Tran sent an email to the respondent reminding the respondent of the
orders her Honour had made on 4 October 2023, and stating that
emails sent
by the respondent would not be placed on the Court file or replied to unless
they complied with those orders.
was in that context that the respondent then sent the email that is alleged
contempt number 1, and which expressly and directly
accused Judge Tran as
being a ‘corrupt low [life]’.
the principles which I have discussed, it is clear that the email constituted a
contempt of court on a number of bases.
First and foremost, it was an
intentional and direct contravention by the respondent of the order made by
Judge Tran, just 13 days
earlier, that an email sent by him to any County
Court email address must not contain abusive or threatening material. Secondly,
the email was directed to a judge who was presiding over hearings in a case in
which he was a party. It constituted an extra-curial
attempt by the respondent
for the purpose of influencing or affecting the deliberations and considerations
by the judge. Thirdly,
the email was intended to, and had the tendency to,
undermine and detract from the authority of the judge as a member of the Court
and, as such, to compromise the system of justice.
those reasons, it must be concluded that the email dated 17 October 2023 (the
first alleged contempt) constituted a contempt of
court by the
respondent.
Second alleged contempt (hearing
before Judge Manova — 3 April 2024)
respect of the second alleged contempt, counsel for the applicant submitted that
the respondent spoke the particular words in an
extremely expressive and
threatening tone to the judge. He submitted that the insult by the respondent
was part of a campaign by
him to undermine judicial officers with whom the
respondent took issue, and that objectively, it was calculated to interfere with
the judge’s ability to administer justice.
had the opportunity to listen to the relevant part of the recording of the
hearing before Judge Manova, I accept that the words,
which are the subject
of alleged contempt number 2, were spoken by the respondent in a tone, and in a
manner, which evidenced an
intention by him to deliberately insult the judge.
The words, so spoken by the respondent, constituted abuse by him in court of
judge who was presiding on the hearing in which he was involved. As such, they
clearly constituted contempt of court. As explained
by Whelan J in
that conduct
was contempt because it challenged the authority of the Court, it interrupted
the Court’s proceedings, and it
detracted from the capacity of the Court
to conduct proceedings in a dispassionate, rational and objective manner.
insult directed by the respondent to the judge was plainly entirely unjustified.
The respondent spoke the words in response to
a request by the judge to identify
to her the part of the video footage in which he alleged that he had been
assaulted by the police
prosecutor. In that way, the judge was endeavouring to
assist the respondent in the presentation of his case. The insult directed
the respondent to the judge was entirely gratuitous.
I have noted, it is quite clear that the words spoken by the respondent were
deliberately chosen by him, and were not a mere slip
of the tongue, or the
product of a momentary loss of rationality. The subsequent conduct by the
respondent clearly demonstrates
that he selected the insult, and intended that
it offend the Court. As such, it not only undermined the authority of the
but it was intended and calculated to endeavour to intimidate the judge
in the conduct by her of the judicial proceeding that was
those reasons, I am satisfied that the words, that constitute allege contempt
number 2, did, in fact, constitute a contempt of
Third alleged contempt (email to
Judge Manova dated 29 May 2025)
for the applicant submitted that the third alleged contempt was transmitted by
the respondent after the commencement of the
contempt proceeding by originating
motion, and in circumstances in which he was aware that he was already being
prosecuted for contempt
of court by calling Judge Manova a
‘whore’. It was an email sent to the chambers of a judge who had
supervised the proceeding,
that was still on foot, in which he was a party.
Counsel submitted that the email constituted a direct breach by the respondent
of the order of Judge Tran made 4 October 2023. It was an insult
specifically selected by the respondent, and was calculated to
interfere with
the course of justice, by retaliating against decisions and views made or
expressed by the judge in the course of
the hearing in which she presided.
email forwarded by the respondent to Judge Manova, that is the subject of
alleged contempt number 3, clearly constituted an intentional
breach by him of
the order of Judge Tran dated 4 October 2023, namely, that he must not send
emails to the Court which contained
abusive or threatening material. The
respondent was aware of the terms and content of the order. By transmitting the
intentionally and knowingly contravened the order which, he ought to
have understood, was made for the purpose of ensuring that appropriate
communications be made to the Court to enable the Court to objectively and
appropriately undertake its work in the system of justice.
the email constituted an extra-curial communication, by the respondent, with a
judge who had managed proceedings in which
he was then a party before the Court.
As such, the email was calculated by the respondent to influence or affect the
management by
the judge, and by the Court, of the proceeding in which he was a
addition, the email was forwarded, not only to Judge Manova’s
chambers, but to others, including the chambers of two County
Court judges, the
Chief Judge of the County Court, the Attorney-General, and the Victorian
Government Solicitor’s Office.
In the circumstances, I am persuaded that
the level of distribution of the email was such as to constitute it a contempt
the basis that it was a scandalous disparagement of the judge in the
Court, and, as such, it had a tendency to interfere with the
those reasons, the third alleged contempt did constitute a contempt of court by
the respondent.
Alleged contempt number 4 (email
to Judicial Registrar Lorenz dated 28 September 2025)
for the applicant submitted that the email, that is the subject of alleged
contempt number 4, is a serious contempt, constituting
a direct threat to
Judicial Registrar Lorenz, who was then conducting proceedings in the
Supreme Court involving the respondent.
Counsel also noted that the email
denigrated judicial officers who had previously conducted, or were conducting,
proceedings involving
him, including two judges of the County Court.
the principles which I have discussed, it is clear that the email, that is the
subject of alleged contempt number 4, was
a contempt of court. First, it was
directed to a judicial officer, namely Judicial Registrar Lorenz, who was
then responsible for
the conduct of Supreme Court proceedings in which the
respondent was a party. It was a communication quite plainly directed, and
intended, to intimidate the judicial registrar and her management of the
proceeding. Most seriously, it contained a direct threat
to the judicial
registrar concerning and in respect of the pending proceeding involving the
respondent. As such, it was, as the
applicant has submitted, a direct
deliberate attempt by the respondent to divert the course of justice.
addition, I note that the respondent copied the email (inter alia) to the
Chief Judge of the County Court, and to the chambers
of Judge Tran and
Judge Manova. As such, the email was a direct contravention by the
respondent of the order made by Judge Tran
on 4 October 2023, in
circumstances in which the respondent well knew and understood that he was
prohibited from forwarding to members
of the County Court abusive and
threatening emails. In the email the respondent directly referred to
Judge Manova and Judge Tran
in grossly disparaging terms. As I have
noted, the County Court proceedings involving the respondent were, at that time,
still extant,
although they were temporarily stayed. The email, as such,
constituted a contempt of court by being intended to intimidate the judges
the County Court in their proceedings in which he was a litigant.
in addition to being copied to the Chief Judge of the County Court, and to the
chambers of Judges Tran and Manova, the email
was also copied to the
Attorney‑General, to two solicitors acting for the plaintiff in the
vexatious litigant proceedings,
and to one Matthew Laxton of Victoria Police.
The email again referred to Judges Manova and Tran, and Beale J in
terms which constituted
a scandalous disparagement of each of those judges of
those Courts and, as such, had a tendency to undermine the administration of
justice in the State.
those reasons, alleged contempt number 4 constituted a clear and serious
contempt of court by the respondent.
Alleged contempt number 5 (email
dated 29 September 2025)
respect of the fifth alleged contempt, counsel for the applicant noted that
before the email was sent by the respondent, the Supreme
Court – General
List had forwarded an email to the respondent reminding him of the undertaking
given by him on 16 September
2025, enclosing a copy of the orders made on
that date, and noting that the respondent had corresponded with the Court by
28 September 2025 in breach of the undertaking so given by the
respondent to the Court on 16 September.
submitted that although the email, that constitutes alleged contempt
number 5, was not sent directly to the chambers of a
judge, nevertheless,
it was forwarded directly to the Court, and to an employee of the Court who was
engaged in official duties,
with the intention of intimidating the Court and
undermining the Court’s authority. Counsel noted that the email was
by the respondent in defiance of the reminder given to him that he was
not to forward such emails to the Court.
considering the fifth alleged contempt, a number of considerations are relevant.
First, at the time, the respondent was a party
to litigation in the Supreme
Court. Secondly, the email in question, under the heading
‘Subject’, specified that proceeding.
Thirdly, the email plainly
contravened the ‘undertaking’ given by the respondent to the Court
on 16 September, of which
the respondent had been reminded on the previous date.
The email commenced by disparaging three members of the Court, alleging that
they were exemplars of the ‘proven endemic corruption’ of the
those matters into account, I am persuaded that the communication by the
respondent constituted a contempt of court, by comprising
an extra-curial
communication by him for the purpose of influencing or affecting the conduct of
the litigation in the Court in which
he was a party.
follows that the communication constituted a contempt of court.
Alleged contempts numbered 6 and 7
(emails dated 1 October 2025 at 1.07pm and 1.39pm)
contempts numbered 6 and 7 comprised emails sent by the respondent to the
Supreme Court General List email address on 1 October
2025 at 1:07 pm and
1:39 pm, respectively. Earlier on the same day, at 10:51 am, the
Court General List had sent an email to the
respondent attaching the
authenticated order of Tsalamandris J dated 1 October, and advising
the respondent that the matter had been
listed for mention at 2:15 pm on 2
October in court number 1. The email attached the order. In ‘other
matters’ the
Court noted that on 28, 29 and 30 September, the respondent
had sent email correspondence to the Court which needed to be addressed.
for the applicant submitted that, in that context, each email constituted a
contempt of court, because it had the tendency
to interfere with the course of
justice. Counsel submitted that although alleged contempt number 6 was not
sent directly to the
chambers of Judicial Registrar Lorenz or
Tsalamandris J, it was clearly directed to those two judicial officers.
Further, counsel
submitted that the email constituted a contempt of court by
being sent to an employee of the Court, and was expressed in such terms
had a tendency to discourage the recipient from undertaking their duties in
relation to the proceeding that was before the
Court. Counsel submitted that it
should be inferred that each email was forwarded to the Court with that
intention, namely, to place
pressure on those connected with the
respondent’s cases from performing their duties in respect of them.
in the case of alleged contempt number 5, the ‘subject’ of each of
alleged contempts numbered 6 and 7 was the present
proceeding. The only
reasonable inference, both from the context, and from the content, of each of
the two emails, is that they
were intentionally directed to Tsalamandris J
and Judicial Registrar Lorenz, and that it was the intention of the
respondent that
they be brought to the attention of each of those two judicial
I have noted, the two emails followed the email by the Court to the respondent
notifying him of the order of Tsalamandris J that
the matter was listed for
mention at 2:15 pm on the following day, 2 October. The sixth alleged
contempt commenced with a reference
by the respondent to the
‘undertaking’ that he gave to the Court on 16 September. The
email expressly referred to Judicial
Registrar Lorenz. The email that
constituted alleged contempt number 7 followed that email (alleged contempt
number 6), and was,
in a sense, an addendum to it. In that context, it must be
concluded that it was the intention of the respondent that each of those
be brought to the attention of the two judicial officers who were managing his
cases, namely, Tsalamandris J and Judicial
Registrar Lorenz.
the circumstances, the only reasonable inference, from the content of each of
the two emails, is that they were intended by the
respondent to influence or
affect the discharge by each of those judicial officers of their roles in the
cases involving the respondent.
As such, they were intended to, and had the
tendency, to interfere with and undermine the proper administration of the
justice. The alleged contempt number 6 concluded with a clear threat
to the intended recipients, which reinforces the conclusion
that the emails were
intended to undermine the due course of justice in respect of the cases in which
the respondent was involved
in this Court.
those reasons, the emails constituting alleged contempts numbered 6 and 7 were
each contempts of court.
Alleged contempt number 8 (email
dated 1 October 2025 at 11:03pm)
respect of alleged contempt number 8, counsel for the applicant noted that the
email commenced by being addressed ‘Dear Associate’.
Counsel noted
that the email continued and made further allegations of corruption against the
Court, and was a demand that the Court
attend to his grievances, before he would
cooperate by appearing in the proceeding on the next day. Counsel submitted
that, as such,
the email constituted an extra-curial correspondence directed to
the associate that was intended to influence the Court in its handling
is some substance in the submissions made on behalf of the applicant in respect
of alleged contempt number 8. Nevertheless,
reading the email as a whole, I
could not be satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that it constituted an intended
attempt by the respondent
to influence or affect the Court’s determination
of the proceedings in which he was involved. Nor am I persuaded, beyond
doubt, that the email could be fairly described as having such a
tendency. In particular, it is not possible to exclude, as a reasonable
hypothesis, that the email constituted an ill‑expressed explanation by the
respondent for his failure to attend the mention
hearing of the present
proceeding that was listed before Tsalamandris J on the following day,
2 October 2025.
those reasons, I am not persuaded that the eighth alleged contempt did
constitute a contempt of court by the respondent.
Alleged contempt number 9 (email
dated 2 October 2025 at 11:12am)
respect of the ninth alleged contempt, counsel for the applicant noted that the
email was addressed and copied (inter alia) to
the chambers of Judge Tran,
and, as such, constituted a breach of her Honour’s order made on 4 October
further submitted that the email contravened the undertaking contained in the
order of Tsalamandris J on 16 September 2025,
and was part of an ongoing
campaign by the respondent to attempt to put improper influence on the Court in
respect of the proceedings
in which he was a litigant. Accordingly, it was
submitted that the email, being directed to the chambers of Tsalamandris J,
copied to the chambers of Judicial Registrar Lorenz, was transmitted by
the respondent with an intention to divert the course of
justice, by attacking
and seeking to intimidate judicial officers who were responsible for the conduct
of proceedings in which he
was a party.
the reasons relied on by counsel for the applicant, I am persuaded that alleged
contempt number 9 does constitute a contempt of
court by the respondent.
the email was copied (inter alia) to the chambers of Judge Tran of the
County Court. The email twice referred to Judge Tran,
and alleged that her
Honour was part of an alleged coverup of corruption in the justice system. As
such, the email contravened the
order by Judge Tran of 3 October 2024, in
that it contained abusive and threatening material.
the email was directed to the chambers of Tsalamandris J, and copied to the
chambers of Judicial Registrar Lorenz, each of
whom were then presiding
over cases in the Supreme Court in which the respondent was a party. On its
face, it was plainly an extra-curial
communication to two presiding judicial
officers. It followed, inter alia, alleged contempts numbered 6 and 7, which
had been sent
on the previous day, and which I have concluded were intended by
the respondent to influence or affect the discharge by those judicial
of their roles in the cases involving the respondent. In that context, and
taking into account the text of the alleged
contempt number 9, the circumstance
that the email was forwarded and copied to two judicial officers who were then
presiding on cases
in which he was a party, and that it was copied to other
persons involved in the justice system, the only reasonable inference is
the respondent sent it to those judicial officers with an intention to divert
the course of justice, by seeking to intimidate
Tsalamandris J and Judicial
Registrar Lorenz who were responsible for the conduct of proceedings in
which he was a party.
follows, that it must be concluded that the ninth alleged contempt did
constitute a contempt of court by the respondent.
Alleged contempt number 10 (email
dated 2 October 2025 at 11:18am)
for the applicant submitted that alleged contempt number 10 constituted a
broadside attack by the respondent on anyone who
has been involved in the
respondent’s court proceedings, including judicial officers to whom the
email was sent and copied.
Counsel noted that the email accused everyone of
being ‘criminal low lives and perverters of the law’. It was
that the email was an attack on any person who would attempt to
undertake their duties in connection with the respondent’s
proceedings
and, as such, constituted a contempt of court.
email was directly copied to the email address of Judge Tran. It addressed
each of the recipients — including Judge Tran
‘criminal low lives and perverters of the law’. As such, it was
plainly in contravention of the order
of her Honour made 4 October 2023 and,
accordingly, constituted a contempt of court.
Furthermore,
and perhaps more significantly, as submitted by the applicant, the remarks made
by the respondent in the email were directed
to each of the recipients of it,
including Tsalamandris J to whom the email was directed, and Judicial
Registrar Lorenz, to whom
it was copied. As submitted on behalf of the
applicant, the email abused, in quite flagrant terms, each of the recipients,
those judicial officers who were then involved in the conduct and
litigation in which the respondent was a party. It was a blatant
attack on any
person who had been involved in legal proceedings in connection with the
respondent. The only reasonable inference
is that, by sending the email, the
respondent intended to intimidate each person who was involved in his
proceedings, including the
judicial officers responsible for the management of
the two proceedings in the Supreme Court.
conclusion is reinforced by the circumstance that the email was sent by the
respondent just six minutes after he had remitted
the email which constitutes
alleged contempt number 9 and which, as I have concluded, was transmitted by the
respondent with the
same intent to the recipients, including Tsalamandris J
and Judicial Registrar Lorenz.
follows that it must be concluded that alleged contempt number 10 constituted a
contempt of court.
Alleged contempt number 11 (email
dated 2 October 2025 at 11:43am)
for the applicant made the same submissions, in respect of the 11
alleged contempt of court, as he advanced in respect of the tenth alleged
contempt of court.
am satisfied that the 11
alleged contempt of court did constitute a
contempt of court for two reasons.
by being addressed to Judge Tran’s chambers, it constituted a breach
of the order made by her Honour on 4 October 2023,
by constituting an email that
contained abusive and threatening material.
the email, by suggesting that the recipients should each be
‘euthanised’, constituted a blatant threat by the
respondent to the
recipients, including to the two judicial officers, Tsalamandris J and
Judicial Registrar Lorenz, who were then
involved in the management of
cases in which he was a party. The abuse contained in the email, and that
threat, could only have
been sent by the respondent with the intention of
intimidating those judicial officers — and others — involved in
with those cases. As such, it constituted a clear and blatant
contempt of court.
Alleged contempt number 12 (email
dated 2 October 2025 at 11:45am)
email, that constitutes alleged contempt number 12, was transmitted by the
respondent exactly two minutes after he transmitted
the email that was the
subject of alleged contempt number 11. As such, it must be construed and
considered as a continuation of,
or addendum to, that email.
that context, I am satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that the intention of the
respondent in forwarding the email to the chambers
of Tsalamandris J, and
copying it (inter alia) to the chambers of Judicial Registrar Lorenz, was
to attack and intimidate those judicial
officers in the performance of their
duties in connection with the proceedings involving the respondent. As such, it
constituted
a contempt of court.
by being copied to the chambers of Judge Tran, it again breached the order made
by her Honour on 4 October 2023, and as such,
also constituted a contempt of
court in that way.
those reasons, alleged contempt of court number 12 constituted a contempt of
Alleged contempt number 13 (email
dated 2 October 2025 at 11:56am)
for the applicant submitted that although the email, that constitutes alleged
contempt number 13, was not directly insulting
to Tsalamandris J or the
other judicial officers to whom it was copied, nevertheless, it was part of an
overall campaign by the respondent
to place pressure on, and intimidate, those
who are undertaking their duties in the justice system, including the judge who
to hear a mention in the present case.
the email were considered in isolation, it would be questionable whether,
standing alone, it did constitute a contempt of court.
However, the email
followed four previous emails transmitted by the respondent to the chambers of
Tsalamandris J, and copied to
others including Judicial
Registrar Lorenz, over a period of 44 minutes. As such, it was part of the
same chain of emails.
email was addressed to the chambers of Tsalamandris J and copied (inter
alia) to Judicial Registrar Lorenz. It directly impugned
a magistrate who
had presided over a case in which the respondent was a party, and directly
accused that magistrate of acting in
a corrupt manner to protect a corrupt
lawyer. The balance of the email, which I have not quoted, was expressed in
vituperative and
quite offensive language. Taken in context, I am satisfied,
beyond reasonable doubt, that alleged contempt number 13 was, as the
has contended, part of an overall campaign by the respondent to place pressure
on and intimidate those who were undertaking
their duties in cases in which he
was a party, including Tsalamandris J, who was about to hear a mention in
the present case, and
also Judicial Registrar Lorenz, who was managing the
other proceedings in this Court involving the respondent.
those reasons, alleged contempt number 13 did constitute a contempt of
Alleged contempt number 14 (email
dated 2 October 2025 at 12:06pm)
for the applicant submitted that the 14
alleged contempt is a
contempt of court because it constituted an intentional defiance by the
respondent for the authority of the
Court in connection with the hearing before
Tsalamandris J that was to take place, in the present case, later on the
analysis, that submission is correct. The email was directed to the chambers of
Tsalamandris J, who was to preside in the directions
hearing in this matter
that was to take place at 2:15pm on 2 October. The second-last sentence in the
email was, as the applicant
has submitted, a deliberate defiance of the
authority of the Court. The email was sent in the context of the communications
preceded it on the same day. In that context, the only reasonable
conclusion is that the respondent transmitted the email with the
intention of
defying and intimidating the Court, and thus undermining the authority of the
Court. In that connection, it is also
relevant that the email was copied (inter
alia) to the chambers of Judicial Registrar Lorenz, who, as I have
discussed, is responsible
for the management of the other Supreme Court
proceedings in which the respondent is a party.
addition, the email was copied to the chambers of Judge Tran, and it
contained explicit abuse directed to her Honour and to other
members of the
County Court. In that way, the email was also a contempt of court on the basis
that it contravened the order of Judge
Tran dated 4 October 2023.
those reasons, it is concluded that alleged contempt number 14 was a contempt of
Alleged contempt number 15 (email
dated 2 October 2025 at 2:03pm)
for the applicant submitted that the 15
alleged contempt
constituted a contempt of court because it contained a threat, addressed to
Tsalamandris J, that was in the last
three lines of the email.
uphold that submission. The last section of the email informed the recipient,
Tsalamandris J, that she had a ‘choice’.
It then set out the
‘choice’, the first of which would be favourable to the respondent.
The clear threat to the judge
was that if her Honour did not make that
‘choice’, she would be ‘one day dealt with accordingly’.
That threat
was reinforced by the last line, which was to the effect that if the
judge did not adopt the course favourable to the respondent,
he would not change
his ‘trajectory’, which plainly would be unfavourable to the
email, that constitutes the alleged contempt number 15, was the sixth email
directed to Tsalamandris J in the preceding period
of two hours. It was
transmitted by the respondent just 12 minutes before her Honour was due to
preside over a hearing of the present
case in which the respondent is, of
course, a party. In that context, and by its terms, the email was clearly a
direct threat to
the judge, intended to intimidate her. As such, it was a
serious contempt of court by the respondent.
Summary of conclusions
the foregoing reasons, I conclude that the emails, and comments made by the
respondent in open court on 3 April 2024, that comprise
alleged contempts
number 1 to 7 (inclusive), and alleged contempts number 9 to 15
(inclusive), were each contempts of court.
Accordingly,
the respondent is convicted of the 14 counts of contempt of court constituted by
that conduct. Subject to hearing from
the parties, I shall make declarations
that the respondent be adjudged guilty of contempt of court in respect of each
of those communications
and comments. I shall, in due course, hear submissions
from the parties on the issue of the appropriate sentence in respect of those
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR 1
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 189 CLR 51
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
John Fairfax & Sons Pty
Ltd v McRae
[1955] HCA 12
(1955) 93 CLR 351
, 365 (Dixon CJ, Fullagar, Kitto and
Taylor JJ);
Grassby v The Queen
[1989] HCA 45
(1989) 168 CLR 1
, 17 (Dawson J).
Brown v State of
[2023] VCC 1282.
Attorney-General for the
State of Victoria v Brown
(SECI 2024 No 06736).
Gallagher v Durack
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238
, 245 (Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson and Brennan JJ);
(1995) 183 CLR 525
, 533–4 (Brennan, Deane, Toohey and Gaudron
[1935] HCA 34
(1935) 53 CLR 434
(‘Dunbabin’)
Ibid 442–3; see also
445–6 (Starke J), 447 (Dixon J).
, 534 (Brennan, Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ).
Advan Investments Pty
Ltd v Dean Gleeson Motor Sales Pty Ltd
[2003] VSC 201
[31] (Gillard J);
Scott v Evia Pty Ltd
[2007] VSC 15
[36] (Dodds-Streeton J).
Australasian Meat
Industry Employees Union & Ors v Mudginberri Station Pty Ltd
[1986] HCA 46
, 112 (Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson and Deane JJ);
Attorney-General for New
South Wales v Dean
(1990) 20 NSWLR 650
, 656 (Gleeson CJ, Kirby P and
Priestly JA);
Chan v Chen (No 2)
[2007] VSC 24
[22] (Kaye J);
Construction Forestry Mining and Energy Union v Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 261
(2014) 47 VR 527
, 563-564 [138]–[141] (Ashley,
Redlich and Weinberg JJA).
(1995) 183 CLR 525.
Ibid 538–9 (citations
[2017] NSWCA 200
R v Davison
Barn & Ald 329
(1821) 106 ER 958
, 959 (Abbott CJ);
Magistrates’ Court at Prahran v Murphy
[1997] 2 VR 186
(Callaway JA).
[2011] VSC 643.
[2008] NSWSC 389.
Rajski v Bainton
(1990) 22 NSWLR 125
, 131–2 (Samuels AP, Handley JA);
R v Vasiliou
[2012] VSC 216
[36]–[37] (Beach J);
R v Bonacci
[2015] VSC 121
[80]–[88] (Kaye JA).
[1849] EngR 498
(1849) 1 MaC & G 116
Re Dyce Sombre
Re Dyce Sombre
[1849] EngR 498
(1849) 1 MaC & G 116
[1849] EngR 498
Re JRL; Ex parte CJL
[1986] HCA 39
(1986) 66 ALR 239
, 244 (Mason J).
[1935] HCA 34
(1935) 53 CLR 434
[1983] HCA 2
(1983) 152 CLR 238.
(1969) 70 SR (NSW) 413
[1969] NZLR 55.
[1953] VicLawRp 49
[1954] VLR 46.
SR (NSW) 413
[1969] NZLR 55.
[1953] VicLawRp 49
[1954] VLR 46
[2009] NSWSC 1058.
Ibid [341]–[344].
[2017] NSWCA 200
(Simpson JA).
[1986] Fam 134
[2012] FCA 1187
(2012) 297 ALR 599.
Ibid, 612 [78].
Ibid, 614 [85].
Above [102], [109].
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520.
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR 1.
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
(Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ).
Ibid, 561-2.
Ibid, 567-8.
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR 1.
Ibid, 77–9 (Gummow
and Hayne JJ).
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 189 CLR 51.
Ibid, 107-8 (Gaudron J),
122–4 (McHugh J), 134, 143 (Gummow J).
R v Duffy; Ex
[1960] 2 QB 188
, 197–8 (Lord Parker CJ);
Attorney-General v Nationwide News Pty Ltd
(1986) 43 SASR 374
(Matheson J), 407 (Olsson J);
R v Bonacci
[2015] VSC 121
[2011] VSC 643
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (491 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter