URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clayton v State of Victoria [1998] VADT 28 (30 November 1998)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LIST
No. 175 of 1997
No. 183 of 1997
ERIC CLAYTON
STATE OF VICTORIA
MS C. McKENZIE
, Deputy President
TRANSCRIPT OF DECISION
AT MELBOURNE ON MONDAY 30 NOVEMBER 1998 AT 9.46 A.M.
MR E. CLAYTON appeared on his own behalf.
MR D. JANSON appeared on behalf of the Respondent.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Now, I reserved my decision in relation to these two
complaints, both against the State of Victoria but in two different
capacities,
one against in the state in its capacity of the Office of Fair Trading and
Business Affairs which I will call OFTBA and
the other against Victoria Police.
The decisions in both complaints are that the complaints are to be
I now give my reasons and I first begin with the complaint against
OFTBA. This complaint was lodged with the Equal Opportunity Commission,
call the Commission, on 6 August 1997. Mr Clayton in that complaint claimed
discrimination in the provision of services because
of imputed disability or
impairment. In October 1997 the Commission declined to entertain the complaint
under s.108 of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
, which I will call the Act. Its
letter to the complainant notifying him of this decision is included in the
documents tendered in
evidence as Exhibit A. The letter states that is has
declined the complaint because of lack of substance but it is clear from the
reading of the letter as a whole that the Commission was declining the complaint
because in its view s.70 of the
Equal Opportunity Act
applied to it.
As Mr Clayton was entitled to under s.108 of the Act he requested or
required the Commission to refer the complaint to the then Anti-Discrimination
Tribunal. The Commission referred the complaint to that Tribunal by letter dated
27 October 1997, received by the ADT on 31 October
1997. There was a preliminary
conference held on 16 December 1997 and directions for the filing and service of
particulars of complaint
and defence were given. Those documents were
subsequently filed and served.
On 1 July 1998 the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
which I will call the VCAT Act, and the Tribunals and Licensing Authorities
(Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1998, which I will call
the Miscellaneous
Amendments Act, came into operation. The effect of these, among other things is
to abolish the Anti-Discrimination
Tribunal, to create the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal, which I will call VCAT, and to confer on VCAT the
Equal Opportunity Act
formerly exercised by the
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal. The effect of clause 9(1) of schedule 2 of the
Miscellaneous Amendments Act
is, among other things, that if a complaint is
pending before the ADT and the hearing of it had not begun on 1 July 1998 then
complaint is taken to have been commenced before VCAT. Anything done by the
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal or the parties in relation
to that complaint is
taken to have been done by or in relation to VCAT and the procedure prescribed
by the VCAT Act applies on and
from 1 July 1998 but VCAT only has the powers,
functions and duties in relation to that complaint that the Anti-Discrimination
had before 1 July. I treat clause 9(1) of that schedule as applying to
this complaint.
Mr Clayton did not in his complaint or particulars of complaint identify
any requirement, condition or practice that might form the
basis of a claim of
indirect discrimination. I therefore treat the claim as one of direct
discrimination. I now briefly summarise
the provisions of the Act relating to
this claim.
Section 4 defines attribute as an attribute in s.6. It defines detriment
as including humiliation and denigration. It defines discrimination
the meaning given in Part 2. It defines impairment, among other things, as
meaning para.(d), "A malfunction of a part of
the body including (i). a mental
or psychological disease or disorder." It defines services as including,
para.(f), "Services provided
by a government department." Section 6 provides the
following are the attributes on the basis of which discrimination is prohibited
in the areas of activity set out in Part 3. Paragraph (b) states that impairment
is an attribute for the purposes of that section.
Section 7(1) makes it clear
that discrimination includes direct and indirect discrimination on the basis of
an attribute. Section
7(2)(d) makes it clear that discrimination on the basis of
an attribute includes discrimination on the basis that a person is presumed
have that attribute or to have had it in the past. Section 8(1) provides,
"Direct discrimination occurs if a person treats or
proposes to treat someone
with that attribute less favourably than the person treats or would treat
someone without that attribute
or with a different attribute in the same or
similar circumstances." It is clear from s.8(2) that the attribute need not be
or dominant basis for the treatment but must be a substantial basis for
it. It is also clear from s.8(2) and s.10 that the motive
of the discriminator
or the discriminator's awareness that the treatment is discriminatory are
irrelevant.
This claim is based on the provision of services and s.42 is the section
relevant to that. Sub-section (1) provides, "A person must
not discriminate
against another person", and I then deal with only the paragraphs that are
relevant, "(a) by refusing to provide
services to the other person, (b) in the
terms of which services are provided to the other person, (c) by subjecting the
other person
to any other detriment in connection with the provision of services
to him or her."
I now deal with the evidence and make findings of fact. They are based
on all the evidence before me, that evidence includes witness
statements and
oral evidence by Mr Clayton and Mr Pawluk who is an investigation officer in the
Division of Investigation and Compliance
of OFTBA. I also make my findings based
on various documents that were attached to those witness statements and which
are exhibits
before this Tribunal and there are a number of other exhibits
before me as well.
A good deal of the evidence is not in dispute. On 26 February 1997 a
letter was received by OFTBA from
Mr Clayton. In that letter Mr Clayton asked OFTBA to investigate a complaint
that unauthorised people had unlawfully entered the room
in which he then lived
in a rooming house at 36 Nicholson Street, Fitzroy. The investigation was
assigned to Mr Les Lacny, an investigation
officer with OFTBA.
On 11 March 1997 Mr Clayton phoned Ms Telegllou, a senior investigations
officer with OFTBA requesting that a different officer be
assigned to the
investigation because he was unhappy with the way in which Mr Lacny had
investigated a previous matter which had
occurred between Mr Clayton and OFTBA.
He was told that the circumstances did not warrant re-allocation of the file and
also he was
told that his request letter, his original letter of 26 February,
would be acknowledged and that facts would be gathered and assessed
and he would
be advised of the outcome of the investigation.
On 11 March 1997 Ms Telegllou wrote to Mr Clayton acknowledging his
letter of 26 February and stating that he would be contacted
at a later date for
further information or to receive advice as to the outcome of enquiries.
On 14 March 1997 Mr Clayton rang OFTBA and on 15 March 1997 sent a
letter to Ms Telegllou enclosing some additional material. On
20 March 1997 Mr
Clayton wrote twice to OFTBA, the first letter gave more details of his
complaints and the second, again, asked
for a re-allocation of the file on the
basis that Mr Lacny had a conflict of interest.
On 1 April 1997 there was a meeting between Mr Clayton and Mr Pawluk and
Mr Hickey, another investigation officer. At that meeting
there was discussion
of Mr Clayton's complaints of unlawful entry into his room and of other
complaints made by him concerning certain
other conduct which he alleges against
certain residents of the rooming house in which he lived. Mr Clayton expressed
concern about
the officers of OFTBA approaching staff and residents of the
rooming house about his concerns.
On 2 April 1997 Mr Clayton again wrote to OFTBA setting out further
details of his complaints. On 23 April 1997 the Director of OFTBA,
Ms Bernadette
Steele, wrote to Mr Clayton advising him that his complaints of theft and
stalking were matters more appropriately
dealt with by the police. But that
OFTBA could and would investigate the complaint of breach of the Rooming Houses
Act and that it
may be necessary to raise Mr Clayton's concerns about this
matter with the owner of the rooming house and with staff and residents
house. And that as Mr Clayton had expressed concern about doing this the
investigation could not proceed until Mr Clayton
advised OFTBA in writing that
he had no objections to his allegations being raised with these people. The
letter confirmed that Mr
Pawluk was now handling the file, that is that Mr Lacny
had been removed from handling the file.
Mr Clayton wrote two more letters to OFTBA dated 5 May 1997 but neither
included the written advice sought by Ms Steele. Mr Clayton
also phoned OFTBA
several times asking about the progress of the investigation. After a phone
discussion between Mr Pawluk and Mr
Clayton on 12 May 1997, in which Mr Pawluk
explained the need for the written advice or authority requested by Ms Steele,Mr
brought to OFTBA on 13 May a written authority which permitted his
allegations to be raised with the relevant rooming house residents,
with the rooming house owner. On that day Mr Pawluk produced an authority in
more precise terms and Mr Clayton signed it,
although he complained that this
was a pedantic way to proceed.
On 16 May 1997 Mr Clayton rang Mr Pawluk expressing some concern that
OFTBA might not have received some of his letters. Mr Pawluk
advised Mr Clayton
to address his letters to him in future so that he could ensure that they would
come direct to the appropriate
On 24 May 1997 Mr Clayton wrote again to OFTBA enclosing more details of
his complaints. On 29 May 1997 Mr Clayton saw Mr Pawluk
and gave him a tape
which he alleged to contain evidence of the unlawful entries to his room on 24
December 1996. Mr Pawluk gave
evidence that he and Mr Clayton listened to some
parts of the tape at that time, Mr Clayton denies this. On this point I accept
Pawluk's evidence. Mr Pawluk said, and I accept this evidence, that he
explained to Mr Clayton at the time that the tape was indistinct
and gave no
indication of where and when it had been made. It appears that Mr Pawluk kept
the tape and told Mr Clayton that he would
listen to it later that afternoon. Mr
Pawluk also told Mr Clayton that he would visit the rooming house and take
necessary statements
from those involved with the allegations made by Mr
On 3 June 1997, Mr Clayton again wrote to OFTBA giving some additional
details about the recorded tape which he had given to Mr Pawluk.
On 12 June 1997
Ms Steele wrote to Mr Clayton assuring him that he would be advised of the
progress of the investigation. On 25 June
1997 Mr Pawluk left messages on Mr
Clayton's pager asking him to call Mr Pawluk. On 26 June 1997 Mr Pawluk visited
36 Nicholson Street,
knocked at the door of Mr Clayton's room and on receiving
no reply went to the offices of the rooming house owner which was then,
understand the evidence, Yarra Community Housing Group. He spoke to the group's
manager, Mr Brew, and was told by him that on
23 December 1996 Mr Clayton had
called the emergency paging service of the rooming house saying that there was a
power failure in
his room. It being so close to Christmas Mr Brew arranged for
an electrician to come to the rooming house on 24 December and Mr Clayton
being at that time in his room, Mr Brew authorised the electrician, accompanied
by a cleaner, to enter
Mr Clayton's room, using a master key. The material before the Tribunal
includes statements by the cleaner and the electrician and
although they were
not called to give evidence their statements are broadly consistent with what Mr
Pawluk has said in his evidence.
Mr Clayton has claimed that the rooming house owner breached certain
provisions of the Rooming Houses Act in relation to unlawful
entry to his room.
That matter was brought by Mr Clayton before the Residential Tenancies Tribunal
by an application which was decided
on 14 January 1997. On that date that
Tribunal dismissed the application on the basis that Mr Clayton had not
satisfied it that there
had been an unlawful breach of the Rooming Houses
On 30 June 1997 and again on 1 July 1997 Mr Pawluk attempted to contact
Mr Clayton via his pager. A business card from Mr Pawluk
was also left under
Mr Clayton's door also asking him to contact Mr Pawluk urgently. Mr Clayton
phoned Mr Pawluk on 2 July 1997. In this conversation
Mr Pawluk explained to Mr
Mr Brew's version of the events of 24 December 1996 and offered to call at
Mr Clayton's room to discuss the matter and also explained
that he would be
available for Mr Clayton to contact in the second week of July after he returned
from leave.
Mr Clayton indicated that he was at that time unwell but would be
July. On 3 July 1997 the assistant director of OFTBA, Ms Perera wrote to
Mr Clayton confirming that a discussion between Mr Pawluk
and Mr Clayton was to
take place in the week beginning 14 July. On 15 July 1997, Mr Pawluk received a
letter from the Ombudsman who
had been contacted by Mr Clayton in relation to
the progress of the investigation then being conducted by OFTBA and the
in response to that letter inquired of OFTBA as to the status of Mr
Clayton's complaints.
Mr Pawluk advised the Ombudsman that he would be arranging an interview
with Mr Clayton shortly. On 15 and 17 July 1997 Mr Pawluk
tried unsuccessfully
to contact Mr Clayton via his pager. On 31 July 1997 he wrote to Mr Clayton
asking Mr Clayton to contact him
and advising that further discussion with him
was necessary before the investigation could continue. On 10 September 1997 Mr
visited Mr Clayton's resident and again left a business card, there being
no answer to his knock.
On 11 September 1997 Mr Pawluk wrote to Mr Clayton advising that as he
had received no response from Mr Clayton he would be unable
to continue the
investigation and was closing the file, but that if Mr Clayton wished to discuss
the matter in the future with him
the file would be reopened. It appears from
the evidence that in September 1995 in relation to an earlier contact between Mr
and OFTBA, Dr Jan Theobald had written to Mr Lacny of OFTBA stating that
staff at the Clarendon Clinic which Mr Clayton had attended
had been contacted
by Mr Pynt for information about Mr Clayton's psychiatric condition but had
given no information.
I accept Mr Pawluk's evidence that Mr Pawluk did not know of the
existence of this letter until long after the events that are the
this claim had occurred. Mr Clayton claims that knowing of Dr Theobald's letter
Mr Pawluk and other officers of OFTBA
who dealt with this complaint imputed a
psychiatric disability to him and because of it treated him less favourably than
a person to whom such an impairment wasn't imputed. He claims that
the less favourable treatment consisted of delaying or hindering
investigation of his complaints, failure to advise him of the progress or
outcome of the investigation and not taking action
against those who had
unlawfully entered his room. And also by impolite treatment of him by the
officers of OFTBA.
I find these claims not to be substantiated on the evidence. There is no
evidence before me of impolite dealing, there is no evidence
before me of undue
delay in investigation caused by OFTBA. The only substantial delay in the
investigation was caused by the failure
of Mr Clayton to reply to repeated
requests by OFTBA, to contact it and also to produce certain
authorisations.
There is no evidence that Mr Clayton was not advised of the
investigation of the complaint or of its outcome, namely that the file
closed because of lack of contact from Mr Clayton but would be re-opened if he
wished to further discuss the matter in the future.
It's clear from the evidence
that - and in fact Mr Clayton doesn't dispute it - he did not contact Mr Pawluk
again in relation to
the reopening of the file, and he says that he failed to do
this because in fact he had already made complaints to the Equal Opportunity
Commission.
There is no evidence that Mr Pawluk, who was the main officer involved
in conducting the investigation, did what he did on the basis
of any impairment
which he imputed to Mr Clayton. In fact there's no evidence that Mr Pawluk
imputed to Mr Clayton any impairment
at all. It seems that Mr Clayton expected
that the result of the investigation, it's outcome, would be immediate and that
that result
would be action against the rooming house owner in relation to what
Mr Clayton alleged was an unauthorised entry to his room.
It seems to me on the evidence that this wasn't a reasonable expectation
given that Mr Clayton had himself indicated that he didn't
want the allegations
to be raised with the rooming house owner. There is nothing in the evidence to
indicate that this complaint
was investigated in any way different from the way
in which OFTBA investigated other complaints. That is first by obtaining
authorisations, then by interviewing those who are the subject of the
allegations and then by attempting to discuss the matter with
the person who had
made the original allegations.
I conclude that there is no contravention of s.42 of the Act and indeed
that there is no discrimination. It follows therefore that
the complaint should
be dismissed.
MR JANSON: Ma'am, on behalf of the respondent I'm instructed to seek
costs, can I address you in relation to the question of costs
DEPUTY PRESIDENT: It is better, I think, I deal with the decision in
relation to the complaint against the police and then that I
take submissions
from you in relation to both matters.
MR JANSON: Thank you, Ma'am
DEPUTY PRESIDENT: You will need to indicate whether you apply for costs
in the second matter.
MR JANSON: Thank you, Ma'am.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Turning now to the complaint against the State of
Victoria in its capacity of the Victoria Police, that complaint
was lodged with
the Equal Opportunity Commission on 22 August 1997. The Commission declined it
under s.108 of the Act and I'll use
the same shorthand terms in these reasons as
I did in the earlier reasons for decision.
The Commission declined to entertain the complaint under s.108 of the
Act on the basis that it lacked substance. As he was entitled
to do Mr Clayton
requested that the complaint be referred to the then Anti Discrimination
Tribunal and the Commission did refer the
complaint by letter dated 26 September
but received by the tribunal on 21 October 1997. A preliminary conference was
held on the
19th of November 1997 and particulars of complaint and defence were
directed to be filed and served. Those were subsequently filed
In the earlier reasons for decision in relation to Mr Clayton and OFTBA
I have explained how it comes that VCAT hears this complaint
and the provisions
that apply to it. There is no change in those matters in relation to this
complaint. This complaint claims discrimination
in the provision of services on
the basis of imputed impairment. In my decision in Clayton and OFTBA I have set
out the provisions
of the Act that apply to that claim and those provisions
equally apply to this one, it's a claim of the same nature. I now turn to
findings of fact.
Those findings are based on oral evidence given by Mr Clayton and for
the respondents by Senior Constable Purcell, Detective Senior
Constable Moloney
and Senior Sergeant Whiting. All of these gave oral evidence and also witness
statements by them have been tendered
and are exhibits before this tribunal.
Those were adopted as true and correct in their evidence. There are some other
exhibits on
which I also base my findings. There are also some notes made by
Senior Sergeant Whiting contemporaneously with the events that they
describe and
they are also an exhibit before this tribunal.
In his particulars of complaint, witness statement and oral evidence, Mr
Clayton makes certain claims in relation to Senior Sergeant
Whiting which were
not included in his original complaint. The respondent hasn't objected to these
claims being made and included
as part of Mr Clayton's claims and in fact at
hearing expressly confirmed that there was no such objection and indeed the
calls Senior Sergeant Whiting as a witness to answer those
allegations.
So turning now to my findings, Mr Clayton alleges that on 24 December
1996 at some time between 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. people without
his authority
entered the room in which he was living at a rooming house at 36 Nicholson
Street, Fitzroy. The rooming house, he says,
was entered - his room in the
rooming house - while he was absent and clearly without his authority.
He alleges that a voice activated tape recorder which he left switched
on in his room while he was absent recorded the incidents
and also he alleges
that a sound or a motion detector sounded when that incident occurred. On the
26th of December he went to the
Fitzroy Police Station and spoke to a senior
constable, then Acting Sergeant Purcell, and reported the incident and showed
tape which he said was a tape of the incident. They had a lengthy
discussion during which Mr Clayton told Senior Constable Purcell
that he had at
one time been hospitalised in Royal Park.
On the whole of the evidence I find that Mr Purcell was polite and dealt
with the matter politely in relation to that report. He
instructed Senior
Constable Tulk to prepare a report in relation to the incident and that report
is an exhibit before me and is dated
26 December 1996. It states that the
incident alleged by Mr Clayton occurred on 23 December 1996. Mr Clayton in his
evidence is emphatic
that it occurred on 24 December 1996.
Senior Constable Purcell says that he would have noted the date of the
incident from what Mr Clayton told him. I am inclined to prefer
the evidence of
Mr Clayton on this point because it seems to me that his recollection is more
vivid and he has consistently mentioned
this date of 24 December throughout the
documentation that this tribunal has before it, but having said that I don't
think that the
variance in dates, the slight variance in recollections of these
witnesses at all impacts on their credibility.
Mr Clayton said in evidence that Senior Constable Purcell treated him
with anger and ridicule. Senior Constable Purcell denies this
and on this point
I prefer his evidence, that is Senior Constable Purcell's evidence. An interview
was arranged between Mr Clayton
and the Criminal Investigation Officer at the
Fitzroy Police Station at the time - Detective Moloney. The interview occurred
8.30 a.m. on 30 December 1996.
Mr Clayton describes the interview as cursory and patronising at best.
He said in evidence that Detective Moloney told him that burglaries
of this kind
happen all the time and that the police couldn't help him. Mr Clayton demanded
an investigation and said that if his
demand were not satisfied he would
complain to the Chief Commissioner, the Police Ethical Standards Branch and the
Ombudsman. He
describes Detective Moloney as snatching the tape from him, the
tape which he alleges contains particulars or a description, a recording
alleged incident and that she said to him I don't want to talk to you any
Mr Clayton also said that during the interview he told Detective Moloney
that he had been hospitalised at Royal Park. There is clear
agreement as far as
the evidence is concerned, between the evidence of Mr Clayton and Detective
Moloney on this point, that is that
Mr Clayton told her that he had been
hospitalised in Royal Park during the interview but apart from that one point
their accounts
of the interview are quite different.
Her evidence states that the interview was polite, that she and Mr
Clayton talked, that he told her that nothing had been stolen
or disturbed in
his room. I prefer Detective Moloney's evidence on these points. I think it
unlikely that if the interview had been
conducted in a patronising way as Mr
Clayton said, he would have disclosed to her that he had been hospitalised in
Royal Park.
Detective Moloney said that she did not recall telling Mr Clayton that
she could not help him, but that she might well have said
that if there were no
evidence she could not help him, and on the evidence it seems to me that in fact
this was what was said. After
the interview, Detective Moloney listened to the
tape. She said that the sounds on the tape were muffled and the voices were
and that it wasn't possible to tell whether the sounds and voices on
the tape came from inside or outside Mr Clayton's room.
Her evidence was that further investigations showed that before the
alleged unlawful entry had occurred, Mr Clayton had reported
a power failure in
his room, to the rooming house owner, a fact that he agreed in evidence he had
not in fact mentioned to the police
when he originally made his report and that
rooming house staff having been unable to contact to him, and it being close to
the rooming house owner permitted an electrician to enter his room
and check the power. A master key was used for this purpose.
Mr Clayton maintains that there was an unlawful entry to his room but it
is clear from the evidence of Detective Moloney that on
the basis I have just
mentioned, on the further investigation and on the basis of the tape, she
concluded that there was no evidence
of a trespass or of a person being
unlawfully on Mr Clayton's premises of a kind that would warrant her continuing
the investigation
into a possible burglary or a possible offence under the
Summary Offences Act
. Accordingly she closed the file.
On the 5th of January 1997 while on normal traffic patrol duties, Senior
Constable Purcell saw a car driving in Brunswick Street,
Fitzroy emitting an
excessive level of smoke from its exhaust. He intercepted the car for a road
worthiness check. He found that
as well as the smoke from the exhaust one of the
car's brake lights was inoperative and the car had three bald or un-roadworthy
He recognised the driver as Mr Clayton. He issued a defect notice under
the Road Safety Vehicles regulations and that notice set
out the defects I've
mentioned and required a full roadworthy inspection of the car. It seems that
its effect was that the car could
not be driven on the road until the defects
were attended to and that full inspection made.
He then resumed his normal duties. He gave evidence which I accept that
where inspection shows some minor defect which did not affect
the road safety of
the car, he would often issue a warning rather than put the car off the road,
but that where, as with Mr Clayton's
car there were multiple defects of a major
nature and involving road safety he always issued as defect notice and put the
the road until the defects were remedied.
Mr Clayton gave uncontradicted evidence that in early February 1997 two
policemen came to the door of the room in which he was then
living and asked him
to go with them to the Fitzroy police station without telling him why. He went
with them and was taken to the
office of the commander of the station, Senior
Sergeant Johnson. Senior Sergeant Johnson and Mr Clayton then discussed the
which Mr Clayton had by this time made about the police conduct of
the allegation that someone had unlawfully entered his room.
After more than an hour's discussion between himself and Senior Sergeant
Johnson, Mr Clayton agreed to prepare a document stating
that he would be
pursuing his allegation of unlawful entry with OFTBA rather than with the police
because it was a civil matter and
that he understood that the police would in
future make random inspections of the rooming house in which he lived.
Mr Clayton prepared this document after returning from the police
station but also gave uncontradicted evidence that a policeman
later came to his
room to collect the document. Counsel for the respondent sought to place great
weight on this document as a recognition
by Mr Clayton that he was not
dissatisfied with the investigation of his allegations by the police and that he
had simply chosen
to pursue them in another forum.
I place far less weight and in fact very little weight on this evidence.
Although there is no suggestion that Mr Clayton was forced
to prepare the
document it seems to me that the circumstances in which it came to exist make it
likely that Mr Clayton may have felt
powerless or reluctant to include in it any
further complaints that he might wish to make.
It is clear that on 10 February 1997 Mr Clayton wrote to the Police
Ethical Standards Division again raising concerns about the way
in which the
investigation had been handled originally by the Fitzroy police. In March of
1997 Mr Clayton alleged in a letter to
the Police Ethical Standards Division
that he had been followed by a person, probably it seems to me on the evidence,
from the rooming house, that he had turned on or confronted that
person and photographed him with a camera which he always carried
and that the
person had then assaulted him by punching him in the chest.
The Division sent a letter containing these allegations to the Fitzroy
police. That letter was received by Senior Sergeant Whiting
on 21 March 1997.
Senior Sergeant Whiting gave evidence about what she did then. I regard her as a
truthful and reliable witness
and I accept her evidence. Her evidence is that
she became very concerned that Mr Clayton's behaviour in confronting and
photographing
a person without authority to do so was the thing that was likely
to have precipitated the assault. She anticipated that if Mr Clayton
this behaviour with other people he would be assaulted again and would perhaps
next time be seriously injured. She thought
that he could be protected from
further assaults if he modified his behaviour.
Having understood, and it is now clear how, but either from the letter
from the Police Ethical Standards Division or from the file
itself, that Mr
Clayton may have in the past had some treatment for an illness of a psychiatric
nature. She contacted the relevant
crisis assessment team to discuss the matter,
she was advised by members of the team that they could not assist unless there
an immediate crisis, but she was also advised that at some time Mr Clayton
had been treated by a Dr McIntosh.
Senior Sergeant Whiting contacted Dr McIntosh and again raised with him
her concerns about Mr Clayton's safety. Dr McIntosh said
that he had now ceased
to see Mr Clayton as a patient and that he wasn't prepared to visit him at this
time. There was discussion
to visit Dr McIntosh and the difficulties of this approach, given Mr
belief that the police were not assisting him. After this, Senior
Sergeant Whiting took the matter no further.
Mr Clayton claims, and the respondent does not deny, that the police
provided a service to him. I identify that service as the investigation
criminal conduct alleged by the victim, or the alleged victim of the conduct,
that is in Mr Clayton's context in relation to the
unlawful entry of his room
and also the protection of Mr Clayton from further criminal conduct, in this
context the protection of
Mr Clayton from further criminal assaults.
I deal first with the question of the investigation of the alleged
unlawful entry and that concerns Senior Constable Purcell and
Detective Maloney.
Mr Clayton has not satisfied me that there has been discrimination. I find that
the investigation was conducted
politely, professionally and without undue
delay. There is no evidence, in my view, that Mr Clayton was treated less
favourably than
others who make similar allegations of criminal conduct, or that
the treatment of Mr Clayton was based on any disability or impairment
him because he had told them that he had once been admitted to Royal Park
Mr Clayton said in evidence that at one time Detective Maloney called
him paranoid, but she denies this and on this point I accept
her evidence. I am
not prepared to find that in fact Detective Maloney or Senior Constable Purcell
imputed any disability to Mr Clayton
at this time, or at any time on the
evidence before me, or that on the basis of any such imputed disability they
treated him less
favourably in conducting their investigation. The file was
closed, not for discriminatory reasons, not because of discrimination
basis of imputed impairment, but because there was simply insufficient evidence
to continue the investigation.
Again, Mr Clayton has not satisfied me that Senior Constable
Purcell discriminated against him when he issued the defect notice in
to Mr Clayton's motor car in January 1997. In the first place it is not clear to
me how the issue of a defect notice amounts
to the provision of a service to Mr
Clayton, but secondly and more importantly, even if it does, I am not satisfied
that Senior Constable
Purcell did treat Mr Clayton less favourably than he would
have treated others whose cars he found to have the same defects as the
in Mr Clayton's car. On his evidence, which I accept, he would have treated
these hypothetical people in exactly the same
way. Third, there is no evidence
to find that the treatment was based on any disability imputed to
Mr Clayton by Senior Constable
Purcell. It seems to me on the whole of the
evidence that Senior Constable Purcell's conduct was based on the condition of
Mr Clayton's
Now I turn to the allegations concerned Senior Sergeant Whiting. On a
proper construction of all the material before me it seems
discrimination of the direct kind is claimed. Direct discrimination only occurs
if on a substantial basis in this case
of imputed impairment Senior Sergeant
Whiting treated Mr Clayton less favourably than she would a person without that
imputed impairment
in the same or similar circumstances. There are a large
number of authorities which show how difficult it is to define the correct
comparator in these cases.
First, I am satisfied that what Senior Sergeant Whiting did in relation
to Mr Clayton , the inquiries she made, was because she believed
that Mr Clayton
had at present, or had in the past, some kind of psychiatric impairment. But
having said that, the next question
is did she treat him less favourably than
she would have treated someone without that impairment in the same or similar
circumstances.
For this comparison, the circumstances are, in my opinion, that a person
has been assaulted and that that person's behaviour precipitated
the assault, so
it is on this basis I asked Senior Sergeant Whiting whether she would have made
similar inquiries of a hypothetical
person and the hypothesis I put to her was
would she, for example, approach an alcoholism treatment service if a person
psychiatric impairment, without even an imputed psychiatric impairment
became drunk, was verbally aggressive and because of that
aggression was
assaulted. She answered quite clearly to me that she would not.
Counsel for the respondent asked me to infer that she would, for
example, have spoken to and warned the victim of the assault in
my hypothetical
case and so asked me to infer that in fact she, looking at less favourable
treatment in a general way, that there
was no less favourable treatment when I
compare Mr Clayton's case and the hypothetical example. But in my view this
inference is
not open on the clear evidence which is given to me. Clearly,
Senior Sergeant Whiting said that she would not have treated the drunken
in that way.
However, the fact that Senior Sergeant Whiting would have treated Mr
Clayton, the person with the imputed psychiatric impairment,
and my hypothetical
drunken and aggressive person differently in similar circumstances may be
differential treatment, but is not
necessarily less favourable treatment, and in
fact, I find that it does not constitute less favourable treatment in this
On the contrary, I am satisfied that by making the inquiries she did,
Senior Sergeant Whiting was treating Mr Clayton not less, but
more favourably
than she would have treated a person without an imputed disability in similar
circumstances. She was making much
greater efforts to protect his safety than
she would in my hypothetical case. I am satisfied that Mr Clayton wasn't treated
favourably. In addition, I am satisfied that on the evidence Mr Clayton
suffered no detriment from this treatment and it seems to
me that that would be
the only part of s.42 that might come into play here.
Mr Clayton said in evidence that he found out about Senior Sergeant
Whiting's inquiries much later than the date they occurred. He
said that he
regarded those inquiries as humiliating and intrusive and that, in his view, his
behaviour was being singled out as
always being a symptom of some psychiatric or
mental illness. While there is no doubt that detriment is defined by the Act as
humiliation, I do not think that on an objective view of the evidence
what Mr Clayton was subjected to by Senior Sergeant Whiting
and vicariously by
the respondent can amount objectively to humiliation.
Senior Sergeant Whiting's conduct was intended by her and was, in my
view, objectively aimed at protecting Mr Clayton against further
assault and it
seems to me that this does not constitute a detriment within the meaning of s.42
of the Act. The respondent also relied
on s.80 of the Act. That provision
relevantly permits a person to discriminate against another person on the basis
of impairment
if the discrimination is reasonably necessary to protect the
safety of any person, including the person discriminated against, and
s.80(1)(a). This provision is only relevant where discrimination is found. Here
I have made no finding of discrimination,
so it is therefore unnecessary for me
to consider the application of s.80 of the Act. It flows from what I have said
that this complaint
is also dismissed.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT: These two complaints having been dismissed, the
respondents are State in both of them now seeks costs. I now give
my decision
and the reasons for it. My decision is that there should be no order as to costs
and these are the reasons for my decision.
Clause 9(1) of the Tribunals and
Licensing Authorities Miscellaneous Amendments Act 1998 among other things give
VCAT the same powers,
functions and duties that a former tribunal, in this case
the Anti Discrimination Tribunal, had in relation to a complaint that was
pending before that Tribunal and eventually comes before VCAT. This means, in my
view, that s.138 of the
Equal Opportunity Act
applies to this application for
costs and my conclusion is confirmed by the recent decision of His Honour Judge
Davey of this Tribunal
in the case of
Ellissey v. Otis
decided on 18
November 1998.
The effect of s.138 is broadly to confer a broad discretion on the
Tribunal to award costs, or for that matter, not to award costs.
conferral of a broad discretion it is in substantially the same terms as the
former s.47 of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
. On that section the former Anti
Discrimination Tribunal has made a number of observations in
Colorific Lithographics Pty Ltd
decided on 22 January 1997 and in the course
of that decision has discussed the application of a number of the observations
Court of Appeal in
Spencer v. Dowling
(1997) 2 V.R. at p.127. In
my view, all those observations apply with equal force to s.138 of the
Opportunity Act
The Tribunal said that the Tribunal ought not under the
Opportunity Act
follow a rule that costs automatically follow the event, but
that if circumstances existed apart from the fact that a party has won,
justify an award of costs, then the Tribunal would consider whether or not costs
should be awarded. The circumstances put forward
by the respondents in this case
relate to the late filing by the complainant of his witness statements in both
complaints, which
the respondents say put it at a disadvantage and involved it
in additional work to answer those witness statements.
The respondent is not asking for costs, at least before me, on the basis
that the complaint should never have been brought, or that
it is vexatious. I
have come to the conclusion that an award of costs in this context is
inappropriate. My first reason is a particular
one and the second is a general
one. I deal first with the reason which is closely related to the very
particular context. While
it is clear that Mr Clayton was late in filing his
witness statements, he was directed to do so at call-over and directed to do so
by 15 October and then there was a further directions hearing on 4 November at
which another direction to file witness statements
was given and to file them by
11 November, and eventually they were filed by 18 November, so although it is
clear that there was
certainly a late filing, I do not agree that the respondent
has in effect been forced to do additional work, or was put at a disadvantage
because of this.
First, it cannot be argued that the 4 November directions hearing would
not have happened if Mr Clayton had filed witness statements.
That hearing was
in fact provided for by the orders made by the Tribunal at a call-over on 7
September 1998 and it occurred as provided
for in those orders. The lateness of
the witness statements, in my view, do not put this respondent at a
disadvantage. The witness
statements as it will be noted are very short and in
fact, in my view, say little more than was said in the particulars of
It does not seems to me that on a proper reading of the particulars of
complaint the respondent in fact would have been involved
in more work in
responding to the witness statements than it was in fact responding to the
particulars of complaint. In addition,
as Mr Clayton correctly points out, the
respondent was also somewhat late in filing its witness statements. It filed an
amended witness
statement before Senior Constable Purcell at the beginning of
the hearing of these complaints on 26 November and also a witness statement
for Senior Sergeant Whiting.
It appears from the file that the witness statement for Mr Pawluk of the
Office of Fair Trading and Business Affairs was filed in
the Tribunal on the
25th, but certainly it is my understanding that Mr Clayton was not served with
that until the morning of the
hearing. So between the time when Mr Clayton filed
his witness statement on 18 November and the time when the respondents witness
statements and the amended witness statement of Purcell, the statement of Pawluk
and the statement of Senior Sergeant Whiting were
filed, is about a week. It
would have been presumably possible for the respondent to have filed that
statement earlier and that then
may not have necessitated the adjournment which
the Tribunal had to give to enable Mr Clayton to read those various witness
statements.
Taking into account relative disadvantage and relative fairness to
the parties, it seems to me that these particular circumstances
do not justify
an award for costs.
Turning now to the general reason on which I also base this decision,
and it is to do with what I might call the twin focuses of
Equal Opportunity
and the VCAT Act. This complainant is unrepresented. The respondents are
State and under the VCAT Act, which in this procedural aspect
applies to this
proceeding, the respondent has an automatic right of legal representation and
was in fact represented by counsel.
I have said something about the twin focuses
of these two pieces of legislation, the VCAT Act and the
Equal Opportunity Act
The first focus is conciliation.
If one reads the
Equal Opportunity Act
it sets up a mechanism by which
complaints may go to the Equal Opportunity Commission for conciliation and for
quite a complex process
of conciliation. Clearly, in addition, both pieces of
legislation are designed to help lay people bring proceedings before the Equal
Opportunity Commission and before the Tribunal. For example, under the
Opportunity Act
the Equal Opportunity Commission is required to assist a
complainant in formulating a complaint.
Under the VCAT the principal Registrar has a duty to give reasonable
assistance where requested to a party in formulating his or
her application, and
in addition to the conciliation process set out under the
Equal Opportunity Act
the VCAT Act permits referral of the proceedings for mediation and also provides
for compulsory conferences for, among other things,
the purpose of promoting
settlement of the proceedings.
In relation to unrepresented parties, the Act permits the Tribunal to
appoint a person to represent an unrepresented party and also
it provides that,
except in so far as the legislative requirements and the proper consideration of
the case provide, the proceedings
of the Tribunal are to be informal. So it
seems to me that these are the two broad focuses of the Act. Given these
focuses, it seems
to me that they require applications for costs where a
complainant is unrepresented to be dealt with in a particular way.
I am not saying that if there are clear circumstances and clearly
unreasonable conduct on the part of an unrepresented party, an
award of costs
will always be inappropriate. But it seems to me that given the dual focuses of
the Act, of the two pieces of legislation,
the Tribunal should be cautious
before awarding costs. In such a case there must be a clear case and the conduct
must be clearly
unreasonable.
Here, as I said, we have an unrepresented complainant and a respondent
represented by counsel. It seems to me that the understanding
which a respondent
in these circumstances will have of the relevant Tribunal procedures may well be
greater than that of the unrepresented
complainant. Here we have a case where
there has been late filing by both parties. I am not satisfied, given all the
circumstances,
that the conduct of the complainant has been so unreasonable that
an award of costs if justified.
If I were to award costs in these circumstances, I believe that one of
the effects might be to deter unrepresented parties from accessing
the Tribunal
at all and, in turn, perhaps from accessing the Equal Opportunity Commission.
This would, of course, then frustrate
or impede one of the objectives of the
Equal Opportunity Act
, which is to provide redress for the victims of
discrimination et cetera, or harassment.
I am not saying that in an appropriate case where there was clearly
unreasonable conduct and clearly no questions on relative disadvantage
an award of costs might not be justified, but in my view it is not in these
particular circumstances. Thank you very much.
I might say that I will reduce
the orders to writing. If you wish to wait I can do that almost immediately. If
not, I will make sure
that they are sent to the parties at their relevant
addresses for service.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (52.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter