URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VDBT/1998/63.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:29:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Innis Ltd & ors v Demos & ors [1998] VDBT 63 (2 February 1998)
THE DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(DOMESTIC BUILDING CONTRACTS AND TRIBUNAL ACT 1995)
- RULING AND DIRECTIONS -
INNIS LIMITED, W.T.C. INGRAM, M. YOSHIDA
MR JOHN DEMOS
SAVVAS PAPASAVAS & ELLY PAPASAVAS
RAIA ARCHICENTRE (AUST) PTY LTD
PRESIDING MEMBER:
DR DAMIEN CREMEAN
FORM OF APPLICATION:
APPEARANCES:
Mr Manly of Counsel for the Applicant
Mr Robbins of Counsel for the First Respondent
Mr Margetts of Counsel for the Second Respondent
Mr Settle of Counsel for the Third Respondent
DATE(S) OF HEARING:
12 January 1998
DATE OF RULING AND
DIRECTIONS:
2 February 1998
I MAKE THE FOLLOWING RULING AND DIRECTIONS:
1. Pending the outcome of the hearing the Second and Third Respondents are
entitled to remain as applicants.
2. Security for costs is not to be ordered against the First Applicant.
3. It is further reserved for determination whether, as a matter of law,
those paragraphs of the defence of each Respondent alleging
a compromise or
settlement or release involving Housing Guarantee Fund ought to be struck
4. Costs are reserved.
5. I direct the Registrar to return this matter to Case Management Conference
on a convenient date after 27 February 1998.
DR DAMIEN CREMEAN
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
INNIS LIMITED, W.T.C. INGRAM, M. YOSHIDA
MR JOHN DEMOS
SAVVAS PAPASAVAS & ELLY PAPASAVAS
RAIA ARCHICENTRE (AUST) PTY LTD
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
INTRODUCTION
1. On 30 October 1997 the Tribunal referred for hearing on 12 January 1998
the following questions:
(a) whether, despite the orders made in para 2, the second and third named
Applicants are as a matter of law, entitled to be or to
applicants;
(b) whether security for costs ought to be ordered in favour of any of the
Respondents against any Applicant;
(c) whether, as a matter of law, those paragraphs of the defence of each
Respondent alleging a compromise or settlement or release
involving Housing
Guarantee Fund Ltd ought to be struck out.
2. As it happens, at the hearing on 12 January 1998 only questions (a) and
(b) proceeded to agreement. Question (c) was adjourned
off for the purpose of
seeing whether a re-assignment or rectification was to take place.
3. For the purposes of the hearing on 12 January 1998 each of the parties
provided Statements of Facts and Contentions. There were
also certain earlier
Summaries of Facts and Contentions. As well there was Affidavit material before
the Tribunal. I was assisted
by the written Statements and Summaries and
authorities referred to and I was assisted also by the various submissions of
The Affidavit material I have considered in detail.
POSITION OF SECOND AND THIRD APPLICANTS
4. It is submitted that despite the orders made on 24 November 1997
(following directions given on 30 October 1997) the Second and
Third Applicants
are not, as a matter of law, entitled to be or to remain as applicants. The
test to be applied on a question of
law of that nature is generally that laid
down by Barwick CJ in
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for
Railways (NSW
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125.
also Dey v Victorian Railways
Commissioners
[1949] HCA 1
(1949) 78 CLR 62.
I was referred also to the decision of
Lindon v Commonwealth of Australia (No 2)
[1996] HCA 14
(1996) 136 ALR 251.
His Honour (at 256) there said that it:
"is a serious matter to deprive a person of access to the courts of law for
it is there that the rule of law is upheld".
According to his Honour (also at 256), a party seeking to strike out in the
High Court:
"must show that it is clear, on the face of the opponent’s documents,
that the opponent lacks a reasonable cause of action or
is advancing a claim
that is clearly frivolous or vexatious."
His Honour added:
"An opinion of the court that a case appears weak and such that it is
unlikely to succeed is not, alone, sufficient to warrant summary
termination."
Referring to O26r18 of the
High Court Rules
his Honour then said the
guiding principle is doing what is just:
"If it is clear that proceedings within the concept of the pleading under
scrutiny are doomed to fail, the court should dismiss the
action to protect the
defendant from being further troubled, to save the plaintiff from further costs
and disappointment and to relieve
the court of the burden of further wasted time
which could be devoted to the determination of claims which have legal
I would respectfully add a reference also to a decision of the Full Federal
Australia Building Industries Pty Ltd v Stramit Corporation Ltd
(1 December 1997) where their Honours say, speaking of O20 of the
Federal Court Rules
"proceeding should not be dismissed summarily merely on the ground that it
appears at the early stage of the hearing of the motion
brought for that
purpose, to advance a highly implausible claim which will very probably
5. I was referred to a number of authorities on the position of the Second
and Third Applicants. Those authorities include:
Bryan v Maloney
128 ALR 163;
Council of the Municipality of Woollahra v Sved
Australian Torts R. 81398; and
Zumpano v Montagnese
[1997] 2 VR 525.
have considered the various authorities in detail but, having done so, I must
state that I am not satisfied that the Second and
Third Applicants are not, as a
matter of law, entitled to be or to remain as applicants in these proceedings.
I have that as my
view bearing in mind the principles I am called upon to
6. I am not persuaded that the proceedings, as they are brought by the Second
and Third Applicants, are, in Kirby J’s words
in Lindon v Commonwealth
of Australia (No.2)
(at 256) "doomed to fail". Or, to adopt the formulation
of Barwick CJ in
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways
) (at 129) it does not seem to me to be "plain and obvious’
that it can be said at once that "the statement of claim, even if
proved, cannot
succeed." Or, to adopt even other formulations (referred to by Barwick CJ in
General Steel Industries
case) I am not satisfied that the
proceedings brought by the Second and Third Applicants are "manifestly
groundless" or are "so obviously
untenable that [they] cannot possibly
7. It is "a serious matter" to deprive a party of the opportunity of being
able to proceed. As Sheppard J observed in
Trade Practices Commission v
Pioneer Concrete (Qld)
(1994) 124 ALR 685
at 695: "One has to err on the
side of caution lest one deprive a party of a case which in justice it ought to
be able to bring".
Carr J has observed that the power is one which should be
exercised with exceptional caution and is one which should never be exercised
unless it is clear that there is no real question to be tried:
(Federal Court of Australia, 5 May 1994).
8. Bearing in mind the relevant principles it seems to me that I should not
hold that the case pleaded by the Second and Third Applicants
is one that is not
able to be put or is one which is obviously unarguable. It is alleged that they
have suffered loss and damage
by reason of a breach of duty owed to them as
occupiers of the premises at 9-11 Myrnong Crescent, Toorak, Victoria. The
allegations,
however, may go a little further than that. It is said that a duty
of care cannot be owed, for example, by a builder to an occupier.
Bryan v Maloney
a duty of care was held to be owed to a purchaser
occupier. But the High Court in that case did not have to deal with the
of an occupier who was not a purchaser. I would agree, however, that
there are statements in the majority judgments in that case
which would not
clearly support the position of the Second and Third Applicants. Brooking JA in
Zumpano v Montagnese
said that on "the widest view of its ultimate
Bryan v Maloney
will impose upon builders who erect or alter any
kind of building at least a ‘prima facie’ duty of care to all those
who come to own or even only to use or occupy it and that duty will extend to
all defects, whatever their nature and extent, and
whether or not they result
from the work of a subcontractor, provided only that they are
‘latent’." Referring then to
a decision of Malcolm CJ in
Fences Pty Ltd v A Ravi (Builder) Pty Ltd
(SC(WA) 27 December 1990) his
Honour, pointing out that a "large number of questions arise about the scope of
Bryan v Maloney
", then asks intriguingly: "4. Is the duty owed not only
to the purchasers but also to mere occupiers, as the decision of Malcolm
would suggest?".
9. So far as I can tell, there is nothing in any of the judgments I have
considered which positively says that an occupier, who is
not also a purchaser,
cannot sue in negligence. It is true though that the doctrine of reliance does
figure prominently in several
of the authorities. I do not wish to be taken as
saying, however, that I am unhesitatingly of the view that an occupier, who is
not a purchaser, can sue a builder in negligence. One might regard a claim in
negligence by an occupier who is not a purchaser as
one which is highly
implausible and as one which, ultimately, may well fail. But even if that was
one’s view, the Full Federal
Court decision in
Australian Building
Industries v Stramit Corporation Ltd
and other authorities would still
indicate that the matter must be ventilated. As Kirby J has said, summary
termination is not warranted
even if a case is "weak" and "unlikely to succeed."
Moreover, the issue, I think, is a most important and far-reaching one which
deserving of full argument. It is not fitting now that I have heard counsel to
dispose of it in the summary way sought. Almost
as an aside, I should mention,
too, this further factor, namely, that claims of the Second and Third Applicants
are not founded only
in negligence but appear to include as well claims based on
alleged contravention of the
Fair Trading Act 1985
. To exclude the
Second and Third Applicants altogether from the proceedings on a strike-out
motion would be to exclude them also
from being able to raise those claims.
SECURITY FOR COSTS
10. I have previously made a ruling in this proceeding that the Tribunal does
have power to order security for costs: see ruling DBT
3 September 1997. The
question now is whether such power ought to be exercised to require the First
Applicant in this case to provide
security. That question arises because of the
circumstance, as I noted in my earlier ruling, that the First Applicant is a
incorporated in the British Virgin Islands. At the same time I note
also that it is alleged that the First Applicant is the registered
proprietor of
the Toorak property I have mentioned. That, of course, is the property which is
the subject of the proceedings.
11. I was referred to a number of authorities on the ordering of security for
costs. They include:
Pearson v Naydler
1977] 3 All ER 531
Lines v Tana Pty Ltd
[1987] VicRp 53
[1987] VR 641
The Seaspeed Dora
[1987] 3 All
De Bry v Fitzgerald
[1990] 1 All ER 560
Interwest Ltd v
Tricontinental Corporation Ltd
(1991) 5 ACSR 621
Re Little Olympian
Each Ways Ltd
[1994] 4 All ER 651
Lagarna Pty Ltd v Bridge Wholesale
Acceptance Corporation (Australia) Ltd
[1995] 1VR 150. To these I would
In re Percy & Kelly Nickel Cobalt and Chrome Iron Mining Co
(1876) 2 Ch D531
DSQ Property Co Ltd v Lotus Cars Ltd
[1987] 1 WLR 127
Remm Construction (SA) Pty Ltd v Allco Newsteel Pty Ltd
(1992) 57 SASR
I do not believe I am assisted on the question of ordering security by the
provision in s1335(1) of the Corporations Law because
that provision refers to a
"court having jurisdiction in [a] matter..." and I think the "court" there being
referred to is a court
satisfying the requirements of Chapter 111 of the
Constitution. Nor, of course, does O62 of the
Rules of the Supreme Court
apply to govern the question. In the circumstances it seems to me that the
question is one which I can resolve only by reference
to common law authorities
at it were.
12. The Full Court in
Lines v Tana Pty Ltd
(at 642) quoted Lord
Alverstone in
JH Billington Ltd v Billington
[1907] 2 KB 106
that the cases make it plain that an order for security for costs will be made
"only in a few exceptional circumstances."
The ordering of security is
discretionary; a court (in this case the Tribunal) must ascertain "... where, on
considerations of what
is just and reasonable, the balance rests between the
risk of exposing an innocent defendant to the expense of defending his position
and the risk of unnecessarily shutting out from relief a plaintiff whose case if
litigated would result in his obtaining that relief":
Tradestock Pty Ltd v
TNT (Management) Pty Ltd
[1977] FCA 1
(1977) 14 ALR 52
at 56. As Olsson J observed in
Health and Life Care Ltd (receivers and managers appointed) v Price
[1993] SASC 4092
(1993) 11 ACSR 326
at 330: "At the end of the day a decision must
be made in light of the particular facts of the specific case and as a
consequence
of balancing of relevant considerations." Often there will be a
good case for security able to be made out where the plaintiff (or
applicant) is
a foreign corporation. However, neither the fact that a plaintiff or applicant
is a corporation nor the fact that
a plaintiff or applicant, whether or not a
corporation, resides outside the jurisdiction, requires an order for security to
As Lord Donaldson MR observed in
De Bry v Fitzgerald
"It is to be noted that residence outside the jurisdiction enables, but does
not require, the court to order security for the costs
of the action."
Or, as Gummow J. observed in
Energy Drilling Inc v Petroz NL
ATPR 40954: "the mere circumstance that an applicant is resident outside the
of discretion in favour of
ordering security..." Of course there may be an issue about whether a
corporation, although incorporated
overseas, truly does reside in its place of
incorporation: in
DSQ Property Ltd v Lotus Cars Ltd
(at 132) Millet J
said that he had "not overlooked the fact that a company is not necessarily
resident in the country of its incorporation,
but resides where its central
control and management abide...".
13. At the end of the day (to use the words of Olsson J) I have decided in
this case not to exercise a discretion to order security.
I have approached
this question without any predisposition one way or the other: compare
Interwest Ltd v Tricontinental Corporation Ltd
per Ormiston J (at 624).
Before ordering security I think the Tribunal must have reason to believe that
an applicant, if unsuccessful,
will be unable to pay the costs of a respondent.
It was submitted, in effect, in this case that I should have reason to believe
that of the First Applicant. It was pointed out that the First Applicant is
incorporated, as I have noted, in the British Virgin
Islands. But that factor
alone is not, itself, as I have mentioned, sufficient to warrant an order being
made. The purpose of such
an order "is to have a fund within the jurisdiction
which will guarantee that any order for costs in favour of the defendant will
met"; consequently, "it is a complete answer to an application for such an order
that a fund already exists, at least if the court
can ensure that the fund will
not be dissipated":
De Bry v Fitzgerald
at 563 per Lord Donaldson MR.
Energy Drilling Inc v Petroz NL
. I refer to the Affidavits of
Thomas Keck (land valuer) sworn 18 December 1997 and Stephen Jacks
(chartered accountant) sworn 19
December 1997. Each is filed with the
Tribunal. Both such Affidavits are admittedly brief but they are to the point
and I am able
to take their contents into account under ss77(1)(a) and (c) of
the Act. If I take their contents into account then it emerges that
Applicant has in Victoria the Toorak property valued at $2.7m; that the Toorak
property is its only asset; that there is
a registered mortgage over that
property of $1m; that the First Applicant has no other debts in the world.
Neither deponent has
been cross-examined, but no Affidavit filed by a Respondent
specifically contradicts the matters deposed to in such Affidavits.
The matters
deposed to in such Affidavits, if accepted, lead to a conclusion that a "fund"
relevantly exists in the jurisdiction.
To take up the reference by Lord
Donaldson MR in
case, I should add, I have nothing before
me which positively indicates that that fund is or is likely to be "dissipated".
mention in that regard that the Tribunal has certain powers under s90
of the Act providing its conditions are met. But there was
nothing, on this
occasion, which persuaded me that a case was made out for an order under
14. Respondents’ Affidavits on this aspect of the question include
those sworn by Catriona Lowe (Solicitor) on 26 November 1997;
Nicolas Zervos
(Solicitor) on 3 December 1997; and David Powell (Solicitor) on 19 December
1997. The principal Affidavit on the
issue is the one sworn by Catriona Lowe.
But taking their contents into account, as I am able to do, I am not persuaded
"fund" I have referred to, as relevantly existing in the jurisdiction,
does not exist. If, however, after taking their contents
and the contents of
the other Affidavits into account, I am left in a position of doubt on this
(such that I cannot be certain one
way or the other about the existence of a
fund) then it seems to me that the Respondents simply do not preponderate on the
See remarks of King CJ in
Remm Construction (SA) Pty Ltd v Allco
Newsteel Pty Ltd
at 185. Even if I was persuaded on any of the materials
that the fund does not exist, I would still, however, decline to make an
for security. The Applicants, as a whole, include not only the First Applicant
but the Second and Third Applicants as well.
The Second and Third Applicants,
who are natural persons, occupy the Toorak property and reside in the
authority would indicate that security
ought not to be ordered. In
Pearson v Naydler
(at 533) Megarry VC spoke
of the "basic rule that a natural person who sues will not be ordered to give
security for costs, however
poor he is" as being "ancient and well established";
he then said that the "extension of the basic rule to cases where there are
plaintiffs, one resident abroad and the other resident here, is also ancient and
well-established". He went on to hold (at 535-6),
however, that it is a matter
for discretion whether an order for security should be made in a case where one
plaintiff is a foreign
corporation but a co-plaintiff is a natural person or
co-plaintiffs are natural persons resident in the jurisdiction. See also
Seaspeed Dora
at 970, 972. But, considering
the materials in
each of the Affidavits in this case, there is nothing which makes it plain to me
why as a matter of discretion,
it would be just in the circumstances to order
that security should be given -
I assume, in the first place, that the
fund I have mentioned does not relevantly exist. And, in the end, of course, it
is a matter
of discretion in an area where it is acknowledged that orders will
be made "only in a few exceptional circumstances" to quote Lord
Alverstone.
Furthermore none of the Respondents’ Affidavits informs me about the
nature of any legal arrangements between
Australia and the British Virgin
Islands regarding the enforcement of orders for costs. This is an important
matter and not something
to the remarks of King CJ in in
Remm Construction (SA) Pty Ltd v Allco
Newsteel Pty Ltd
15. In any event, all of this is dependent (as I have indicated) upon the
assumption which I have made that the fund I have mentioned
does not relevantly
exist. If the fund I have mentioned does relevantly exist (and I am not
persuaded to the contrary) then none
of this material is relevant. I note, I
should add, that Gummow J made an order for security in
Energy Drill Inc v
in which there was, he said, no evidence given as to the law and
procedures in the Republic of Liberia whereby an order for costs
made by the
Federal Court might be enforced there. But also in that case, unlike the
present, there was no evidence of the presence
in the jurisdiction of any assets
of the applicant which could be made available to satisfy such an order.
Moreover it appears that
in that case there was only one foreign corporation
applicant and no co-applicants (natural persons or not) resident in the
These differences, are I think, critical.
16. It was put to me that the First Applicant’s claim was made bona
fide and has a reasonable prospect of success. It was also
put to me that an
element in any diminution of the First Applicant’s financial position has
been caused or contributed to by
the conduct of the Respondents. I am unable to
comment on any of these matters. The merits of the dispute as such have not yet
been entered into. It was also put to me that, on the question of ordering
security, I should take into account the fact that under
s93 of the Act there is
no guarantee that a successful party will necessarily have its costs (see
s93(3)) but this is true also in
the courts where costs usually, but do not
always, follow the event. In any event, I must say, I had difficulty following
the reasoning
in the argument on this point.
17. Accordingly, I have answered the questions, which were set aside, in the
way I have indicated. The Applicants have succeeded
on both, as it were, with
question (c) yet to be decided, if it is to proceed. Accordingly, I reserve the
question of costs for
argument to a later date.
18. I direct the Registrar to return this matter to Case Management
Conference on a convenient date after 27 February 1998.
DR DAMIEN CREMEAN
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
g:detch96\0824A-96.doc
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (45.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter