URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2024/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Malik Dua v Coles Group Limited [2024] VMC 15 (15 October 2024)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
No. MAG-CI-230205218
Rupali MALIK DUA
COLES GROUP LIMITED
Magistrate M A Hoare
DATE OF HEARING
27-28 August 2024
DATE OF DECISION
15 October 2024
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Malik Dua v Coles Group Limited
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2024] VMC 15
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION – Bilateral plantar fasciitis -
Accepted claim – Termination of weekly payments and medical
expenses – Capacity for pre-injury duties - Credit of the plaintiff
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr A Theodore
Zaparas Lawyers
For the Defendant
Mr B McKenzie
Lander & Rogers
Introduction
1. From around November 2018, Ms Malik Dua
was employed by Coles Group Limited (Coles) in various in-store bakeries. She
worked initially
as a casual retail team member (the casual role) and then from
around February 2022 on a full-time basis in the role of store bakery
(the manager role). She resigned on around 6 October 2022 and ceased working
soon afterwards.
2. Pursuant to the
Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
(the Act), Ms Malik Dua
lodged a claim on around 26 October 2022 for injuries including bilateral
plantar fasciitis arising out of
and in the course of her employment with Coles.
3. Coles accepted her claim (by notice dated 22
November 2022), before then terminating (by notice dated 31 March 2023)
entitlements
to both weekly payments (effective 16 April 2023) and medical and
like expenses (effective 30 April 2024).
essence, Coles contended the claimed injuries had resolved fully by 16 April
2023 (when weekly payments ceased); that she was
not incapacitated for
employment beyond 16 April 2023 (if at all); and/or, if she did have any
incapacity, it was not materially
contributed to nor resulting from
employment.
5. Ms Malik Dua was the only witness to
give evidence at hearing. All medical reports and other materials were tendered
into evidence
by agreement. I have considered carefully all of the extensive
materials tendered into evidence and shall refer only to the evidence
to my factual findings and my conclusions on disputed
Ms Malik Dua’s evidence
6. By way of background, Ms Malik Dua, now aged
39 years, migrated to Australia in 2009. Before that, she lived in India where
gained tertiary degrees in English and worked in administrative roles. Once
in Australia, she readily obtained work in administrative
roles which she did
over several years including in her husband’s business (an accountancy and
mortgage broker practice). Their
two children were born in 2012 and 2016. Her
health before commencing at Coles was described as perfect.
Employment with
7. In the casual role with Coles, she
worked 11 hours a week initially before increasing to 22 hours a week. In the
manager role,
she worked full-time Monday to Friday from 4:00am to around
2:00pm. She commonly worked around 50 to 55 hours per week as required
Shifts varied in length from 3 to 5 hours (either with no breaks or 15 minute
breaks) and up to 7 to 8 hours (with up to
45 minute breaks although often
8. As for duties performed in the bakery,
in both roles the work was ‘hands on’ and included: baking cakes,
doughnuts; slicing bread using a bread-slicer; packaging baked goods
and bread; pushing/pulling trolleys of baked goods from the
freezer to the
retail bakery section; and stocking shelves with bakery items. The work was
fast-paced and done mostly standing. As
a manager, one of the sedentary duties
was preparing rosters, however that occupied little time
9. The reason she resigned was because of
left heel pain. She first noticed pain in September 2022. She reported her
injury before
she resigned although not formally. She resigned because the pain
was not going away and she could no longer bear the pain in her
foot and leg.
She quit to rest and look after herself. She also quit because she had no time
to see a doctor whilst still working.
At the time of stopping work, she was
limping. As for her pain levels, the left foot pain was ‘8 out of
10’ constantly
whereas the right foot pain was ‘5 out of 10’
on and off.
10. In cross-examination, she denied she
could have seen her GP any afternoon after finishing work at 2.00 or 2.30 pm.
That was due
to her feeling too tired having started at 4.00am.
11. On 11 October 2022, she saw her usual GP Dr Khan
at Myhealth Point Cook who recorded a complaint of
‘left heel pain for
(the 11 October attendance
The GP prescribed
celebrex (an anti-inflammatory) and arranged an ultrasound. He gave her a
medical certificate and phoned her subsequently
to let her know the ultrasound
showed plantar fasciitis. As for why she hadn’t initially attributed her
condition to work,
she didn’t know she had a work injury at first. The GP
had requested ultrasound of the left foot only initially because he
taken the right foot as seriously at first.
12. After letting Coles know she had been diagnosed
with plantar fasciitis, she was told not to serve out her notice period.
Treatment post-employment with
13. As for treatment, beyond the 11 October
attendance, under cross-examination, she agreed with the following matters as
in the GP clinical records:
a. She saw Dr Khan regarding
plantar fasciitis on the following dates: 20 and 24 October 2022; 30 November
2022; 6 December 2022;
6 and 30 January 2023; 3 March 2023; 4 April 2023; 1 and
29 May 2023; 27 June 2023; 10 and 12 July 2023.
March 2023 was the last date on which medication was prescribed (Mobic 7.5 mgs).
c. 27 June 2023 was the last date on which the GP
recorded issuing a certificate of capacity.
d. Beyond 12 July 2023, she continued to see the GP
but for reasons not related to the plantar fasciitis condition.
e. As for why she did not proceed with injections
suggested by Dr Khan in October of 2022, she had hoped the pain would resolve
felt worried about side-effects.
14. She had physiotherapy regularly
between December 2022 to May 2023, which was helpful, but she could not afford
to continue once
Coles stopped paying. Under cross-examination, she denied the
real reason she did not continue with physiotherapy was because the
fasciitis condition had resolved.
15. She took
medication for the plantar fasciitis condition on a daily basis which was
‘over the counter’ analgesics (Panadol
and Nurofen). Also, in
cross-examination, she could not explain why Dr Ramaswamy had a history of
pain-killers having been taken
in the past but not up to the time of assessment,
saying she just answered questions she was asked by the
Condition post-employment with
16. The injury continued to affect her
mentally, financially and physically as there were activities she could not do
with friends
or with her children. To this day, her bilateral heel pain had not
resolved, although she had slightly less left heel pain. She did
(although she had a cleaner) and rested frequently. As for her social life and
activities outside work from the time
of finishing work, in
examination-in-chief, Ms Malik Dua’s evidence was as follows:
a. She could stand or walk for
two hours; she had been on a hike twice, it was very easy, more a walk than a
hike, but she did not
repeat it as afterwards the pain was aggravated and she
had to take pain-killers.
b. She had tried playing
badminton once and lasted only half an hour whereas she used to play weekly.
c. She did not go out much, maybe once or twice a
month. She used to do Bollywood-style dancing when at parties and now was
in what she did. She could still dance but only 5 to 10 minutes at a
d. She had been on family holiday cruises at
Christmas-time in 2023 and 2024. Also she visited India to visit parents and
November 2022 and January 2023.
Social media
17. I now turn to cross-examination of Ms
Malik Dua on the extensive social media material tendered by Coles. This showed
her in various
social and recreational settings across a 22-month period which
coincided roughly from her finishing work (October 2022) up to a
month or so
before the hearing (August 2024). Under cross-examination, Ms Malik Dua agreed
that all of the tendered Instagram posts
and ‘stories’ depicted her
and were mostly self-published on her own account or sometimes by friends on
their accounts.
18. It is convenient to set out
this material in chronological date order (the evidence was that the activity
was on or around the
date of posting unless stated otherwise) as follows:
a. Posts on 25 October 2022 (captioned
‘Diwali vibes’) showed Ms Malik Dua standing in formal attire with
her husband
and friends celebrating the Indian cultural festival of Diwali [SDCB
pp. 41-43].
b. Posts on 1 November 2022 showed her
standing with her husband in a Halloween costume [SDCB pp.
c. Posts on 7 November 2022 (captioned
‘One great weekend’ and including a 13-sec. video) showed her at a
T20 cricket
match against India in Melbourne with her husband standing and
actively barracking waving a flag [SDCB pp. 36–38 &
d. Posts on 7 November 2022 (captioned
‘One great weekend’) showed Ms Malik Dua standing in formal attire
celebrating
with female friends at a birthday party [SDCB pp.
e. Posts on 11 November 2022 showed
her standing in formal attire with her husband at an Indian bar and restaurant
celebrating a friend’s
birthday [SDCB pp.
f. Posts on 26 November 2022
(captioned ‘While Street Walking #melbourne’) showed her apparently
standing or seated at
a bar across various CBD locations including Queen
Victoria Market and Flinders Lane
g. Of her January 2023 trip to India about
which she posted subsequently:
i. posts on 17 May
2023 showed her standing in formal attire with her brother and husband at a bar
celebrating a birthday in Jalandhar
(‘Club TropicanaIN’) [SDCB pp.
ii. posts on 25 May 2023 showed her in
Punjab with her daughter including crouching on the ground [SDCB pp. 19-21];
iii. posts on 1 June 2023 showed her in Delhi
with family at an amusement park [SDCB pp. 49, 50,
h. Post on 5 March 2023 (in the form of a 31.1
sec. video) showed Ms Malik Dua dancing in formal attire amongst friends
celebrating
the Holi festival [SDCB p. 45].
on 11 March 2023 (in the form of videos of up to slightly over a minute) showed
Ms Malik Dua dancing in formal attire amongst
friends celebrating a family
friend’s birthday event [SDCB p. 46].
on 11 April 2023 (in the form of videos of up to slightly over a minute) showed
Ms Malik Dua dancing in formal attire and
heeled dress shoes amongst friends
celebrating a family friend’s birthday event [SDCB p.
k. Posts on 1 June 2023 showed her standing in
sneakers with family members on a pier in Adelaide and in front of the Twelve
on the Great Ocean Road [SDCB pp. 48 &
l. Posts on 3 June 2023 showed her dancing (in
the form of videos of up to slightly over a minute) with friends [SDCB pp. 53
m. Posts on 15 June 2023 showed her
dancing (in the form of a 25 sec. video) in flat shoes in her home with friends
[SDCB pp. 56 –
n. Post on 2 July 2023
(captioned ‘#MORNINGHIKE’ and including a 13-sec. video) showed her
standing with a friend wearing
active wear and runners on a track at the You
Yang Ranges. As for this activity, under cross-examination, she said she walked
between an hour and half an hour, that her pain was aggravated and she did
not continue.
o. Posts on 24 July 2023 depicting Ms
Malik Dua standing posing in the snow at Mt Baw Baw, Victoria and seated on a
toboggan. Under
cross-examination, Ms Malik Dua replied initially
‘yeah’ when it was put to her that being at the snow would have
her to walk on an incline or uneven ground. At a later point she denied
that was so, saying ‘snow is smooth’, it was
uneven’ and was ‘all right’. She also denied she had been
tobogganing, saying she was posing for
Instagram and didn’t actually do it
[SDCB pp. 15–18].
p. Post on 6 August 2023
depicting her standing and posing in a new dress apparently before attending a
prayer meet [SDCB p. 14].
q. Post on 13 August 2023
(captioned ‘#HIKING’ and ‘Good morning Sunday’) showed
her posing standing with
friends wearing active wear and runners on a trail at
the You Yang Ranges. In cross-examination, she denied it was hiking and more
like a walk.
r. Posts on 21 August 2023 (captioned
‘This barbie is gold’) showed Ms Malik Dua standing in a formal
gold-coloured dress
and heeled court shoes with her husband and friends
celebrating a birthday event [SDCB pp. 11-13]. Under cross-examination, she
she was wearing shoes with a heel although not a big heel and that she
danced at this event but ‘not much’ as she could
‘like before’.
s. Post on 7 September
2023 (captioned ‘Sunshine & Smiles #weekend getaway #fathersdayin
australia’) showed her standing
with her husband outside a restaurant on
the Mornington Peninsula [SDCB p. 10].
t. Post on 4
October 2023 (captioned ‘Obsessed with the song and I mean it too’)
showed her standing in a formal silver-coloured
dress and high-heeled sandals
with her husband and friends celebrating a birthday event. Under
cross-examination, she conceded they
were high heels [SDCB p.
u. Posts on 30 October 2023 showed Ms Malik Dua
in a collation of brief videos dancing and celebrating various social functions
different dresses (some of which appear to be the same as the posts of still
photos referred to previously, for example on 11 March
and 11 April 2023) [SDCB
v. Posts on 8 and 25 January 2024 showed her
standing and posing on the cruise ship and at a tourist site in New Zealand
[SDCB pp.6-8].
w. Post on 24 March 2024 (in the form
of a 30.2 sec. video) showed Ms Malik Dua dancing in casual attire amongst
friends celebrating
the Holi festival [SDCB p.
x. Post in August 2024 (in the form of a 31.3
sec. video) showed Ms Malik Dua dancing in formal attire with friends at her
birthday [SDCB p. 66].
y. Post on 5
August 2024 showed Ms Malik Dua out with friends wearing black boots and
celebrating a social event at a bar [SDCB pp.
Surveillance film – 30 January
19. In the course of cross-examination, Ms
Malik Dua was also shown a surveillance film taken on 30 January 2024 of about
13 minutes’
total duration beginning at 3:07 pm and ending around 4:10 pm.
She agreed she was depicted in the film. She accepted the film showed
wearing flat thong-like sandals: escorting her child into a building; shopping
for groceries and carrying a basket of items;
then, for about eight or so
minutes, standing and walking along a concourse in front of the store talking on
her mobile phone.
20. Under cross-examination, it
was put to her that the film appeared to show her walking completely normally
and comfortably with
no sign of a limp and wearing footwear. She responded that
she was not someone who cried in public, she was close to home and she
filling in a short time during her child’s swimming lesson.
Capacity for work
21. Although she would love to return to work,
Ms Malik Dua had not applied for other employment nor attempted to return to
This was because pain-killers made her drowsy. Also, she wanted to fix the
problem and get better. She then conceded in cross-examination
that she had told
Dr Slesenger on 15 March 2024 she had been looking for administrative roles;
although only through personal contacts,
but had been unsuccessful so far.
22. She had completed two short training courses,
one in conveyancing and one as a teacher’s aide. However, in
cross-examination,
she denied the real reason she resigned from Coles was to
pursue other types of work related to the two courses. She also denied
completed the conveyancing course to work in her husband’s business.
23. I turn now to consider the medical
evidence in chronological order commencing with the radiology. The initial left
heel ultrasound
of 14 October 2022 reported plantar fasciitis based on
‘borderline thickening of the plantar fasciitis suggestive of plantar
fasciitis’. As for the bilateral plantar fasciitis ultrasound on 4 July
2023, the radiologist reported ‘mild thickening
of the central insertional
band of both plantar fascia’ which ‘can be related to mild bilateral
plantar fasciitis’.
24. Dr Shamon
, treating GP, prepared a brief medical report dated 12 July 2023 in
which he stated the diagnosis to be bilateral plantar fasciitis
the left than the right’ with no evidence of any pre-existing condition.
On causation, he opined her long working
hours, combined with the need to stand
and walk frequently, were contributing factors to the condition. He considered
she was unfit
for any duties that put pressure on her feet due to her condition.
Treatment including physiotherapy was essential for a return to
carrying out activities of daily living without significant
deterioration.
25. Dr Joseph
, occupational physician, provided three reports for Coles. At
the time of the initial examination (10 November 2022) the history
was of having
severe symptoms when she stopped work with the left heel pain deteriorating
further since stopping work. She described
onset of right heel pain over the
preceding fortnight. She reported difficulty walking including on uneven
ground. On examination,
a pronounced left-sided limp was observed which improved
with distraction. There were apparent marked restrictions of range of ankle
movements. Diagnosis was ‘difficult’ in light of the reported
ultrasound of ‘borderline’ pathology, unexplained
shin bruising and
various aspects of the history including the complaint of deterioration in spite
of rest. It was opined there
was evidence supportive of left heel plantar
fasciitis which had, by the time of assessment, resolved with no ongoing
for pre-injury duties and no ongoing need for treatment. Her work
duties were a ‘plausible cause’. He opined that she
could return to
work, working pre-injury duties and
26. Dr Slesenger’s
supplementary opinion of 21 February 2023 was unaltered, after being
provided with Dr Sheehan’s opinion regarding a chronic
pain condition and
the GP’s certificate of incapacity dated 30 January 2023.
27. Dr Slesenger
assessed Ms Malik
Dua a second time on 15 March 2024 and prepared a report dated 19 March 2024 in
which he considered Dr Khan’s
report and the clinical records. The
reported history was of left foot symptoms over the lateral heel having
persisted although right
foot symptoms had settled. Left heel pain was moderate
during the day and severe at night. There was a reported difficulty walking
uneven ground with a tendency to limp towards the end of the day and
occasionally in the early part of the day. She remained
under the care of her
GP, taking medication including celebrex as required. He opined there had been
evidence of left plantar fasciitis
which had resolved. He stated he was unable
to correlate her current left foot impairment with the claimed injury and noted
non-organic features.
28. Dr Shankar
, pain specialist, prepared a report dated 8 April 2024 for Ms
Malik Dua’s lawyers. Ms Malik Dua reported pain of ‘6 or
10’ at rest and ‘8.5 out of 10’ after standing or walking for
one to two hours. Walking and standing tolerance
was two hours. There was an
inability to put any pressure on her foot. She could run for 15-20 minutes. She
used to enjoy dancing
which she can no longer do. She had stopped going on long
walks. Her social life had become more restricted. On clinical examination,
there was tenderness around the plantar fasciitis in the left heel and lateral
aspect of the foot with not much pain on the right
side. The impression was of
chronic bilateral plantar fasciitis as a consequence of employment and which
required an extensive treatment
regime and would preclude her from pre-injury
29. Dr Ramaswamy
supplementary opinion of 27 June 2024, was sent six selected images from the
social media posts by Ms Malik Dua’s lawyers
and asked to address whether
the bilateral plantar fasciitis condition had an organic basis. He re-stated his
opinions and conclusions
including that the images provided did not indicate
anything beyond the patient’s stated functional limitations.
30. For completeness, I note
psychiatrist, provided medico-legal reports for Coles dated 21
November 2022 and 15 December 2022. On initial assessment, she reported
energy and feeling sad every day with reduced enjoyment. He opined there was a
diagnosis of mild adjustment disorder with
depressed and anxious mood. This was
secondary to the left heel condition as well as feeling aggrieved with the
employer. He also
considered a chronic pain condition syndrome had developed.
However, given the plaintiff made no claim for psychological injury and
reports of Dr Sheehan were referred to only in passing, it is not necessary to
say more about them.
Consideration
burden of proof rested upon Ms Malik Dua to satisfy the Court, on the balance of
probabilities, that she had an entitlement to
weekly payments of compensation
and medical and like expenses beyond the termination dates contained in the 31
March 2023 notice.
32. Before making findings on disputed
issues, I turn to the issue of the plaintiff’s credit which, as I stated
at the outset,
came squarely under attack and was of central importance in a
case of this kind
. Ms Malik Dua
needed to persuade me that her evidence was credible and reliable on the
disputed issues. I needed to be persuaded
that the histories given to the
medical witnesses were reliable.
33. Coles attacked
Ms Malik Dua’s credit on various grounds including apparent
inconsistencies and contradictions between her
own evidence in chief and under
cross-examination. Moreover, it was said her credit was damaged not only by the
contents of the social
media material but, even more particularly, by the stark
inconsistencies (it was submitted) between that material and her own evidence
and in histories to the doctors.
34. As for the
medical opinions, it was urged by Counsel for Coles that the social media
material, considered in its entirety, accorded
with Dr Slesenger’s view
that any plantar fasciitis condition had resolved on or before the termination
dates contained in
the 31 March 2023 notice. Further, Dr Slesenger’s
opinion ought to be preferred as he was the only examiner to assess Ms Malik
twice, once a month after ceasing work and the second time earlier this
35. On the other hand, Counsel for Ms Malik
Dua urged the Court to arrive at a favourable finding of credit. That was based
evaluation of the evidence as a whole including: she made various
concessions such as about dancing and hiking; the diagnosis of
plantar fasciitis
was confirmed on ultrasound twice; her GP’s support and certification of
incapacity until July 2023; and
the supportive opinion of Dr Ramaswamy as the
only pain specialist in the case. Moreover, and importantly, it was submitted,
seen in any of the social media material nor the surveillance film was
inconsistent with the evidence regarding stated tolerances
for standing and
36. On the issue of credit, the
Court’s task is to arrive at findings based on a careful evaluation of the
whole of the evidence
including the plaintiff’s own evidence and the
medical evidence. In assessing the medical evidence, I am guided by the
principles set out in
Pulling v Yarra Ranges Shire
In particular, I note
the obligation to examine the whole of the medical evidence even where it may
have been undermined by other
evidence, including evidence that the worker may
not have been fully frank with a
37. Certainly,
the medical opinions were premised upon Ms Malik Dua’s account of and
unresolved plantar fasciitis symptoms and
persisting restrictions. The
reliability of the plaintiff’s account to the medical witnesses is of
particular significance
in a case such as this in which none of the medical
practitioners’ opinions were tested by
cross-examination.
38. Weighing the whole of the
evidence, Ms Malik Dua did not impress me as a truthful or reliable witness. It
seemed to me her answers
appeared embellished or exaggerated and seemed at
times, intended to mislead the Court in order to advance her interests. An
of her apparent willingness to mislead was her contradictory evidence
no longer dancing at
all (as told to Dr Ramaswamy in April 2024); dancing only for 5 to 10 minutes
(in examination in chief); then,
after the social media material was shown, for
15-20 minutes; and ultimately to, ‘definitely not more than 20
39. She was a voluble witness whose
answers were often digressive or evasive. An example was when it was put to her
that the surveillance
film appeared to show her walking completely normally and
without any observable limp, she responded that she was ‘not someone
cried in public’. Another example was when it was put that her evidence
under cross-examination regarding dancing and high
heels had contradicted her
evidence in chief, she responded ‘no one asked me’ the questions.
Yet another example was
she disagreed that being at the snow would necessitate
walking on an incline or uneven ground, saying snow is ‘smooth’
then later contending the ground was ‘not very uneven’.
40. An example of her tendency to exaggerate was
her evidence (which I consider weighing the whole of the evidence to be
implausible)
of spending ’22 to 23 hours a day’ sitting and resting
at home. Another instance of improbable and unlikely evidence
related to her
account of excessive drowsiness caused by over the counter paracetamol or
ibuprofen. When pressed further about this
in cross-examination, she then said
she meant this caused her to sleep a lot more (nine hours rather than seven)
although conceded
drowsiness did not impact on her ability to drive, for
example, taking her children to school.
Malik Dua denied vehemently that the social media material showed her to be a
person with a busy and active life who had no
apparent problem with either foot.
She also provided a justification of having to engage in such activities for the
benefit of her
marriage and her family, saying that it would be inappropriate
culturally to be a guest at a celebration and participate half-heartedly
42. It is true that Ms Malik Dua conceded
that: she could stand and walk for two hours; she went on a hike although it
easy’; she still went out but ‘not much maybe once
or twice a month’; and she still did Bollywood-style dancing
but not as much as she used to do.
43. In assessing
her credit as a witness, however, it is as I stated earlier a matter of
evaluating the whole of the evidence in particular
Ms Malik Dua’s
44. It is a truism that Instagram posts
are ‘snap-shots’ of people living their ‘best lives’
rather than how
their ordinary day to day lives are led in between times.
45. I accept the submission for Ms Malik Dua that
the still photographs and brief videos of dancing, socialising and standing were
not, of themselves, inconsistent with the stated
tolerances.
46. I turn now to a more detailed
evaluation of the evidence considered
sequentially.
47. In this case, there was (as stated
previously) a considerable volume of snap-shots of Ms Malik-Dua’s life in
different contexts
and settings over an extensive date range (some 22 months)
from the time she stopped work (October 2022) to a month before the hearing
(August 2024).
48. On my assessment of the social
media posts, considered collectively and noting the long span of time (some 22
months) covered,
although ‘snap-shots’ and thus not representative
of the whole of life, I conclude that evidence is at odds with her
evidence and
the histories to the doctors.
49. Over the period
of October and November of 2022, Ms Malik Dua was depicted on successive
occasions socialising and dancing with
considerable gusto and in an apparently
wholly unrestrained fashion. That is particularly apparent from the brief but
nevertheless
striking videos. This was over six separate social or recreational
contexts between late October and late November of 2022. She
was, variously,
celebrating Diwali (25 October 2022); barracking vigorously and while standing
at the cricket (7 November 2022);
attending two other birthday celebrations (7
and 11 November 2022) and walking around various CBD locations (26 November
50. To my mind, Ms Malik Dua’s credit
was impugned by the stark contrast between her repeated presentation on social
her own evidence about her situation at that stage and her
contemporaneous accounts as recorded by the GP, Dr Slesenger and Dr Ramaswamy.
51. It was regarding in this same period (October
and November of 2022) that her evidence was of having ceased work because of:
a. Of being ‘unable to bear’ the heel
pain and needing to rest and seek medical attention;
b. Of walking with a limp and heel pain at levels
of 8 out of 10 constantly (left foot) and intermittently 5 out of 10 (right
c. Of symptoms that were
‘severe’ when she stopped work and ‘deteriorated’
further after ceasing work (as
told to Dr Slesenger on 10 November 2022).
d. As for mood, she was ‘sad every day with
reduced enjoyment’ (as told to Dr Sheehan on 21 November 2022).
52. Then, over the period between January 2023 and
July 2023, Ms Malik Dua was depicted: on a family visit to India (January) where
she celebrated a birthday at ‘Club Tropicana’ and attended an
amusement park; attended various birthday celebrations
(5 and 11 March 2023; 11
April 2023; 3 and 15 June 2023), dancing and celebrating on at least some of
these occasions in heels (such
as 11 April 2023); hiking or walking in the You
Yang ranges (2 July 2023); having a day at the snow (24 July 2023) whether
tobogganing or not.
53. Yet, her evidence
and rested for extended periods
every day and, further, was being certified from
month to month as unfit for work with pain. The few notes of actual complaints
by Dr Khan were ‘chronic’ (on 3 March 2023); ‘slowly
improving few days without pain but few days lots of pain’
(on 4 April
2023); and of being ‘still not ready to go back to work’ (on 10 July
54. From mid-2023 to mid-2024, Ms Malik Dua
was depicted hiking again (21 August 2023), at parties including at times in
heeled shoes
or sandals (21 August 2023, 4 October 2023, 24 March 2023 and
August 2024), at a tourist site in New Zealand and other activities.
55. Again, and still keeping in mind what I have
already stated regarding the posts being moments in time, it is nevertheless my
that these depictions, when considered collectively, paint a wholly
inconsistent impression to her presentation to the medical examiners
first quarter of 2024. In particular:
a. First, Dr
Slesenger on 14 March 2024 recorded that Ms Malik Dua presented on that date
with a limp (which he observed disappeared
on distraction). She gave a history
of persisting moderate pain by day and severe pain and a tendency to limp by
b. Second, the history taken by Dr Ramaswamy
on 8 April 2024 was of being unable to put pressure on her left foot; of
persisting pain
at a level of 6-7 out of 10 at rest and 8.5 out of 10 after
exertion; of no longer dancing; and reporting having a more restricted
56. I now turn to the surveillance film of
January 2024 which I am required to view, in addition to the intrinsic content,
overall contextual setting as Ashley JA said in
Regional Health
57. I accept the film was of short duration
and needed to be viewed in context. There is no question that the walking and
shown in the film was consistent with Ms Malik Dua’s reported
standing and walking tolerance. However, it is markedly contrasting
histories taken by Dr Slesenger on 14 March 2024 and Dr Ramaswamy on 8 April
2024 as referred to previously. Moreover, in
my opinion, in viewing the film
myself and in light of Ms Malik Dua’s evidence as a whole, there was a
significant feature
to me about that section of the film when she was walking
and talking on her mobile phone. It was striking that she chose to stand
walk for about eight minutes rather than sitting on the vacant bench seat
positioned immediately behind her.
contemporaneous evidence of complaints of bilateral plantar fasciitis to her GP,
it seems to me to be of some significance
that the clinical records of the GP
visits after 4 April 2023 and until 12 July 2023 (the last attendance for a
certificate) record
only the provision of the monthly certificate of capacity.
59. Of course, as the Court of Appeal has observed
before, in cases such as
Philippiadis v Transport Accident Commission,
courts must exercise care in relying on the record of medical practitioners
which are very often highly probative, but cannot be treated
as a verbatim
transcript of the entire medical
allowing for the usual constraints of a busy general practitioner, it is
nevertheless somewhat surprising that beyond 4 April
2023 there is a complete
dearth of recorded complaints of symptoms. There is not one note of her seeking
advice or support as to
the impact of the injury nor a recorded clinical
examination by the GP nor requests for
medication.
61. Ms Malik Dua’s explanation for
not making complaints or seeking treatment when attending for certificates or
was that there was no reason to do so because she already had been
told to rest and medication and physiotherapy were the recommended
and, further, that she was worried about side-effects if she had the injections
suggested in October 2022.
62. However, I must
reject that explanation for three reasons:
findings about her credit as a witness generally;
b. A consideration of the medical records over an
eleven month period between August 2023 and July 2024 including nine or so
consultations
reveals regular attendances for a range of minor or moderate
complaints including taking celebrex, paracetamol and ibuprofen for
c. The nature and level of symptoms (persisting
pain at a level of 6-7 out of 10 at rest and 8.5 out of 10 after exertion)
to Dr Slesenger in March 2024 and Dr Ramaswamy on 8 April 2024 seem to
me to be at odds with an absence of any recorded reference
by the GP of
complaints and discussion of symptoms.
63. Accordingly, for these reasons and again in
evaluating the evidence as a whole, including my finding that Ms Malik Dua was
a credible witness, I am unable to accept as truthful her account of
unresolved and persisting plantar fasciitis pain.
64. In particular, I reject her evidence that the
bilateral plantar fasciitis has impacted, and continues to impact on her,
financially and physically requiring extended hours of rest and daily
medication. Also for the reasons stated, Ms Malik Dua has failed
to establish
the reliability of the histories given to the medical witnesses, whose opinions
as I have stated, were premised on the
accuracy of her accounts to them. As
stated previously, that is what she needed to do in accordance with the
principles in
Johns v Oaktech Pty
therefore prefer and accept, as being persuasive and compelling, Dr
Slesenger’s opinion on diagnosis as to the condition
having resolved. I
also agree with Dr Slesenger’s finding, which I consider accorded with the
whole of the evidence, that the
ongoing and unresolved left foot impairment of
which she complained did not correlate with the claimed injury. I also give
to his opinion as the only legal specialist to examine Ms Malik Dua on
two occasions. I also prefer and adopt his opinion that she
was fit to return to
work, working pre-injury duties and working by April 2023 (indeed he considered
she had such capacity at the
time of his assessment in November 2022).
66. Counsel for Ms Malik Dua submitted that Dr
Ramaswamy’s opinion as a pain specialist was significant given Dr
Slesenger’s
comment that a pain specialist would be better able to assess
whether there was some form of chronic pain or pain syndrome.
67. However, I am unable to accept that submission
given my findings that Dr Ramaswamy’s opinion was based on a history the
plaintiff has failed to establish as being accurate or credible (no longer
dancing) nor reliable or credible (having inability to
put any pressure on her
foot and persisting pain in April 2024 of 6-7 out of 10 at rest and 8.5 out of
68. It is also true that Dr Ramaswamy
maintained his opinion after being forwarded by the plaintiff’s lawyers a
selection of
six ‘stills’ from the social media material (two hiking
posts, her seated on the toboggan and two others in social setting
including one
in heeled court shoes). However, I place little weight on that. In my view, Dr
Ramaswamy was sent a proportionately
very small and somewhat unrepresentative
sample of the social media material and also included still images only and none
69. Finally, whilst Dr Khan’s
opinion contained in his report of 12 July 2023 maintained the diagnosis and
opinion of incapacity,
I find that Dr Khan was at all times relying on the
plaintiff’s account, for example of being ‘not ready’ to
to work, which I have concluded was not credible or reliable. It is of
note that his opinion (obtained some thirteen months before
hearing) was the
most recent treating opinion relied upon by Ms Malik Dua’s lawyers.
Further, I refer to my previous observations
complaints or clinical examination beyond April 2023 other than the provision of
certificates.
70. I now turn to my conclusions.
of Injuries
71. Based on the ultrasounds, the
initial opinion of Dr Khan and the opinion of Dr Slesenger, I conclude that the
nature of the medical
condition relevant to Ms Malik Dua’s injury was
bilateral plantar fasciitis (since resolved).
72. For completeness, there was no evidence, nor
reliance by the plaintiff at hearing, on the other claimed injuries such as the
lower limbs nor the left hip.
Capacity for
73. Weighing the whole of the
evidence, and for the reasons stated, I find that the plaintiff has failed to
discharge the burden of
proof, to the requisite standard of probability, that
she had an inability to return to her pre-injury employment as a bakery manager
beyond the date of termination of weekly payments contained in the 31 March 2023
Medical and like
74. Also for the reasons stated, I
find that the plaintiff has failed to discharge the burden of proof, to the
requisite standard
of probability, that she had an entitlement to medical and
like expenses beyond the date of termination contained in the 31 March
Final orders
these reasons, I find that the plaintiff is not entitled to the relief sought
and I would dismiss the proceeding subject to hearing
from the parties regarding
proposed orders.
Johns v Oaktech Pty Ltd
[2020] VSCA 10
[2018] VSC 248
Ibid at [50]
[2008] VSCA 153
[2018] VSCA 243
[2020] VSCA 10
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (426 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter