URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VLSC/2018/37.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:33:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commissioner Determination (Discourteous communication) [2018] VLSC 37 (30 August 2018)
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner
A notice made under s.
318 of the Legal Profession Uniform Law (Victoria)
Commissioner Determination (Discourteous communication)
[2018] VLSC 37
Date of Determination:
30 August 2018
Pursuant to section 299(1) of the Legal Profession Uniform
Law (Victoria)
(‘the Uniform Law’), I find that the
Respondent Lawyer has engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct and I make
following order –
The Respondent
Lawyer is reprimanded pursuant to section 299(1)(b) of the Uniform
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Respondent Lawyer is the Principal of the Law Practice and the Complainant was
employed by the Law Practice for a period of time
prior to lodging her
approximately 1 February 2017 the Complainant’s employment with the Law
Practice was terminated.
5 February 2017 the Complainant sent the Respondent Lawyer an email requesting
the removal of the Complainant’s profile from
the Law Practice’s
1 June 2017 the Complainant sent the Respondent Lawyer a further email, again
requesting the removal of the profile from the Law
Practice’s website and
also requesting the removal of details from a plaque in the window of the Law
13 July 2017 the Complainant called the Victorian Legal Service
Commissioner’s office regarding the Respondent Lawyer’s
remove the details. On this date, an Intake & Assessment Officer (‘the
VLSC officer’) spoke with the Respondent
Lawyer and was advised the issue
would be dealt with “
”, noting there were four websites
in which amendments would need to be made.
31 August 2017 the VLSC officer left a message with the Law Practice regarding
the removal of the Complainant’s details and
seeking an assurance
regarding same.
5 September 2017 the VLSC officer sent the Respondent Lawyer an email noting a
failure to return his call of 31 August 2017 and
that the Complainant’s
details had not been removed.
12 September 2017:
4:17pm the VLSC officer sent a follow up email to the Respondent Lawyer after
there being no reply to his earlier email of 5 September
4:19pm the Respondent Lawyer called and alleged to the VLSC officer "
threatening me"
. The file note of this telephone attendance records the
Respondent Lawyer was angry, loud and aggressive throughout the
The Respondent Lawyer also commented that the
Complainant was "
" and that with regard to the complaint, he had
other priorities.
15 September 2017 the Complainant again contacted the Commissioner advising that
the details had yet to be removed and lodged a
formal complaint against the
Respondent Lawyer. The Complainant advised that three requests of the Respondent
Lawyer to remove her
details had been made, and that some of her current and
potential clients were confused about whether she was still working at the
20 September 2017 the Assistant Manager of Disciplinary Investigations sent an
email to the Respondent Lawyer after being unable
to contact the Law Practice on
two occasions. The email stated:
“I advise that we have
received a complaint from (the Complainant) regarding ... your firm’s
website. I would like the
opportunity to discuss this matter with you. Could you
please let me know of a suitable time over the next two days that I may
21 September 2017 the Respondent Lawyer sent an email in response which
contained the following comments:
am aware of the complaint having been harassed, over a period of several weeks,
by one of your rather excitable colleagues who has
been making distressing and
slanderous allegations of misleading or deceptive conduct simply because we
haven’t updated our
website removing a contractor who once worked here. I
am appalled. I find it curious that your colleague doesn’t have something
better to do. Surely the LSB would benefit allocating its limited resources to
material consumer complaints?
do not want my firm affiliated with (the Complainant) in any manner. (The
Complainant’s) file work and client contact was
highly unsatisfactory and
unprofessional jeopardising the reputation of the firm. (The Complainant) has
cost the firm both time and
money since (the Complainant’s) departure
rectifying client issues... left behind.
will not waste anymore of my time on this nonsensical
22 September 2017:
Assistant Manager sent the Respondent Lawyer an email for a timeline to settle
the website issue; and
Respondent Lawyer responded by stating it would take four weeks, and commented
This is outrageous
22 November 2017, a Senior Investigations Officer called the Respondent Lawyer
and advised that he had been allocated the matter
and was calling to discuss the
status of the issues in the complaint. The file note of this telephone
attendance notes the Respondent
Lawyer immediately became abusive, was "
and said it was a waste of time. The Respondent Lawyer requested an
email from the Senior Investigations Officer with his details
and the date of
the file allocation so as to make a complaint. The Respondent Lawyer stated
I will not be doing one more thing about this complaint
" and terminated
23 November 2017 the Manager of Disciplinary Investigations spoke with the
Respondent Lawyer and he was aggressive and abusive.
The Respondent Lawyer swore during this telephone attendance, stating the
complaint was "
a waste of your fucking time
" and he terminated the
Issues under investigation
following issues have been investigated:
Respondent Lawyer’s failure to remove the Complainant’s details from
the Law Practice websites and premises; and
Respondent Lawyer’s conduct in dealing with the Commissioner’s
Investigation
7 December 2017:
Respondent Lawyer received a
Notice of Decision to Investigate
advised that on the basis of communications with the Commissioner, as detailed
above, the scope of the investigation had been
extended pursuant to section 283
of the Uniform Law to include the Respondent Lawyer’s conduct in dealing
with the Commissioner’s
Respondent Lawyer sent an email advising there were now no links to the
Complainant on any website and the plaque at the Law Practice
had now been
review of Law Practice websites confirmed the Complainant’s details
remained on two of the websites;
was brought to the Respondent Lawyer’s attention and the Respondent Lawyer
responded by further email which stated “
paralegal of the Law Practice sent an email confirming the Complainant’s
details had subsequently been removed.
email dated 19 December 2017 the Respondent Lawyer provided submissions to the
Commissioner advising:
Complainant’s details were removed from the Law Practice websites on 7
December 2017; and
reason for the delay was administration issues resulting from the IT team being
unable to attend to their removal earlier and
although details were partly
removed from some websites, it was an oversight that they were not removed from
The submissions did not address the extended scope of the investigation,
being the Respondent Lawyer’s communications with the
Commissioner.
letter dated 31 January 2018 the Commissioner advised the Respondent Lawyer of
the findings of the investigation to that date,
the concerns regarding his
conduct, invited written submissions or material regarding whether the conduct
should be characterised
as unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct and the Commissioner’s proposed order pursuant to section
of the Uniform Law.
letter dated 20 February 2018 the Respondent Lawyer provided submissions in
response. The submissions did not address the conduct
of dealing with the
Commissioner’s staff, save for saying if there was swearing during the
telephone conversation on 12 September
2017, the Respondent Lawyer
apologised.
Findings of fact on issues under
investigation
the basis of the available evidence, I find the following proved:
the Respondent
Lawyer, in his communications with the Commissioner:
courteous in dealings in the course of legal practice as the communications were
inappropriate, discourteous, gratuitous
and/or offensive; and
- engaged in
conduct which is likely to a material degree to be prejudicial to, or diminish
the public confidence in, the administration
of justice or bring the profession
into disrepute.
communications were not an isolated incident, as they:
- occurred on
four (4) separate dates from 12 September 2017 – 23 November 2017;
- were directed
to four (4) different employees, being the VLSC Officer, the Assistant Manager,
the Senior Investigations Officer
and the Manager; and
- escalated in
their tone and content.
Uniform Law applies to the conduct, the subject of the findings of fact, as it
occurred after 1 July 2015.
Characterisation of the
4.1.2 of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors’
Conduct Rules
(‘Rules’) states a solicitor must be honest
and courteous in all dealings in the course of legal practice.
5.1.1 of the Rules states that a solicitor must not engage in conduct, in the
course of practice or otherwise, which is likely
to a material degree to be
prejudicial to, or diminish the public confidence in, the administration of
5.1.2 of the Rules states that a solicitor must not engage in conduct, in the
course of practice or otherwise, which is likely
to a material degree to bring
the profession into disrepute.
reason of the above finding of fact, I find that the Respondent Lawyer’s
communications with the Commissioner were in breach
of Rules 4.1.2 and 5.1.1 or
5.1.2 of the Rules.
298(b) of the Uniform Law prescribes that, without limitation, conduct capable
of constituting unsatisfactory professional
conduct includes conduct consisting
of a contravention of the Uniform Rules.
because of the Respondent Lawyer’s repeated inappropriate, discourteous,
gratuitous and/or offensive communications
with the Commissioner and in
accordance with previous Commissioner determinations, the Respondent
Lawyer’s conduct fell below
the expected standard of competence and
diligence. This conduct thereby constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct
to section 298 of the Uniform Law and warrants a
Determination
light of the above and having considered all of the evidence and relevant law, I
determine that it is fair and reasonable in all
the circumstances to make the
order detailed above.
to section 314 of the Uniform Law, a respondent lawyer or a legal practitioner
associate of a respondent law practice may,
in accordance with the applicable
legislation, appeal to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal or seek a
review by the
VCAT of this determination made under section 299 of the Uniform
Russell Daily
Delegate of the Victorian
Legal Services Commissioner
30 August 2018
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (159 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter