URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VBAB/2025/107.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:26:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
�Hardie v Municipal Building Surveyor for the Glen Eira City Council [2025] VBAB 107;
(3 September 2025)
BUILDING APPEALS BOARD OF VICTORIA
Building Act 1993
BAB CASE NO. 456363
– An appeal made under
s 142(2)(a)
Building Act 1993
) by the owner of the building or
land against the making of a building order by the relevant building surveyor
of the Act – building without a building permit –
whether a building permit is required.
(Subject Land owner)
Municipal Building Surveyor for the City of Glen Eira
RELEVANT MUNICIPALITY
Glen Eira City
Unit 1, 50 Lahona
Avenue, Bentleigh East
Members B Thomas (panel chair) and G
Avramopoulos
HEARING TYPE
On the papers
DATE OF HEARING
10 July 2025
DATE OF DETERMINATION
3 September 2025
Hardie v Municipal Building Surveyor for the Glen Eira City
Council [2025] VBAB 107
DETERMINATION AND ORDERS
Having considered all the submissions and information placed before it, the
Building Appeals Board (
) determines that:
s 149(1)(a)
Building Act 1993
), the decision of
the Respondent to issue a Building Order dated 3 September 2025 is
to sch 3, cl 16(3) to the Act, liberty to apply on the question of costs,
subject to such liberty being exercised within
from the date of
this determination/these
determinations.
_______________________ ________________________
Member B Thomas Registrar M Finlay
Applicant is the owner of the Subject Land on which a dwelling is situated.
Applicant conducts a business on the Subject Land under the name of ‘Tinas
at your service Dog Grooming.’
14 September and 3 December 2022, the Applicant had a shed constructed on the
northern boundary of the Subject Land.
a letter to the Applicant dated 19 July 2024, Matthew Storey, the Senior
Planning Investigations Officer for the Glen Eira City
) advised the Applicant that by 19 August 2024, she must:
(a) Reduce size of the signage advertising her business to 0.2 square metres;
(b) Apply to the Council for a planning permit to allow for signage in excess of
0.2 square metres.
20 August 2024, pursuant to
Section 228F
Building Act 1993
) the Council’s Municipal Building Surveyor (
to the Applicant a Notice Before Entry and Search (
Notice stated that the Council believed that without first obtaining a building
(a) A building had been constructed within the front setback of the allotment;
(b) A front and side fence had been erected which exceeded the height
limitations specified by the
Building Regulations 2018
(the Building
Applicant refused to give access to the MBS to conduct an inspection of the
Building Work.
3 September 2024, the MBS issued a Building Notice alleging that contrary to
Section 16(1)
of the Act, the following building work had been carried out on
the Subject Land without a building permit –
(a) Construction of a building within the front setback of the allotment of the
(b) Construction of a front and side fence incorporating gates and a vehicular
roller door on the intersecting street alignments
(front and side) exceeding the
exemption criteria under Schedule 3 of the
Building Regulations 2018
Regulations
(c) The fence exceeds 1000mm in height above the footpath when within 9 metres
of a point of intersection of street allotments; and
(d) The fence exceeds a height mm of 1500 (
the Building Notice
Building Notice required the Applicant to show cause by 5.00pm on 16 October
2024 why she should not be required to demolish the
shed and the fence.
an undated document entitled ‘Applicant’s Response of Reply’
she states:
(a) The complaint made to Council originated from my next-door neighbour ... The
Complaint appears to be personal rather than based
on actual concerns about
compliance.
(b) On 18 July 2024, Council officers ... arrived without prior appointment,
demanding to inspect my shed. I declined. I had already
reviewed Council
guidelines and confirmed with the shed supplier that no permit was required
(c) On 19 July 2024,I received written confirmation from Council that no permit
was required for the shed ...
(d) A week later, I received a call from Council officer Nikki Babatsikos
advising a permit was required for the shed, contradicting
the earlier written
advice. ...
(e) On 20 August, I received a Notice Before Entry and Search that also raised
new concerns regarding my fence extensions and roller
door – matters not
previously discussed. ... There is no reason to ‘search’.
(f) ... the trees surrounding the shed ... provide adequate coverage. The shed
is clearly not visible from the street, and no permit
should be required for
existing trees...
(g) ... My property still has more open garden space than surrounding
townhouses.
(h) Apart from the neighbour who submitted the complaint, other residents have
expressed support or indifference to the shed. ...
(i) Council’s website does not clearly state the criteria for requiring a
permit, and residents are advised to call if unsure.
The shed, fence and roller
door are on private land, poses no risk to the public, and is not accessible to
them (sic).
(j) The conflicting information from Council has created confusion and stress.
... I cannot justify paying more than the shed’s
value to obtain further
reports when the matter appears to be driven by a single neighbour’s
31 October 2024, the MBS made a building order which stated
The building/land is a danger to the life, safety or health of
any member of the public or of any person using the building in that:
The building work has been carried out on the land without a building permit
being issued and in force contrary to
section 16(1)
Building Act
the Building Order
Building Order required the Applicant by 2.00pm on 3 February 2025 to:
(a) Demolish the shed located within the front setback of the allotment;
(b) Demolish the front and side fence incorporating;
gates and vehicular roller door on intersecting street alignments;
section of the fence exceeding 1000mm in height above the footpath within 9
metres of the intersection of street alignments;
section of the front fence higher than 1.5 metres.
29 November 2024, the Applicant filed with the BAB an appeal against the
decision to make the Building Order (
25 May 2025, the BAB issued Directions and Orders requiring the:
(a) Applicant to file with the BAB and serve on the Respondent her
of Contentions
by 13 June 2025;
(b) The Respondent to file and serve his
Statement of Contentions
reply to the
Applicant’s Statement of Contentions
by 27 June 2025;
(c) The Applicant to file and serve any
Statement in Reply
Respondent’s Statement of Contentions
by 4 July 2025.
Appeal was listed for hearing on 10 July 2025. On 7 July 2025, the BAB issued
Directions and Orders for the proceeding to be determined
15 July 2025, the BAB issued Directions and Orders requiring:
(a) The Applicant to file with the BAB by 23 July 2025:
confirmation from the Council that a building permit was not required for the
written confirmation from the supplier of the shed that a building permit was
not required;
(b) The Respondent to file and serve:
response to documents filed by the Applicant pursuant to para (a)(i); and
confirmation or communication to the Applicant that the construction of the shed
required a building permit.
CITY OF GLEN EIRA WEBSITE
regards the need to obtain a building permit, the City of Glen Eira website
Do I need a building permit?
Find out if you need a building permit for building
a new dwelling or structure, making changes to an existing building, fences,
pools and more.
ON THIS PAGE
you need a building permit
building works require a permit?
a building permit
a planning permit also required?
Why you need a building permit
Building permits are issued under the
Building Act 1993
, while planning
permits are issued under the
Planning and Environment Act 1987
You generally need a building permit when you're constructing any new
building or changing an existing building. In some cases, you
building permit to build a fence or large shed.
Building Regulations 2018
state that you must receive a valid
building permit for certain proposed building works before you start. For more
information see
Building Regulations 2018
Victorian legislation.
Which building works require a permit?
Common works that you may need a building permit for, but is not limited to,
Construction of
a new building or structure
Additions and
Alterations to dwellings and other buildings
Re-blocking or
restumping of an existing building
Verandas, decks
and pergolas
pools/spas and safety barriers
gazebos, shipping containers or like structures
, for more information see
regulations - Glen Eira City Council | Glen Eira City
RELEVANT LEGISLATION
of the Act states:
A person must not carry out building work
unless a building permit in relation to the work has been issued and is in force
Penalty 500 penalty units, in the case of a natural person.
building work
means work for or in connection
with the construction, demolition or removal of a building.
includes a structure, temporary building, temporary
structure and any part of a building or structure.
(Minimum street setbacks) of the Regulations states:
(2) ... a building must be set back from a street
alignment not less than the distance specified in respect of that
in Table 74.
Table 74—Street
Adjoining development context
dwellings on adjoining allotments facing
the same street
The average distance of the setbacks of
the front walls of the existing buildings on the adjoining allotments facing
the front street,
or 9 m, whichever is the lesser
Not applicable
Existing dwelling on one adjoining allotment facing
the same street and
no building on the other adjoining allotment facing
The same distance as the setback of
the front wall of the existing building on the adjoining allotment facing
the same street,
9 m, whichever is the lesser
Not applicable
No existing dwellings on adjoining allotments facing
the same street
6 m for a building facing a declared
4 m for a building facing any other street
Not applicable
If there is a building on the adjoining allotment facing
the same street
The same distance as the setback of
the front wall of the existing building on the adjoining allotment facing
the front street,
9 m, whichever is the lesser
The same distance as the setback of
the front wall of the existing building on the adjoining allotment facing
the side street or
m, whichever is the lesser
If there is no building on the adjoining allotment facing
the same street
6 m for a building facing a declared
4 m for a building facing any other street
20. Regulation
79 (Side and rear setbacks) states:
(a) an allotment is
in a zone of a planning
scheme specified in Schedule 6; and
(b) a schedule to that zone in the planning
scheme specifies minimum setbacks from
side and rear boundaries—
a building on the allotment must
be set back from a side or rear boundary not less than the relevant setback specified
in that schedule.
(2) If subregulation (1) does not apply, a building must be set back from a
side or rear boundary not less than the distance specified
in respect of that
boundary in Table 79.
Table 79—Side and rear
side or rear boundary at that point
3·6 m or less
More than 3·6 m but not m ore than 6·9 m
1 m plus an additional distance calculated at the rate of 300 mm for every
metre of height over
More than 6·9 m
2 m plus an additional distance calculated at the rate of 1 m
for every metre of height over 6·9
(3) The following may encroach into the setback distance
required by subregulation (1) or (2)—
(a) landings with an area of not more than 2 m
than 1 m in height;
(b) unroofed stairways and ramps;
(c) pergolas;
(d) shade sails;
(e) eaves, fascia and gutters, if the encroachment is not more than 600 mm;
(f) carports that comply with regulation
(4) The following may encroach into the setback distance
required by subregulation (1) or (2) by not more than 500 mm—
(a) porches and verandas;
(b) masonry chimneys;
(c) sunblinds;
(d) permanent and fixed screens referred to in regulation
84(5)(d) or (6);
(e) flues, pipes and rainwater heads;
(f) domestic fuel tanks and water tanks;
(g) heating and cooling equipment and other services.
(5) This regulation does not apply to a wall that complies with regulation
The report and consent of the relevant council must be obtained to an
application for a building permit in relation to a design that
does not comply
with this regulation.
(Emphasis added)
THE APPLICANT’S STATEMENT OF CONTENTIONS (IN SUMMARY)
Applicant submits that:
(a) Over 24 years her property has been subjected to ongoing damage and safety
concerns due to a large Council tree;
(b) There have been multiple security incidents including cars broken into, her
letterbox stolen twice and cars sideswiped;
(c) Housing development within 50 metres of her dwelling has resulted in
increased traffic and cars parked on the street, residents
not using their
garage or driveways and increased foot traffic;
(d) Strangers enter her property without authorization;
(e) There are privacy and security issues due to the proximity to a park;
(f) she has experienced bullying and harassment from Council employees;
(g) she proceeded with the construction of the shed after checking the council
website and consultation with a person that a permit
was not required due to it
being only 6m² in size;
(h) Fence extensions were built after checking the Council website and receiving
two to three quotations from fencing companies that
no permit was required;
(i) The roller door is more than 9 m from the street corner and has been
reinforced at the base of posts and concreted 600 mm deep
providing security
without breaching corner visibility.
Applicant contends that:
(a) Council has neglected its responsibility to manage the tree properly on or
near Council property, which has resulted in damage
and personal risk;
(b) Easy unauthorised access to her property by anyone while boundaries were
insecure is unlawful and creates further security risks;
(c) Council communication has been misleading regarding requirements to inspect
her property and permits (shed and fencing) leading
to unnecessary distress,
financial cost and delay;
(d) The Council has acted contrary to its own stated support for small
businesses, particularly in how it handled the issue of the
construction of a
shed not for business use; and
(e) Bullying and harassment by Council officers particularly in line with
behaviours cited in Councils “standard” emails,
misconduct requiring investigation and remedy
Applicant submits that the issues for determination by the BAB are
(a) The Council has failed in its duty to maintain trees and foot paths and
ensure resident safety;
(b) The Council’s inconsistent or unclear communication regarding permits
for sheds and fencing caused to the Applicant; and
(c) Whether the Applicant has been subject to misconduct, intimidation or unfair
treatment by Council representatives
Applicant seeks the following relief:
(a) Exemption from building work or confirmation in writing that no permit is
required shared, fence extension and roller door;
(b) A formal investigation into the conduct of relevant Council employees and an
understanding that they should not act like police
and treat people in a more
appropriate way; and
(c) Remediation of damage caused by the tree including repairs to the footpath
and appropriate ongoing tree management.
THE RESPONDENT’S STATEMENT OF CONTENTIONS (IN SUMMARY)
Respondent submits that the Applicant’s Statement of Contentions focuses
on issues not relevant to building legislation
matters such as the large Council
tree outside her property and security concerns.
Respondent further submits that:
(a) The shed is not 6m² but has an approximate building area of 72m²,
which does not meet the exemption criteria under
Schedule 3, item 1(a) to the
Regulations;
(b) The Council’s website does not refer to a 6m² building permit
exemption for outbuildings;
(c) Matthew Storey was a planning enforcement officer regarding matters relating
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(d) The fact that a planning permit may not have been required does not obviate
the need to obtain a building permit under
of the Act;
(e) The shed as constructed is associated with multiple siting non compliances
of the Regulations, including but not limited to:
- Minimum street setback
The shed is visually dominant and obtrusive in the immediate streetscape.
There are no examples of buildings in the immediate streetscape
with a front
setback of 0.5 metres
- Site coverage
The approximate site coverage of 65% on the
allotment is not in keeping with the immediate streetscape and neighbouring
allotments.
The building impacts negatively on the neighbourhood character and amenity of
reduced open space on the allotment.
There is no evidence that the shed complies with the National Construction
Code and the relevant Australian Standards regarding but
not limited structure
(footings and framing), fire safety and stormwater drainage.
(f) Council’s website for fencing regulations should be used as a guide
only and it is the responsibility of the landowner
to seek professional advice
from a building consultant to verify if the proposed building work is exempt
from Sch 3 to the Regulations.
(g) The front and corner fences exceed the height limitations listed in the
guidance material on the Council’s website, and
the fences including the
roller door do not meet the exemption criteria under Sch 3, item 10(b) and (d)
of the Regulations.
(h) The fences including the roller door are associated with multiple siting
non-compliances under Part 5 of the Regulations including
but not limited to:
- Front fence height
Having regard to Ministers Guideline 12 (MG-12) there are no front fences in
the immediate street scape with a prevailing height ranging
from 2.3 to 3.5
- Fences on intersecting Street alignments
The corner fence
does not achieve a 3.0 metres x 3.0 metres splay as required Council’s
Traffic Engineering Department.
The design of the fence will cause to pedestrians, cyclists and motor vehicle
There is no evidence to suggest that the front and side fences including the
roller door comply with the National Construction Code
and the relevant
Australian Standards regarding, but not limited to, structure and footings.
(i) The Building Order should be affirmed.
THE RESPONDENT’S REPLY TO THE APPLICANT (IN SUMMARY)
letter to the Applicant dated 19 July 2024, does not relate to building
legislation matters and specifically references
“Requirements for Planning
Building Department did not provide any written confirmation that a building
permit was not required for the shed
and the front/corner fences.
Applicant states ‘I was informed that recent regulations had
changed’. However, she submits, no recent changes have
occurred to Sch 3
to the Regulations.
have reviewed the parties’ Statement of Contentions, Contentions in Reply
and all other material filed in the proceeding.
do not accept the Applicant’s Contentions for the following
(a) The construction of the shed and the fence is building work as defined
under Section 3 of the
Act and therefore requires a building permit under
Section 16(1) of the Act.
(b) The Section titled ‘
Do I need a building permit?
Council’s website clearly states that
all building
including shed and most
(c) There is no evidence the Applicant sought confirmation with the
Council’s Building Department or a private building surveyor
building permit was not required for the construction of the shed or the
(d) Mr Storey was the Senior Planning Officer in the Council’s Planning
Department and was not a member of the Building Department.
(e) His letter to the Applicant dated 19 July 2019 is headed ‘Requirements
for Planning Permit’ and simply states that:
Under the neighbourhood Residential Zone, the use of the Land as (sic) a does
not require a
Planning Permit
if it meets the requirements of 52.17 (the
Scheme) (Emphasis added)
(f) The Applicant’s contention that Mr Storey’s letter that a
building permit was not required for the construction
of the shed and the fence
is incorrect. The letter contains no reference to building permit requirements.
(g) The Applicant did not provide any evidence to support her claim that she
received two to three quotations from fencing companies
advising her that no
building permit was required.
(h) The shed and the fence have been constructed in breach of regs 74, 76, 89
and 92 of the Regulations.
(i) The shed and fence are also in breach of section 16(1) of the Act.
33. The decision to make the Building Order will be affirmed.
DATE OF DETERMINATION
: 3 September 2025
Clause 17 of Schedule 3 to the
Building Act 1993
provides: ‘Unless the Building Appeals Board
otherwise determines, a party to a proceeding before the Board must bear his,
or its own costs’.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (370 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter