URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VDBT/1997/72.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:29:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lin v HGF & anor [1997] VDBT 72 (9 December 1997)
FILE NO. A135/97
THE DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(DOMESTIC BUILDING CONTRACTS AND TRIBUNAL ACT 1995)
- INTERIM DETERMINATION -
HOUSING GUARANTEE FUND LTD.
(A.C.N. 006 258 233)
T/AS SECCULL BUILDERS
PRESIDING MEMBER:
Mr A.T. Kincaid
ORIGINATING DOCUMENT:
Original Application
APPEARANCES:
Mr R Lombardi of Counsel for the Applicant
Mr H Foxcroft of Counsel for the First Respondent
No appearance for the Second Respondent
DATE OF HEARING:
17 October, 1997
DATE OF INTERIM DETERMINATION:
9 December, 1997
I MAKE THE FOLLOWING INTERIM DETERMINATION:
1. The Applicant has failed to prove that loss and damage suffered by her
(being completion costs to a maximum of $71,753) has been
suffered "on account
of the failure of the builder to fulfil the builder’s obligations under
the contract" (see s.7(3)
House Contracts Guarantee Act
such loss and damage has been suffered on account of the failure of the owner to
have acted in accordance with her rights
and obligations in the building
contract, specifically clause 19 and Schedule 3 thereof, providing for staged
payments of the contract
sum. The First Respondent is therefore under no
obligation to make good such loss and damage.
2. If a variation occurs to the terms of a building contract or if an
indulgence is granted by an owner to a builder during the course
of the works,
which variation or indulgence is made knowingly but without the knowledge or
consent of the statutory guarantor, and
which has the effect of materially and
prejudicially altering the guarantor’s position as guarantor, the
guarantor will be
under no obligation to make good loss or damage suffered by
the owner on account of such variation or indulgence unless such variation
indulgence was of a type reasonably contemplated by the terms of the relevant
building contract. The indulgence granted by the
Applicant in this case, being
the making of progress payments prior to the completion (and possibly the
commencement) of relevant
stages of the building works to which they relate was
not of a type reasonably contemplated by the terms of the relevant building
3. Leave to the parties to make written submissions within seven days of
today’s date concerning my characterisation of the
loss and damage
suffered by the Applicant for which the First Respondent is not liable to make
good (being completion costs to a
maximum of $71,753), and in regard to
A.T. Kincaid
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(G:Determ97\0135-97)
FILE NO. A135/97
THE DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(DOMESTIC BUILDING CONTRACTS AND TRIBUNAL ACT 1995)
- REASONS FOR INTERIM DETERMINATION -
HOUSING GUARANTEE FUND LTD.
(A.C.N. 006 258 233)
T/AS SECCULL BUILDERS
PRESIDING MEMBER:
Mr A.T. Kincaid
ORIGINATING DOCUMENT:
Original Application
APPEARANCES:
Mr R Lombardi of Counsel for the Applicant
Mr H Foxcroft of Counsel for the First Respondent
No appearance for the Second Respondent
DATE OF HEARING:
17 October, 1997
DATE OF DETERMINATION:
9 December, 1997
REASONS FOR INTERIM DETERMINATION:
1. Gloria Lin (the "Applicant") was at all material times the registered
proprietor of 43 MacGregor Street, East Malvern (the "property").
2. By a building contract dated 7 September, 1995 (the "contract") the
Applicant engaged Peckie Pty Ltd (trading as "Seccull Builders")
‘builder") to build a two-storey brick-veneer dwelling upon the property
for a contract price of $192,000 (the "contract
3. Clause 19 of the contract provides:
"the [Applicant]
make the progress payments set out in Schedule 3
within the number of days set out in Schedule 1
the stage has been completed;
the [Applicant] has received a
notice to that effect from the Builder
4. The amount of the progress payments payable by the Applicant pursuant to
clause 19 of the contract are set out in Schedule 3 to
the contract. Schedule 3
provides, in effect, that the builder is entitled to 3% of the contract price as
a deposit, 10% of the
contract price upon completion of the "base stage", 15% of
the contract price upon completion of the "frame stage", 35% of the contract
price upon completion of the "lock-up stage" and 25% upon completion of the
"fixing stage".
5. A copy of the contract, which is a "domestic building work contract" under
the provisions of the
House Contracts Guarantee Act 1987
(the "Act"), was
provided to the First Respondent. The First Respondent subsequently confirmed
the existence of a statutory guarantee
in relation to the work of the builder in
constructing the dwelling under the contract (see Section 6 (i) of the Act).
6. During the course of the works the builder fell into financial
difficulties. As a result the builder asked the Applicant for money
materials in advance. The Applicant paid such monies to the builder. The
Applicant gave evidence that she was aware
that she was making payments prior to
the time that she was obliged to make them pursuant to Clause 19 and Schedule 3
of the contract.
7. It seems that as a result of its financial difficulties the builder was
unable to continue with the works. On 16 August, 1996
the contract was
determined by the Applicant.
8. At the time of the determination of the builder by the Applicant the
dwelling had only reached lock-up stage. Had the Applicant
been making
progress-payments in accordance with the terms of the contract she would, on my
calculation at the time of the determination,
only have been liable to have paid
the builder the sum of $120,960 (being 63% of the contract price, calculated by
reference to the
increments set out in paragraph 4 above), plus agreed
variations. It is accepted that agreed variations amounted to $6,785 at the
time of the determination of the contract. This means that the Applicant was
liable to have paid the builder the sum of $127,745
at the time of the
determination.
9. As a result, however, of the Applicant making the payments prior to the
time that she was obliged to make them under the contract
the Applicant had paid
the builder a total of $199,498 at the time of the determination, which sum is
$713 above the adjusted contract
price of $198,785. The amount paid to the
builder at the time of the determination, on my calculation, is $71,753 more
amount of $127,745 which the Applicant should have paid to the builder
under the provisions of the contract at the time of the determination.
10. The owner has since received a quotation of $76,200 from a contractor to
complete the builder’s obligations under the contract.
This figure
apparently contains a small amount for rectification. Had the owner not made
the extra payments referred to in paragraph
6 above but had paid the builder in
accordance with the provisions of the contract, she would have had $71,753
unspent contract price
still available, which she would now have available to
apply to the completion costs.
11. It was submitted by Mr Lombardi on behalf of the Applicant that the fact
that she had paid the builder amounts of money prior
to being required to do so
under the contract does not affect the obligation of the First Respondent under
the guarantee. That would
only be a factor, it was submitted, if there was
evidence of dishonesty on the part of the Applicant or if there was evidence of
a loan between the Applicant and the builder. He contended that the payments
made by the owner to the builder, prior to the owner
being obliged to do so
under the terms of the contract, were variations pursuant to the contract. It
was submitted that the contract
permits variations, and the guarantee covers the
contract as so varied. Mr Lombardi placed reliance on the words of Tadgell J in
Housing Guarantee Fund Ltd and Another v Johnson and Another
, a decision
of the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria dated 17 March, 1995 (the
decision) in which His Honour states at p.2:
"...the statutory guarantee is ambulatory in the sense that it covers a
liability of the builder under the building contract from
time to time,
irrespective of variation of that liability by, for example, the granting of
indulgences by the owner to the builder
or an increase or other amendment of the
work to be done or its cost".
12. I do not consider that the payment of $71,753 by the owner prior to the
times at which the relevant monies were due for payment
constitutes a variation
as contemplated under clause 26 of the contract, which relates only to the
"building works" being capable
of variation. I also doubt that the advance
payments arrangement constituted a variation to the contract at law, for it
seems doubtful
that the builder gave any consideration for the benefit of the
alleged variation.
13. In the alternative, Mr Lombardi submitted that to the extent that
pre-payments had not constituted a lawful variation, given the
ambulatory nature
of the guarantee and the consumer-protection nature of the Act, a loss caused to
the owner by having granted indulgences
to the builder was the very type of loss
which the statutory guarantee was intended to cover.
14. Mr Foxcroft on behalf of the First Respondent submitted that the
statutory guarantee is a guarantee of the builder’s contractual
obligations. The owner provided a copy of the contract to the HGF before the
guarantee was granted. The HGF was therefore in a
position to know the risks it
was taking as statutory guarantor. Further, the payment was made voluntarily in
excess of her obligations
under the contract. He submitted that the parties
contracted in accordance with their obligations as they may have been varied as
contemplated by the contract. Mr Foxcroft drew support for his argument from
the fact that where any departure from the payment
terms set out in Section 21
of the Act was contemplated, there is a relevant warning in attachment 1 to
Schedule 3, method 2 of the
contract. I also note that clause 19 of the
contract, referred to in paragraph 3 above, is drawn in emphatic terms with
the time that the owner is obliged to pay relevant progress claims.
Mr Foxcroft respectfully submitted that the remarks of Tadgell J in the
decision referred to in paragraph 11 above concerning the
coverage of the liability of a builder from time to time by the guarantee
to be narrowed in their application. Mr Foxcroft sought to confine His
Honour’s comments to only contracts varied in
the manner contemplated by
the relevant building contract of which this "variation" is not an example.
Accordingly, he submitted,
the guarantee did not extend to cover the
owner’s loss caused as a result of making voluntary ex-gratia payments to
the builder.
Mr Foxcroft relied on a passage on pp 28 - 29 of the judgment
given by J.D. Phillips, J in the
decision which makes it clear,
as does the decision, that the liability of the First Respondent may well be
affected by what takes
place between a builder and a building owner.
15. It is clear from a reading of the Johnson decision that the nature and
extent of the Fund’s liability, whether one calls
it a guarantor or a mere
indemnifier, are to be derived from the Act. I have concluded that in order for
the First Respondent to
be liable to make good the Applicant’s loss and
damage in this case (to the limit of the guarantee) the Applicant must
demonstrate
that the loss and damage suffered by her was "on account of ...the
failure of the builder to fulfil the builder’s obligations
contract" (see section 7 (3) of the Act). The
defines the expression "on account of" as "because of" or "by reason of". The
question which must be answered therefore
is one of causation. It requires that
I first characterize the nature of the Applicant’s loss and damage and
then decide whether
such loss or damage was sustained on account of the failure
of the builder to fulfil the builder’s obligations under the contract.
16. The Applicant’s loss and damage is in the nature of completion
costs. The bulk of the loss and damages suffered (to the
extent of $71,753)
would not have been sustained, however, had she not, contrary to the provisions
of the contract, made voluntary
payments of $71,753 to the builder. Had the
Applicant complied with the provisions of the contract, such monies would have
available to contribute to the cost of completing the work by another
contractor.
Such loss and damage is, in my view, not suffered by the Applicant "on
account of the failure by the builder to fulfil its obligations
building contract...", but her failure to have regard to her rights and
obligations set out in Clause 19 and Schedule 3
under the contract. The single
dominant, efficient cause of her loss is the fact that she made the relevant
payments when she was
not obliged to do so under the terms of the contract.
17. I accept Mr Foxcroft’s argument that the First Respondent is
entitled to expect that the Applicant will comply with the
terms of the building
contract as it relates to progress payments. It is a building contract in terms
specifically endorsed by the
First Respondent. The clauses under consideration
specifically protect the position of the First Respondent. I therefore do not
accept the proposition that the loss caused by the gratuitous granting of an
indulgence by the Applicant to the builder is loss or
damage intended to be
covered by the statutory guarantee. On the contrary, I am of the view that
pre-payments made by the beneficiary
of a guarantee, made knowingly but without
the knowledge or consent of the guarantor, will discharge the guarantor from its
to make good relevant loss, where such pre-payments materially and
prejudicially alter the guarantor’s position as guarantor;
General Steam-Navigation Company v Holt
(1858) 141 E.R. 572;
Fuller Construction Co (1858) Ltd v Continental Insurance Co
(1970) 36 DLR
18. I accept that in the case of the statutory guarantee given by the First
Respondent, there may be no room for the doctrine whereby
a guarantor is
discharged by a variation during the currency of the guarantee of the contract
the performance of which was guaranteed.
I also consider, however, that if a
variation or (as in this case) an indulgence granted by an owner to a builder is
not to affect
the liability of the First Respondent as statutory guarantor, it
must be of a type reasonably contemplated by the terms of the relevant
contract. The indulgence granted by the Applicant in this case was not such a
A.T. Kincaid
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (41.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter