URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1640.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CDPP v Hartley [2025] VCC 1640 (10 November 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
CR-25-01126
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS (Cth)
DAMIEN HARTLEY
HER HONOUR JUDGE BRECKWEG
DATE OF HEARING
2 October 2025
DATE OF SENTENCE
10 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
CDPP v Hartley
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1640
REASONS FOR
Subject: SENTENCE – CRIMINAL LAW
Catchwords: Using a carriage service to cause child abuse material to be
transmitted to himself - Possess or control child abuse
material obtained or
accessed using a carriage service
Legislation Cited:
Criminal Code
Sex Offender Registration Act
Cases Cited:
DPP v Latham
[2009] TASSC 101
R v Richard
R v De Leeuw
[2015] NSWCCA 183
Hurt v The King; and
Delzotto v The King
[2024] HCA 8
Walker v The Queen
[2008] NTCCA
DPP (Cth) v Garside
[2016] VSCA 74
Heathcote (a pseudonym) v The
[2014] VSCA 35
Heathcote (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2014] VSCA
Alison (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 308.
Sentence: Total effective sentence of five and a half
years imprisonment; non-parole period of three and a half years imprisonment;
256 days of presentence detention reckoned as served; sex offender registration
for life; 6AAA declaration – total effective
sentence of seven years
imprisonment.
APPEARANCES
For the Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth)
Ms L. Skoblar
Office of Public Prosecutions (Cth)
For the Accused
Mr J. Barrera
Johnstone & Reimer Lawyers
HER HONOUR:
Introduction
Hartley, you have pleaded guilty to:
One charge of using a carriage
service to cause child abuse material to be transmitted to yourself, contrary to
s474.22(1) of the
Criminal Code
Charge 2, possess or control child abuse material obtained or accessed using
a carriage service, again contrary to s474.22A(1) of
charge carries a maximum penalty of 15 years' imprisonment. A mandatory minimum
head sentence of four years' imprisonment also
applies on each
have admitted your criminal record.
Circumstances of the
agreed facts of your offending are set out in the summary of prosecution
opening. In summary, on 19 February 2025, information
was received by the
Victoria Police Proactive Targeting Team in relation to your involvement in
using a carriage service for child
abuse material. On 27 February 2025, search
warrants were executed at the address where you resided with your mother, and an
iPhone 16 Pro was located on the bed in your bedroom.
provided the passcode for the iPhone in compliance with a s3LA order.
analysis of your iPhone indicated the presence of images and videos depicting
child abuse material and you confirmed that
there was child abuse material
stored in the 'hidden' folder within the gallery application.
forensic analysis of your iPhone revealed that:
a) You communicated with Telegram user 'Alone' between 15 January and
24 February 2025 and you obtained child abuse material from
discussed making payments to him for the material.
b) There were
child abuse images and
child abuse videos
located in your iPhone 'hidden' folder.
c) You obtained
of the child abuse videos from Telegram.
Record of Conversation
the execution of the search warrant, you participated in a record of
conversation with police during which you made admissions
to possessing child
abuse material and obtaining child abuse material via Telegram
a) Child abuse material would be found 'on my device'.
b) There will be a range of child abuse material on your device and that in
relation to quantity, 'there is a fair whack'.
c) The child abuse material is saved under the 'hide' folder on the device.
d) You did not exchange child abuse material but paid for it using PayPal.
e) You purchased the child abuse material from a person on Telegram.
f) You paid the person on Telegram who was using the username 'Alone' for the
material and you had been doing so for the last few
g) You did not know where the person you purchased the child abuse material
from resides.
h) You had 'no idea' exactly how many videos and images you had saved, and you
did not know how many times you purchased child abuse
material from 'Alone' but
it was a 'few times' and you did not purchase child abuse material from anyone
received some child exploitation material you did not purchase.
j) You had not been purchasing material from 'Alone' for long, 'a couple
k) You understood child abuse material is bad 'because you're abusing kids'.
said you did not look at the child abuse material on your phone much, maybe once
a week and nobody else has access to your phone.
m) 'Alone' first contacted you on Instagram and: 'He just said, you know 'if you
want videos send money' and I only did it a couple
of times, but a lot of the
times he'd just send them through for free'.
n) In relation to having child abuse material on your iPhone you said: 'Yeah, I
did it, yeah. I've done it. I've done it. It's on
the phone.'
Charge 1 – Use carriage service to cause child abuse
material to be transmitted to yourself
1 covers child abuse material you obtained from 'Alone' between 15 January and
24 February 2025 using the messaging service
Telegram. You paid 'Alone' for the
of communications between you and 'Alone' include:
a) On 7 February 2025, you sent 'Alone' a message: 'Hello my friend, still
having problems with my pay. I will send 75 instead
of 65. Can you send - can
you send me some good clear videos, really good long ones xxoo. You know I will
b) On 13 February 2025, you sent 'Alone' messages: 'I've got the last one my
friend' and 'any more my friend', to which 'Alone' responded
on 15 February: 'OK
dear one' and forwarded digital media files to you.
c) On 24 February 2025, you sent 'Alone' a message: 'Hello my dear friend.
Instead of 50, how about I give you 60 for a few more
videos. I will pay you on
Friday morning' and 'Alone' responded: 'dear 60$' and forwarded two attachments.
total, you obtained
child abuse materials through Telegram user
'Alone' and this material was stored in the 'hidden' folder on your iPhone.
Charge 2 - Possess child abuse material obtained or accessed
using a carriage service
child exploitation files located in the 'hidden' folder of
your iPhone which you possessed at the execution of the search warrant.
material covers 651 child abuse material images and 340 child abuse
material videos.
340 child abuse videos include the 271 child abuse videos that constitute Charge
child abuse material consisted of male and female children aged from
approximately less than one year old to 15-years-old, engaging
in sexual acts
(sexual intercourse, oral sex, masturbation and bondage) with adult males or
being subjected to sexual acts by adult
males whilst appearing to be asleep or
unconscious.
Personal circumstances
were born in in Maidstone and have lived there your entire life. You were raised
by your parents and have two sisters and a younger
brother. You said you had a
generally good childhood, were not neglected or uncared for and you played a lot
of sport. You were close
to your siblings but have not had contact with your
eldest sister for over a year due to matters unrelated to the charges against
you. Your other siblings are aware of the charges and remain supportive of you.
You had a very close relationship with your father
and his death in 2022 was
very traumatic for you and led to your relapse into substance abuse. After your
father died you took on
the role of primary caregiver for your mother who is
aged 81. You resided with her before your arrest, and you have a strong
relationship.
She knows of the charges against you, remains supportive of you
and she visits you in custody.
were educated at Footscray primary school until Year 5. At age five you were
diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. You transferred
to another school to
compete Grades 5 and 6 where you received extra support. You said you were not
bullied and maintained some limited
friendships. You went to Maribyrnong High
School in Year 7 but transferred to Buckley Park in Year 8 after engaging in
problematic
behaviour. You repeated Year 9. You had behavioural problems due to
the bad influence of your peer group, your attendance was poor,
and you were
suspended several times. You left school during Year 10 without finishing
secondary school.
you were 16 you worked in a variety of jobs and from 17 to 21 you worked at a
factory. You were then unemployed for four years.
When you were around 25 you
commenced employment at Footscray Hospital as a pharmacy technician, and you
later transferred to the
Royal Melbourne Hospital where you worked as a
storeman. During your employment history you worked at several hospitals and
working in the hospital system for 21 years. You stopped working at age
44 as you said you needed to care for your parents, and you
were also diagnosed
with bi-polar disorder which impacted your ability to work. You have received
disability support pension since
you ceased working.
are heterosexual and had your first significant relationship from 15 to 20. You
have no children and have been single for around
five years. You have had many
non-intimate friendships over the years, and you remain in contact with some
former workmates from
the hospital system, but your primary support is your
mother. You said your friends were supportive, but they were not always positive
influences given their regular drug and alcohol use and that you have always
been susceptible to peer influence and encouragement.
You said you are
embarrassed by your offending, and your friends would not condone it.
terms of your drug and alcohol use, you first began drinking at age 14. Over the
last 10 to 12 years your alcohol use has escalated
to daily use, and you
have experienced withdrawal symptoms since entering custody. You used cannabis
your arrest. During your 30s and early 40s you
occasionally used methamphetamines but from age 42 to 46 you were using this
daily. You ceased use between 2019 and 2022 but following your father's
death you restarted and from 2022 until your arrest in 2025
you were using
one to two grams per day when it was available, often with alcohol. You also
have a history of using GHB, Xanax and
Valium but ceased prior to your
offending. When you were remanded, you said you experimented with buprenorphine
but ceased when transferred
to Ravenhall. You have not had treatment for alcohol
or drug misuse, but you have completed an Ice and Me program in
Character references
sister Kylie Ryan provided a character reference on your behalf. She wrote that
you worked as a pharmacy technician for almost
20 years and were known in the
community as a kind, thoughtful and supportive man. She said you have struggled
with your mental health
from a young age and at age five you could not speak so
were taken to a child psychiatrist and speech therapists and you eventually
learned how to speak. Your sister wrote that she believed you resorted to taking
drugs and alcohol use after a doctor who was treating
you moved away, and your
personal issues escalated further after the passing of your father in 2022.
Ryan wrote that you have tried to end your life on many occasions and on one
attempt it was believed you would die. After your
father's death in 2022 your
sister said your mental health problems deteriorated further, and your mother
attempted to obtain psychiatric
treatment for you, but shortages and funding
cuts made this difficult. Your drug and alcohol use increased to daily use at
Your sister said she and your mother visit you regularly, they can
see a change in your attitude and believe if you receive the mental
treatment you have not been given, you can get your life together.
Kameel Anton also provided a character reference for you. He wrote that he has
known you as a customer for more than 20 years and
considers you to be a man of
high integrity and honesty. He said you were competent, have an excellent
rapport with people and have
been taking care of your mother. He did not make
any reference to the charges you are pleading guilty to.
Sentencing Principles
applicable sentencing principles and factors in sentencing for offending
involving child abuse material are uncontroversial and
well established, and I
have set those out in the reasons, but I do not see the need to repeat them
have also had regard, in addition to those principles, to the matters applicable
in sentencing for Commonwealth offences. Section
16A(1) of the
provides that a court must impose a sentence or an order that is of an
appropriate severity in all the circumstances of the offending,
and s16A(2) sets
out a non-exhaustive list of factors that
be taken into account as
far as these are relevant and known to the court. I have had regard to the
following factors set out in
Nature and circumstances
your counsel accepted during the plea, your offending is very serious.
have pleaded guilty to two charges covering two different types of offending,
namely, possessing and causing child abuse material
to be transmitted to
were in possession of 991 items of child abuse material comprising
videos. These were stored in your iPhone 'hidden' folder.
You obtained
child abuse videos from 'Alone'. This is not an
insignificant quantity, and whilst it is perhaps towards the lower end compared
other cases involving much larger collections, it must be stressed that
quantity is a secondary indicator of the seriousness of offending.
The primary
indicator is the type of material and its degree of
and the material you
accessed and possessed was certainly highly depraved.
1 is a 'rolled up' charge encompassing several instances of separate offending,
each capable of constituting a separate offence,
so the criminality involved in
the charge is greater than with a charge involving only one episode of criminal
were very active in your dealings with 'Alone', including discussing the price
for child abuse material and payment dates.
paid for the material, or at least most of it, that you received from 'Alone'.
You were an active and not simply a passive participant
in the child abuse
market. You requested, paid for and received material which is actively
contributing to the expansion of the market.
content of the material involved in the charges is abhorrent and highly
depraved. Some specific descriptions have been set out
in the appendix to the
summary of prosecution opening which I will not repeat here.
offending was not opportunistic or isolated and extended over some weeks.
different child victims were depicted in the material and each of those children
is presumed to have suffered harm.
assess your moral culpability for the offending as high, especially given your
prior conviction and your clear knowledge of the
wrongfulness of your actions.
accept that you did not further transmit the material you received or try to
resell it to others which would aggravate the offending.
maximum penalty for the charges is 15 years' imprisonment, which is an
unequivocal indicator of the seriousness of those charges
in the view of
parliament.
your case, mandatory minimum head sentences of four years' imprisonment also
apply to both charges because pursuant to s16AB of
a person convicted of two Commonwealth child sex abuse offences who has
previously been convicted of a child sexual abuse
offence. This arises from your
conviction in the Sunshine Magistrates Court on 12 December 2019 of knowingly
possessing child abuse
material. You were placed on a 24-month community
correction order at that time.
the crown helpfully set out, in
Hurt v The King; and Delzotto v The
the High Court determined
that sentencing for a statutory mandatory minimum sentence in s16AB of the Act
should be approached in
the same way as a statutory maximum penalty in that they
both fix 'ends' of the sentencing yardstick – the mandatory minimum
the beginning of the yardstick within which a court is to exercise its
discretion to determine the appropriate
As a yardstick, the
mandatory minimum imposes an increased starting point for the appropriate term
of imprisonment for an offence
in the least serious circumstances and operates
to increase the appropriate term of imprisonment generally for that
Possible reductions to mandatory minimum head
may use ss16AAC(2) and (3) of the Act to impose a sentence less than the
mandatory minimum where it is necessary to do so to give
adequate recognition to
your plea of guilty and/or cooperation of the kind specified in s16AAC(2)(b) of
. The provisions allow a
maximum reduction to the minimum term of 25 per cent to allow for a guilty plea
pursuant to s16A(2)(g) of
and by up to 25 per cent to allow for
any cooperation where the level of offending prevents these discounts being
the majority held
that it is 'legitimate' for a court to first determine a 'prima facie sentence
with the use of the prescribed minimum
sentence as a yardstick, prior to
considering the discount'. In other words, the court should first engage in an
instinctive synthesis
of all relevant factors,
the plea of
guilty and any co-operation; it should then proceed to separately consider
ss16A(2)(g) and (h) factors; and only then
determine whether the s16AAC
mechanism is required to move below the prescribed mandatory minimum term.
Accordingly, a s16AAC reduction
will ordinarily only be appropriate where the
prima facie
sentence determined falls within, or close to, the 'least
serious circumstances'.
principles relevant to the setting of minimum terms have not been altered by the
introduction of the mandatory minimum sentencing
16A(2)(g) Plea of guilty
have pleaded guilty to the charge at the earliest reasonable opportunity. You
did not run a committal hearing. Your plea warrants
a clear reduction in the
sentence to be imposed to reflect its utilitarian value in saving the community
the time and expense of
a trial and witnesses from having to give evidence and
to reflect its demonstration of acceptance of responsibility, willingness
facilitate the course of justice and remorse.
your case, I am satisfied that you have also demonstrated remorse for your
offending over that reflected by your plea alone. Your
contrition for the
offending is evident from your admissions and the remorse you expressed to your
mother and to Ms Fahkri, describing
your feelings of deep regret as you now
recognise that the children in the material you obtained and possessed suffered
you feel great shame for your actions.
Degree of co-operation
have given weight to your co-operation with police to the extent that you
admitted your offending, provided your passcodes for your
(notwithstanding the existence of a s3LA order) and you consented to the
forfeiture of your iPhone. You did not, however,
provide much information to
police about 'Alone' who you got child abuse material from, apart from
identifying the length of your
communications.
16A(2)(j) Specific Deterrence
16A(2)(k) Need for Adequate Punishment
deterrence, denunciation, punishment, and protection of the community are very
important considerations in sentencing for
offending involving child abuse
have had regard to the need to deter you personally from further offending of
this type. You have a prior conviction for possessing
child pornography material
and past punishment has not deterred you from reoffending. You reoffended when
you were subject to sex
offender reporting requirements. I was told that you
undertook some offending behaviour programs as part of your CCO, but these did
not prevent you from reoffending. You knew what you were doing was wrong, yet
you still offended in largely the same way. I accept
you are remorseful but, in
my view, this does not diminish the strong weight that must be given to specific
deterrence in your case.
have also had regard to the requirement that you be adequately punished for your
offending and to denounce your offending.
16A(2)(ja) General Deterrence
noted earlier, general deterrence is the primary sentencing consideration for
offending involving child abuse material given the
prevalence and ready
availability of this material and the need to protect children from sexual
Where general deterrence
is primary, personal mitigatory factors such as prior good character, age,
prospects of rehabilitation,
etc, must therefore be given less weight than might
otherwise be
16A(2)(m) Character,
antecedents, age, means and physical or mental condition
were 51 at the time of the offending and are now 52.
stated above, you have a relevant prior conviction. On 12 December 2019, you
were convicted of knowingly possessing child abuse
material and placed on a
community correction order for two years. You have no subsequent or outstanding
have had regard to the contents of a psychological report from Ms Rebecca Fakhri
dated 3 September 2025 who made a provisional diagnosis
of autism spectrum
) but she stressed that formal assessment is required and a
full ASD diagnosis may not be appropriate in your case. Similarly, she
the plausibility of a diagnosis of Bipolar 1 but concluded that given the
overlap of symptoms of this disorder with other
disorders, such as substance use
giving rise to mood instability, formal diagnosis is complicated. She opined
that you present with
severe major depressive disorder and severe stimulant and
alcohol use disorders. She concluded that your offending appears to be
by your substance abuse which disinhibits you and amplifies your underlying
cognitive and emotional vulnerabilities. This
opinion was strengthened in her
view by the fact that when sober you can recognise the harmfulness of your
actions on victims and
feel remorse.
have no diagnosed psychological disorder such that Limbs 1 to 4 of
apply to reduce your
moral culpability for the offending or the weight to be given to the principles
of general and specific deterrence.
Nor did your counsel rely on these limbs.
I accept the opinion of Ms Fahkri that
Limb 5 applies in
your case and imprisonment may be more burdensome for you than on another
prisoner given your major depressive
disorder, emotional reliance on your family
and your psychological vulnerability, notwithstanding the absence of formal
psychiatric
illness. I accept the prosecution argument that
6 is not enlivened in your case. There is nothing in the report of Ms Fahkri or
otherwise that clearly points to the possibility
that your mental condition will
substantially worsen or deteriorate in custody. The evidence at hand suggests
that your mental condition
is being well managed, your medication has been
decreased, and you are progressing well – indeed, you are now living in a
restrictive lodge environment.
do, however, give some very modest weight to your mental health background and
presentation insofar as you have a history of suicide
attempts and severe
anxiety and depression. I also give some weight to the fact that imprisonment
will weigh heavily on you because
of your separation from, and concern for, your
mother who is now aged 81 and you were her primary
16A(2)(n) Prospects of rehabilitation
noted earlier, you have a prior conviction for possessing child pornography
material and past punishment has not deterred you from
reoffending. You
reoffended when you were subject to sex offender reporting requirements. You had
strong family support. You knew
what you were doing was wrong, yet you still
offended in largely the same way. The material you obtained demonstrates a
level of sexual deviance' in the opinion of Ms Fahkri. She also
assessed you as presenting with a moderate risk of reoffending.
this you still have strong family support, some pro social connections and have
expressed remorse. You recognise the harm
your offending causes the victims
depicted in the material and that you are motivated to undergo treatment. Your
counsel submitted
that you have demonstrated in the past that you can remain
drug free, you are now in remission for your substance abuse disorders
controlled prison environment, and that by the time you are released from
custody you will have had a longer period of abstinence
which bodes well for
your risk of reoffending and prospects of rehabilitation, which he submitted
were reasonable.
my view, your prospects of rehabilitation will depend very much on your ability
to abstain from using drugs and alcohol and on
you completing structured offence
specific treatment which is typically a lengthy therapeutic process. You require
further sustained
treatment for substance use issues and general mental health
given your offending occurs when you have impulse control issues, especially
when you are under the effects of drugs or alcohol or more serious depression.
As Ms Fahkri opined, you are vulnerable to relapsing
into drug use, and this is
exacerbated by the absence of any clear plan in terms of future employment or
expansion of your support
network. It is very concerning that you have
reoffended in the same way despite past punishment and I assess you as having
reasonable prospects of rehabilitation at this point.
have had regard to s16A(2AAA) of the Act which provides that when sentencing for
a Commonwealth child sex offence (here both charges),
in addition to any
other matters, I must have regard to the objective of rehabilitating you,
and I do so. You have not engaged in
significant treatment yet and it is
imperative that you do so if you are to achieve any rehabilitation. You
understand the harm your
offending causes and have expressed remorse and
disgust, but you knew this when you were last convicted, and you require sex
specific treatment and further treatment to address your substance use
disorders. I also note that the objective of rehabilitating
you does not operate
to swamp the primacy to be given to principles of general and specific
deterrence and the need to protect the
community, and I must also impose a
sentence which adequately reflects the seriousness of your
Totality and cumulation
19(5) of the Act provides a presumption in favour of full cumulation between
sentences imposed for Commonwealth child sex
offences, although s19(6)
permits the court not to impose full cumulation if, in all the circumstances,
this will still result in
appropriately severe sentences. I will not impose
complete cumulation between the charges, nor did the prosecution suggest I
do so, as to do so would breach the principle of totality and I am able
to construct a sentence of appropriate severity without needing
to impose wholly
cumulative sentences.
counsel submitted that I must be mindful of the need to avoid double punishment
in your case as the material you caused to be
sent to you is also included in
the number of items in your possession the subject of a separate charge. I
accept that submission,
however, the fact that an overlap exists does not
preclude me being mindful of the principles of totality and proportionality and
the need to avoid imposing a crushing sentence, from imposing a modest degree of
cumulation between the charges to reflect the different
and discrete types of
offending with each charge being directed at different vices, having different
elements, and warranting a degree
of separate punishment. As stated in
(a pseudonym) v The Queen
offences such as accessing (here, similarly, causing to be transmitted) and
possessing child abuse material are aimed at different
behaviours and have
different elements. The court held further that access offences focus on
the activity of intentionally searching
for, locating and
viewing child abuse material. In contrast, the possession offence
involves an additional step, namely, that the
material accessed is
kept for ongoing or future use, which can include viewing, distribution, sharing
Comparative sentences
was referred to three intermediate appellate sentences for offences involving
mandatory minimum sentences in the prosecution written
submissions, which I have
had regard to. These sentences are of assistance in illustrating the relevant
sentencing principles, and
they are of some utility in the present sentencing
exercise. However, as frequently occurs, it is very difficult to find cases of
sufficient factual similarity to be of any substantive assistance and so each
case must be decided on its own facts and circumstances.
Submissions on sentence
counsel accepted that in your case a mandatory head sentence of four years'
imprisonment applies to each charge. He submitted,
however, that the sentences I
impose could go below the prescribed mandatory minimums by up to 25 per cent to
reflect your plea of
guilty and by up to 25 per cent to reflect your
co-operation by making full admissions. In terms of the degree of reduction for
factors, your counsel did not submit that they would be such as to mean a
non-parole period was not imposed. That is, the total effective
sentence imposed
would still exceed three years' imprisonment, as I understood his
submission.
prosecution submitted that the objective seriousness of your offending on each
charge is not at the lowest end of seriousness
and accordingly it is not
necessary for me to utilise the reductions in ss16AC(2) and (3) of the Act to
move below the mandatory
head sentence. The prosecution accepted that you
entered a plea at the earliest opportunity and made full admissions, however,
applicable sentencing yardstick of between four and 15 years provides
sufficient scope to accommodate the objective considerations
and all mitigating
factors you rely on without needing to go below the mandatory minimum head
have endeavoured to balance the very serious nature of your offending and the
strong need for general and specific deterrence, just
punishment and
denunciation in your case with your fair prospects of rehabilitation, guilty
plea, remorse and the need to promote
your rehabilitation.
determining the sentences to be imposed on Charges 1 and 2, which both carry
mandatory minimum head sentences of four years'
imprisonment, having regard to
the seriousness of your offending – which in my view falls above (albeit
not significantly)
that which may be contemplated as being in the 'least serious
circumstances', I do not need to use s16AC to impose a sentence below
prescribed mandatory minimum head sentence. I can accommodate discounts for your
plea of guilty under s16A(2)(g) and your co-operation
under s16A(2)(h) within
the available sentencing yardsticks of four to 15 years.
Charge 1, you are convicted and sentenced to four years and three months'
imprisonment. I direct that the sentence commences today,
10 November 2025.
Charge 2, you are convicted and sentenced to four years' imprisonment. I direct
that the sentence commences 18 months prior to
the expiration of the sentence
imposed on Charge 1.
results in a total effective sentence of five and a half years' imprisonment.
set a non-parole period of three and a half years' imprisonment.
declare pursuant to s18E of the
Sentencing Act
that you have served
256 days pre-sentence detention, from your arrest on 27 February 2025,
excluding today.
you have been convicted of two or more Class 2 offences listed in Schedule 2 of
Sex Offenders Registration
, and you have a prior conviction for a
Class 2 offence, you are required to comply with reporting obligations for
to s6AAA of the
Sentencing Act
, but for your plea of guilty I would have
imposed a total effective head sentence of seven years' imprisonment with a
period of four and a half years.
HONOUR: Yes, thank you very much Ms Skoblar. Thank you, I'm grateful for your
assistance as always, and for your assistance
as always too Mr Barrera.
BARRERA: As Your Honour pleases.
HONOUR: Thank you, I'll stand down.
Crimes Act 1914
DPP v Latham
[2009] TASSC 101
R v Richard
[2011] NSWSC
, at [65(f)];
R v De Leeuw
[2015] NSWCCA 183
[2024] HCA 8
Hurt and Delzotto
Hurt and Delzotto
That is, for cooperation with
the investigation of the offence for which the person is being sentenced or
another Commonwealth child
sex offence, but it does not include future
cooperation.
Hurt and Delzotto
Hurt and Delzotto
Walker v The Queen
[2008] NTCCA 7
[2005] NSWCCA 370
(2005) 162 A Crim R 29
DPP (Cth) v Garside
[2016] VSCA 74
DPP (Cth) v Zarb
[2014] VSCA 347
R v De Leeuw
[2015] NSWCCA 183
Heathcote (a
[2014] VSCA 35
DPP (Cth) v
[2016] VSCA 237
[2008] VSCA 268
(2008) 192 A Crim R 76
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269
[2021] VSCA 308
s 34(1)(c)(i)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (324 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter