URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/vic/VicSAC/2024/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:23:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Criminal Justice Diversion Program in Victoria: Second Statistical Profile [2024] VicSAC 5; (25 June 2024)
The Criminal Justice Diversion Program in Victoria: Second Statistical
Sentencing Advisory Council
Acknowledgement of Country
Sentencing Advisory Council acknowledges the Traditional Owners of the lands and
waters on which we live and work, and we pay
our respects to them, their culture
and their Elders past and present.
Stakeholder acknowledgments
In finalising this
statistical profile, we presented our findings to the following organisations to
seek their input, and we thank
them for their generous contributions and time:
Law Institute of
Victoria (Diversion Working Group);
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria;
Victoria Legal
Victoria Police;
Legal Service Victoria.
Executive summary
This statistical profile
presents data on the use of the Criminal Justice Diversion Program (CJDP) in the
Magistrates’ Court
in the 10 years to 30 June 2021. It includes the
demographics of people receiving diversion plans, the principal proven offences
people were prosecuted for, the conditions of their diversion plans, and their
criminal history before and after receiving the diversion
plan. It also updates
the findings of our first CJDP statistical profile published in 2008.
Key findings include:
more than 50,000
people received a diversion plan in the 10 years to 30 June 2021;
during the 10
years, there was a numerical and proportional increase in the use of diversion
plans, making up 6.6% of all Magistrates’
Court outcomes by 2020–21
(there were almost 6,000 diversion plans in the year before COVID-19 affected
court operations);
while men made
up the majority of people receiving diversion plans (67.3% of diversion plans),
women were much more
than men to receive diversion plans (8.7% of
all women’s cases, compared to 5.2% of men’s), especially in cases
a family violence flag (17.3% of women’s cases with a family violence
flag, compared to 5.2% of men’s cases with a family
violence flag);
both younger
people (aged 18 to 19) and older people (aged 65 and over) were more likely to
receive diversion plans (16.8% and 10.8%
respectively) than people aged 20 to 64
(6.1%), most likely because of the unique mitigating factors associated with
people who offend
early or later in life;
a diversion plan
was most commonly imposed in cases involving property offences, such as theft
and criminal damage (13.9%), and least
commonly imposed in cases involving
traffic offences, such as speeding (1.6%), which is likely because there are
significant restrictions
on the availability of diversion plans for traffic
diversion plans
have gotten longer over time, from an average of 3.6 months in 2011–12 to
5.4 months in 2020–21 (the legislated
maximum is 12 months);
majority of diversion plans are successfully completed (93.3%);
the four most
common conditions of diversion plans are to be of good behaviour (68.0% of
diversion plans), to make a donation to either
the Court Fund or a charitable
organisation (63.6%), to write a letter of apology to the victim or a letter of
gratitude to the police
informant (47.1%), and to compensate the victim
there were some
significant changes over time in the types of conditions included in a diversion
plan, with the letter of apology
or gratitude condition almost halving (from
64.6% to 38.4%) and the good behaviour condition almost doubling (from 44.8% to
received a diversion plan were significantly less likely to have any prior
offences in the last five years (11.0%) than
people receiving other court
outcomes (35.8%); and
received a diversion plan were also significantly less likely to reoffend in the
next five years (21.3%) than people receiving
other court outcomes
1. Introduction
The Criminal Justice
Diversion Program (CJDP) is a pre-plea diversion program available for eligible
defendants in the Magistrates’
and is primarily (but not
exclusively) aimed at first-time
It involves adjourning
proceedings for up to 12 months so that the person can complete a diversion
plan, which will involve certain
conditions. Examples of conditions include
apologising to the victim, compensating the victim, completing an education
course, undertaking
counselling or treatment, or donating to a charitable
organisation.
The CJDP began as a pilot program in 1997 in Broadmeadows Magistrates’
Court. It became available statewide in 2001 and formally
became ongoing in July
A 2004 evaluation showed
positive results, with a 94% completion
In addition, our 2008
analysis found that over 90% of participants successfully completed their
diversion plans.
To be eligible for a diversion plan, the defendant must acknowledge
responsibility for the offending,
the offending must not preclude the defendant from accessing the
the court must consider it
appropriate to make the order,
the prosecution and the defendant must
The prosecution’s
decision whether to consent to a diversion plan is guided by the
‘diversion matrix’ established
by Victoria Police. A copy of the
current matrix, which has been revised over time, is included in the Appendix.
The requirement
of prosecutorial consent for a diversion plan is a controversial
one, with many justice system stakeholders advocating for its removal,
recent parliamentary inquiry into the Victorian criminal justice system
recommending that prosecutorial consent be
If a defendant receives a diversion plan and completes it to the satisfaction
of the court, they are discharged without receiving
a finding of guilt or a
conviction.
If they do not
complete the diversion plan to the satisfaction of the court, the matter
continues as a contested matter (unless the
defendant pleads guilty), and their
previous acknowledgment of responsibility cannot be used as evidence against
If they later plead guilty
or are found guilty, the court must take into account at sentencing the extent
to which they complied
Other types of diversion in Victoria
The CJDP is not the only diversionary initiative in
Victoria. Other initiatives include police cautions for
drug diversion cautions
for adults,
police cautions for
infringement notices
and official warnings,
prosecutorial discretion not to proceed with
and Children’s
Court youth diversion.
Magistrates’ Court’s Assessment and Referral Court (ARC) List also
enables participants to have their case adjourned
for up to one year to allow
them to receive psychological, health, disability, housing, or drug and alcohol
treatment services.
successful completion of a diversion plan, successful participation in an ARC
plan allows the court to discharge the offender
without making a finding of
Each of these initiatives operates at different stages of the criminal
justice system and has different requirements and rules. The
focus of this
statistical profile, however, is exclusively the CJDP.
The Council’s first statistical profile on the CJDP
In 2008, we published a statistical profile of all
5,201 people who received a diversion plan in the 2006–07 financial year
(accounting for 7.2% of all Magistrates’ Court outcomes that
Some of the key findings
in that statistical profile included that:
diversion plans were successfully completed (the other 8.7% were not
successfully completed, and the person was sentenced
for their offending);
majority of diversion plans (84.5%) were 4 months or less (51.3% were 3 to 4
months, and 33.2% were 1 to 2 months), and just
2.0% were 9 months or
while men made
up the majority of people receiving diversion plans (71.2%), women were much
more likely than men to receive diversion
plans (11.0% compared to 6.4% of
both younger
people (aged 17 to 19) and older people (aged 65 and over) were most likely to
receive a diversion plan as the outcome
in their case (17.4% and 16.1%
respectively), both more than twice the rate of adults aged 20 to 64
the offence type
most likely to result in a diversion plan was a property offence such as theft
(14.4% of cases involving a property
offence received a diversion plan), and the
offence type least likely to result in a diversion plan was a traffic offence
cases involving traffic offences received a diversion plan);
the five most
common offences in cases resulting in a diversion plan (
diversion cases
collectively accounting for 39.4% of all diversion cases, were careless driving
(13.7%), theft (8.1%), shop-theft (7.3%), unlawful
assault (5.8%) and criminal
damage (4.5%); and
the most common
conditions in diversion plans were making a donation (71.7% of diversion plans),
making an apology (33.1%), writing
a letter of gratitude to the police informant
(24.0%) and compensating the victim or victims (17.7%).
Aim of this statistical profile
The aim of this statistical profile is to update our
2008 report and examine whether there have been any changes in the use of
plans since then. It has been 16 years since the 2008 report was
published, and much has changed in the Victorian criminal justice
system in that
time. In addition, this statistical profile will introduce three novel analyses
that were unavailable in 2008:
analysis of
trends over time for a number of variables, made possible by the use of a
larger, 10-year reference period (1 July 2011
to 30 June 2021);
an analysis of
diversion plans in family violence cases, made possible by the introduction of a
family violence indicator in the Magistrates’
Court database in 2015; and
an examination
of prior offending and reoffending by people receiving diversion plans, made
possible by our reoffending database,
which was developed in 2012.
Methodology
The statistics in this report derive from two
extracts of Magistrates’ Court’s data: one from the Courtlink
system, which
has information about cases dealt with in the criminal
and another from the
Platypus database, which contains details of diversion plans imposed in the
Magistrates’ Court.
data-matching operation was conducted to link the two datasets together using
unique identifiers and key dates. There were 50,988
cases receiving a diversion
plan in the Courtlink dataset during the 10-year reference period. The
data-matching operation was successful
in matching 46,671 (91.5%) of these
Courtlink cases with their corresponding records in the Platypus database such
that the diversion
plans for this subgroup were reliably linked to their
associated conditions.
The index population in this statistical profile is everyone identified in
Courtlink as having received a diversion plan in the 10
years from 1 July 2011
to 30 June 2021 (i.e. people involved with the 50,988 cases that received a
diversion plan). The index population
excludes people who were initially
considered for a diversion plan but did not, for whatever reason, receive one
(e.g. because the
prosecution did not consent, or the court did not consider it
appropriate).
In some parts of this statistical profile, other populations are used as a
point of comparison (e.g. people who received outcomes
other than a diversion
plan). And in other parts, subsets of the index population are examined (e.g.
people receiving diversion plans
in particular years). Platypus data was only
included in this statistical profile where a reliable linkage could be
established with
one of the 50,988 cases in the Courtlink dataset.
Reliable data became available in 2015 to identify whether a
Magistrates’ Court case involved family violence; as such, the
analysis of
family violence cases is limited to 2015–16 onwards. Where a case has a
family violence flag, this indicates that
at least one offence in the case
occurred in a family violence context, but not which offence or offences in that
case. The family
violence flag is variously described throughout this
statistical profile as either a ‘family violence flag’ or a
violence indicator’.
This statistical profile focuses exclusively on the duration and conditions
of diversion plans at first instance as this reflects
what the court originally
regarded as an appropriate response to the offending. In some instances, a case
may involve more than one
diversion plan, or the original diversion plan changes
over time (e.g. due to a change in circumstance); however, these events are
within the scope of this profile.
2. The characteristics of diversion cases
This chapter focuses on
the characteristics of all cases that received a diversion plan (
). Importantly, the data does not illustrate the
receiving diversion plans for these characteristics (for that analysis, see
Chapter 3). For instance, the data in this chapter
shows that men constituted
the majority of people receiving diversion plans, but that is because of their
over-representation in
the criminal justice system generally. In comparison, the
data in Chapter 3 shows that women were more
to receive diversion
plans than men were. Nevertheless, the data in this chapter is important in
painting a picture of who is receiving
diversion plans.
Number of diversion plans
In the 10 years to June 2021, people received a
diversion plan in 50,988 cases.
The number of diversion cases each year has increased steadily since
2011–12 (Figure 1). The number peaked at almost 6,000 people
2018–19 and declined thereafter. However, the recent decrease is almost
certainly due to the effect of COVID-19 on court
operations. In particular, from
March 2020, courts had reduced capacity to manage their workloads, and they
prioritised more serious
cases that were less likely to receive a diversion
plan, especially where people were being held on remand or were facing
imprisonment.
Figure 1: Number of diversion cases, by year (50,988 cases)
Age and gender of people receiving diversion plans
Two-thirds of people receiving diversion plans in
the 10 years to 2020–21 were men
This is slightly less
than our finding in 2008 that 71.2% of people receiving diversion plans were
Two-thirds of people receiving a diversion plan were
Almost half of all people receiving diversion plans (47.8%) were aged between
20 and 34 (Figure 2), though a significant proportion
were aged 18 or 19
These rates are also
broadly similar to those in our 2008
suggesting that, as
with our finding on gender, the ages of people receiving diversion plans have
not changed much over the years.
Figure 2: Ages of people receiving diversion plans (50,630 cases)
65 and over
Successful completion rates
It was possible to determine the successful
completion rates for the 46,671 cases that were reliably matched with Courtlink
Of those 46,671 diversion plans, 93.3% were successfully completed (43,545
diversion plans). The remaining 6.7% were not (3,126 diversion
plans). This high
success rate is largely consistent with the successful completion rates found in
the 2004 and 2008 reviews of the
CJDP (94% and 91%
respectively).
93% of diversion plans are successfully completed
Diversion cases with a family violence flag
A reliable family violence flag has been available
for Magistrates’ Court cases since mid-2015. That flag indicates that at
least one of the offences in a case occurred in a family violence context. Of
the 31,076 cases resulting in a diversion plan in the
six years to 30 June 2021,
5,381 (17.3%) involved at least some family violence related offending.
17% of diversion cases had a family violence flag
Offence types in diversion cases
Only principal proven offences have been examined in
analysing the offence types in the 50,988 cases resulting in a diversion plan.
principal proven offence
is the most serious offence in each case, as
measured by the offence receiving the most serious penalty or having the most
ranking according to the National Offence
Property offences, such as theft and fraud, represented one-third of all
diversion cases (Figure 3), and offences against the person
another one-quarter.
This suggests that there have been some significant shifts in the offence
profile of diversion cases since
In particular,
the prevalence of offences against the person more than doubled (from 11.6% to
24.6% of diversion cases), drug-related
offences substantially increased (from
4.7% to 7.4%) and traffic offences reduced significantly (from 21.7% to
Figure 3: Offence types in diversion cases, 2011–12 to 2020–21
(50,988 cases)
Offence type
Offences against the person
Property offences
Traffic offences
Drug-related offences
Other offences
These rates also varied by the demographics and characteristics of the
relevant people and cases:
property offences were the most common offence types in both men’s and
women’s diversion cases, but at a higher proportion
for women than for men
(37.5% and 30.7% respectively) (Figure 4).
Figure 4: Offence
Offence type
Male (34,279 cases)
Female (16,641 cases)
Offences against the person
Property offences
Traffic offences
Drug-related offences
: between July 2015 and June 2021, offences against the person made
up just over half of all diversion cases with a family violence
flag (52.7%
compared to 19.0% of diversion cases with no family violence flag) (Figure 5).
In comparison, property offences, traffic
offences and drug-related offences
made up a much larger proportion of diversion cases with no family violence
flag. This is consistent
with the offence profile of family violence cases
generally. The vast majority of family violence offences tend to be assaults and
breaches of court orders (with the latter classified here as part of the
5: Offence types in diversion cases, by family violence indicator
Offence type
Family violence indicator
No family violence indicator
Offences against the person
Property offences
Traffic offences
Drug-related offences
for offenders aged 18 to 19, almost half of diversion cases involved property
offences (42.2%), whereas this age group had a relatively
low rate of offences
against the person (15.3%) (Figure 6). In comparison, for offenders aged 65 and
over, the most common offence
cases was traffic offences (25.6%). Notably, this represents a significant
in the proportion of traffic offences in diversion cases for this age
group since 2006–07, from 41.2% to 25.6%, and a doubling
in offences
against the person, from 12.2% to
Offence categories in diversion cases, by age group
Offence type
18 to 19 (5,430 cases)
20 to 64 (42,857 cases)
65 and over (2,343 cases)
Offences against the person
Property offences
Traffic offences
Drug-related offences
Specific offences in diversion cases
Beyond high-level offence groupings, it is also
useful to examine which
offences were most common in diversion
cases. The three most common principal proven offences in all diversion cases
were unlawful
7,164 cases), theft
6,861 cases) and careless
(7.8% or 3,968 cases)
(Figure 7). Effectively, unlawful assault and careless driving have switched
places in prevalence since 2006–07,
when careless driving was the most
common offence in diversion cases (13.7%) and unlawful assault was the fourth
most common (5.8%).
Figure 7: The five most common principal proven offences in diversion
cases (50,988 cases)
Unlawful assault
Careless driving
Criminal damage
Cause injury recklessly
The offence types in diversion cases varied by offender demographics and case
characteristics:
unlawful assault was the most common offence in both men’s and
women’s diversion cases (14.2% and 13.8% respectively).
However, the
offence of shop-theft was four times more prevalent in women’s diversion
cases (13.6%) than in men’s (3.7%),
whereas criminal damage was more
common in men’s diversion cases (8.1% compared to 5.0% of women’s
diversion cases).
diversion cases for offenders aged 18 to 19, the most common offence was
careless driving (15.5%), followed by criminal damage
(9.3%) and unlawful
assault (7.4%). The offence profile for younger people receiving diversion plans
was therefore notably different
from the offence profile for older people, for
whom unlawful assault was the most common offence in diversion cases. For
for people aged 65 and over, the most common offences in diversion
cases were unlawful assault (14.6%) and careless driving (9.4%),
and for people
aged 20 to 64, the most common offences were unlawful assault (14.9%), criminal
damage (7.1%) and shop-theft (6.9%)
with careless driving being the fourth most
common offence (6.8%).
: noting that a family violence indicator was only available from
July 2015 onwards (31,076 diversion cases), unlawful assault was
still the most
common offence in diversion cases both with and without a family violence flag,
but at vastly different rates (36.1%
of diversion cases with a family violence
flag, and 10.6% of diversion cases without a family violence flag).
Unsurprisingly, breaching
a family violence intervention order or safety notice,
including breaches intended to cause harm or fear, and persistent breaches,
represented another one-quarter of diversion cases with a family violence flag
(25.4%), whereas the next most common offences were
shop-theft (9.0%) and
careless driving (8.7%) in diversion cases without a family violence
Conditions of diversion plans
Most diversion plans had three or fewer conditions
(85.8%), with a median of two conditions per diversion plan (Figure
There were 13 cases
involving 10 or more conditions, the most being 17 conditions (in two cases).
The defendants in these two cases
both had 13 separate compensation conditions,
two letters of apology or gratitude, one donation condition and one good
Figure 8: Number of conditions in diversion plans (46,612 cases)
1 condition
2 conditions
3 conditions
4 conditions
5 or more conditions
As shown in Figure 9, the three most common conditions of diversion plans
were to be of good behaviour (68.0%), to make a donation
to either the Court
Fund or a particular charity
and to write a letter
of apology to the victim or a letter of gratitude to the informant (47.1%).
Figure 9: Conditions of diversion plans (46,671 cases)
Good behaviour
Letter of apology or gratitude
Compensation
Anger management course
Drug awareness course
Defensive drivers course
Road trauma awareness course
Volunteer work
Other condition(s)
The values of the donations were specified for 28,982 of the 29,660 diversion
plans with a known donation condition. Across the 10-year
period, there was a
total of $9,004,439.23 in donations ordered across those 28,982 diversion plans.
That is an average of $311 per
donation, ranging from $10 (in 7 cases) to
$66,838 (in 1 case). The latter donation was a significant outlier given the
next highest
donation was $26,795 (1 case) – the defendant was a
corporation in both cases. For natural persons, the largest donation was
(1 case). The median donation for the 28,892 cases was $250.
Compensation amounts were recorded for 5,941 of 5,984 diversion plans with a
known compensation condition. In total, compensation
conditions amounted to
$5,623,013.21. Compensation amounts ranged from $0.01 (in 2 cases) to $35,920.93
(in 1 case), with a median
In 10 years, there was a total of $9,004,439.23 in
donations (in 28,982 diversion plans) and $5,623,013.21 in compensation (in
diversion plans)
Durations of diversion plans
The duration of diversion plans was determined by
calculating the number of days between a diversion hearing (in the 50,988 cases
that received a diversion plan) and the ‘return’ or ‘adjourned
majority of diversion plans were intended to run for 6 months or less (86.3%),
with the most common durations being 3 months
(28.3%) and 6 months (26.3%)
(Figure 10).
A significant
number of diversion plans (4,491) also ran for 12
The shortest diversion
plan was one day, in 123 cases (potentially suggesting a condition that could be
fulfilled almost immediately,
such as making a charitable donation), and the
median duration was 4 months.
Figure 10: Duration of diversion plans (50,978 cases)
1 month or less
More than 12 months
Trends in the characteristics of diversion cases
The last 10 years has seen some notable changes in
the characteristics of people receiving diversion plans, as well as the
characteristics
of their cases:
there has been a slight increase in the proportion of women receiving diversion
plans, from 29.8% of diversion cases to 33.2% (Figure
Figure 11: Trends in the percentage of diversion cases (50,920
cases), by gender
diversion population seems to have gotten older (Figure 12). People aged 18 to
19 and people aged 20 to 24 were the two age
groups that decreased as a
proportion of diversion cases by 2020–21 (together decreasing from 42.2%
of diversion cases to 28.7%).
In contrast, the proportion of every other age
group increased, with the proportion of people aged 65 and over doubling from
of diversion cases to 6.5%.
Figure 12: Trends in the
percentage of diversion cases (50,630 cases), by age
65 and over
violence indicator
: the proportion of diversion cases with a family violence
indicator has been relatively stable since 2015–16 (Figure 13), with
family violence cases fluctuating between 14.6% (in 2018–19) and 20.6% (in
Figure 13: Trends in the percentage of diversion
cases (31,076 cases), by family violence indicator
Family violence indicator
No family violence indicator
: the most notable changes in offence types were a decrease in the
proportion of diversion cases involving property offences (from
diversion cases to 28.3%), and an increase in drug-related offences (from 5.6%
of diversion cases to 9.4%) (Figure 14).
There has also been an increase in
traffic offences since 2014–15 (from 11.6% of diversion cases to 15.7%),
although this increase
is still lower than the peak in 2011–12
Figure 14: Trends in the percentage of diversion cases
(50,988 cases), by offence type
Offences against the person
Property offences
Traffic offences
Drug-related offences
: the rate of successful completion of diversion plans was quite
stable, ranging from 91.8% of diversion cases to 95.3% (Figure 15).
and highest completion rates were both in the two most recent years examined.
Figure 15: Trends in successful completion of diversion plans
(46,671 cases)
Percentage completed
there was a noticeable increase in the average (mean) duration of diversion
plans, from 3.6 months in 2011–12 to 5.4 months
in 2020–21 (Figure
Figure 16: Trends in average duration (months) of diversion
plans (50,978 cases)
Average duration (months)
Figure 17 presents the proportion of diversion plans with each of the four most
common conditions each year. During the 10-year
period, there was a decline in
the rate of compensation conditions (15.7% to 9.3%) and donation conditions
(69.6% to 59.4%). The
proportion of diversion plans requiring a letter of
apology (to the victim) or gratitude (to the informant) dropped significantly,
from 64.6% in 2011–12 to 40.0% in 2015–16, and it has been
relatively stable since then. And the proportion of diversion
plans requiring
the person to be of good behaviour has doubled over time, from 44.8% to
Figure 17: Trends in the types of conditions in diversion
plans (46,671 cases)
Letter of apology or gratitude
Good behaviour
Compensation
3. The prevalence of diversion plans
In Chapter 2, we
examined the characteristics of the 50,988 cases that resulted in a diversion
plan in the 10 years to 2020–21.
Those statistics tell us
receiving diversion plans, but not who is
most likely
diversion plans. To do that, we need to examine the prevalence of diversion
plans in all cases involving certain offenders
or offences. That is the focus of
this chapter.
Prevalence of diversion plans in all criminal
proceedings
A fine is by far the most common outcome in the
Magistrates’ Court. Fines accounted for over half (54.8%) of all
Magistrates’
Court outcomes in the 10 years to 30 June 2021 (this includes
diversion plans, which are not a sentence but nevertheless represent
proceedings). Diversion plans were the fifth most common outcome in that period
(5.8%), after fines (54.8%), adjourned
undertakings (13.7%), community
correction orders (8.7%) and imprisonment (7.9%). The prevalence of diversion
plans as a proportion
of all outcomes has, though, increased slightly,
particularly since 2015, from 5.2% of all outcomes to 6.6% (Figure
This trend has been
relatively consistent, and it does not seem to have been affected by
Figure 18: Prevalence of diversion plans as an outcome in the
Magistrates’ Court, 2011–12 to 2020–21
Prevalence of diversion plans for men and women
Diversion plans made up a higher proportion of
outcomes for women (8.7%) than for men (5.2%) (Figure 19). This was consistent
the reference period (Figure 20), with the gap even widening in more
recent years. The prevalence of diversion plans increased for
both men and women
in that time, but for men it increased by just 0.8%, whereas for women it
increased by 2.2%. Indeed, in the two
most recent years, the prevalence of
diversion plans reached a point where one in 10 women received a diversion plan
as their outcome
in the Magistrates’ Court. This seems to be a return to
the prevalence of diversion plans for women from earlier years: 11.0%
and 9.5% in
Figure 19: Prevalence of diversion plans for men and women, 2011–12
Figure 20: Trends in the percentage of cases that received a diversion
plan, by gender
Prevalence of diversion plans by age
Figure 21 shows the proportion of cases that
received a diversion plan as an outcome in the Magistrates’ Court,
according to
the age group of the offender. People aged 18 to 19 had the highest
likelihood of receiving a diversion plan as an outcome (16.8%
of diversion
cases) compared to other age groups, and that proportion has increased in recent
years to 19.4% in 2020–21 (see
Figure 22). This likely reflects the unique
value of diversion plans for younger and first-time offenders, potentially
them becoming entrenched in the criminal justice
People aged 65 and over
were the next most likely age group to receive a diversion plan (10.8% of their
cases). This could reflect
some of the unique mitigating circumstances that this
age group may have,
having little to no criminal history for most of their lifetime, prior to the
current offending. The proportion of people
aged 65 and over receiving a
diversion plan also increased during the reference period (from 8.6% to 13.1%)
– indeed, the proportion
receiving a diversion plan increased for all age
Figure 21: Prevalence of diversion plans by age group, 2011–12 to
65 and over
Figure 22: Trends in the percentage of cases that received a diversion
plan, by age group
65 and over
Prevalence of diversion plans by family violence
In the six years to 2020–21, 7.0% of cases
with a family violence indicator resulted in a diversion plan, a slightly higher
rate than for cases without a family violence indicator (5.8%). This did,
though, vary significantly by gender. While women were
more likely than men to
receive diversion plans in both cases with and without a family violence
indicator, the difference was most
stark in cases with a family violence
indicator (Figure 23). Women were over three times more likely than men to
receive a diversion
plan in family violence cases (17.3% compared to 5.2%). This
high rate of diversion plans for women prosecuted for family violence
is in line with our recent finding for breaches of intervention orders between
2011 and 2020: the rate of diversion plans
for women prosecuted for breach of
intervention order was more than three times the rate for men (8.3% compared to
Figure 23: Prevalence of diversion plans by gender and family violence
indicator, 2015–16 to 2020–21
Family violence indicator
No family violence indicator
The trends in Figure 24 also distinguish between cases for men and women that
either did or did not have a family violence indicator.
The trends illustrate
that female family violence offenders receive diversion plans at a much higher
rate than any other offenders.
Research on women’s use of violence
indicates that this could be due to a number of factors, including that
women’s offending
is often less serious than men’s, and women tend
to have less criminal history.
There is, though, another likely contributor here: when men commit family
violence, they are typically the primary aggressor in the
relationship, either
with or without occasional retaliatory violence from their partner. Conversely,
when women commit family violence,
it often occurs in the context of a
relationship where they are the primary victim and their male partner is
actually the primary
In those circumstances, it may be that the parties in these proceedings
ultimately consider a diversion plan an appropriate outcome,
balancing the fact
that the alleged offending did indeed occur with recognition of the context in
which it occurred.
Figure 24: Trends in the percentage of cases that received a diversion
plan, by family violence indicator and gender
Female - family-violence related
Female - non-family violence related
Male - family violence related
Male - non-family violence related
Prevalence of diversion plans for each offence type
Property offences were the offence type most likely
to result in a diversion plan (13.9% of cases where a property offence was the
principal proven offence) (Figure 25). These were followed by offences against
the person (10.3% of cases) and drug-related offences
(9.9% of cases). In
comparison, a diversion plan was quite rare for traffic offences (1.6% of cases
where a traffic offence was the
principal proven
which instead were
much more likely to result in a fine (74.8%).
Figure 25: Prevalence of diversion plans by offence type, 2011–12 to
Offence type
Offences against the person
Property offences
Traffic offences
Drug-related offences
The rate of diversion plans remained relatively stable for most offence types
during the reference period, with mostly minor fluctuations
(Figure 26). The one
exception, though, was drug-related offences, for which there was a clear and
sustained increase in the use
of diversion plans, almost doubling from 7.2% of
all cases with a drug-related offence as the principal proven offence to
Figure 26: Trends in the percentage of cases that received a diversion
plan, by offence type
Offences against the person
Property offences
Traffic offences
Drug-related offences
The prevalence of diversion plans often varied for each offence type based on
the defendant’s characteristics. Being female
was strongly associated with
a higher likelihood of diversion plans for almost all offence types (with a very
small exception in
the context of drug-related
). Male family violence
offenders consistently had the lowest rate of diversion plans of all offenders,
regardless of offence type
(Figure 27). Male non-family violence offenders had
the second lowest rate, again with that very small exception in the context of
drug-related offences. As we recently found in the context of stalking
it seems that gender
is an even stronger predictor of court outcomes than a family violence
Figure 27: Prevalence of diversion plans by offence type, gender and
family violence indicator, 2015–16 to 2020–21
Offence type
Male - family violence flag
Male - no family violence flag
Female - family violence flag
Female - no family violence flag
Offences against the person
Property offences
Traffic offences
Drug-related offences
Offenders aged 20 to 64 were least likely to receive diversion plans across
all offence categories, compared to both younger offenders
(aged 18 to 19) and
older offenders (aged 65 and over). However, younger and older offenders
received diversion plans at different
rates depending on the offence type. Both
younger and older offenders were most likely to receive diversion plans for
property offences
(31.0% and 30.9% respectively of people prosecuted for
property offences in those age groups). But younger offenders were much more
likely to receive diversion plans for drug-related offences (23.8%) and traffic
offences (9.0%), whereas older offenders were more
likely to receive a diversion
plan for offences against the person (24.4%).
Figure 28: Prevalence of diversion plans by offence type and age,
2011–12 to 2020–21
Offence type
65 and over
Offences against the person
Property offences
Traffic offences
Drug-related offences
Prevalence of diversion plans for specific offences
In Chapter 2, we found that the five most common
offences in diversion cases were unlawful assault, theft, careless driving,
damage and causing injury recklessly. The prevalence of these offences
in diversion cases, though, is driven, at least to some extent,
prevalence in the criminal justice system more generally. There were, for
example, 49,250 cases involving unlawful assault
as the principal proven offence
in the 10 years to 2020–21; of those cases, 14.5% resulted in a diversion
plan (Figure 29).
Criminal damage was the principal proven offence in
comparatively fewer cases during that 10-year period (16,543 cases), but cases
involving criminal damage had a much higher rate of diversion plans
Figure 29: Prevalence of diversion plans by specific offence,
2011–12 to 2020–21
1. Unlawful assault
3. Careless driving
4. Criminal damage
5. Cause injury recklessly
Again, though, these rates varied by the demographics of the person receiving
a diversion plan:
women were much more likely than men to receive diversion plans for each of the
five most common offences in diversion cases (Figure
30). A diversion plan was
the outcome in 11.6% of cases where men had careless driving as their principal
proven offence. In comparison,
the rate of diversion plans doubled to almost
one-quarter of cases (24.2%) where women had careless driving as their principal
offence. Even more strikingly, women (19.7%) were almost three times more
likely than men (6.9%) to receive diversion plans for causing
recklessly.
Figure 30: Prevalence of diversion plans by specific
offence and gender, 2011–12 to 2020–21
1. Unlawful assault
3. Careless driving
4. Criminal damage
5. Cause injury recklessly
both younger defendants (aged 18 to 19) and older defendants (aged 65 and over)
were much more likely than defendants aged 20 to
64 to receive diversion plans
for each of the five most common offences resulting in a diversion
Both younger and older
defendants had a similar likelihood of receiving diversion plans for three of
the five offences. But the main
exception was unlawful assault: older defendants
were much more likely to receive diversion plans (in 35.6% of cases where
assault was their principal proven offence) than younger defendants
(20.7% of cases). Similarly, but to a smaller degree, older defendants
were more likely than younger defendants (13.1%) to receive diversion plans for
causing injury recklessly. When older defendants
commit these types of offences,
the offences tend to be less serious and involve more mitigating factors, and
the defendants have
less risk of similar further
which may help
explain the higher rates of diversion plans for assault and injury offences in
cases involving older defendants.
Figure 31: Prevalence of
diversion plans by specific offence and age, 2011–12 to
65 and over
1. Unlawful assault
3. Careless driving
4. Criminal damage
5. Cause injury recklessly
4. Prior offending and reoffending
This chapter compares
the prior offending and reoffending rates of people who received diversion plans
with people who were otherwise
sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court during
the same time period.
Methodology for this analysis
For the purposes of this analysis, the
included anyone who received a diversion plan, or a sentencing
outcome other than a diversion plan, in the two financial years 2015–16
and 2016–17 (the
index period
). A related concept, the
, describes the earliest occasion on which a person in the index
population received a diversion plan within the two-year period.
If a person
received a diversion plan more than once, the earliest diversion plan is used as
the index outcome. For comparisons with
sentenced offenders (those who received
an outcome other than a diversion plan), their
index outcome
is also the
earliest occasion on which they were sentenced within the two-year period.
We used a two-year index period for this analysis as it allows for a
five-year follow-up period both before and after each person
received their
index outcome in the Magistrates’ Court. These people were matched to our
reoffending database to identify whether
they had been sentenced or had received
a diversion plan at any stage in the five years before or after the index
outcome date.
Prior offending and reoffending are defined as being sentenced or receiving a
diversion plan for other offending (as opposed to being
arrested, charged, etc.)
and are measured by the date on which the person was sentenced or received a
diversion plan for that other
offending (as opposed to the date on which the
offence occurred).
The index population
During the two-year index period to 30 June 2017,
there were 149,268 unique people who received any form of index outcome in the
Magistrates’
Court. This included 10,393 people who received a diversion
plan, and 139,906 people who received an outcome other than a diversion
These two numbers combined are slightly larger than the total number of people
dealt with during the period because there is
some overlap between the two
cohorts; some people (in 1,031 cases) received both a diversion plan and another
the two-year period.
Prior offending and reoffending
Of the 10,393 people who received a diversion plan
as their index outcome in the two-year period, almost three-quarters (72.7%) did
not receive any other outcome on any other occasion in the five years before
after receiving their diversion plan. Another 6.0% had prior offences
but did not reoffend, 16.3% had no prior offences but did reoffend,
both had prior offences
did reoffend. As a point of comparison, of
the 139,906 people who received an outcome other than a diversion plan as their
outcome, just 46.5% had no prior offences and did not reoffend. Another
13.2% had prior offences but did not reoffend, 17.7% had
no prior offences but
did reoffend, and 22.5% both had prior offences
did reoffend. In
other words, people receiving diversion plans were over 1.5 times more likely to
prior offences and to not reoffend than people who were
sentenced. In contrast, people who were sentenced were 4.5 times more likely
have received another court outcome on another occasion
after their index outcome.
How many people were
sentenced (or diverted)
again for any other offences at all in the five years before or after ...
receiving a diversion plan? 72.7%
... being sentenced? 46.5%
Prior offending
Figure 32 shows the rate of offending in the
previous five years for people who received a diversion plan and people who
outcomes other than a diversion plan. People receiving diversion plans
were one-third as likely as people receiving other court outcomes
prior offence in the last five years. The presence and nature of a
person’s criminal history will often influence
the accessibility of
diversion plans, especially with the requirement of prosecutorial consent, so it
would be expected that there
would be a significant discrepancy in the prior
offending histories between those two groups.
Figure 32: Prior offending rates of people receiving either a diversion
plan or another court outcome
Rate of Prior offending for people receiving diversion plan (10,393
Rate of Prior offending for people receiving outcome other than
diversion plan (139,906 people)
Those prior offending rates varied by the demographics of the offenders, but
the difference in prevalence was about the same: people
who received outcomes
other than diversion plans were consistently about three to four times more
likely than people receiving diversion
plans to have received another court
outcome in the previous five years:
each age group, people receiving diversion plans had a lower rate of prior
offending than people receiving other court outcomes
(Figure 33). This was
especially pronounced for both younger and older people. For instance, just 7.3%
of people aged 18 to 19 who
received diversion plans had received another court
outcome in the previous five years, whereas 32.7% of sentenced people aged 18
19 had received another court outcome in the previous five years. Similarly,
just 5.0% of people aged 65 and over who received
diversion plans had prior
offences, compared to 23.5% of sentenced people aged 65 and over. For all age
groups, there was a starkly
higher rate of prior offending for people receiving
court outcomes other than diversion plans.
Figure 33: Prior
offending rates of people receiving diversion plans, by age
Number receiving diversion plan
Percentage receiving diversion plan
Number receiving outcome other than diversion plan
Percentage receiving outcome other than diversion plan
65 and over
family violence
: the cohort with the highest rate of prior offending was men
in family violence cases who received outcomes other than a diversion
(46.6% had received another court outcome in the previous five years), and the
cohort with the lowest rate was women in family
violence cases who received
diversion plans (8.6%), followed closely by women in non-family violence cases
who received diversion
plans (9.0%) (Figure 34).
Figure 34: Prior
offending rates of people receiving diversion plans, by gender and family
violence flag
Gender and family violence flag
Number receiving diversion plan
Percentage receiving diversion plan
Number receiving outcome other than diversion plan
Percentage receiving outcome other than diversion plan
Men - family violence flag
Men – no family violence flag
Women - family violence flag
Women - no family violence flag
: people who received diversion plans during the two-year index
period were much less likely to have any prior offences within the
previous five
years compared to people who received any other court outcome, regardless of
their principal offence type (Figure 35).
The disparity was especially stark for
those who received a court outcome for traffic offences: 3.6% of people
receiving diversion
plans had prior offences, whereas people receiving another
court outcome were almost eight times more likely to have prior offences
(28.1%). This suggests that a recent criminal history is a significant barrier
to receiving a diversion plan for traffic offences.
Prior offending rates of people receiving diversion plans or another court
outcome in 2015–16 and 2016–17,
by principal offence type
Offence type
Number receiving diversion plan
Percentage receiving diversion plan
Number receiving outcome other than diversion plan
Percentage receiving outcome other than diversion plan
Offences against the person
Property offences
Traffic offences
Drug-related offences
Reoffending
This section examines the reoffending rates of
people who received a diversion plan and compares those rates to the reoffending
of people who received another court outcome. As an important caveat,
people who receive diversion plans are a distinct cohort –
they are more
likely to be women, have committed non-violent offences and have no prior
criminal history. Each of these factors are
associated with the person having an
inherently lower risk of reoffending, regardless of the outcome of their case.
It is therefore
to be expected that the diversion population would have a lower
rate of reoffending. The results below, however, illustrate
likely the diversion population was to reoffend.
Figure 36 shows the rate at which people received a court outcome in the next
five years after receiving a diversion plan or another
court outcome. People
receiving diversion plans were almost half as likely to reoffend (21.3%) as
those receiving other court outcomes
Figure 36: Reoffending rates of people receiving diversion plans
Reoffending rate for people receiving diversion plan (10,393
Reoffending rate for people receiving outcome other than diversion plan
(139,906 people)
This was true for both men and women: 22.2% of men who received a diversion
plan reoffended compared to 42.3% of men who received
another court outcome, and
19.4% of women who received a diversion plan reoffended compared to 33.4% of
women who received another
court outcome. Moreover, reoffending rates also
remained lower for people who received a diversion plan in cases with and
a family violence flag. For instance, about one-quarter of men who
received a diversion plan in family violence cases went on to
reoffend (24.1%),
whereas that figure more than doubled (to 55.1%) for men who received other
court outcomes in family violence cases.
Figure 37: Reoffending rates of people receiving diversion plans, by
gender and family violence flag
Gender and family violence flag
Number receiving diversion plan
Percentage receiving diversion plan
Number receiving outcome other than diversion plan
Percentage receiving outcome other than diversion plan
Men - family violence flag
Men - no family violence flag
Women - family violence flag
Women – no family violence flag
People aged 18 to 19 were the group most likely to reoffend (32.9% of people
receiving diversion plans and 53.2% of people receiving
other court outcomes),
with the reoffending rate consistently declining for people in older age groups,
especially those aged 45
and over. This was true, however, for both those
receiving diversion plans and those receiving other court outcomes. Those who
diversion plans were consistently less likely to reoffend than those
who received other court outcomes, regardless of age.
Figure 38: Reoffending rates of people receiving diversion plans, by
Number receiving diversion plan
Percentage receiving diversion plan
Number receiving outcome other than diversion plan
Percentage receiving outcome other than diversion plan
65 and over
People who received diversion plans were consistently less likely to reoffend
within the next five years compared to people receiving
other court outcomes,
regardless of their principal offence type. People involved with drug-related
offences were the most likely
to reoffend within five years, both for those who
received a diversion plan (35.0%) and for those who received another court
(57.9%). People with a traffic offence had the largest proportional
difference in reoffending rates: people who received a court
outcome other than
a diversion plan were three times more likely to reoffend (33.1%) than people
who received a diversion plan (10.8%).
Figure 39: Reoffending rates of people receiving diversion plans or other
court outcomes in 2015–16 and 2016–17, by principal
Offence type
Number receiving diversion plan
Percentage receiving diversion plan
Number receiving outcome other than diversion plan
Percentage receiving outcome other than diversion plan
Offences against the person
Property offences
Traffic offences
Drug-related offences
5. Concluding remarks
This statistical
profile has presented data on the Magistrates’ Court’s Criminal
Justice Diversion Program in the 10 years
to 2020–21. This has included an
analysis of:
the number of
people receiving diversion plans each year;
who is receiving
diversion plans;
to receive diversion plans;
the most common
conditions attached to diversion plans;
the duration of
diversion plans;
the type of
offending most common in diversion cases;
the type of
most likely
to result in a diversion plan; and
offending and reoffending of people receiving diversion plans.
analysis has led to a number of key findings.
First and foremost, the findings are strongly indicative of the effectiveness
of diversion plans, or at the very least, the findings
strongly indicate that
the cases in which a diversion plan has been utilised were appropriately
targeted. Over 93% of people who
receive diversion plans successfully complete
the various conditions. Moreover, people who receive diversion plans have much
prior offending and reoffending rates than people who receive other court
outcomes. Each of the stakeholders we consulted about these
findings found the
results very encouraging, especially given that the increased use of diversion
plans and changes in the use of
conditions have not detracted from the very high
successful completion rates each year.
Second, a diversion plan has become an increasingly common outcome of
criminal proceedings in Victoria. In the eight years to 2018–19
financial year before COVID-19 affected court operations), the number of
diversion plans increased by 34%, from 4,388 to 5,874.
Further, while the total
number of cases finalised in the Magistrates’ Court increased in that same
timeframe, the proportion
of court outcomes that were diversion plans also
increased, from 5.4% of all outcomes to 6.4%. As mentioned above, successful
rates have remained largely stable, meaning that the increased use of
diversion plans does not seem to have affected successful completion
Third, women are more likely than men to receive diversion plans (8.7% of all
cases involving women compared to 5.2% involving men),
regardless of the type of
offending involved. This was true for all principal offence types, and for cases
both with and without
a family violence flag. Indeed, female family violence
offenders had the highest rate of diversion plans, about double the rate for
female non-family violence offenders, and more than three times the rate for all
male offenders (family violence offenders and non-family
violence offenders).
There are likely numerous reasons for this, including women’s offending
profiles being different from
men’s, and female family violence offenders
often committing their offences in the context of a relationship where they are
the primary victim and their male partner is the primary aggressor.
Fourth, while the use of diversion plans has remained relatively stable,
their nature has changed somewhat. It is still far more likely
that a person
will receive a diversion plan if they are female, are younger, are older and/or
have committed a property offence.
But diversion plans have, on average, gotten
longer (from about 3.5 to 5.5 months). Further, the conditions attached to
plans have changed, with fewer compensation conditions, donation
conditions and letters of apology or gratitude conditions, co-occurring
significant increase in good behaviour conditions, which are now included in
87.2% of diversion plans.
Finally, a diversion plan is extremely rare for traffic offences (1.6% of
cases with a traffic offence as the principal proven offence).
This is likely
because section 59(1) of the
Criminal Procedure Act
expressly precludes
from the CJDP (a) any matter involving an offence with a mandatory licence
suspension or disqualification, and
(b) any matter involving an offence under
section 49(1) of the
Road Safety Act
(drink and drug driving offences).
While diversion has occasionally been advocated as a useful response to
driving-related offences,
number of studies have found diversion to be surprisingly ineffective in
reducing further driving-related offending (other than
Moreover, it has been
argued that diversion can perpetuate inequalities in the criminal justice system
if people are required to
participate in an ‘offender-funded’ driver
education program.
people who received diversion plans for traffic offences were one-third less
likely to reoffend in the next five years
(10.8%) than people who received other
court outcomes (33.1%). This could suggest that diversion plans are an
under-utilised but
effective response to traffic offences, but without
accounting for the differences in those cases and people, it is difficult to
so definitively.
Appendix: The diversion matrix
Magistrates Court Diversion Criteria Matrix
making the assessment for diversion, Prosecutors must have consideration to the
Victoria Police Manual and other relevant policy
documents, along with this
Diversion Criteria Matrix.
There are 4 specific offence categories that require additional consideration
prior to recommending diversion:
A diversion or withdrawal of charges should not be offered to
the accused or their counsel without first consulting with an Inspector
at the Licensing & Regulation Division – (03) 9247 3231. PBEA –
LRD- Diversions-Manager-OIC
where the accused is a
. A diversion or
withdrawal of charges should not be offered to the accused or their counsel
without first consulting with an Inspector
or above at the Licensing &
Regulation Division – (03) 9247 3231. PBEA –
LRD-Diversions-Manager-OIC
A diversion should not to be offered to
an accused or their counsel where a licensee or BYO permittee has been charged
`non-compliance incident offence’ without first gaining written approval
of the OIC of the Liquor Licensing Unit - (03)
Careful consideration must be given,
after reviewing all relevant information regarding the seriousness of the
charge, its impact
on the victim, the intent of the legislation and the
circumstances in which the offending occurred. Prosecutors must seek approval
for diversion of emergency worker harm offences from their Work Unit manager who
is to ensure an appropriate record is made as to
the rationale in support of the
Offence seriousness and future risk
Offence seriousness: 1 MINOR
Offence seriousness: 2 MEDIUM
Offence seriousness: 3 MAJOR
Future offending risk: 3 MAJOR
POSSIBLY SUITABLE
GENERALLY NOT SUITABLE
NOT SUITABLE
Future offending risk: 2 MEDIUM
POSSIBLY SUITABLE
POSSIBLY SUITABLE
GENERALLY NOT SUITABLE
Future offending risk: 1 MINOR
POSSIBLY SUITABLE
GENERALLY NOT SUITABLE
Offence Seriousness Table
Description
Family violence matters may only be diverted if exceptional circumstances
As a general rule, the following offences
be included in the major category:
Traffic Drug of
Dependence.
Any offence
attracting a mandatory penalty (e.g. mandatory licence disqualification).
Any offence
involving a serious injury.
Any offence
incurring ‘vehicle impoundment’ provisions.
Any offence with
a penalty of 15 years or more.
As a general rule, all other indictable offences should be included in the
medium category.
Any Summary Offences (other than those attracting a mandatory
Managers must be consulted and make the final decision as to whether exceptional
circumstances exist
– In each individual case, it is necessary to look behind the
circumstances and apply the ‘diversion principles’
outlined in the
VPM and other Victoria Police policy documents to see whether there are
‘serious concerns’.
Future Offending Risk Table
Description
As a general rule, the likelihood of future offending is to be regarded as
the accused has
been found guilty by a court within the preceding 5 years.
As a general rule, the likelihood of future offending is to be regarded as
The accused has
been subject to a previous diversion/caution or warnings.
The accused has
been processed by way of penalty notice.
The accused has
a prior finding of guilt/conviction that is 5 years or older.
As a general rule, the likelihood of future offending is to be regarded as
The accused has
no court priors.
Bibliography
Silvia, Julian King, Jim Hales and Amy Swan,
Court Diversion Program
Evaluation: Final Report
(Turning Point Alcohol & Drug Centre,
Anthony, Thalia and Harry Blagg,
Addressing the ‘Crime
Problem’ of the Northern Territory Intervention: Alternative Paths to
Regulating Minor Driving Offences
in Remote Indigenous Communities
to the Criminology Research Advisory Council (Criminology Research Grants,
Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘National Offence Index’
(abs.gov.au, 2018)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/classifications/national-offence-index/latest-release>.
Broughton, Jeremy, Gavin Buckle, Su Buttress and Lorna Pearce,
The Effects
of the National Drivers Improvement Scheme on Re-Offending Rates
Research Laboratory, 2005).
Children’s Court of Victoria, ‘Youth Diversion Service’
(childrenscourt.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.childrenscourt.vic.gov.au/criminal-division/youth-diversion-service>.
Family Violence Reform Implementation Monitor,
Monitoring Victoria’s
Family Violence Reforms: Accurate Identification of the Predominant Aggressor
(Family Violence Reform Implementation Monitor, 2021).
Henning, Kris, Brian Renauer and Robert Holdford, ‘Victim or Offender?
Heterogeneity Among Women Arrested for Intimate Partner
Violence’ (2006)
Journal of Family Violence
Hua, Jiuzhao and Jacqueline Fitzgerald,
Matching Court Records to Measure
Reoffending
, Crime and Justice Bulletin no. 95 (NSW Bureau of Crime
Statistics and Research, 2006).
Liberty Victoria,
Justice Diverted? Prosecutorial Discretion and the Use
of Diversion Schemes in Victoria
(Liberty Victoria, 2018).
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, ‘Diversion’
(mcv.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.mcv.vic.gov.au/find-support/diversion>.
Miller, Susan,
Victims as Offenders: The Paradox of Women’s Violence
in Relationships
(Rutgers University Press, 2005).
Nachtigal, Sammi, ‘The Potholes of Offender-Funded Driving Diversion:
How Minnesota’s Driving Diversion Program Fails
the People it is Supposed
to Help’ (2019) 37(2)
Law & Inequality: A Journal of Theory and
Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Policy of the Director of Public
Prosecutions
(Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria, 2023).
Parliament of Victoria, Legislative Council, Legal and Social Issues
Inquiry into Victoria’s Criminal Justice System
(Parliament of Victoria, 2022).
Reeves, Ellen, ‘A Culture of Consent: Legal Practitioners’
Experiences of Representing Women Who Have Been Misidentified
as Predominant
Aggressors on Family Violence Intervention Orders in Victoria, Australia’
Feminist Legal Studies
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Criminal Justice Diversion Program in
Victoria: A Statistical Profile
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2008).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Crossover Kids: Vulnerable Children in the
Youth Justice System – Report 3: Sentencing Children Who Have Experienced
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2020).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Gender Differences in Sentencing Outcomes
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2010).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings:
Consultation Paper
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Rethinking Sentencing for Young Adult
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2019).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Family Violence
Intervention Orders and Safety Notices: Third Monitoring Report
(Sentencing
Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Children and Young People in
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2012).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Older Offenders in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2021).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Stalking in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022).
Skrzypiec, Grace, Joy Wundersitz and Helen McRostie,
Magistrates Court
Diversion Program: An Analysis of Post-Program Offending
(Office of Crime
Statistics and Research, 2004).
Swan, Suzanne C., Laura J. Gambone, Jennifer E. Caldwell, Tami P. Sullivan
and David L. Snow, ‘A Review of Research on Women’s
Use of Violence
with Male Intimate Partners’ (2008) 23(3)
Violence and Victims
Victoria Police,
Victoria Police Manual
(Victoria Police, 2022).
Women’s Legal Service Victoria and Monash University,
She’s Psychotic and I Need Protection’: Police Misidentification of
the ‘Primary Aggressor’
in Family Violence Incidents in Victoria
(Women’s Legal Service Victoria and Monash University, 2018).
Legislation
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Country Fire Authority Act
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Road Safety Act 1986
Summary Offences Act 1966
Authored by Dennis Byles and Paul McGorrery
Published by the Sentencing Advisory Council, Melbourne, Victoria,
© Copyright State of Victoria, Sentencing Advisory Council, 2024
This publication is protected by the laws of copyright. No part may be
reproduced by any process except in accordance with the provisions
ISBN 978-1-925071-79-5 (Online)
Authorised by the Sentencing Advisory Council,
Level 3, 333 Queen Street,
Melbourne VIC 3000
Procedure Act 2009
Previously,
Magistrates’ Court Act
(Vic) s 128A (repealed).
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria, ‘Diversion’ (mcv.vic.gov.au, 2022).
Advisory Council,
Criminal Justice Diversion Program in Victoria: A
Statistical Profile
Alberti et al.,
Court Diversion Program Evaluation: Final Report
Advisory Council (2008), above n 3, 3.
Procedure Act 2009
s 59(2)(a).
Procedure Act 2009
A diversion plan is not available for
offences against
section 49(1)
Road Safety Act 1986
(Vic) (driving
under the influence of alcohol or drugs) or offences punishable by minimum or
fixed sentences or penalties, including
licence suspensions, disqualifications
and cancellations. However, it is still available for driving offences that
attract demerit
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
court will seek the views of any victims in the matter, and a court registrar
will interview the defendant: Magistrates’
Court of Victoria (2022), above
Procedure Act 2009
s 59(2)(c).
of Victoria, Legislative Council, Legal and Social Issues Committee,
into Victoria’s Criminal Justice System
(2022) 218–227,
495–502. See also Liberty Victoria,
Justice Diverted? Prosecutorial
Discretion and the Use of Diversion Schemes in Victoria
Procedure Act 2009
Procedure Act 2009
Procedure Act 2009
are formal procedures available for people who have admitted relatively minor
offending, but they are currently limited to low-level
cannabis and shop-theft
offending: Victoria Police, ‘Cautions’,
Victoria Police Manual
(2022) 2–4.
are similar to police cautions but require the person to successfully
participate in a treatment program if they are found in
possession of a small
quantity of illicit drugs: ibid 3, 6–7.
the child’s parent or guardian consents, the police officer can have an
informal discussion with the child and their parent
or guardian about
inappropriate behaviour and its consequences: Victoria Police,
‘Disposition of Offenders’,
Victoria Police Manual
A police caution may also involve referrals to appropriate support
officers can issue an infringement notice or official warning to someone who has
committed certain offences in the
Summary Offences Act
: ibid 5–6.
Police, ‘Brief Preparation and Management’,
Victoria Police
(2022) 6; Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Policy of the
Director of Public Prosecutions
(2023) 3–5.
allows the court to adjourn the proceedings for up to 6 months to allow the
child to complete a diversion program:
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
(2). This can include requirements such as engaging in
sport or music activities, receiving support to improve school attendance,
writing a letter of apology, or participating in counselling: Children’s
Court of Victoria, ‘Youth Diversion Service’
(childrenscourt.vic.gov.au, 2022). As with the CJDP in the Magistrates’
Court, successful participation in a youth diversion
plan requires the court to
discharge the child without a finding of guilt, and unsuccessful participation
requires the court to consider
the extent of participation if the child is later
found guilty:
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Magistrates’
Court Act 1989
Magistrates’
Court Act 1989
Advisory Council (2008), above n 3.
is the current case management system for criminal matters heard in the
Magistrates’ Court. It contains information
such as the age and gender of
the defendant, the number and type of offences they have been charged with, and
the sentence or disposition
given for each charge once the matter has been
Platypus case management system records information about the conditions,
durations and successful completion rates of diversion
percentage excludes 68 people whose gender was unknown. These 68 people were
excluded from subsequent analyses relating to gender.
If this group had been
included, they would have accounted for 0.1% of the diversion population.
Advisory Council (2008), above n 3, 5.
percentage excludes 358 people whose age was unknown. These 358 people were also
excluded from subsequent analysis relating to
age. If this group had been
included, they would have accounted for 0.7% of the diversion population.
Advisory Council (2008), above n 3, 5.
3; Silvia Alberti et al. (2004), above n 4, 6.
Bureau of Statistics, ‘National Offence Index’ (abs.gov.au, 2018).
If two or more charges were at the same
level of severity in the National
Offence Index, then the principal proven offence was allocated to the offence
with the lowest charge
number on the charge sheet for the case (e.g. charge 1
rather than charge 2).
Advisory Council (2008), above n 3, 6.
for example, Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings:
Consultation Paper
(2022) 25 (finding that, together, assault and injury
offences and justice procedure offences accounted for over 80% of family
cases resulting in an adjourned undertaking).
Advisory Council (2008), above n 3, 14.
Offences Act 1966
This includes shop-theft (3,529 cases), theft
a motor vehicle (249 cases), theft
a motor vehicle (130 cases),
theft of a bicycle (79 cases), theft of a trailer (13 cases), theft of a boat or
maritime vessel (3
cases), and theft where there was no further information
available on what was stolen (2,858 cases).
Safety Act 1986
Advisory Council (2008), above n 3, 6.
were 59 diversion plans for which the data suggested there were zero
conditions.
an overview of the difference between donations to the Court Fund and donations
to particular charities, see Sentencing Advisory
Council (2022), above n 32,
some diversion plans also had ‘extension dates’, this analysis only
presents data on the initial intended duration.
We excluded 10 cases from our
analysis here because they were not given a definitive return date when the
defendant initially received
the diversion plan.
was calculated by determining the number of days between the diversion hearing
and the intended return date, dividing that number
by 30.4375 (to account for
the different number of days in each month), then rounding the result to the
nearest month (e.g. 1.4 months
as 1 month).
the maximum duration of a diversion plan is 12 months, there were 40 cases where
the data suggested that the intended duration
of the diversion plan was 13
months or more (up to 25 months in 1 case).
our previous statistical profile, we found that diversion plans made up an even
higher proportion of all outcomes in 2006–07
(7.2%): Sentencing Advisory
Council (2008), above n 3, 3.
Advisory Council,
Gender Differences in Sentencing Outcomes
(2010) 13 fn
for example, Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Children and Young
People in Victoria
(2012) 51–75; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Crossover Kids: Vulnerable Children in the Youth Justice System –
Report 3: Sentencing Children Who Have Experienced Trauma
(2020) 5–30;
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Rethinking Sentencing for Young Adult Offenders
(2019) 5–19.
for example, Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Older Offenders in
(2021) 5–8.
said, even 13.1% is still lower than the rate of 16.1% in 2006–07 for
people aged 65 and over: Sentencing Advisory Council
(2008), above n 3, 4.
Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Family Violence Intervention Orders
and Safety Notices: Third Monitoring Report
Advisory Council (2010), above n 45, 16, 56.
Henning et al., ‘Victim or Offender? Heterogeneity Among Women Arrested
for Intimate Partner Violence’ (2006) 21
Journal of Family Violence
351; Suzanne C. Swan et al., ‘A Review of Research on Women’s
Use of Violence with Male Intimate Partners’ (2008)
Violence and
301, 301; Susan Miller,
Victims as Offenders: The Paradox of
Women’s Violence in Relationships
(2005). On the importance of
identifying the primary aggressor in family violence offending, see, for
example, Parliament of Victoria,
Legislative Council, Legal and Social Issues
Committee (2022), above n 10, 232–243; Women’s Legal Service
Victoria and
Monash University,
‘Officer She’s Psychotic and I
Need Protection’: Police Misidentification of the ‘Primary
in Family Violence Incidents in Victoria
(2018); Family
Violence Reform Implementation Monitor,
Monitoring Victoria’s Family
Violence Reforms: Accurate Identification of the Predominant Aggressor
(2021); Ellen Reeves, ‘A Culture of Consent: Legal
Practitioners’ Experiences of Representing Women Who Have Been
Misidentified
as Predominant Aggressors on Family Violence Intervention Orders
in Victoria, Australia’ (2023) 31
Feminist Legal Studies
rate of diversion plans for traffic offences was notably higher in
2006–07, at 3.4%: Sentencing Advisory Council (2008),
above n 3, 3.
is likely in part because of how few female family violence offenders had a
drug-related offence as their principal proven offence
(148 cases, only six of
which received a diversion plan), limiting the utility of any comparisons.
Advisory Council,
Sentencing Stalking in Victoria
Interestingly,
the similar offence of wilfully damaging property valued at less than $5,000
– a summary version of criminal
damage – was even more likely to
receive a diversion plan, at 23.1% of the 3,931 cases that had this as the
principal proven
Summary Offences Act 1966
data analysis, one of the highest rates of diversion plans we found was for
defendants aged 65 and over where the principal
proven offence was lighting a
fire in the open air during a fire danger period:
Country Fire Authority Act
In the 115 cases involving that age group and offence,
67.8% received a diversion plan (78 cases).
for example, Sentencing Advisory Council (2021), above n 47, 53–55.
reoffending database uses the Soundex algorithm to match unique people based on
identifiable details such as name and date of
birth, while accounting for data
entry discrepancies: see, for example, Jiuzhao Hua and Jacqueline Fitzgerald,
Matching Court Records to Measure Reoffending
, Crime and Justice Bulletin
no. 95 (2006).
for example, Thalia Anthony and Harry Blagg,
Addressing the ‘Crime
Problem’ of the Northern Territory Intervention: Alternative Paths to
Regulating Minor Driving Offences
in Remote Indigenous Communities
to the Criminology Research Advisory Council (2012) 75.
for example, Grace Skrzypiec et al.,
Magistrates Court Diversion Program: An
Analysis of Post-Program Offending
(2004) 29; Jeremy Broughton et al.,
The Effects of the National Drivers Improvement Scheme on Re-Offending Rates
Nachtigal, ‘The Potholes of Offender-Funded Driving Diversion: How
Minnesota’s Driving Diversion Program Fails the
People It Is Supposed to
Law & Inequality: A Journal of Theory and
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.05 MB)
PDF format (1.02 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter