URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICmr/2025/75.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:32:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
'GB3' and Swan Hill District Health (Freedom of Information) [2025] VICmr 75; (30 May 2025)
Notice of Decision and Reasons for Decision
Swan Hill District Health
Decision date:
30 May 2025
Exemptions and provision considered:
Sections 35(1)(a), 25
'GB3' and Swan Hill District Health
(Freedom of Information) [2025]
VICmr 75 (30 May 2025)
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION – hospital funding – model budgets –
purely factual information – disclosure not contrary
to the public
All references to legislation in this document are to the
Information Act 1982
) unless otherwise stated.
Notice of Decision
I have conducted a review under section 49F of the
Agency’s decision to refuse access to documents requested by the Applicant
under the FOI Act.
My decision on the Applicant’s request differs from the Agency’s
decision as I have decided to release one document in
part with irrelevant
information deleted, and one document in full.
Please refer to page 8 for information about review rights through the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (
My reasons for decision follow.
Sean Morrison
Information
Commissioner
30 May 2025
Reasons for Decision
Background to review
Applicant made a request to the Agency seeking access to the following
A copy of all
pre-Budget submissions, briefing notes or proposals provided by Swan Hill
District Health, to the Department of Health,
between [date range].
A copy of the
latest [specified financial year] model budget sent to Swan Hill District Health
by the Department of Health.
Agency identified two documents falling within the terms of the
Applicant’s request and refused access to them under section
35(1)(a). The
Agency’s decision letter sets out the reasons for its
Review application
Applicant sought review by the Information Commissioner under section 49A(1) of
the Agency’s decision to refuse access.
have examined a copy of the documents subject to review.
Applicant and the Agency were invited to make a written submission under section
49H(2) in relation to the review.
have considered relevant communications and submissions received from the
undertaking my review, I have had regard to the object of the FOI Act, which is
to create a general right of access to information
in the possession of the
Government or other public bodies, limited only by exceptions and exemptions
necessary to protect essential
public interests, privacy and business
note Parliament’s intention the FOI Act must be interpreted so as to
further the object of the Act and any discretions conferred
by the Act must be
exercised, as far as possible, so as to facilitate and promote the disclosure of
information in a timely manner
and at the lowest reasonable cost.
Preliminary view
Agency was provided with my preliminary view on [date] that I did not consider
the documents exempt under section 35(1)(a). My
staff asked the Agency whether
it would like to make a fresh decision or provide a further submission in
support of its decision.
Agency did not respond.
Review of exemptions
Section 35 – Documents containing material obtained in
more information about section 35 see the FOI
Guidelines.
35 contains two exemptions that relate to information communicated in confidence
by or on behalf of a person or a government
to an agency or
Consultation
agency or Minister must consult with the relevant third party or parties who
communicated the information, before making a decision
on the request, unless an
exception applies, or if it is not reasonably practicable to.
Agency consulted with the Department of Health who advised the information it
provided to the Agency was provided in confidence.
35(1)(a) – Information communicated in confidence to an agency that would
be exempt if generated by an agency
document is exempt under section 35(1)(a) if two conditions are satisfied:
(a) disclosure would divulge information or matter communicated in confidence by
or on behalf of a person or a government to an agency
or a Minister; and
(b) the information would be exempt matter if it were generated by an agency or
Was the information communicated in confidence to the Agency?
am satisfied the information in the documents was provided in
confidence.
Would the information be exempt matter if it were
generated by an Agency or Minister?
Agency claims the information in the documents would be exempt under section
30(1) if it had generated that information.
Section 30(1) –
Internal working documents
more information about section 30 see the FOI
Guidelines.
30(1) exempts documents that contain opinion, advice or recommendation, or
consultation or deliberation, where disclosure
would be contrary to the public
interest. A document is not exempt simply because it is an internal working
be exempt under section 30(1), three conditions must be satisfied:
(a) the document or information is matter in the nature of:
(i) opinion, advice or recommendation prepared by an agency officer or a
Minister; or
(ii) consultation or deliberation that has taken place between agency officers
or Ministers; and
(b) the matter was created during the deliberative process of an agency,
Minister, or the government’s functions; and
(c) disclosure of the matter would be contrary to the public interest.
are four circumstances where section 30(1) does not apply:
(a) documents required to be made available for inspection and purchase under
(b) purely factual information;
(c) certain documents relating to adjudicative functions;
(d) documents more than 10 years old.
documents are:
(a) an item from a Board of Directors’ meeting relating to the model
(b) a document setting out more detailed information about the model budget,
headed ‘for discussion’, including itemised
budget amounts and some
information about how to interpret those amounts and future action required.
of the information in both documents is purely factual. However, considered
broadly, I consider some of the information in the
documents is the opinion,
advice or recommendation of Agency officers.
am also satisfied the information was prepared for the deliberative processes of
the Agency, that of managing its budget.
Would disclosure of the
documents be contrary to the public interest?
deciding whether disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public
interest, I have given weight to the following relevant
(a) the right of every person to gain access to documents under the Act;
(b) the sensitivity of the issues involved and the broader context of how the
documents were created;
(c) the stage of a decision or policy development at the time the communications
(d) whether disclosure of the documents would be likely to inhibit
communications between agency officers that are essential for
the agency to make
an informed and well-considered decision or for those officers to properly
participate in a process of the agency’s
functions (such as an audit or
investigation, regulatory or law enforcement function);
(e) whether disclosure of the documents would give merely a part explanation,
rather than a complete explanation, for the taking
of a particular decision or
the outcome of a process, but only where the agency would not otherwise be able
to explain upon disclosure
of the documents;
(f) the impact of disclosing documents in draft form, including disclosure not
clearly or accurately representing a final decision
by an agency or Minister;
(g) the likelihood that disclosure would inhibit the independence of officers,
including their ability to conduct proper research
and make detailed
submissions;
(h) the public interest in the community being better informed about an
agency’s deliberative, consultative and decision-making
(i) the public interest in government transparency and accountability by
enabling scrutiny or criticism of decisions and the decision-making
process and
building the community’s trust in government and its decision-making
(j) whether there is controversy or impropriety around the decision or the
decision-making process.
Agency’s decision letter sets out the following factors in relation to
disclosure being contrary to the public interest:
Factors in favour
of the public interest
Section 3 of the FOI Act provides a right as far as possible to the community
to access information in the possession of the Government
of Victoria and other
bodies. It does this by making as much information available as possible and
creating a general right of access.
It is the intention of the Victorian
Parliament that the Act be interpreted in a way that fosters the greatest
release of information
at the lowest reasonable cost. Section 13 of the Act also
provide applicants with a legally enforceable right to obtain access to
information unless it is exempt information. Both are important factors when
considering the public interest.
In addition, the budgets of government and other agencies are used with
taxpayer funds and as such, comes with an expectation of accountability.
scrutiny and accountability of budgets to the community is one of considerable
public interest. This perhaps even more so with
a health service that plays a
large role in community safety.
These factors weigh in favour of release of the information.
Factors contrary to the public interest
While the factors above in favour of release go to the need to be accountable
to taxpayer funds, there is in our view, considerable
risks in releasing this
information in a preliminary or draft format.
When information is released under the FOI Act, it is point in time. If a
preliminary draft budget was released ‘point in time’,
the community
lose the value of understanding what the final position might be or what might
change from that draft status. This
not only could but would readily lead to
misinformation and likely cause unnecessary anxiety and concern in the Swan Hill
There has already been significant media interest in this space and the
community is already largely alarmed as a result before final
budgets have been
determined, despite the Government making a record investment in health for [a
specified financial year].
If the draft model budget was released, it is our view that this would create
more harm and anxiety for the Swan Hill community about
their health service in
an industry with the least ability to absorb such sentiment. Confidence in the
continuing excellence of our
health service is paramount to a safe community and
the premature release of changing information would unnecessarily and
unreasonably
jeopardise that.
In contrast, the final budget when determined will be something health
services and government alike will be held accountable for
as it is each year.
The use and expenditure of taxpayer funds is one of our most accountable and
important scrutiny processes that
will continue.
On balance, is it our view that more harm would result from the premature
release of the draft model budget than good with respect
of the public
have decided it would not be contrary to the public interest to disclose the
information in the documents for the following reasons:
(a) The public interest weighs in favour of disclosure of the draft budgets, so
that the Agency is transparent about the way it makes
decisions regarding public
expenditure on health.
(b) All agencies are subject to changes in budget, and these changes affect the
services provided to the community. While I note
some of the changes and budget
items would be more sensitive, the Agency has not identified any particular
information where its
sensitivity rises to a level where the public interest
weighs against disclosure.
(c) The part of the budget process is evident from the date and contents of the
documents. Members of the community are capable of
understanding that such
budgets are subject to change.
(d) [At the time of making my decision], I consider any sensitivity regarding
the disclosure of certain line items in the documents
would have been
(e) It is unlikely that disclosure would cause unnecessary anxiety or alarm in
the community.
(f) These are foundational documents which are relied on by hospitals in setting
their yearly budgets.
am therefore satisfied the documents are not exempt under section 30(1).
the documents are not exempt under section 30(1), they are not exempt under
section 35(1)(a).
Section 25 – Deletion of exempt or
irrelevant information
25 requires an agency to grant access to an edited copy of a document where it
is practicable to delete exempt or irrelevant
information and the applicant
agrees to receiving such a copy.
whether it is ‘practicable’ to delete exempt or irrelevant
information requires an agency or Minister to consider:
(a) the effort involved in making the deletions from a resources point of
(b) the effectiveness of those deletions – that is, whether the edited
document still has meaning.
information is information which is clearly outside the scope, or beyond the
terms of the applicant’s request.
Board of Directors meeting notes include one item relevant to the request, being
item 5.2. The remainder of the document is irrelevant
to the request.
have considered the effect of deleting irrelevant information from the
documents. In my view, it is practicable for the Agency to
delete the irrelevant
information, because it would not require substantial time and effort, and the
edited documents would retain
the information before me, I am not satisfied information in the documents is
exempt from release under sections 35(1)(a).
I it is practicable to provide the Applicant with an edited copy of the Board of
Directors meeting notes with irrelevant information
deleted in accordance with
section 25, access is granted in part to that document, with the additional
notes headed ‘for discussion’
to be released in
Timeframe to seek a review of my decision
a party to this review is not satisfied with my decision, they are entitled to
apply to VCAT for it to be
Applicant or the third party may apply to VCAT for a review up to 60 days from
the date they are given this Notice of
Agency may apply to VCAT for a review up to 14 days from the date it is given
this Notice of Decision.
Information
Alternatively, VCAT may be contacted by email at
admin@vcat.vic.gov.au or by
telephone on 1300 018 228.
Agency is required to notify the Information Commissioner in writing as soon as
practicable if a party applies to VCAT for a review
party review rights
I have determined to release documents that contain documents claimed exempt
under section 35(1)(a), if practicable, I am required
to notify those persons of
their right to seek review by VCAT of my decision within 60 days from the date
they are given notice.
this case, I am satisfied it is practicable to notify the relevant third party
of their review rights and confirm they will be
notified of my decision on the
date of decision.
Department of Health will therefore be notified of my
When this decision takes effect
decision does not take effect until the third party’s 60 day review period
expires. If a review application is made to VCAT,
my decision will be subject to
determination.
https://ovic.vic.gov.au/freedom-of-information/foi-guidelines/section-35/.
https://ovic.vic.gov.au/freedom-of-information/foi-guidelines/section-30/.
Graze v Commissioner of State Revenue
[2013] VCAT 869
https://ovic.vic.gov.au/freedom-of-information/foi-guidelines/section-30/#disclosure-would-be-contrary-to-the-public-interest.
Mickelburough v Victoria Police
[2009] VCAT 2786
Herald and Weekly Times Pty Limited v The Office of the Premier
[2012] VCAT 967
Honeywood v Department
of Human Services
[2006] VCAT 2048
RFJ v Victoria Police
FOI Division (Review and Regulation)
[2013] VCAT 1267
Re Hutchinson and Department of Human Services
The Applicant in
section 50(1)(b) and the Agency in section
Sections 50(3F) and
Sections 49P(5),
50(3AB) and 52(3).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (290 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter