URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VLSC/2018/32.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:33:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commissioner Determination (Failed to act in client's best interest) [2018] VLSC 32 (10 July 2018)
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner
A notice made under s.
318 of the Legal Profession Uniform Law (Victoria)
names of the Complainant, Respondent Lawyer and any other persons have been
removed from this document in compliance with
the requirements of the
Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2014
Commissioner Determination (Failed to act in client’s
best interest) [2018] VLSC 32
Date of Determination:
10 July 2018
Pursuant to section 299(1) of the Legal Profession Uniform
(Victoria) (‘the Uniform Law’), I have decided that the
Respondent Lawyer has engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct
the following order –
The Respondent
Lawyer is cautioned pursuant to section 299(1)(a) of the Uniform
STATEMENT OF REASONS
or around August 2013, the complainant engaged the law practice to act on her
behalf in respect of the estate of the late [Name]
(the ‘deceased’).
The Respondent Lawyer had carriage of this matter. The complainant and
Respondent Lawyer are first
8 April 2014, an ‘Application for Payment of Benefit-Death’ was
submitted to CBUS by the law practice on behalf of
the complainant concerning
the deceased (the ‘application’). The application was based on the
fact that the complainant
was the de facto partner of the deceased.
11 November 2014, the law practice received a letter from CBUS advising that,
following consideration of the application, the Trustee
proposed to pay 100% of
the death benefit to the complainant on the ground that she was the de facto
partner of the deceased. The
death benefit was the sum of approximately
$373,345.00.
or around 22 December 2014, the law practice was engaged to act on the
complainant’s behalf with respect to a contract for
the sale of land. On
23 December 2014, the complainant entered into a contract to purchase a property
situated at [address] (the
‘purchase’). The complainant intended to
apply any death benefit payment to the purchase.
2 January 2015, the law practice received a letter from CBUS advising that the
Trustee had approved the payment of the death benefit
to the complainant,
enclosing a cheque for $386,147.64 (the ‘funds’).
5 January 2015, the funds were deposited into the law practice’s trust
12 January 2015, the Respondent Lawyer contacted the complainant by telephone.
The Respondent Lawyer and complainant’s evidence
as to the matters which
were discussed during this telephone call differ substantially. The Respondent
Lawyer’s file note dated
12 January 2015
“call to o/c, money in trust.
Asked has appeal date passed. Yes.
o/c made concerning comments. I told her upset, I have
responsibilities.
Her application fraudulent
- me have to do what she wants
no, will have to tell JT
no defacto, new g/f
Stat decs dad + b/f
he unable to speak, will ring back
Me – serious concerns URGENT.”
13 January 2015, the Respondent Lawyer made multiple attempts, unsuccessfully,
to contact the complainant by telephone. The Respondent
Lawyer’s phone
records indicate she attempted to contact the complainant eleven times over the
course of the day.
14 January 2015, the complainant wrote to [Name 2], principal of the law
practice (‘the principal’), which detailed
her concerns regarding
the Respondent Lawyer’s conduct, stating that she was
unhappy with her recent harassment and threats with regard to the settlement of
the property ([address]) and all
beneficial rights”
. She indicated
that she wished for the matter to be
15 January 2015, the Respondent Lawyer contacted the brother of the deceased
(‘the brother’), by telephone. The Respondent
Lawyer’s phone
records indicate that the call commenced at 7.43pm and lasted for 64 minutes.
The brother and the Respondent
Lawyer discussed the relationship between the
complainant and the deceased. The Respondent Lawyer’s file note dated 15
2015 includes the record:
“No word from
[Complainant]. Looked @ RIP [deceased] facebook for his brother, [Name]. Inboxed
him. Him not overly keen but
gave me mob if I promised not to disclose to
[Complainant]. He knew who I was from funeral.
Asked info on [Deceased] + [Complainant]
She – treating him like shit, broke up, living with parents, many
months new girlfriend – not allowed @ funeral for kids’
16 January 2015, the Respondent Lawyer contacted CBUS by telephone. The
Respondent Lawyer’s phone records indicate that the
call commenced at
4.15pm and lasted for 28 minutes. The Respondent Lawyer’s file note dated
16 January 2015 records:
“Rang CBUS – explained
concerns in a general manner. We have information someone else entitled. Asked
for details. Cannot
give but I could ask person to contact them.
WHAT ABOUT TRUST MONEY?
Said worried if I gave it to her knowing potential fraud.
CBUS – better to return the money, advise their supervisor and they
would investigate.
Told [Principal] everyone says send it back.”
19 January 2015, the Respondent Lawyer contacted the Law Society of New South
Wales (‘Law Society’) by telephone. The
Respondent Lawyer also
or around this same date, the principal held a conference with the complainant.
The principal and the complainant’s evidence
differ as to the date and
substance of this conference.
20 January 2015, the law practice wrote to the complainant advising her of the
“We have recently been provided with information
that someone has objected to you receiving the money from [Deceased]’s
estate. We understand that the objection is on the basis that there may be
someone else with a better claim to the proceeds of the
superannuation fund held
As you are aware, your purchase of [Address] is due to settle within the
next two weeks. We are obliged to return the funds held in
trust to Cbus until
they make a final determination in this matter. Subsequently, you cannot rely on
the proceeds from [Deceased]’s
superannuation fund to settle the
You should ensure that you have made other arrangements for settlement
funds to be available at the time of settlement...
As we are no longer able to comply with your instructions, we have no
other option, but to cease acting for you in the estate matter
and your purchase
The correspondence was signed by a law clerk at the law practice (‘the
law clerk’).
21 January 2015, the complainant signed a letter acknowledging receipt of the
above correspondence.
21 January 2015, the law practice sent a letter to CBUS enclosing a trust cheque
payable to CBUS for $386,147.64. The principal
authorised the trust account
withdrawal by cheque, to return the funds `held in trust on behalf of the
complainant to CBUS. The correspondence
was signed by the law clerk. This
correspondence had been previously, that same day, forwarded by email from the
law clerk to Law
Cover for their approval. By return email, Law Cover replied
stating that their records indicated that the law practice had not held
insurance with Law Cover since June 2004 and therefore they were unable to
provide any advice and recommended that the current insurer
be contacted. The
law clerk forwarded the email from Law Cover to the principal and the Respondent
Lawyer. No further enquiries appear
to have been made by the law clerk, the
principal or the Respondent Lawyer to Law Cover or any other insurer.
28 January 2015, the Respondent Lawyer relevantly stated in email correspondence
to the principal and the law clerk:
“Money has been
returned to CBUS at their direction.
I have yet to contact them with the details of the witnesses regarding
[Complainant]’s fraud. Will do it on Monday.”
3 February 2017, the law practice sent a further letter to CBUS confirming that
the funds had been returned to CBUS and noting
“[Respondent Lawyer] informed you that she had been
recently provided with plausible information by a third party that may raise
issues as to who in fact is the nearest of kin to the Estate of
[Deceased].
[Respondent Lawyer] discussed with you her concerns at some length and
told you that we still held the funds from [Deceased]’s
superannuation in
our trust account.
You advised [Respondent Lawyer] to return the funds, so that Cbus could
make their own enquiries. Accordingly, we have returned those
Also you asked us to provide the details of the person providing the
information to our firm referred to above.
We are unable to do that as we are bound by the solicitor/client
confidentiality rules. However we believe that the people alleging
to have that
information will contact you directly.”
20 November 2015, a complaint to the Victorian Legal Services Commissioner
(‘VLSC’) was transferred from the New South
Wales Office of the
Legal Services Commissioner regarding the conduct of the Respondent Lawyer with
respect to the complainant’s
application and
Issues under investigation
allegations that have been investigated are as follows:
the Respondent Lawyer did not follow instructions and inappropriately insisted
on becoming Trustee to the complainant’s
children’s bank accounts
before she would transfer money, presumably from the firm’s trust account,
into the children’s
the Respondent Lawyer did not act in the complainant’s interests in the
matter and may have placed her alleged personal
animosity towards her above her
duty as a legal representative;
that money paid to the law practice by CBUS on the complainant’s behalf
was returned to CBUS without instructions to
do so with no explanation to the
complainant as to why this occurred; and
the complainant required her file to be returned with all correspondence between
the complainant and CBUS to be made available
Investigation
8 December 2015, the VLSC gave notice to the Respondent Lawyer of its decision
to investigate the issues outlined above.
part of the investigation of the complaint, responses were sought and obtained
from the Respondent Lawyer. On 3 February 2016,
the Respondent Lawyer
acknowledged that, on 15 January 2015, she contacted the brother to discuss her
concerns and submitted that
during the telephone call she told the brother that
he should contact CBUS.
information and documentation was obtained from the complainant, Law Cover, the
law clerk, the Law Institute of Victoria
(‘LIV’), the Law Society
and the principal.
17 June 2016, the VLSC wrote to the Respondent Lawyer setting out what the
investigation indicated to date and inviting any further
written submissions and
material from the Respondent Lawyer before a decision was made.
light of these submissions, the VLSC obtained further information from the
principal, the law clerk, the Law Society and the LIV.
15 November 2017, the VLSC wrote to the complainant:
notice that the VLSC was of the preliminary view that the conduct outlined at
paragraph 20 (a), (c) and (d) above required
no further investigation, as the
VLSC was likely to find that the Respondent Lawyer’s conduct did not
amount to any disciplinary
breach; and
any further written submissions or material that the complainant would like
taken into account before a decision was made.
the same date, the VLSC wrote to the Respondent Lawyer:
notice that the VLSC was of the preliminary view that the Respondent
Lawyer’s conduct of:
the brother regarding the relationship between the complainant and the deceased;
CBUS on 16 January 2018 prior to:
principal’s meeting with the complainant and having the opportunity to
clarify and/or obtain instructions from the complainant
concerning the Funds;
2. the Respondent Lawyer contacting both the Law Society and Law Cover for
advice, may constitute a breach of rule 1.1 of the
Professional Conduct and
Practice Rules 2005
(Victoria) (the ‘PCPR’);
any further written submissions or material that the Respondent Lawyer would
like taken into account before a decision was
submissions as to which of the proposed orders available under section 299(1) of
the Uniform Law would be most appropriate.
20 December 2017, the complainant provided her response by email. The
complainant relevantly outlined that given the Respondent
Lawyer was acting for
her at the time, no explanation was or has been provided to her as to why the
Respondent Lawyer would have
invited him to express his concerns regarding the deceased and her relationship
the death benefit claim. The Respondent Lawyer’s contact with the
brother was contrary to her interests and was effected in
the absence of her
instructions and without her authority or knowledge.
11 February 2018, the Respondent Lawyer provided her response by letter, in
which she relevantly stated:
consultation with the principal on 14 January 2015, she advised the principal
that she could speak to the brother to verify
one way or the other whether the
complainant’s claims that the relationship had ended with the deceased
were correct. While
it is correct that the principal did not specifically tell
her to contact the brother, he was totally supportive of her taking whatever
steps were necessary to ascertain the truth of the situation. He did not
distinguish between her contacting CBUS, the Law Society,
Law Cover or the
brother. Instead, he not only encouraged but openly instructed her to make such
inquiries. This was an error on
the principal’s
brother and his family were known to her and she had interacted previously about
general family issues. Her conversation with
the brother was wide ranging not
just about superannuation. She did not refer to or even mention specifics of the
was following the advice of the principal when he requested she call CBUS
–she did not mention the details of the parties
to the case, but described
the matter in a hypothetical context.
30. On 14 March 2018, the VLSC
gave notice of the proposed determination pursuant to section 299(2) of the
Uniform Law to the complainant
and the Respondent Lawyer and invited written
submissions about the proposed order.
submissions were received from the complainant or the Respondent
Findings of fact on issues under
investigation
the basis of an extensive review of the law practice’s file, the responses
received and the materials provided by the Respondent
Lawyer, the complainant,
the principal, the law clerk, Law Cover, the LIV and Law Society, I find the
following proved:
Respondent Lawyer directly contacted the brother, seeking information about the
relationship;
Respondent Lawyer undertook to the brother not to disclose to the complainant
that she had spoken with him;
was inappropriate for the Respondent Lawyer to contact a family member of the
complainant and seek information regarding the complainant
deceased’s relationship and the death benefit claim;
reason of the above, the Respondent Lawyer engaged in conduct which was not in
the complainant’s best interests and did not
maintain the
complainant’s confidences in the matter.
have accepted that the Respondent Lawyer:
concerns as to whether a misrepresentation had been made to CBUS concerning the
relationship between the complainant and the
the view that the most prudent course available to her was to contact CBUS to
advise them of her concerns in respect of the application;
mentored and supervised by the principal and relevantly sought guidance from the
principal regarding her concerns.
on the basis of the evidence before me and having conducted a thorough
investigation, I find that the remaining concerns,
being those outlined at
paragraphs 20 (a), (c) and (d) above, the part of the concern at paragraph 20
(b) relating to the Respondent
Lawyer placing her alleged personal animosity
towards the complainant above her duty as the complainant’s legal
representative
and the alleged conduct outlined at paragraph 26(a)(ii), not to
be substantiated and that accordingly no further investigation is
regarding these concerns.
Relevant law
PCPR applies to the conduct the subject of the findings of fact as the conduct
occurred prior to 1 July 2015.
1.1 of the PCPR provides that:
“A practitioner must, in the
course of engaging in legal practice, act honestly and fairly in clients’
best interests
and maintain clients’ confidences.”
296 of the Uniform Law prescribes that unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of a lawyer occurring in connection
with the practice of law
that falls short of the standard of competence and diligence that a member of
the public is entitled to
expect of a reasonably competent lawyer.
section 298(b) of the Uniform Law provides that unsatisfactory professional
conduct includes conduct consisting of a contravention
of the Uniform
the purposes of the Saving and Transitional Provisions set out in Schedule 4 to
the Uniform Law (in particular, clauses 2 and
27), a breach of the PCPR is
capable of amounting to unsatisfactory professional conduct for the purposes of
section 298 of the Uniform
Law (on the basis that the same conduct was capable
of amounting to unsatisfactory professional conduct for the purposes of the
contained in the
Legal Profession Act 2004
(Vic), now repealed
and, in particular, sections 4.4.4(a) thereof).
Characterisation of the conduct
reason of the above findings of fact, I find that the Respondent Lawyer has
failed to act honestly and fairly in the complainant’s
best interests and
maintain the complainant’s confidences through contacting the brother and
seeking information regarding
the complainant and the deceased’s
relationship and the death benefit claim.
am therefore satisfied that the respondent lawyer engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct within the meaning of section 296
of the Uniform Law in
that her conduct fell short of the standard of competence and diligence that a
member of the public is entitled
to expect of a reasonably competent
conduct amounts to a contravention of rule 1.1 of the PCPR constituting
unsatisfactory professional conduct pursuant to section
298(a) of the Uniform
Determination & reasons
considered all of the evidence and relevant law, and having made the above
findings on the issues under investigation, I determine
that it is fair and
reasonable in all the circumstances to make the orders detailed above.
this matter I have taken into account the following mitigating factors, the
Respondent Lawyer has:
record of previous substantiated complaints; and
co-operated
with this office during the course of the investigation, providing her answers
in a timely manner and, if unable to provide
the answers as and when required,
has been in contact with this
to section 314 of the Uniform Law, a respondent lawyer or a legal practitioner
associate of a respondent law practice may,
in accordance with the applicable
legislation appeal to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(‘VCAT’), or
seek a review by VCAT, of this determination made under
section 299 of the Uniform Law.
Russell Daily
Delegate of the Victorian Legal Services
Commissioner
10 July 2018
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (299 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter