URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VDBT/1997/49.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:29:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gunther v HGF & ors [1997] VDBT 49 (22 August 1997)
THE DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(DOMESTIC BUILDING CONTRACTS AND TRIBUNAL ACT 1995)
- DETERMINATION -
E.J. GUNTHER
HOUSING GUARANTEE FUND LTD.
(A.C.N. 006 258 233)
MS JANICE GORDON GLASSFORD
E.J. GUNTHER
HOUSING GUARANTEE FUND LTD.
(A.C.N. 006 258 233)
ST GEORGES BANK LTD
PRESIDING MEMBER:
HIS HONOUR JUDGE DAVEY
FORM OF APPLICATION:
APPEARANCES:
Mr Roberts of Counsel on behalf of E.J. Gunther
Mr Cyngler of Counsel on behalf of CSR Ltd
DATE(S) OF HEARING:
18 August 1997
DATE OF DETERMINATION:
22 August 1997
I MAKE THE FOLLOWING INTERIM DETERMINATION:
1. The application by CSR Ltd Third Respondent for the dismissal of the
proceedings on the grounds of lack of jurisdiction is dismissed.
2. The Applicant’s costs of this interim determination are
JUDGE DAVEY
CHAIRPERSON
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
E.J. GUNTHER
HOUSING GUARANTEE FUND LTD.
(A.C.N. 006 258 233)
MS JANICE GORDON GLASSFORD
E.J. GUNTHER
HOUSING GUARANTEE FUND LTD.
(A.C.N. 006 258 233)
ST GEORGES BANK LTD
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
The question at issue in this hearing is whether or not the Tribunal has
("the builder")
against CSR Ltd ("CSR") who was the Third Respondent in each of these
proceedings. The claims concern two properties
which had been built as a
duplex. Proceeding A663/96 concerns a property owned by Mr Gordon Glassford at
4A Keys Avenue, Brighton
East and proceeding A247/97 concerns a property owned
by St Georges Bank Ltd at 4 Keys Avenue, Brighton East. The properties
new properties having recently been built by the Applicant using hebel
bricks a product manufactured by CSR.
On 7 May 1997 the Tribunal directed that CSR be joined as an additional party
in both proceedings pursuant to s56 of the Act. Dr
Cremean, the presiding
member in the course of his reasons for ordering the joinder, observed that the
joinder could have just have
easily been ordered under s63. In any event it was
conceded by Mr Cyngler of Counsel who appeared for CSR that it was now too late
for that order to be appealed from so that the issue for me to decide has to be
decided on the basis that the joinder was a proper
"At any time the Tribunal may order that a sub-contractor, insurer, supplier
or another person be joined as a party to any domestic
building dispute before
S54 in defining a domestic building dispute identifies disputes between
specified classes of persons in relation to "a domestic building
contract or the
carrying out of domestic building work". Those classes of persons consist of
the following, the builder, owner,
architect, building practitioner,
sub-contractor and insurer. The witness statements make it clear that CSR was
the supplier of
hebel bricks to the bricklaying sub-contractor. Accordingly it
follows that CSR could not have been joined initially in the proceeding
could only be joined by order of the Tribunal under either s56 or s63.
On 24 July 1997 both of these proceedings were referred to mediation. Each
of the proceedings between the builder and the original
parties that is the
owners and HGFL were settled. Each of the terms of settlement were in similar
terms and provided:-
"the proceedings are as between those parties (Gunther, Glassford, St Georges
Bank Ltd and HGFL) withdrawn with a right of reinstatement."
The terms further provided:-
"Nothing in these terms of settlement prejudice Gunther’s right to
pursue his claim against CSR in the proceeding."
The consequence of the above is that all that is left of the proceedings is
the dispute between the Applicant and CSR in relation
to the quality of the
bricks supplied by CSR. Mr Cyngler has submitted that the proceeding no longer
bears the character of a domestic
building dispute although he did concede it
may still bear the character of a building dispute. He noted that there was not
a contract between the builder and CSR. It is plain that the builder could
not now commence a claim against CSR as such a claim
could not be characterized
as a domestic building dispute. According to his submission it follows
therefore that the proceedings
should now both be dismissed on the basis that
the Tribunal no longer has jurisdiction or alternatively in the exercise of the
discretion it should be dismissed under s97 on the basis that
the dispute as it now stands should more appropriately be dealt with
As Mr Roberts of Counsel who appeared for the builder noted although it is
clear that the Tribunal was established to hear domestic
building disputes as
defined, s52(a) defines the types of disputes that may be heard and determined
by the Tribunal in an inclusive
form as follows:-
"The functions of the Tribunal are
(a) to hear and determine matters referred to it under this Act
(i) domestic building disputes; and...."
He also referred to s4(b) of the Act which provides as follows:-
"The objects of this Act are-
(b) to enable disputes involving domestic building work to be resolved as
quickly and efficiently and as cheaply as is possible having
regard to the needs
of fairness."
Accordingly it is his submission that consistent with the legislative intent
and the expressed objects of the Act the fact that the
other parties have
settled their part of the dispute does not have the effect of depriving the
Tribunal of jurisdiction once it is
properly seized of the matter.
The question raised not only involves an interpretation of the sections which
expressly define the jurisdiction of the Tribunal but
also require consideration
of the policy behind the legislation as revealed by the Act and also by the
second reading speech of the
Attorney General which was referred to by Mr
In my opinion both the second reading speech and the legislation reveal a
clear intent to establish an informal judicial Tribunal
with wide powers to
resolve domestic building disputes quickly, efficiently and as cheaply as
possible. That may necessarily involve
the ability of the Tribunal to resolve
closely related ancillary disputes which when considered independently may not
necessarily
bear the character of a domestic building dispute. The Minister
refers in two parts of the second reading speech to the Government’s
intent that the Tribunal was to be established as a single point for the
resolution of Domestic Building Disputes. At one part of
the speech she states
as follows:-
"The Tribunal it to be established as a single point for the resolution of
all domestic building disputes and the courts will be required
to refer matters
brought before them to the Tribunal for consideration unless the parties to the
dispute explicitly request that
the matter be dealt with by the courts."
Later in her speech she says as follows:-
"The public policy rationale for this proposal is the intention to provide a
single, inexpensive, time efficient expert forum for
the resolution of all
domestic building disputes....therefore, a party to the dispute should be able
to have the option of taking
advantages of the benefits offered by the Tribunal
if a matter is brought before the courts for resolution."
When one has regard for the fact that both s56 and s63 do not purport to
confine the category of persons who fall within the expressions
"another person"
or "a person who may be affected" then it is plain that the legislature intended
to give the Tribunal a wide discretion
to join other parties where it is
established that there is at least an arguable case against them directly
connected with the issues
arising out of the core domestic building dispute. Mr
Cyngler has submitted having regard to the observations to the Court of Appeal
Zumpano & Ors v Montagnese & Or
(1996) CONV.54-554 that I
should take the view that CSR owed no duty of care to the builder in the
circumstances. That is in the
absence of a contractual relationship CSR as the
supplier of the bricks wasn’t in a sufficiently proximate relationship
the builder so as to impose a duty of care on CSR. That question may not
be a simple one but it is sufficient for me to say that
in my opinion there is a
sufficiently arguable case against CSR in the circumstances as disclosed in the
witness statements. In
any event I am not sure in the present circumstances
that that argument is relevant as it would appear to have much greater
significance
for the consideration of the application for joinder rather than
the issue of jurisdiction which is before me.
In my opinion provided the joinder of another party is a proper joinder then
the fact that the domestic building dispute as between
the builder, owner and
insurer settles does not mean that the Tribunal is therefore deprived of
against CSR. To take a narrow view
would in my view result in significant additional costs and inconvenience to the
parties and
as a matter of sensible policy should be avoided if at all possible.
The effect of a proper joinder is to join the issues arising between the
applicant and the new party with the core domestic building
dispute thus all the
matters are then properly to be considered as part of the domestic building
dispute. The mere fact that part
of the proceeding is settled does not in my
view change the character of the residue of the unresolved issues. They remain
building dispute. Alternatively to the above because s52 is an
inclusive definition even if it is correct to say that the residual
not longer a domestic building dispute there is nothing to prevent the Tribunal
from deciding those issues as part of
its inclusive jurisdiction.
I am strengthened in my view of this matter by reference to the approach
taken by the Federal Court in respect to its accrued jurisdiction.
In the case
Dorotea P/L v Van Cleve P/L
the Full Court of the Federal
Court had to consider whether or not the court lost its jurisdiction over claims
in the accrued jurisdiction
merely because an Applicant fails on the issue which
attracted Federal jurisdiction. At page 632 the court in a joint judgment said
"Upon the institution of the proceedings in the court, the court acquired
with, the whole of the matter being the controversy between the parties:
Bargal P/L v Force
[1983] HCA 36
(1983) 49 ALR 193.
The court does not lose
time limitation may mean
that the applicant will fail on the issue which
attracted Federal jurisdiction...Nor does there seem any particular reason an
should be permitted to be released from such an undertaken given to
avoid a multiplicity of proceedings merely because when a defence
is served it
appears that a plea has been made which, if persisted in, may defeat the claim
which attracted the courts jurisdiction."
In a later case of
MacIntosh v National Bank Ltd
80 ALR 47 Gummow J
was required to consider a similar question and at page 50 of the judgment said
as follows:-
"Once Federal jurisdiction has been attracted it will not be lost because the
claim or assertion which attracted it has not or cannot
be substantiated or has
been displaced by some countervailing claim or assertion..."
In my view these authorities are consistent with the view I have taken in
this matter and I am satisfied that the Tribunal has jurisdiction
to hear the
claim between the builder and CSR notwithstanding the fact that the case has
between the builder and the other parties
may be either discontinued or struck
out. For the above reasons CSR’s application is dismissed and I reserve
the question
of costs for the presiding member at the final hearing.
JUDGE DAVEY
CHAIRPERSON
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
g:\detch96\0663A-96.doc
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (53.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter