URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2021/38.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Farah Ventures Pty Ltd at Beand Cafe San Remo premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2021] VCGLR 38 (15 December 2021)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application under
section 153
Liquor Control
Reform Act 1998
by Farah Ventures Pty Ltd for an internal review of a
decision to refuse an application for the grant of a restaurant and cafe licence
and a decision to refuse an application for the grant of a renewable limited
licence for the premises known as BEANd, located at
Shop 4-6, 157 Marine Parade,
Commission:
Ms Deirdre O’Donnell, Deputy Chair
Mr Andrew Scott, Commissioner
Mr Des Powell AM, Commissioner
Appearances:
Mr Martin Towey, Counsel for the Applicant
Sergeant Jay Rattigan on behalf of Victoria Police
Ms Caitlin McAlister, Counsel Assisting the Commission
Date of Hearing 20 September 2021
Date of Decision: 15 December 2021
Date of Reasons: 15 December 2021
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the Delegate and, in substitution, grant a restaurant and cafe licence
renewable limited licence subject to the conditions set out in Appendix A and
Deirdre O’Donnell
Deputy Chair
Preliminary issue
1. These reasons for decision include significant personal information.
Accordingly, the Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation (
) considers it appropriate that these reasons are not to be
2. BEANd is a café serving coffee, food and drinks in San Remo near
Philip Island (
the Premises
3. On 20 October 2020, the Commission
received an application by Farah
Ventures Pty Ltd (
the Applicant
) for the grant of a restaurant and cafe
the Restaurant and Cafe Licence Application
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for the Premises, located
at Shop 4-6, 157 Marine Parade, San Remo. On 17 November 2020, the Commission
subsequently received an
application by the Applicant for the grant of a
renewable limited licence for the Premises under section 14 (
the Renewable
Limited Licence Application
4. The Applicant sought a restaurant and cafe licence in order to supply
liquor on the Premises for consumption on the Premises with
meals during the
following trading hours:
Good Friday and ANZAC Day Between 12 noon and 11pm
Sunday Between 10am and 11pm
On any other day Between 7am and 11pm
5. The Applicant also sought a renewable limited licence in order to supply
liquor as part of a home delivery meal service as well
as with any takeaway meal
purchased by a customer attending at the Premises, or where the customer has
finished dining at the premises
on the same day.
6. The quantity of liquor proposed to be supplied, if the Renewable Limited
Licence Application was granted, would be limited to:
One bottle of wine; or
Six containers of beer or cider; or
Six containers of pre-mixed drinks.
7. The proposed hours during which liquor would be supplied or delivered
under the Renewable Limited Licence Application, if granted,
Good Friday and Christmas Day Between 9am and 11pm
Sunday Between 10am and 11pm
ANZAC Day Between 12noon and 11pm
On any other day Between 9am and 11pm
8. The Premises consist of three shops that together include:
(a) a footpath seating area;
(b) a terrace dining area;
(c) an internal front dining area;
(d) a café servery area;
(e) a pizza servery;
(f) a commercial café kitchen;
(g) a commercial pizza kitchen;
(h) a café dining area;
(i) a pizzeria dining area; and
(j) toilets.
9. With the Applicant’s intention of seeking liquor licences for the
Premises, the Applicant’s sole director, Mr Fouad
Farah completed
responsible service of alcohol (
) training in October
His youngest son, Mr Riad
Farah, completed RSA training in January 2021.
10. In submissions dated 14 January 2021, Mr Peter Aldred, liquor consultant,
on behalf of the Applicant stated that the Applicant
was first registered on 18
September 2008 with three directors appointed namely, Fouad, Riad and
Fouad’s oldest son, Mr Salim
Farah. He further stated that Salim and Riad
then resigned as directors. Whenever Fouad, as sole remaining director, would be
from the Premises, Riad would be in charge, and the Applicant proposes to
have Riad appointed as the nominee for the company, should
the Commission grant
the proposed licences.
Applicant further proposes to have Salim continue to work at the Premises but
not in a managerial position, rather as an employee
who works for the Applicant,
and reports to Fouad and Riad, the two of them being the managers of the
Applicant’s business.
11. The Restaurant and Cafe Licence Application and the Renewable Limited
Licence Application included:
(a) a declaration of associates, dated 5 October 2020, in which Fouad, Mrs
Georgetta Farah (Fouad’s wife), Riad and Salim were
declared as associates
by Fouad; and
(b) an application for the approval of Riad as a nominee, dated 18 January
12. In accordance with section 33(1), a delegate of the Commission (
) provided a copy of the Restaurant and Cafe Licence Application to
the Chief Commissioner of Police on 28 October 2020. The Chief
Commissioner of
Police and the licensing inspector
Victoria Police
) informed the Delegate on 13 November 2020
that they objected to the Restaurant and Cafe Licence Application on the ground
Applicant is not a suitable person to hold the licence “due to
the involvement of director, Salim Farah, who is unsuitable
due to his extensive
criminal history for dishonesty related offences”.
13. On 20 November 2020, the Delegate sent Victoria Police the ASIC extract
showing that Salim is not a director of the Applicant
and noting that he had
been declared as an associate by the sole director, Fouad.
14. On 20 November 2020, the Delegate received an email from Victoria Police
providing an amended objection to the Restaurant and
Cafe Licence Application to
reflect the fact that Salim is not a director of the Applicant, but otherwise
maintaining the ground
for its objection.
15. In accordance with section 33(1), the Delegate provided a copy of the
Renewable Limited Licence Application to Victoria Police
on 17 November 2020.
Victoria Police informed the Delegate on 2 December 2020 that they objected to
the Renewable Limited Licence
Application on the ground that the Applicant is
not a suitable person to hold the licence “due to its involvement with an
associate namely, Salim Farah, who has an extensive criminal history
for dishonesty related offences and a failure to comply with
16. The objections by Victoria Police to the Restaurant and Cafe Licence
Application and the Renewable Limited Licence Application
were forwarded by the
Delegate to the Applicant’s liquor consultant, Mr Aldred.
17. On 14 January 2021, the Delegate received Mr Aldred’s response to
the objections by Victoria Police to the Restaurant and
Cafe Licence Application
and the Renewable Limited Licence Application, in which he stated on behalf of
the Applicant that although
Salim has been declared by Fouad as an associate of
the company, Salim is an employee of the business and has a negligible direct
influence. In contrast, Fouad is the sole director of the company, and Riad is
the manager and also the proposed nominee as defined
under the LCR Act. While
Salim has previously played a management role from time to time, this has now
18. On 16 February 2021, Victoria Police confirmed that they maintained their
objections to the Restaurant and Cafe Licence Application
and the Renewable
Limited Licence Application. Victoria Police stated:
(a) Salim is “a shareholder” of the Applicant and resides at the
same address as the sole director, Fouad and the proposed
nominee, Riad;
(b) Salim has an extensive criminal history relating to dishonesty offences and
traffic offences;
(c) Salim has shown a habitual tendency to utilise Riad’s details when he
is caught offending: the Applicant has no adequate
controls to prevent Salim
assuming the identity of Riad for the purposes of carrying out controlling
duties in relation to any liquor
licence granted;
(d) Salim does as he pleases with little regard for others or any laws or
regulations;
(e) Salim’s involvement in the Applicant’s business and his presence
on the Premises will give him unfettered access
to credit card information of
customers; and
(f) Victoria Police would maintain their objection to each application unless
the following condition is endorsed on the proposed
Salim Farah is not to have any involvement directly or indirectly in the
business of the licensee and is not allowed to be physically
present on the
licensed premises during trading hours.
19. On 14 March 2021, the Delegate received Mr Aldred’s response to the
objections by Victoria Police to the Restaurant and
Cafe Licence Application and
the Renewable Limited Licence Application. Mr Aldred stated on behalf of the
(a) the assertion by Victoria Police that Salim is a shareholder of the
Applicant is incorrect. The ASIC extract shows that the shareholders
Applicant are Fouad, Riad and Georgetta; and
(b) at the time of making the Restaurant and Cafe Licence Application and the
Renewable Limited Licence Application, Salim was declared
to be an associate
given his previous managerial role but he will now only be an employee with no
managerial role. Rather, Riad,
as proposed nominee of the Applicant, will manage
the business at the Premises on behalf of the Applicant when Fouad is
20. In accordance with section 33(2), the Commission served a copy of the
Restaurant and Cafe Licence Application on the Council on
28 October 2020. The
Council did not respond.
21. In accordance with section 33(3), a copy of the Renewable Limited Licence
Application was served on the Council on 17 November
2020. The Council informed
the Commission that it did not object to the grant of the proposed licence on 2
December 2020.
22. On 6 July 2021, the Delegate refused the Restaurant and Cafe Licence
Application and the Renewable Limited Licence Application
on the basis that she
was not satisfied that the Applicant was a suitable person to hold the proposed
the Original Decision
(a) the Applicant’s purported association with Salim; and
(b) Salim not being a suitable person to be an associate of the holder of a
liquor licence given his criminal history, including
serving a term of
imprisonment in the last three years.
23. In her written reasons, the Delegate stated that, in spite of the
Applicant submitting that Salim will no longer be in a managerial
remained unclear to her whether Salim would still exert power and influence over
the business at the Premises. She also
doubted the Applicant’s proposed
undertaking that Salim would be limited to certain duties on the Premises as an
employee (not
a manager) on the basis that she considered his criminal record
demonstrated he was a person that does as he pleases with a blatant
for the law.
Application for Internal Review
24. On 22 July 2021, the Applicant made an application for internal review of
the Original Decision (
the Review Application
), and Victoria Police
confirmed that they maintained their objections to the Restaurant and Cafe
Licence Application and the Renewable
Limited Licence Application on the ground
that the Applicant is not a suitable person to hold the proposed licences.
25. On 14 September 2021, Mr Martin Towey, Legal Counsel on behalf of the
Applicant, submitted:
(a) the Commission has a residual discretion pursuant to sections 44 and 47 to
decide whether or not to refuse to grant an application
in circumstances where a
person is identified as unsuitable;
(b) the Original Decision failed to recognise the level of supervision proposed
over Salim by the Applicant, Fouad and Riad; and
(c) the level of supervision proposed over Salim will negate a finding that he
is an associate as defined in the LCR Act. Rather,
he is an employee in the
Applicant’s business and enjoys no relevant powers.
26. On 14 September 2021, Victoria Police lodged additional material in
respect to Salim’s criminal history. Specifically, Victoria
provided a summary of offending detected against Salim on 4 April 2018 involving
handling stolen goods, possessing counterfeit
money and identification
information.
27. Between 15 to 17 September 2021, Mr Towey lodged further documents in
support of the Review Application namely:
(a) a letter from Father George Nasr of the Orthodox Church in Thornbury
regarding Fouad;
(b) a character reference from Mr Nazih Seoud of the Orthodox Church in
Thornbury regarding Fouad and his family;
(c) an unsigned statement of Fouad; and
(d) an unsigned statement of Riad.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review
28. Division 2 of Part 9 governs internal review applications. Under section
152, the decision made by the Delegate in the Original
Decision is a reviewable
decision and the Applicant is an eligible person to apply for a review of that
decision. The Review Application
was made pursuant to section 153.
29. Pursuant to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with
respect to the Review Application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the reviewable decision; or
(b) sets aside the reviewable decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.
30. In effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original
decision maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Restaurant and
Cafe Licence Application and the Renewable Limited Licence Application. In this
case, the Commission must decide
whether to:
(a) grant the applications for the restaurant and cafe licence and the renewable
limited licence, and if so, whether to do so subject
conditions;
(b) refuse to grant the
applications.
Determination of a contested application
31. Where an application is a contested
application, pursuant to section 47(1):
Subject to Division 3, the Commission must, after the period for making an
objection under Division 5 has expired, including any extension
of time granted
for making an objection, grant or refuse a contested application.
32. Section 47(2) provides that the Commission
may refuse to grant a contested application on any of grounds set out in section
and section 44(3) applies accordingly.
33. Section 44(2)(a) provides the following ground for refusal –
in the case of a grant or transfer of a licence or BYO permit, that the
applicant or proposed transferee is not a suitable person
to hold or carry on
business under the licence or BYO permit.
34. Section 44(3) states that:
Without limiting the reasons why a person is not a suitable person to
hold, or carry on business under, a licence... a person is not
a suitable person
to hold, or carry on business under, a licence ... if the person or, if the
person is a body corporate, any
of the person has, within the preceding 3 years—
(a) been convicted, whether in Victoria or elsewhere, of an offence of
without a licence or of supplying adulterated
or of an offence against any law relating to customs or excise; or
(b) engaged in activities involving the trading in or marketing of
in a manner contrary to the provisions of this Act.
35. The Commission also considers it appropriate
to have regard to the suitability of persons who are associates of the
Section 3AC provides a definition of associates being:
(1) For the purposes of this Act, an
of a person (the
first person
(a) a person who—
(i) holds or will hold any relevant financial interest, or is or will be
entitled to exercise any relevant power (whether in right
of the person or on
behalf of any other person) in any business of the first person involving the
sale of liquor; and
(ii) by virtue of that interest or power, is able or will be able to exercise
a significant influence over or with respect to the
management or operation of
that business; or
(b) a person who is or will be a director,
whether in right of the person or on
behalf of any other person, of any business of the first person involving the
sale of liquor;
(c) if the first person is a natural person, a person who is a relative of
the first person, other than a relative—
(i) who is not, and has never been, involved in any business of the first
person involving the sale of liquor; or
(ii) who will not be involved in the business the first person proposes to
conduct as a licensee or permittee.
this section—
, in relation to a person, means—
(a) the spouse or domestic partner of the person; or
(b) a parent, son, daughter, brother or sister of the person; or
(c) a parent, son, daughter, brother or sister of the spouse or domestic
partner of the person;
relevant financial
, in relation to a business involving the sale of liquor,
(a) any share in the capital of the business; or
(b) any entitlement to receive any income derived from the business;
(c) any entitlement to receive any payment as a result of money
relevant power
means any power,
whether exercisable by voting or otherwise and whether exercisable alone or in
association with others—
(a) to participate in any directorial, managerial, or executive decision;
(b) to elect or appoint any person as a
36. Further, section 3 provides a definition of
“director”, being:
(a) any person occupying or acting in the position of director of the body
corporate, by whatever name called and whether or not
validly appointed to
occupy or duly authorised to act in the position; and
(b) any person in accordance with whose directions or instructions the
directors of the body corporate are accustomed to act.
37. Section 47(3) provides that before granting or refusing a contested
application under subsection (1), the Commission may:
(a) ...have regard to any matter the Commission
considers relevant; and
(b) make any enquiries the Commission considers appropriate but is not
required to give any person an opportunity to be heard concerning
application.
Exercising the internal review power
38. Section 9 of the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation Act 2011
) requires the Commission, in
exercising its internal review function, to have regard to the objects of the
LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines issued by the Minister under section
5 of the VCGLR
The objects of the LCR Act are set out at section 4(1) and provide that:
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes
to, and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products;
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and
reducing risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
39. Section 4(2) of
the LCR Act further provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion,
must be exercised and
performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the
misuse and abuse of
40. In exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker
(b) may consider further information or
41. The Commission considers that while the
grounds of refusal outlined in section 44(2) of the LCR Act are relevant
considerations,
the determination of a contested application is ultimately to be
made pursuant to section 47(1) and section 157(1) at the discretion
Commission, with reference to the objects of the LCR Act.
42. Section 44(3)(b) of the LCR Act states:
(3) Without limiting the reasons why a person is not a suitable person to
hold, or carry on business under, a licence or BYO permit,
a person is not a
suitable person to hold, or carry on business under, a licence or BYO permit if
the person or, if the person is
a body corporate, any director of the person
has, within the preceding 3 years—
(b) engaged in activities involving the trading in or marketing of liquor
in a manner contrary to the provisions of this Act.
43. Under section 49 of the LCR Act, the Commission may impose any condition
it thinks fit on the grant of an application.
Conduct of an inquiry
44. Section 34 of the VCGLR Act provides that, subject to that Act, gambling
legislation or liquor legislation, the Commission may
conduct an inquiry in any
manner it considers appropriate.
45. During the conduct of an inquiry, section 25(3) of the VCGLR Act provides
that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence,
however must comply
with the rules of natural justice.
Other sections of the LCR Act relevant to this matter
Restaurant and cafe licences
46. Pursuant to section 9A(1), a restaurant and cafe licence authorises the
Applicant to supply liquor on the licensed premises for
consumption on the
licensed premises, where the predominant activity carried out at all times on
the premises is the preparation
and serving of meals.
47. Section 9A(3)(a) further provides that a restaurant and cafe licence is
subject to the condition that “tables and chairs
must be placed in
position on the licensed premises so as to be available for at least 75% of the
patrons attending at any one time”.
Limited licences
48. A limited licence may be a temporary limited licence or a renewable
limited licence. Pursuant to section 14(1B), a renewable limited
authorises the licensee to supply liquor at the times determined by the
Commission and specified on the licence, and it may
be renewed in accordance
with the LCR Act. A limited licence may further be subject to any conditions
determined by the Commission
and specified on the licence.
49. Section 26 provides that the Commission may grant a limited licence only
if it is satisfied that the scale and scope of the supply
of liquor the subject
of the licence is limited in nature (
Scale and Scope Requirement
Material before the Commission
50. The Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the materials
received by the Delegate. The Commission also received
and considered the
following materials:
(a) the Original Decision and Reasons of the Delegate, dated 6 July 2021;
(b) the Review Application, received 22 July 2021;
(c) the Applicant’s submissions, dated 14 September 2021;
(d) the additional information from Victoria Police, lodged 14 September
(e) the letter from Father George Nasr of the Orthodox Church in Thornbury
regarding Fouad;
(f) the character reference from Mr Nazih Seoud of the Orthodox Church in
Thornbury regarding Fouad and his family;
(g) the unsigned statement of Fouad, dated 14 September 2021;
(h) the unsigned statement of Riad, dated 14 September 2021; and
(i) the email communication from Victoria Police in respect to Salim being an
associate of the Applicant, dated 16 September
51. A hearing was held in relation to the Review Application on 20 September
the Hearing
). The Review Application was heard by videoconference
due to the COVID-19 pandemic restrictions on indoor gatherings.
52. Fouad and Riad gave oral evidence in support of the Review
Application.
53. Mr Towey represented the Applicant and made submissions.
54. Sergeant Jay Rattigan appeared on behalf of Victoria Police.
Additional materials
55. After the Hearing, Mr Towey lodged with the Commission on 23 September
(a) revised conditions as proposed by the Applicant for a renewable limited
licence and additional conditions proposed by the Applicant
for a restaurant and
cafe licence;
(b) amenity based submissions including a published planning property report
from the Department of Environment Land Water and Planning,
dated 5 October
2020, and a bundle of photographs of the Premises and the surrounding area;
(c) an Operational and Management Statement for the Premises;
(d) an RSA certificate for Riad, dated 20 January
(e) an example of comparative conditions as specified in liquor licence
#31821116; and
(f) signed statements of Fouad and
56. In relation to the Renewable Limited Licence Application, the Applicant
proposed to limit the intended choice of liquor to no
more than ten lines of
liquor taken from
Three lines of wine;
Four lines of beer/cider; and
Three lines of pre-mixed
57. The Applicant also proposed to reduce the hours during which liquor could
be supplied or delivered under a renewable limited licence,
if granted, to:
12 noon to 11pm On any day.
58. In relation to the Restaurant and Cafe Licence Application, the Applicant
submitted that it would accept the following additional
conditions being imposed
on a licence, if it were granted by the Commission:
The person who has been the subject of an objection from Victoria Police
and known to the Commission, and the Licensee, is not permitted
to be involved
in the management or control of the business of the supply of liquor and be on
the premises, other than performing
their regular duties.
The Licensee shall ensure that it always operates the licence in
accordance with the most recent operational management statement
endorsed by the
Commission and ensure that this document is retained on the licensed premises
for inspection by an authorised member
of Victoria Police or the Commission. The
Licensee must advise the Commission in writing of any change to the operational
Reasons for decision on review
Issues for determination on review
59. In deciding whether to exercise its discretion to affirm, vary or set
aside the Original Decision and in turn grant or refuse
the Restaurant and Cafe
Licence Application and the Renewable Limited Licence Application that are the
subject of the Review Application,
the key issue to be determined by the
Commission is whether the Applicant is a suitable person to hold or carry on
business under
the proposed licences.
60. The Commission considers the following matters to be relevant in
determining the suitability of the Applicant:
(a) whether Salim is still an associate of the Applicant; and
(b) the suitability of the Applicant’s sole director, Fouad, and the
Applicant’s proposed nominee, Riad.
61. For the Restaurant and Cafe Licence Application, the Commission must
consider whether the predominant activity that is to be carried
Premises at all times is the preparation and serving of meals to be consumed on
the Premises (section 9A(1)(a)) and whether
there are sufficient tables and
chairs in the Premises, in compliance with the condition in section
62. For the Renewable Limited Licence Application, the Commission must
consider whether the nature of the supply of liquor as proposed
by the Applicant
for a renewable limited licence meets the Scale and Scope Requirement.
63. Finally, in exercising its discretion to grant or refuse the Restaurant
and Cafe Licence Application and the Renewable Limited
Licence Application that
are the subject of the Review Application, the Commission must have regard to
the objects of the LCR Act,
with particular regard to the object of harm
minimisation and the matters listed in section 44(2)(b)(i), (ii) and (iv).
Is Salim an associate of the Applicant?
64. As noted above, Victoria Police submit that the
Applicant is not a suitable person to hold a licence because of its association
with Salim.
65. For the Restaurant and Cafe Licence Application and the Renewable Limited
Licence Application, Fouad, on behalf of the Applicant,
had declared Salim as an
associate. However, for the Review Application, both Fouad and Riad submitted
that Salim was not an associate
of the Applicant.
66. As stated in paragraph 35 above, section 3AC defines who is an associate
of a person.
67. In written submissions, Victoria Police stated that Salim was an
associate by virtue of:
(a) Salim being a 25 percent shareholder of the Applicant;
(b) Salim being employed in a position of authority at the business; and
(c) Fouad having declared Salim as an associate of the Applicant in the Original
Application on the basis of his managerial position
68. In response, the Applicant advised the Commission (in
(a) Fouad and Riad have been the primary managers of the business at the
Premises since it started. They manage all decision-making
on behalf of the
(b) even though Salim was initially in a managerial role in the kitchen of the
Premises, unlike Riad and Fouad he was never a primary
manager of the
Applicant’s business at the
(c) Fouad and Riad established the business at the Premises, and Salim has not
invested money into this
(d) Salim lives in a rental apartment with Riad away from the Applicant’s
place of business at the Premises. The brothers’
parents, Fouad and
Georgetta, live elsewhere;
(e) Salim did not assist Fouad in respect to the actual making of, and paying
for, the Restaurant and Cafe Licence Application and
the Renewable Limited
Licence Application;
(f) Salim will not be serving liquor or taking orders for liquor should the
Commission grant the Review
Application;
(g) the Applicant has its own separate bank account. Salim is not a signatory to
that account, nor does he need to
(h) the assertions made by Victoria Police that Salim is a director and/or a
shareholder of the Applicant are incorrect. The Applicant’s
sole director
is Fouad and the Applicant’s shareholders are Fouad, Riad and
(i) Salim will continue working at the Premises as no more than an employee who
reports directly to Fouad and Riad. The terms and
conditions of his employment
will be brought to the attention of all staff, and are reflected in the
Operational and Management Statement
as was lodged by Mr Towey on 23 September
69. At the Hearing, Victoria Police made no specific submissions about
whether or not Salim was an associate within the meaning of
the definition under
section 3AC(1). Victoria Police also made no further submissions in connection
with ownership of shares in the
Applicant’s business.
70. In considering section 3AC(1)(a) regarding the Applicant’s business
at the Premises, and having regard to all information
and evidence, the
Commission finds that Salim neither holds a relevant financial interest nor is
able to exercise a relevant power
in the business of the Applicant involving the
proposed sale of liquor on the
To this end, the
Commission is not satisfied that Salim is an associate of the Applicant under
section 3AC(1)(a).
71. Secondly, for clarity, the Commission also considers that Salim is not an
associate under section 3AC(1)(b) on the basis that
he does not fall within the
definition of ‘director’ for the purposes of the LCR Act. As stated
in paragraph 35 above,
section 3 provides a definition of
‘director’. The Commission understands that Fouad and Riad will
manage the proposed
business of the sale of liquor on the Premises under the
proposed licences as a sole director and a nominee respectively. The Commission
further understands that Salim will have no management powers, in spite of his
employment at the Premises.
72. Thirdly, in determining whether Salim is an associate under section
3AC(1)(c), the Commission notes that the Applicant is a registered
company (as
opposed to a natural person), and therefore is not satisfied that it could find
Salim to be an associate for the purposes
of section 3AC(1)(c).
73. In summary, the Commission overall finds that Salim is not an associate
of the Applicant as defined under section 3AC(1).
Suitability of the Applicant
74. As noted above, Victoria Police submit that the
Applicant is not a suitable person to hold the proposed licences due to the
Applicant’s
association with Salim who has a criminal history relating to
dishonesty offences and traffic offences.
75. While the Commission has found Salim not to be an associate of the
Applicant as defined under section 3AC(1) for the reasons discussed
Commission must still proceed to determine whether the Applicant is unsuitable
to hold the proposed licences.
76. Of relevance to this issue for consideration is that Victoria Police
raised no objection with the personal suitability of Fouad
or Riad or their own
involvement with the Applicant. Further, Victoria Police made it clear at the
Hearing that their enquiries showed
the Applicant had consistently conducted
reputable family businesses in the hospitality industry.
77. However, Victoria Police did object to the Applicant itself, given Fouad
and Riad’s relationship with Salim whom Victoria
Police submit is
unsuitable to be involved in the operation of licensed premises. At the Hearing,
Victoria Police submitted that
Salim would have power and significant influence
over the running of the Applicant’s
On this basis,
Victoria Police seem to submit that the Applicant is an unsuitable person to
hold a licence and the Commission should
refuse the Application under section
78. The Commission recognises the concerns raised by Victoria Police in
connection with Salim’s criminal history. In itself,
such a criminal
history is a serious matter. However, the Commission would be concerned if by
default it were required to assume
that in all circumstances a father and
brother are not able to act independently of their son and brother, and does not
that this is intended under the LCR Act for the reasons outlined in
paragraphs 70 and 71 above. Rather, it is necessary for the Commission
consider each application on its merits, having regard to the specific tests and
definitions set out in the LCR Act.
79. In support of the Review Application, Mr Towey provided two written
references about the character of Fouad. Those referees, Father
George Nasr and
Mr Nazih Seoud, state that they have known Fouad for an extensive period through
the Orthodox Church in Thornbury
and describe him as honest, reliable,
trustworthy, and well respected in the community.
80. The Commission further notes that it has no evidence before it of any
compliance or enforcement action taken by Victoria Police
or the Council in
connection with the Applicant’s running of the business at the Premises,
in spite of Salim working there
for approximately two
81. On the basis of the evidence before it, the Commission is satisfied that
Fouad and Riad are able to act independently of Salim
for the reasons outlined
in paragraphs 70 and 71 above, and any issues of unsuitability that may be
associated with Salim do not
preclude Fouad, Riad and the Applicant from
satisfying the requirements of section 44(2)(a).
82. The Commission further notes that to mitigate against any risk that Salim
could attempt to influence Riad and Fouad in relation
to the operation of the
business of the Applicant, the Commission can impose appropriate conditions to
oblige the Applicant and any
responsible person of the Applicant (e.g. Fouad as
director of the Applicant or Riad as nominee to be appointed under the proposed
The nature of such
conditions that the Commission considers would be appropriate with respect to
this Review Application are addressed
in Appendix A and Appendix B below.
83. Having considered all the materials before the Commission, and the option
of restrictions and controls against Salim as outlined
in Appendix A and
Appendix B below, the Commission is satisfied that the Applicant is a suitable
person to hold, or carry on business
under, a licence. Furthermore and in any
event, in all of the circumstances, and having regard to the objects of the LCR
Commission is not satisfied that it is appropriate to exercise its
discretion to refuse to grant the Applicant the proposed licences
on the alleged
basis that the Applicant is not a suitable person to hold or carry on business
under the proposed licences. The exercise
of the Commission’s discretion
is discussed further below.
Compliance with section 9A – Restaurant and Cafe Licence
Application
84. The Commission may refuse to grant a restaurant
and cafe licence application should an applicant fail to persuade the Commission
that the business will operate in a way that complies with section 9A, under the
general discretion contained in section 44(1).
Preparation and service of meals
85. In applying for a restaurant and cafe licence under section 9A, the
Applicant must satisfy the Commission that the ‘predominant
activity’ will at all times be the ‘preparation and service of
86. The Commission notes that the wording contained in clause 12 of the
planning permit obliges the Applicant to ensure the predominant
activity carried
out at all times on the licensed premises is the preparation and service of
meals for consumption on the Premises.
87. In the Hearing, Riad stated that the predominant activity requirement had
been discussed with the Applicant’s
88. Plans depicting the layout of the Premises show that it has a commercial
café kitchen and a commercial pizza kitchen. The
Applicant submits that
these kitchens are utilised to provide food to the general public for both
consumption on the Premises and
for takeaway and delivery.
89. Having heard the evidence at the Hearing and considered the materials
lodged by the Applicant, the Commission is satisfied overall
predominant activity that is to be carried out at all times on the Premises is
the service and preparation of meals, thereby
complying with section 9A(1)(a).
Tables and chairs in the Premises
90. As required by section 9A(3)(a), a condition of a restaurant and cafe
licence is that tables and chairs must be placed in position
on the licensed
premises so as to be available for at least 75% of the patrons attending the
premises at any one time.
91. The Commission notes that the Planning Permit has conditions that
replicate the wording of sections 9A(1) and 9A(3) regarding
the preparation of
meals and the provision of tables and chairs.
92. The Commission notes that section 9A(3)(a) refers to patrons
‘attending the premises at any one time’. In the Hearing,
indicated that requisite seats will be made available as
93. Photographs lodged by the Applicant show that the Premises are set up
with tables and chairs around them.
94. Having heard the evidence and considered the materials lodged by the
Applicant, the Commission is satisfied that the Applicant
complies with the
condition in section 9A(3)(a).
Limited in scale and scope – Renewable Limited Licence
Application
95. Section 14 provides that a renewable limited
authorises the licensee to supply liquor at the times
determined by the Commission and specified in the licence
”. However,
unlike other categories of licence, limited licences are subject to the
additional restriction found at section
26 in that the Commission may only grant
a limited licence if satisfied “
that the scale and scope of the supply
of liquor the subject of the licence is limited in nature”.
96. There are no statutory signposts which prescribe specific factors for the
Commission to consider in determining whether the Scale
and Scope Requirement is
met. On previous occasions the Commission has considered “
the nature,
location, duration or frequency of the hours of operation of a licence in
as relevant to the Scale and Scope
Requirement
97. In this Review Application, the proposed
supply of liquor for which the proposed renewable limited licence is sought is
different from that which was before the Delegate. In particular, the
following additional limitations were proposed by the Applicant:
(a) the range of liquor supplied would be restricted to no more than ten lines
of liquor taken from three lines of wine, four lines
of beer/cider; and three
lines of pre-mixed drinks (the Original Application did not contain this
proposed cap on the range of liquor
to be supplied); and
(b) the supply of liquor would be limited to 12 noon to 11 pm on any day (in the
Original Application, the Applicant had requested
the supply of liquor between
the hours of 9 am and 11 pm, Good Friday and Christmas Day, 10 am and 11 pm,
Sunday, 12 noon and 11
pm, ANZAC Day, and 9 am and 11pm on any other day).
98. The Commission notes that the quantity of liquor proposed to be supplied
per delivery or meal purchased, if the Renewable Limited
Licence Application was
granted, would be limited to:
One bottle of wine; or
Six containers of beer or cider; or
Six containers of pre-mixed
99. The Commission further notes that the hours of supply proposed by the
Review Application do not exceed the ordinary trading hours
defined at section
3(1) and the liquor would only be served in conjunction with
While this alone is not a
significant limitation for the purpose of the Scale and Scope Requirement, this
may be considered cumulatively
with the limitations referred to in paragraphs 97
and 98 above.
100. Taking into account the nature of the Premises, in which the supply of
liquor is secondary to the main business of service of
food, and subject to the
limitations as referred to in paragraphs 97 to 99 being imposed as conditions on
the proposed licence, as
well as the limitation to serve liquor only in
conjunction with food, the Commission is satisfied that the Scale and Scope
Requirement
Other factors
101. The Commission must also determine whether the grant of the restaurant
and cafe licence and the renewable limited licence would
detract from or be
detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the Premises are located, which
may give rise to a ground of refusal
under sections 47(2) and 44(2).
102. The Commission notes that the Council did not object to the Commission
issuing the Applicant a restaurant and cafe licence and
a renewable limited
licence under the LCR Act, and have not contested the Review Application.
103. Victoria Police also did not object to the Commission issuing the
Applicant a restaurant and cafe licence and a renewable limited
licence on the
ground of a detraction from or detriment to the amenity of the area in which the
Premises are located.
104. Further, in relation to noise controls, the Commission notes that the
terms of the Planning Permit already provide:
The provision of music and entertainment on the premises must be limited
to background music or entertainment by performers using
non-amplified
instruments unless with the written consent of the Responsible Authority.
105. In amenity based submissions lodged after the
the Applicant stated
that there would be no music provided in the external area of the Premises, and
that no more than occasional
background music will be provided in the internal
area of the Premises.
106. Given that noise issues have already been considered by the Council as
part of the planning process for the Premises, to avoid
duplication between the
liquor and planning processes, the Commission does not consider it is
appropriate to further assess noise
controls in this instance. Rather, subject
to the amenity conditions detailed in Appendix A and Appendix B, the Commission
is satisfied,
on balance, that the grant of a restaurant and cafe licence and a
renewable limited licence would not detract from or be detrimental
amenity of the area.
107. The Commission acknowledges there will always be a potential for
negative impact on amenity arising out of the operation of liquor
premises. However, the Commission is not satisfied from all the information
before it in the Review Application, that there
is sufficient (or any) specific
evidence to find the granting of the restaurant and cafe licence and the
renewable limited licence
should impact negatively on the amenity of the
Misuse or abuse of alcohol
108. An application may be refused if granting the application would be
conducive to or encourage the misuse or abuse of
Victoria Police did not
raise any concerns in this regard, nor did the Council.
109. The Commission considers that in all circumstances, given the
limitations on the supply of liquor specifically proposed by the
Application, that the risk of misuse and abuse of alcohol would be minimal. The
Commission further notes that the requirement
for service of food with the
supply of alcohol also assists in the responsible service of alcohol and the
minimising of the risk
110. The Commission also notes that Fouad and Riad have already completed the
RSA program.
111. Due to the above reasons, the Commission does not consider the potential
for the misuse and abuse of alcohol in this instance
constitutes a ground to
refuse to grant the licences that are the subject of the Review Application.
Adequate knowledge of the LCR Act
112. The Commission may also consider whether to refuse the Review
Application on grounds that the Applicant does not have adequate
knowledge of
the LCR Act. Noting that the RSA Certificate and New Entrant Training
Certificate for the sole director, Fouad, were
provided, together with the RSA
Certificate for the Applicant’s proposed nominee, Riad, the Commission
does not in this instance
consider this to be a ground upon which to refuse the
Review Application.
Objects of the LCR Act
113. Although the Commission is satisfied that no grounds for refusal exist
under section 47(2) and 44(2), the Commission must still
exercise its discretion
whether or not to grant the proposed licences. Such a discretion must be
exercised by the Commission with
regard to any other relevant considerations, as
well as with regard to the objects of the LCR Act, particularly harm
minimisation,
which is the primary object.
114. With the imposition of the conditions in Appendix A and Appendix B, the
Commission is satisfied that adequate controls will exist
over the supply of
liquor and that any harm should be minimised. Accordingly, the Commission
considers that the grant of the proposed
licences in this instance would not be
contrary to the LCR Act’s object concerning harm minimisation.
115. Finally, the Commission also considers that granting the proposed
licences would facilitate the development of a diversity of
licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations in furtherance of the object outlined in
section 4(1)(b). At the Hearing, Riad
submitted that apart from a local hotel
and supermarket, there were no other nearby venues like the Premises that would
supply liquor
as proposed in the Review
Application.
Decision on review
116. The Commission is satisfied that the Review
Application meets all legislative requirements set out above. Accordingly, based
on the reasons set out above, the Commission is satisfied that granting the
licences the subject of the Review Application is appropriate
circumstances.
117. The Commission
has therefore determined to set aside the Original Decision and grant the
licences the subject of the Review Application
subject to the conditions set out
in Appendix A and Appendix B.
The preceding 117 paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision
of Ms Deirdre O’Donnell (Deputy Chair), Mr Andrew Scott
(Commissioner) and
Mr Des Powell AM (Commissioner).
This is a restaurant and cafe licence and authorises the licensee to supply
liquor on the licensed premises for consumption on the
licensed premises during
the trading hours specified below.
Restaurant & Cafe Conditions
This licence is subject to the following conditions:
(a) The predominant activity carried out at all times on the premises must be
the preparation and serving of meals for consumption
on the licensed premises;
(b) Tables and chairs must be placed in position on the licensed premises so as
to be available for at least 75% of the patrons attending
the premises at any
one time; and
(c) The licensee must not permit:
live performance of any musical works; or
playing of any recorded musical works –
premises at higher than background music level at any time outside ordinary
trading hours.
The licensee shall not cause or permit undue detriment to the amenity of the
area to arise out of or in connection with the use of
the premises to which the
licence relates during or immediately after the trading hours authorised under
this licence.
Trading hours for the supply of liquor
Good Friday and ANZAC Day Between 12pm and 11pm
Sunday Between 10am and 11pm
On any other day Between 7am and 11pm
Responsible service of alcohol
At all times, staff selling, offering or serving liquor are to have completed
an approved Responsible Service of Alcohol training
course within the preceding
three years.
Special Conditions
The person whose name has been made known by letter, dated 15 December 2021,
from the Commission to the licensee and Victoria Police
in connection with the
Commission’s decision to grant this licence is:
not permitted to
supply alcohol for, or on behalf of, the licensee;
not permitted to
participate in the management or control of the Premises and/or be on the
premises other than performing general
employment duties on behalf of the
licensee as a coffee maker, a kitchen hand and other similar employment
not permitted to
be a signatory to, or have any direction or control over any account with any
bank or other financial institution
held for or on behalf of the licensee;
not permitted to
own or hold company shares in the licensee legally or beneficially or by any
legal or corporate entity of which that
person may be a director, trustee, or
hold any relevant power, or of which he may be a shareholder, beneficiary or
hold any other
relevant financial interest.
Operational and
Management Statement
The licensee must adhere to the Operational and Management Statement provided
to the VCGLR on 23 September 2021 in connection with
the application for the
grant of the licence, in addition to the conditions stated above.
Transfer of licence
This licence is not transferable to a person who is not also the licensee of
the Renewable Limited Licence in respect of these premises.
This licence is a renewable limited licence and subject to the conditions
specified in this licence authorises the licensee to supply
for consumption
off the licensed premises, where the customer has ordered the alcohol as part of
a take-away meal service or home
delivery meal service; or
on the licensed
premises for consumption off the licensed premises, at the conclusion of that
customer’s meal at the Premises
on the same day.
The supply of liquor shall be limited to a range of no more than three lines
of wine, four lines of beer or cider, and three lines
of premixed spirits.
The quantity of liquor to be delivered as part of a take-away meal service or
bottle of wine or six
containers (not more than 375 ml per container) of beer, cider or premixed
spirits per delivery.
The quantity of liquor to be supplied to a customer that has finished dining
at the premises on the same day must not exceed one 750
ml bottle of wine or six
containers (not more than 375 ml per container) of beer, cider or premixed
spirits per day.
Delivery of liquor
Liquor must not be supplied or delivered to a person under the age of 18
years. The licensee must ensure that delivery arrangements
include requiring
evidence of age where appropriate.
Liquor must not be delivered and left at unoccupied premises.
Liquor may only be delivered during the trading hours specified below.
Trading hours for the supply of liquor
On any day – between 12noon and 11pm.
The licensee shall not cause or permit undue detriment to the amenity of the
area to arise out of or in connection with the use of
the premises to which the
licence relates during or immediately after the trading hours authorised under
this licence.
Special Conditions
The person whose name has been made known by letter, dated 15 December 2021,
from the Commission to the licensee and Victoria Police
in connection with the
Commission’s decision to grant this licence is:
not permitted to
supply alcohol for, or on behalf of, the licensee;
not permitted to
participate in the management or control of the Premises and/or be on the
premises other than performing general
employment duties on behalf of the
licensee as a coffee maker, a kitchen hand and other similar employment
not permitted to
be a signatory to, or have any direction or control over any account with any
bank or other financial institution
held for or on behalf of the licensee;
not permitted to
own or hold company shares in the licensee legally or beneficially or by any
legal or corporate entity of which that
person may be a director, trustee, or
hold any relevant power, or of which he may be a shareholder, beneficiary or
hold any other
relevant financial interest.
Operational and
Management Statement
The licensee must adhere to the Operational and Management Statement provided
to the VCGLR on 23 September 2021 in connection with
the application for the
grant of the licence, in addition to the conditions stated above.
Transfer of licence
This licence is not transferable to a person who is not also the licensee of
the Restaurant and Cafe Licence in respect of these premises.
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act.
Fouad also completed First
Entrant Training in October 2020.
A nominee of a licensee or
permittee is defined in section 3 of the LCR Act as meaning a person approved
under section 54 of the
LCR Act as nominee of that licensee or permittee.
Section 3 defines
“licensing inspector” as a person appointed as a licensing inspector
under section 172.
Section 157(2) to (5) of the
LCR Act and section 25(3) of the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation Act 2011
(VCGLR Act) further prescribe the manner in which the
Commission is to undertake internal reviews.
LCR Act, sections 44, 49 and
LCR Act sections 44 and
The meaning of
“director” is defined in section 3.
VCGLR Act, sections 9(3) and
(4). The Commission considered and was satisfied as to the matters set out in
the Decision-Making Guidelines
relating to the assessment of the cumulative
impact of licensed premises dated 7 June 2012. The Commission did not consider
the Decision-Making
Guidelines relating to the grant of licences for the sale of
packaged liquor as applicable to this Review Application given the proposed
trading hours are not outside ordinary trading hours as defined in section 3 of
the LCR Act.
Kordister Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
, which confirms that harm minimisation is
the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act and therefore the primary
consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although not to the exclusion of
the other objects).
LCR Act, section 157(2).
LCR Act, section 157(3).
In their email of 16
September 2021, Victoria Police stated:
suitability or directorship of the Applicant is not in question;
Salim is an
unsuitable person;
It is for Mr
Towey to convince the Commission that Salim is not an associate and for Victoria
Police to convince the Commission that
If Victoria
Police fail to convince the Commission that Salim is an associate of the
Applicant, the suitability of Salim is
irrelevant.
paragraph 9 above.
The contents of these
statements are the same as specified in paragraph 50(g) and (h) above.
The Applicant did not
propose to amend the quantity of liquor to be supplied, if the Renewable Limited
Licence Application was to
be granted.
Victoria Police written
submissions, dated 16 February 2021.
Applicant’s written
submissions, received 18 January 2021, Written statements of Fouad and Riad,
dated 14 September 2021, Operational
and Management Statement, Hearing
Transcript, pp3, 5, 6, 8, 11 and 22.
Applicant’s written
submissions, received 18 January 2021, Hearing Transcript, pp3, 5, 6, 8, 11 and
Fouad purchased the existing
café business at the Premises in 2018. In the same year, Salim was before
the Courts and sentenced
to a 70-day term of imprisonment in March 2019. Written
statement of Fouad, Victoria Police written submissions, dated 16 February
Hearing Transcript, p35.
Hearing Transcript, pp4 and
Written statements of Fouad
and Riad, dated 14 September 2021, Hearing Transcript, p35.
Operational and Management
Statement, Hearing Transcript p33.
Hearing Transcript, p17.
Applicant’s written
submissions, received 8 April 2021, Statements of Fouad and Riad, dated 14
September 2021.
Applicant’s written
submissions, received 18 January 2021, Email communication from Mr Towey, dated
14 September 2021, Statements
of Fouad and Riad, dated 14 September 2021,
Hearing Transcript, pp 5, 7, 8, 9, 11, 22, 24, 25.
See definitions of
‘relevant financial interest’ and ‘relevant power’ in
paragraph 35 above.
Hearing Transcript,
The Commission also refers
to section 47(2) of the LCR Act.
Hearing Transcript, p26.
LCR Act, section 49.
‘Responsible person’ is defined in section 3.
Hearing Transcript,
Hearing Transcipt, p33.
See decision of Fynix Pty
Ltd at 36A Vickers Street, Sebastapol premises (Liquor-internal review) [2016]
VCGLR 19 (25 July 2016)
Letter from Mr Towey, dated
23 September 2021.
The Commission also notes
that the proposed hours of supply of liquor on Good Friday and ANZAC Day do not
exceed the ordinary trading
hours for those days as defined at section 3(1).
See paragraph 55(b)
Section 44(2)(b)(ii).
Hearing Transcript, p34 and
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (65.7 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter