URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2021/35.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Open Door Pub Co Pty Ltd at The Exchange Beach Club premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2021] VCGLR 35 (26 November 2021)
Decision and reasons
for decision
In the matter of an application by Open Door Pub Co Pty Ltd under
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for an internal review of the
decision to grant a temporary limited licence for the premises located at Port
Melbourne Beach (adjacent
to Beach Road/ East of Port Melbourne Beach 3207),
trading as The Exchange Beach Club.
Commission:
Deirdre O’Donnell,
Deputy Chair
Ms Danielle Huntersmith, Commissioner
Mr Andrew Scott, Commissioner
Date of Decision:
26 November 2021
Date of Reasons:
21 December 2021
The Commission has determined to vary the decision of the
Delegate and grant the application for a temporary limited licence subject
the conditions set out in Appendix A.
Deirdre O’Donnell
The Original Application
9 September 2021, Open Door Pub Co Pty Ltd (
) applied to the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation (
the grant of a temporary limited licence (
Original Application
) under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
to operate a pop-up beach
outdoor bar at the premises located at Port Melbourne Beach (adjacent to Beach
Road/ East of Port Melbourne
Beach 3207), trading as The Exchange Beach Club
Applicant describes the event as “...Port Melbourne's first major beach
pop up! Combining pop up container bar, BBQ menu,
beach activities &
program, day beds and deck chairs, this is the ultimate relaxed Australian beach
experience. Ideal for families
and friends, walk in and grab a seat or book a
day bed in advance for a group.”
Premises is a seated outdoor event requiring all patrons to order through Mr.
Yum (https://www.mryum.com/), an online ordering
service. Entry to the event is
Applicant sought to trade at the Premises between the following period:
duration: 5 November 2021 to 30 January 2022
trading hours: Between 12 midday to 10pm on weekdays
Between 10 am to 10 pm on weekends, public holidays and
public holiday eves
Applicant submitted the following material in support of the Original
Application:
Management Plan;
Provisional
Approval Agreement from the City of Port Phillip (
Beach Club Concept.
Commission notes that the Applicant in their Event Management Plan (uploaded
with the Original Application) proposed the following
restrictions:
beverages will be served in plastic cups (reusable and recyclable) and cans only
(no glass); and
more than four (4) drinks of which a maximum of two (2) may be pre-mixed spirits
or cans of wine, per customer, per time (
accordance with section 33(3) of the LCR Act, the Commission exercised its
discretion to serve a copy of the Original Application
on the Chief Commissioner
of Police and the Licensing Inspector (together,
Victoria Police
October 2021. On the same day, Victoria Police informed the Commission it did
not object to the grant of the Original Application.
20 October 2021, a delegate of the Commission (
) determined to
grant the application for a Temporary Limited Licence No. 90161217
), subject to the Condition proposed by the
Applicant (
Original Decision
Application for Internal
29 October 2021, the Applicant applied for an internal review of the Original
Decision and requested the re-wording of the Condition
to the following:
The licensee shall not serve more than four (4)
drinks per customer, per time
Proposed Condition
Application
Applicant made the following submissions in support of the Review Application
(in summary):
Condition is limiting on the types of drinks that may be ordered in one
transaction by a table booking to consist of only two
pre-mixed spirits or cans
of wine, which will restrict the service the Premises is seeking to offer
the Condition is suitable for larger scale outdoor events such as a music
concert or festival, the Applicant believes the Condition
necessary for an intimate event the size and style of Exchange Beach
Applicant seeks to offer “mini-eskies” for purchase by tables, and
each esky contains four (4) cans of a mixture of
either beer, wine or seltzers.
The Applicant is of the view that the Condition “prevents a group of four
from ordering a “mini
esky” containing four cans of wine or
seltzers, yet a group of four is able to order a mini-esky containing four
The Applicant noted that the range of seltzers on offer in the
“mini-eskies” have an ABV of 4.5%, which is comparable
lower than most beers available;
Applicant requested that all patrons in a group should have the ability to mix
and match from the available esky options depending
on their preference;
Applicant noted that “there may be occasions where all patrons in a group
of four or more wish to order beer, and the current
condition would not impact
their request; however, directing a non-beer drinker to choose a beverage they
would not normally drink
has potential to have a very negative impact on their
Beach Club experience”;
Applicant submitted it has a strong and experienced management team, capable of
monitoring patron behaviour at all times, and
all front of house staff at the
Premises are fully trained and certified in the responsible service of alcohol;
Applicant also submitted it has strict measures and practices in place to reduce
the risks of alcohol misuse and abuse at the
Premises as demonstrated in their
Alcohol Management Plan. Further, the Applicant has maintained an excellent
history of regulatory
compliance each year;
Applicant noted that the Temporary Limited Licence No. 90155809 issued for the
Premises on 27 November 2020 did not contain the
The Applicant
also noted that while the Temporary Limited Licence No. 90155809 was issued with
the aim of supporting businesses impacted
during the COVID-19 pandemic,
the event was well managed and there were no concerns raised by
Inspectors during the event’s 4-month operation”.
5 November 2021, a copy of the Review Application was served on Council and
Victoria Police. Both responded to the Commission on
9 November 2021 and 15
November 2021 respectively, and confirmed that they did not object to the grant
of the Review Application.
Legislation and the
Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
2 of Part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under section
152, the decision made by the Delegate in
the Original Application is a
reviewable decision and the Applicant is an eligible person to apply for the
review of that decision.
The Review Application was made pursuant to section
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision
or varies the reviewable decision; or
b. sets aside the reviewable decision and substitutes another decision
that the Commission on review considers appropriate.
the LCR Act, an application for the grant of a licence may be contested or
uncontested. Pursuant to section 3(1), an uncontested
application is defined
an application for the grant, variation, transfer or
relocation of a licence or BYO permit in respect of which no objection is
under Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division
for that objection (or that period as extended under section
Original Application is uncontested, as no objections were received under
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that
Division for that
objection (or that period as extended under section 174).
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Original Application.
In this case, the Commission must either:
the application, and if so, determine whether to do so subject to
to grant the
application
the internal review power
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation Act 2011
) requires the Commission, in exercising its internal
review function, to have regard to the objects of the LCR Act.
objects of the LCR Act are set out at section 4(1) and provide
The objects of this Act are—
) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes
to, and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products;
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and
reducing risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
4(2) of the LCR Act further provides that:
It is the intention of
Parliament that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty
conferred or imposed by this Act
must be exercised and performed with due regard
to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the misuse and abuse of
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
consider all the information, material and evidence before the original decision
consider further information or
in respect of uncontested applications on review, have regard to any matter the
Commission considers relevant, make any enquiries
the Commission considers
appropriate but is not required to give any person an opportunity to be heard
concerning the application.
section 49 of the LCR Act, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit
on the grant of an application.
44(2)(b) of the LCR Act empowers the Commission to refuse to grant the Review
Application on various grounds, including that:
(a) the granting of the application would detract
from or be detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the Premises to which
the application relates are situated; or
(b) the granting of the application would be
conducive to or encourage the misuse or abuse of alcohol.
Commission considers that while the grounds of refusal outlined in section 44(2)
of the LCR Act are relevant considerations, the
determination of an
uncontested application is ultimately to be made pursuant to section 44(1) and
section 157(1) at the discretion
of the Commission, with reference to the
objects of the LCR Act.
limited licence may be a temporary limited licence or a renewable limited
. Pursuant to section 14(1B)
of the LCR Act, a renewable limited licence authorises the licensee to supply
liquor at the times determined
by the Commission and specified on the licence,
and it may be renewed in accordance with the LCR Act. A limited licence may
be subject to any conditions determined by the Commission and specified
on the licence.
26(1) of the LCR Act provides that the Commission may grant a limited licence
only if it is satisfied that the scale and scope
of the supply of liquor the
subject of the licence is limited in nature (
Scale and Scope
Requirement
Conduct of an Inquiry
34 of the VCGLR Act provides that, subject to that Act, gambling legislation or
liquor legislation, the Commission may conduct
any inquiry in any manner it
considers appropriate. During the conduct of an inquiry, section 25(3) of the
VCGLR Act provides that
the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence,
however, must comply with the rules of natural justice.
before the Commission
Commission on review had before it and considered all the materials before the
Commission on review also received and considered the following
Record of the Delegate for the Original Application, dated 20 October 2021;
Application and submissions from the Applicant, dated 29 October 2021.
to the urgent timeframe associated with the Review Application, the Commission
considered it appropriate to determine the Review
Application ‘on the
papers’ without a public
as requested by the
Applicant. The Commission also determined to make and publish the decision in
the Review Application prior to
the reasons for decision, which it did on 26
November 2021.
Reasons for decision on review
Issues for determination on review
deciding whether to affirm, vary or set aside the Original Decision and in turn
grant or refuse the temporary limited licence that
is the subject of the Review
Application, the Commission must consider:
the Commission is satisfied that the scale and scope of the supply of liquor the
subject of the proposed licence is limited
the Review Application should be granted or refused, having regard to the
objects of the LCR Act and, in particular, harm
minimisation, which is the
primary object.
of these issues is discussed in turn.
Limited in scale and scope
Commission must be satisfied that the scale and scope of the supply of liquor
the subject of the licence is limited in nature,
in accordance with section 26
of the LCR Act (defined in paragraph
Commission carefully considered the evidence and is satisfied that the scale and
scope of the supply of liquor the subject of
the licence is limited in nature.
The Commission primarily took into account:
days and hours of trading when liquor would be supplied to patrons with trading
ceasing at 10pm;
restrictions on the supply of liquor contained in the licence conditions
including that no more than four drinks may be served
per customer, per time;
fact that the licence is for a limited period of approximately twelve weeks.
Commission is satisfied, having regard to the combination of matters above, that
the Scale and Scope Requirement is satisfied
in that the scale and scope of the
supply of liquor the subject of the licence is limited in nature and therefore
meets the requirement
in section 26 of the LCR Act.
Discretion to grant or refuse the Review Application
Commission has a discretion under section 44(1) to grant or refuse the Review
Application. In exercising this discretion, the
Commission must have regard to
the objects of the LCR Act, particularly harm minimisation, which is the primary
deciding whether to exercise its discretion under section 44(1), the Commission
took into account the following:
evidence from the Council of temporary support for this event;
event is an annual event which the Commission has assessed for a temporary
limited licence since 2019;
VCGLR records indicate there have been no complaints received or non-compliance
with the LCR Act alleged in relation to previous
conduct of the Applicant under
other liquor licences in relation to previous year’s Temporary Limited
Licences for the same
annual event;
staff who supply liquor will be trained in Responsible Service of Alcohol
comprehensive alcohol management plan contained in the Event Management Plan;
event is a seated outdoor event; and
event is a family-focused event catering for bookings of local residents and
families as well as social groups looking to enjoy
unique food and beverage
offerings on the beach with friends and family.
Commission notes that the Applicant has proposed restrictions as to the days and
hours of operation and patron capacity. The Commission
further notes that the
requirement for food to be available for purchase at all times that liquor is
being supplied also assists
in the responsible service of alcohol and in
minimising the risk of harm.
Commission is satisfied that that there is no significant risk of harm in
relation to the proposed supply of no more than four
(4) drinks per customer,
per time at the Premises.
Commission is also satisfied that the conditions as specified in Appendix A
provide measures of protection relevant to the amenity
of the area and this will
reduce the risk profile of the supply of liquor that can occur under the limited
licence, thereby assisting
in reducing amenity concerns and the risk of misuse
or abuse with supply of liquor.
Whether to exercise discretion to grant or refuse the Review
Application having regard to the objects of the LCR Act
Commission is satisfied that the Review Application meets the Scale and Scope
Requirement, and the Commission is satisfied that
there are no grounds for
refusal under section 44(2), having regard to the objects of the LCR Act.
Importantly,
with the imposition of the conditions in Appendix A, the Commission is satisfied
that adequate controls will exist over
the supply and consumption of liquor at
the Premises and that any risk of harm will be minimised.
Decision on review
regard to all the matters set out above, the Commission has determined to vary
the decision of the Delegate and grant the application
for a temporary limited
licence subject to the conditions set out in Appendix A.
preceding 40 paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Ms
Deirdre O’Donnell (Deputy Chair), Ms Danielle
Huntersmith (Commissioner)
and Mr Andrew Scott (Commissioner).
This licence is a limited licence and authorises the licensee to supply
liquor for consumption on the licensed premises.
Supply of liquor
licensee shall not serve more than four (4) drinks per customer per time.
The licensed
area is the area marked on the plan as approved by the Victorian Commission for
Gambling and Liquor Regulation.
Any licensed
area which is not an enclosed building must be clearly marked and demarcated by
a white picket fence.
Liquor may not
be removed from the licensed area.
Liquor supplied
may only be served in unsealed non-glass containers or opened cans.
engaged in the serving of liquor in the licensed area will have undertaken a
Responsible Service of Alcohol course within
the preceding three years approved
by the Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation. All copies of
the RSA certificate
for each member of staff must be at one central place within
the licensed area for inspection if requested by a member of Victoria
a Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation Inspector.
A copy of the
limited licence, as well as "Intoxicated? Drunk? Disorderly?" and "Under 18? No
Supply" liquor signage must be displayed.
The licensee will not cause or permit undue detriment to the
amenity of the area to arise out or in connection with the use of the
to which the licence relates during or immediately after the trading hours
authorised by this licence.
Provision of food
Food must be available for purchase at all times
that liquor is being supplied. For the avoidance of doubt, patrons may be
liquor without food.
Free drinking water
Free drinking water must be provided at every bar that supplies alcohol.
A3-size signs must be prominently displayed at every bar
area that supplies
alcohol that read "Free drinking water is available at this bar upon request".
A minimum of two (2) crowd controllers, licensed under the "
Private Security
", are to be employed from 6pm until close on Friday and Saturday.
Persons under the age of 18 are not permitted to be on the licensed premises
unless they are in the company of a parent, legal guardian
or responsible adult.
Maximum Capacities
300 patrons
Period of licence
This licence has effect and continues in force from 5 November 2021 until 30
January 2022 inclusive, during the trading hours specified
Trading hours
Saturday, Sunday, Public Holidays Eves & Public Holiday Between 10am and
On any other day Between 12noon and 10pm
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
LCR Act, sections 44, 49 and
LCR Act, sections 44 and
See further
Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
, which confirms that harm minimisation is
the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act and therefore the primary
consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although not to the exclusion of
the other objects).
LCR Act, section 157(2).
LCR Act, section 157(3).
LCR Act, section 44(4).
LCR Act, section 14(1).
An 'on the papers' inquiry is
where the Commission determines an application by considering all relevant
written material and documents.
Generally, a formal hearing is not held, and
oral submissions are not made.
LCR Act, section 26(1).
The Commission notes that in
determining this matter, it has also considered each of the grounds set out in
section 44(2).
The Commission notes that
the Applicant advised that patrons will be ordering at the tables through an
online ordering system and
may wish to order up to four of the same drink in one
order, being one each for each of their group
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (52.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter