URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/47.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wyndham C266wynd (PSA) [2025] PPV 47 (19 September 2025)
Wyndham Planning Scheme Amendment C266wynd
Update to the Wyndham Municipal Planning Strategy
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
19 September 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
Wyndham Planning Scheme Amendment C266wynd
Update to the Wyndham Municipal Planning Strategy
19 September 2025
Michael Ballock, Chair Dianne King, Member
List of Figures
Glossary and abbreviations
Wyndham City Council
Department of Transport and Planning
Local Area Framework Plan
Municipal Planning Strategy
net developable hectare
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Place Intervention Logics
Practitioner’s Guide
Practitioner’s Guide to Victoria’s Planning
Precinct Structure Plan
PSP Guidelines
Precinct Structure Planning Guidelines: New Communities in Victoria
Urban Design Framework
Wyndham Plan
the Wyndham Plan, 2023
Amendment summary
The Amendment
Wyndham Planning Scheme Amendment C266wynd
Common name
Update to the Wyndham Municipal Planning Strategy
Brief description
Update the Municipal Planning Strategy to align with the Wyndham Plan 2023
to provide a strategic framework to guide future development
within the City of
Wyndham. The Amendment also updates the Clause 72.08 Schedule (Background
documents) to include the Wyndham Plan
Subject land
The City of Wyndham
The Proponent
City of Wyndham
Planning Authority
City of Wyndham
Authorisation
24 May 2025, with conditions
20 June to 22 July 2024
Submissions
Number of Submissions: 20 Opposed: 10
Refer to Appendix A
Panel process
Michael Ballock (Chair), Dianne King
Directions Hearing
PPV Hearing Room 2 and by video, 7 July 2025
Panel Hearing
PPV Hearing Room 2 and by video, 4, 5 and 6 August 2025
Parties to the Hearing
Refer to Appendix B
Wyndham PSA C266wynd [2025] PPV
Date of this report
19 September 2025
Executive summary
Wyndham Planning Scheme
Amendment C266wynd (the Amendment) seeks to update Clause 2.0 of the Municipal
Planning Strategy (MPS) to
align with the Wyndham Plan 2023 (Wyndham Plan) to
provide a strategic framework to guide future development within the City of
The Amendment also updates the Clause 72.08 Schedule to include the
Wyndham Plan as a background document.
Key issues raised in submissions included:
requests for
changes to the Wyndham Planning Scheme provisions and the Wyndham Plan
housing density
targets in the Wyndham Plan
the role of
activity centres
clarification on
how current precinct structure plans (PSPs), urban design frameworks (UDFs) and
development plans would be impacted
financing out of
sequence development
terms used in
the proposed changes
the role and
function of Place Intervention Logics (PILs).
The Panel considers
the support for housing densities including focusing increased density around
the Wyndham City Heart, selected
activity centres, railway and bus interchanges
and along Derrimut Road Boulevard is strategically justified and provides an
appropriate
basis for the delivery of 20-minute neighbourhoods and greater
housing choice across Wyndham. However, the dwelling density targets
the Wyndham Plan lack a clear strategic basis.
The proposed changes to the strategic directions of Clause 02.03-1 to deal
with out of sequence development are appropriate. However,
the text dealing
with out of sequence development in the Wyndham Plan is more definitive in that
it canvasses situations where Council
may or may not support permits which is
inappropriate in a background document.
The Panel does not support the use of the term PIL within the MPS and
concludes that a more appropriate terminology is Local Area
Framework Plan which
aligns with established practice. Nevertheless, the Panel is satisfied that the
Clause 74.02 (Further Strategic
work) Schedule should include a requirement to
prepare Local Area Framework Plans to deliver 20-minute neighbourhoods as
by Council in addition to the development of a sequencing policy.
While the Wyndham Plan provides the strategic justification for the
Amendment, the cumulative effect of the content of the Wyndham
Plan and the
issues around density, out of sequence development and PILs makes the Wyndham
Plan, in its current form, unsuitable
for inclusion in the Planning Scheme as a
background document.
The Panel supports the proposed changes to Clause 02 including
Council’s post exhibition changes in response to submissions.
The Panel concludes:
The Wyndham Plan
provides appropriate strategic justification for the Amendment.
Notwithstanding the above, the Wyndham Plan in its current form should not be identified as a Background document including because:
- The density targets are not appropriate.
- The out of sequence provisions in the Wyndham Plan are not appropriate.
Council’s Final Version of Clause 02 is appropriate subject to replacing the term ‘Place Intervention Logic’ with
the term ‘Local Area Framework Plan’.
The exhibited out of sequence provisions in Clause 02.03-1 are appropriate.
The inclusion of work on a sequencing policy in the Clause 74.02 Schedule is appropriate.
The identification of preparation of Local Area Framework Plans for the Wyndham City Heart, Urban Pulses, Village Pulses and Derrimut
Road Boulevard (including their catchments) as further strategic work is justified.
Recommendations
Based on the reasons set out in this report, the
Panel recommends that Council:
1. Adopt Wyndham Planning Scheme Amendment C266wynd as exhibited with the following changes:
Replace Clause 02 with the Panel
recommended version in Appendix D
Amend Clause 72.08 Schedule to
remove the reference to the Wyndham Plan.
Replace Clause 74.02 Schedule
with the Panel recommended version in Appendix E
1 Introduction
1.1 The Amendment
(i) Amendment description
purpose of the Amendment is to update the MPS to align with the Wyndham Plan to
provide a strategic framework to guide future
development within the City of
Wyndham. The Amendment also updates the Clause 72.08 Schedule to include the
Wyndham Plan in the
Wyndham Planning Scheme as a background document.
Specifically, the Amendment proposes to:
following sections of the MPS at:
- Clause 02.01
- Clause 02.02
- Clause 02.03-1
- Clause 02.03-6
- Clause 02.04
Strategic Framework Plan
amend the Clause
72.08 Schedule (Background documents) to insert the Wyndham Plan 2023
amend the Clause
74.02 Schedule (Further strategic work) to include relevant further strategic
work as identified in the Wyndham Plan.
(ii) The subject land
The Amendment applies to all land in the City of
Wyndham as outlined in
The City of Wyndham
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 1 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
1.2 Background
Wyndham Plan was adopted by Council on 24 October 2023 to help deliver the
Wyndham 2040 Community Vision
, to connect people and places and encourage
development in areas supported by infrastructure and services. The Wyndham Plan
an extensive community engagement program and was intended to provide
a strategic planning framework and the foundations of the Council’s
strategies, plans, policies and responses to emerging issues for managing land
use and development for the next 10 to 20 years.
On 24 May 2024, Council received authorisation to prepare the Amendment from
the Minister (under delegation). The authorisation was
subject to conditions
requiring changes to the Explanatory Report and Clauses 02.02, 02.03 and 02,04.
In addition, the authorisation
contained the following comments:
DTP officers are not wholly supportive of the use of language within the MPS
that is not ‘plain English’ such as ‘the
Wyndham Heart’
and ‘Wyndham City Pulses,’ especially since there are suitable
alternative descriptors that are
commonly used throughout the Victoria Planning
Provisions. It is acknowledged that this has been discussed with the Council at
and that while the Council have made some changes in this regard, the
Council’s position is to utilise language from the Wyndham
Plan (2023) to
ensure strong links between the background document and the MPS.
Council submitted it had addressed all conditions of authorisation including
the reference to Ministerial Direction No 9 Metropolitan
Chronology of
24 October 2023
Council adopts the Wyndham Plan
27 February 2024
Council resolves to seek authorisation for Amendment
24-May 2024
Council received authorisation to prepare and exhibit the Amendment
20 June to 22 July 2024
Exhibition of Amendment
27 August 2024
Council considered the submissions received in response to the exhibition
of the Amendment and determined to refer all submissions
to a Planning
11 September 2024
Panel appointed to hear and consider submissions
3 February 2025
First Panel Directions Hearing
May to July 2025
Council undertakes further consultation with submitters
7 July 2025
Second Panel Directions Hearing
4, 5 and 6 August 2025
Panel Hearings
1.3 The Panel’s approach
issues raised in submissions were:
requests for
changes to the Wyndham Planning Scheme provisions and the Wyndham Plan
housing density
targets in the Wyndham Plan
the role of
activity centres.
clarification on
how current PSPs, UDFs and development plans would be impacted
financing out of
sequence development
terms used in
the proposed changes
the role and
function of PILs.
The Panel has assessed the Amendment against the
principles of net community benefit and sustainable development, as set out in
71.02-3 (Integrated decision making) of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment and submissions, evidence and other
presented to it during the Hearing. All submissions and materials have been
considered by the Panel in reaching its conclusions,
regardless of whether they
are specifically mentioned in the report.
This report deals with the issues under the following headings:
The Wyndham
1.4 Versions of the Amendment
Panel directed Council to circulate a ‘Day 1’ version of the
Amendment documentation before the commencement of the
Hearing, and a Final
Version with its closing submissions. Council circulated:
Day 1 amendment
documents (Document 19)
Final Version
amendment documents with its
submission (Document 25).
Day 1 version incorporated changes in response to submissions. The Final
Version incorporated further changes in response to
evidence and matters raised
during the Hearing.
Except where stated otherwise, the Panel supports the changes in the Day 1
and Final Version, which provide greater clarity and improve
the operation of
the controls.
Parties were given the opportunity to provide written comments on the Final
Version following the close of the Hearing. Only one
1228 Leakes Road
Land Pty Ltd and SIG Oak Pty Ltd (Leakes Road and SIG) elected to do so(Document
The Panel has had regard to all comments on the Final Version
in developing its recommended version. The Panel’s recommended
Clause 02 in Appendix D uses Council’s Day 1 version as the starting
2 Strategic issues
2.1 Planning context
chapter identifies planning context relevant to the Amendment which are
summarised in Table 2.
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
- section 4 of
Municipal Planning Strategy
Planning Policy Framework
- Clause 02.01
Context, Clause 02.02 Vision, Clause 02.03 Settlement, Clause 02.04 Strategic
11.01-1S Settlement, Clause 11.01-1R Settlement – Metropolitan Melbourne,
Clause 11.01-1L Settlement, Clause 11.02-1S
Supply of urban land, Clause
11.02-2S Sequencing of development, Clause 11.03-1S Activity centres, Clause
11.03-1R Activity centres,
Clause 11.03-1L Activity centres,
11.03-6S Regional and local places
16.01-1S Housing supply, Clause 16.01-1R Housing supply – Metropolitan
Melbourne, Clause 16.01-1L Housing supply
18.02-3S Public transport, Clause 18.02-3R Principal public transport
19.03-2S Infrastructure design and provision. Clause 19.03-2L Infrastructure
design and provision
Other planning strategies and policies
- West Growth
Corridor Plan
Planning scheme provisions
- Comprehensive
Development Zone
- Land Subject
to Inundation Overlay
Planning scheme amendments
Planning Scheme Amendment C273wynd
Planning Scheme Amendment C269wynd
Planning Scheme Amendment C267wynd
Ministerial directions
- Ministerial
Direction 11 - Strategic Assessment of Amendments
- Ministerial
Direction 15 – The Planning Scheme Amendment Process
- Ministerial
Direction 18 – Victorian Planning Authority Advice on Planning Scheme
Planning practice notes and guidance
Practice Note 46: Strategic Assessment Guidelines, September 2022
Structure Planning Guidelines: New Communities in Victoria 2021 (PSP
Guidelines)
- Practitioner’s
Guide to Victoria’s Planning Schemes (Practitioner’s Guide)
2.2 Strategic justification
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Wyndham Plan provides appropriate strategic justification
for the Amendment.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Council submitted that the Amendment proposes to
update the MPS to:
align with the
vision and strategic directions in the Wyndham Plan
and to better align
with State level policy included in the Planning Policy Framework supporting 20
minute neighbourhoods
introduce some
of the content of the Wyndham Plan into the Planning Scheme to guide decision
making, including the
“six big ideas”
for Wyndham and a
number of high level strategic directions.
Council added that the
Wyndham Plan also applies State policy in a local context; it is strategically
aligned and derived from this
State policy.
Mr Glossop gave evidence that the Wyndham Plan, which is intended to deliver
Wyndham 2040 Community Vision
, provides the strategic framework for
the Amendment. He added that the Wyndham Plan:
...establishes ‘six big ideas’ which are intended to transform
Wyndham (said to be a ‘2 hours city’) into
a municipality of
20-minute cities. A 20-minute city is one principally based around an activity
centre and transport hierarchy,
where new, higher density housing is located
where they are accessible (ideally by public transport) to services and
Planning our cities in this way is the cornerstone of metropolitan planning
strategy, anticipated by Clause 11.03-1S (Activity centres),
Clause 16.01-1
(Housing supply), Clause 16.01-1R (Housing supply – Metropolitan
Melbourne) and Clause 16.01-1L (Housing location),
as well as Plan for Victoria
and Plan Melbourne 2017-2050.
More specifically, the concept of a 20-minute city is embedded in the
Victorian planning system, most obviously by Plan Melbourne
2017-2050 (Direction
5.1)4, Clause 15.01-4R (Healthy neighbourhoods – Metropolitan Melbourne)
and Clause 18.01-3R (Sustainable
and safe transport – Metropolitan
Melbourne).
Mr Glossop concluded that the Amendment was strategically justified.
The submission by Leakes Road and SIG opposed the inclusion of the Wyndham
Plan as a background document without several changes to
its content. This
matter is discussed in the following chapter of this report. However, the
submission acknowledged that the
“Wyndham Plan is the fundamental basis
for the proposed Amendment.”
Mr Fetterplace gave evidence on behalf of Leakes Road and SIG. He concluded
that, subject to changes to Clause 02.03-1 and the Clause
74.02 Schedule, the
Amendment was strategically justified.
The submission by Ranfurlie Asset Management Pty Ltd (Ranfurlie) opposed the
inclusion of the Wyndham Plan as a background document.
It submitted that:
...there is no strategic justification to include the Wyndham Plan as a
background document, nor is there a sound strategic basis
to introduce into the
planning scheme new concepts such as “pulses” and
Mr Negri gave evidence on behalf of Ranfurlie and supported the broad
concepts in the Wyndham Plan but had:
...concerns with how it is reflected in the MPS and how this will
subsequently be interpreted to guide future development.
Peet Ltd submitted that it supported the Wyndham Plan and the Amendment:
...as an important step in outlining the future strategic direction for
Wyndham and aligning this with broader State objectives for
the implementation
of the '20 minute neighbourhood' concept.
Nevertheless, Peet Ltd stated it opposed the inclusion of density targets and
the regulation of out of sequence development.
(iii) Discussion
There are two questions that arise from submissions
for the Panel. The first is whether the Wyndham Plan provides appropriate
justification for the Amendment. The second is whether the Wyndham
Plan should be referenced in the Planning Scheme as a background
document. The
latter question is dealt with in Chapter 3 of this report.
The Amendment proposed changes to the MPS which are based on what the Wyndham
Plan identifies as its six big ideas, which are:
A Wyndham City
Heart that transforms Wyndham from a 2-hour to a 20-minute city.
Creation of
Wyndham City Pulses that foster the development of 20-minute
neighbourhoods.
Transport Network that better connects people and places.
A Derrimut Road
Boulevard that will integrate transport and development and connect the central
parts of Wyndham.
Residential Neighbourhoods that deliver quality residential development.
Celebration of
our Green Lungs, Coast and Country to connect people with Wyndham’s rural
areas and natural environment.
The language used in the Wyndham
Plan, which Mr Negri called
“bespoke terminology and concept”
is proposed to be included into the MPS. However, all three experts agreed that
the broad principles of the Wyndham Plan, including
a 20-minute city, increasing
densities in established areas and particularly around activity centres and
improving connectivity are
consistent with regional and State planning policy.
Nevertheless, there was disagreement about the content and details in the
Given the Wyndham Plan’s links to State policy, the Panel agrees with
Mr Glossop that the Amendment is strategically justified.
The document
provides the strategic framework, consistent with the Plan for Victoria, for the
(iv) Conclusions and recommendation
For the reasons set out in this report, the Panel
concludes that the Amendment:
is supported by,
and implements, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy Framework
is consistent
with the relevant Ministerial Directions and Practice Notes
is well founded
and strategically justified
should proceed
subject to addressing the more specific issues raised in submissions as
discussed in the following chapters.
The Panel recommends
Adopt Wyndham Planning Scheme Amendment
C266wynd as exhibited with the changes recommended in this report.
3 The Wyndham Plan
3.1 Density targets
(i) The issues
issues are whether:
the density
targets are strategically justified
the density
targets in the Wyndham Plan are appropriate for a background document.
(ii) Background
The following density targets are included in the
Wyndham Plan :
average 25-30
dwellings/net developable hectare (NDHa) in all new residential developments in
urban growth areas
dwellings/NDHa within 50 metres of green and transport corridors adjacent to or
leading to a major activity centre within the
city pulses
dwellings/NDHa within 400 metres of existing and future train stations (up to
5-6 storeys)
dwellings/NDHa within 800 metres of existing and future activity centres
(generally up to 5-6 storeys).
These targets do not form part of the
proposed changes to the Wyndham Planning Scheme however, there are references in
the Final Version
of Clause 02 encouraging medium and high density urban
development around activity centres serviced by rail and bus interchanges
the proposed Derrimut Road Boulevard.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Mr Glossop supported the flexibility of the Day 1
version with regard to dwelling density over the use of measurable density
within the Wyndham Plan. His evidence was that, as a background
document, the Wyndham Plan will guide future strategic work to be
that may inform future planning scheme amendments.
Mr Fetterplace’s evidence supported Council’s aspiration to
encourage and pursue higher densities across the municipality
however, he
considered that :
there was no
strategic basis for the density targets
there was lack
of clarity on how and they will be applied
density targets
for new PSP areas should be aligned with the PSP Guidelines and State
Mr Negri supported the Wyndham Plan’s targets for
distribution of growth and the strategic directions proposed within the MPS
housing density. His evidence however, did not support the dwelling density
targets, which exceed the targets at Clause 11.03-2S
and were inconsistent with
the PSP Guidelines. He considered the targets were arbitrary and lacked robust
strategic analysis. When
included within a background document, they could
however assist with understanding the preferred density for areas nominated in
the MPS for increased density.
Mr Stephen’s evidence was that the dwelling density targets were
ambitious but appropriate for long-term (15 plus year) outcomes.
Council submitted that dwelling density targets are aspirational and
acknowledged that further analysis was needed before they could
be translated
into the Planning Scheme. Council submitted that Panel need not turn their mind
to the density targets within the
Wyndham Plan because as a background document,
they cannot be relied upon in decision making.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel considers that the proposed language in
the Final Version of Clause 02 in support of housing densities including
increased density around the Wyndham Heart, railway and bus
interchanges and along Derrimut Road Boulevard is strategically justified.
These changes to Clause 02 are consistent with Plan for Victoria, the Housing
Statement and provides an appropriate basis for the
delivery of 20-minute
neighbourhoods and greater housing choice across Wyndham.
By contrast, the dwelling density targets set out in the Wyndham Plan lack a
clear strategic basis. The Panel has not been provided
with robust evidence or
analysis to demonstrate that the nominated figures are achievable or appropriate
in all circumstances, nor
that they are aligned with infrastructure
The Panel agrees with the evidence of Mr Fetterplace and Mr Negri, that the
dwelling density targets are not strategically justified
and are inconsistent
with State Planning Policy and the PSP Guideline density targets. Further they
risk creating uncertainty in
delivering the strategic directions within the
proposed MPS by including them within a background document. These targets risk
conflict with existing or approved PSPs.
The Wyndham Plan should be confined to providing
strategic context, rather than embedding untested density metrics that are more
appropriately
addressed in a future planning scheme amendment or through the PSP
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes that
the density targets in the Wyndham Plan are not appropriate for a background
3.2 Out of sequence development
(i) The issues
issues are whether:
sequence provisions in Clause 02.03-1 are appropriate
sequence provisions in the Wyndham Plan are appropriate for a background
the inclusion of
work on a sequencing policy in the Clause 74.02 Schedule is
appropriate.
(ii) Background
The Wyndham Plan includes the following in relation
to out of sequence development:
It is proposed that out of sequence development in Wyndham can only be
supported by Wyndham City Council where the costs of out of
sequence development
are borne by the proponents causing a subdivision or development to be out of
sequence. The costs to the community
and to Council resulting from out of
sequence development are so great that they undermine the capacity for the
people of Wyndham
to sustain the quality of life they have sought through the
Wyndham 2040 Community Vision. To address out of sequence development
proposed to adopt the following actions:
Council will
implement State Government strategies identified at Clause 11.01 Victoria of the
Planning Policy Framework through the
Wyndham Plan and in particular Clause
11.01-1S Settlement that identifies Victoria will, among other strategies:
sustainable communities through a settlement framework offering convenient
access to jobs, services, infrastructure and
community facilities.
- Encourage a
form and density of settlements that supports healthy, active and sustainable
- Limit urban
sprawl and direct growth into existing settlements.
Council will
give effect to State Government strategy and policy on sequencing of development
through the Wyndham Plan and its implementation.
In particular, Council will
seek to actively implement Clause 11.02-3S Sequencing of development of the
Planning Policy Framework
within the Wyndham Planning Scheme and all Planning
Schemes. It will do this by defining a preferred development sequence in areas
of growth to better coordinate infrastructure planning and funding.
Council will
prepare a definition of what constitutes out of sequence development and develop
criteria to be used to assess future
applications for subdivision in
Wyndham’s greenfield growth areas.
Council will
support the pipeline of PSPs that are anticipated to proceed to delivery in the
period to 2040 where they will be appropriately
supported by infrastructure to
service the communities they will create, including the committed delivery of
the public transport
services discussed below.
Council will
consider not supporting PSPs that are located more than three kilometres from an
existing (i.e. operational) train station
unless a local bus service operating
on a minimum service level frequency of 20-minutes at peak periods is available
to connect residents
living within and beyond this distance to the nearby train
station. Council will consider not supporting PSPs on the basis that
developments located more than three kilometres from an existing train station
without a public transport connection to it are contrary
to orderly and proper
Council will
consider its support or non-support of PSPs from the perspective of delivering
affordable living outcomes (those that
factor both housing and transport costs)
for existing and future residents of Wyndham and weighing the implications of
such a decision
on additional housing supply and the impacts on existing public
transport infrastructure and services, and the local and regional
road network
if the public transport services discussed above are not provided.
Alternatively,
Council may support proposals in accordance with an agreement registered on
title that phases development of a PSP
with the committed delivery of the public
transport service described above.
Council will
consider refusing planning permits for new subdivisions that are located more
than three kilometres from an existing
(i.e. operational) train station unless a
local bus service operating on a minimum service level frequency of 20-minutes
periods is available to connect residents living within and beyond this
distance to the nearby train station. Permits will be considered
for refusal on
the basis that developments located more than three kilometres from an existing
train station without a public transport
connection to it are contrary to
orderly and proper planning.
Council will
consider refusing planning permits for subdivision applications that are not
aligned with either the green (0-4 years)
or orange (5-10 years) project
designations in the Wyndham North and Wyndham West Development Contribution Plan
Project Implementation
Programs (DCP PIPs) that are prepared annually by
Council. Council will do this on the basis that such developments increase
infrastructure
demand and ‘bring forward costs’ on Council and the
State Government. Council will also consider entering into Section
agreements to address bringing forward costs if requested by developers should
developers seek to enter into such agreements.
The purpose of such agreements
is for developers to fund ‘bring forward costs’ that out of sequence
developments will
impose on Council and the State Government by forward funding
these additional infrastructure costs.
Council’s Day 1 version
of Clause 02.03-1 (Settlement) contains the following:
The geographic spread of development fronts across the municipality has
presented challenges for the provision of infrastructure and
services. Careful
and transparent management of development sequencing is required in Wyndham to
align development with the provision
of infrastructure and services.
Council’s strategic directions for urban growth are to:
Prioritise and
encourage development in locations that are supported by infrastructure and
Create a central
city area (Wyndham City Heart) to support Wyndham’s future population of
more than 500,000 people consistent
with the area’s designation as a
National Employment and Innovation Cluster (NEIC).
Plan for each
Wyndham City Pulse, the Wyndham City Heart and the proposed Derrimut Road
Boulevard and their respective catchments
through an integrated and holistic
planning approach appropriate to its scale.
Encourage medium
and high density urban development, in and around activity centres serviced by
rail and bus interchanges (Urban and
Neighbourhood Pulses) and in the future,
the proposed Derrimut Road Boulevard.
concentrated, vibrant, attractive, high amenity urban places including high
amenity public realm that can attract investment
and enable people to come
together, meet, connect with one another or just relax and enjoy.
sequence of development in Wyndham’s growth areas to align with
infrastructure planning and funding, ensuring a coordinated
and timely provision
of services.
proponents causing subdivision or development to be out of sequence to bear the
additional costs of the infrastructure required
to service the out of sequence
development associated with bringing development forward.
Create compact,
contained and diverse urban environments which are well connected, serviced and
Advocate to
State and Federal Governments and agencies for changes to the State transport
network and development of associated infrastructure.
diverse employment close to where people live, particularly within urban
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Council submitted it had made a number of changes to
the exhibited version of Clause 02.03-1 which were contained in the Day 1
It highlighted that the change focused on the additional costs of
bringing development forward and, in response to a question from
clarified the reference to additional costs were the costs of finance to fund
the provision of infrastructure.
Council added that it had:
...not sought to implement those parts of the Wyndham Plan which relate to
its “traffic light” system, ... However, it
does seek to implement
the policy relating to bring forward costs.
Council submitted that the policy has a sound strategic basis because out of
sequence development is not orderly planning and its
approach is pragmatic and
consistent with the Victorian Planning Authority Guidance Note,
Infrastructure Coordination: Infrastructure and Development Staging
added that:
... the proposed strategic direction is consistent with Council’s
long-established Development Contribution Plan Project Implementation
process (in place for over 7 years), namely to allow out of sequence development
in certain circumstances if proponents agree
to fund the ‘bring forward
costs’ of out of sequence development. Council understands there is broad
support by the
development industry with that approach as it provides developers
with a level of certainty that Council will be willing to entertain
sequence development in certain circumstances.
Mr Stephens’s agreed with the principle of the logical sequencing of
urban development where out of sequence development may
result in additional
costs to governments and the community. He added that it would be appropriate
to consider any costs to the
community from out of sequence development in
decision making. He acknowledged that determining what is out of sequence
development
is a challenge and concluded that the wording of Clause 02.02-1
could be clearer.
Council agreed with this assessment and proposed the following change to the
seventh dot point of the strategic directions of the
Day 1 version of Clause
02.03-1 in its Final Version:
Require proponents causing subdivision or development to be out of sequence
to bear the additional costs of the infrastructure associated
with bringing
development forward.
Mr Glossop considered the Day 1 version of Clause 02.03-1 was “benign
and does not tie the Council or the community into any
outcome.” He observed that Clause 11.02-3S (Sequencing of development)
addressed this issue albeit at a high level.
Council submitted that all current PSPs in the City of Wyndham were prepared
prior to the publication of the PSP Guidelines. As a
result, there is often
little direction in development sequencing. Consequently, it is appropriate
that out of sequence development
criteria are clarified and that its approach to
development sequencing is transparent. For this reason, it proposed to include
following in the Clause 74.02 Schedule:
Prepare a development sequencing criteria and policy for development in
growth areas to be used for the assessment of subdivision
and development
applications.
Council added it was unrealistic to contemplate reviewing existing PSPs to
include sequencing criteria. Its approach of developing
a policy and criteria
was more realistic and would provide the Council with the ability to make
decisions about development sequencing
in an open and transparent way.
Leakes Road and SIG submitted that the out of sequence guidelines in the
Wyndham Plan were inappropriate from a strategic perspective
and for inclusion
in the Wyndham Plan. The changes in the Day 1 and Final Versions did not
resolve its concerns.
Mr Fetterplace observed that Council proposed to manage out of sequence
development through the strategic directions of Clause 02.03-1.
In addition,
the Wyndham Plan provided further detail on Council’s approach to
assessing out of sequence development.
He considered the Day 1 Clause 02.03-1 strategic directions seventh dot point
conflicted with existing State policy for new development
to make a contribution
to the provision of infrastructure and should be deleted. He added:
In new growth area’s it is not always possible for urban development to
commence immediately adjacent an existing urban interface
or infrastructure
item. Nor is unusual for development to commence on a number of development
fronts or in non-contiguous locations
within an approved PSP area for a number
of reasons. These include existing land ownership patterns, environmental
constraints and
access to services
Bring forward costs associated with development sequencing are generally born
by the developer up front and development contributions
are balanced, via a DCPs
(or similar) as part of delivery over time.
Mr Fetterplace said sequencing of development was best managed through the
PSP process and recommended the Wyndham Plan should be
amended to remove the
criteria for out of sequence development and replace it with text that
reinforces the role of PSPs to guide
staging and implementation. He also
recommended removing the action to prepare a development sequencing policy from
the Clause 74.02
Peet Ltd acknowledged that the Day 1 changes to the Amendment resolved some
of its concerns. However, the work proposed in the Clause
74.02 Schedule and
the development sequencing proposals in the Wyndham Plan were premature. In
addition, the proposals lacked clear
direction and it was unclear how they would
assist decision making. Peet Ltd proposed the references to out of sequence
development
in the MPS and the Clause 74.02 Schedule be deleted until they
“have a proper strategic basis.”
(iv) Discussion
The Panel accepts Council’s submission that
the proposed strategic directions are consistent with its past practice and that
it is intended to capture the finance costs in providing infrastructure for out
of sequence development. The Panel does not agree
with Mr Fetterplace’s
view that this is inconsistent with Clause 11.02-3S because what is proposed is
not related to the cost
of the infrastructure but to the cost to the community
of providing that infrastructure in advance of the level of development
to fund its provision.
The Panel also agrees with Mr Glossop that the strategic directions of Clause
02.03-1 do not lock Council into a specific course of
action. In the
Panel’s view this enables Council to take a pragmatic approach to allowing
development to proceed in a manner
that does not disadvantage the community by
incurring additional costs.
The Panel accepts Council’s submission that the development of a
sequencing policy will transparently fill a gap in existing
PSPs and that it is
appropriate to list that further strategic work in the Clause 74.02 Schedule.
The Panel notes that the Practitioner’s
Guide includes the following:
Where a list of further strategic work is provided in a planning scheme, it
should comprise a concise list of work the Council intends
to undertake in the
next review cycle (about 4 years). The work must have a land use and
development focus and must relate to matters
that can be implemented through a
planning scheme.
In the Panel’s view what Council has proposed it consistent with these
guidelines and it is appropriate that the development
of a sequencing policy
should occur within the next review cycle.
However, the text in the Wyndham Plan is more definitive in that it canvasses
situations where Council may or may not support permits.
The Panel acknowledges
that Council submitted that it has no intention of implementing the traffic
light system. Nevertheless,
this discussion remains in the Wyndham Plan which
goes well beyond explaining why the particular requirements of Clause 02.03-1
in the Planning Scheme. In the Panel’s view these elements are
inappropriate in a background document.
(v) Conclusions
The Panel concludes:
out of sequence provisions in Clause 02.03-1 are appropriate.
The inclusion of
work on a sequencing policy in the Clause 74.02 Schedule is appropriate.
out of sequence provisions in the Wyndham Plan are not appropriate for a
background document.
3.3 Place Intervention Logic
(i) The issues
issues are whether:
the reference to
PIL serves a useful purpose
PILs should be
included in the Clause 74.02 Schedule
terminology is appropriate.
(ii) Background
PILs are proposed to be referenced in the Clause
74.02 Schedule (further strategic work).
Council is in the process of preparing the first PIL (for Tarneit) which will
be subject to public consultation.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Council submits that PILs are an important tool to
deliver the vision of the Wyndham Plan, particularly the big ideas such as a
heart, pulses and the Derrimut Road corridor. They will be broad framework
plans to bridge between high level strategy and detailed
Mr Glossop supported PILs in principle and saw them as the “
” in implementing the Wyndham Plan’s strategic aims. He
recognised they are not part of the statutory framework but can
be used to test
ideas (like sequencing and density) before they are translated into statutory
controls. Mr Glossop considered there
was a risk of PILs being treated as
operative policy and stressed they must remain as background/future work until
formalised through
an amendment.
The evidence of Mr Negri was that PILs duplicate or undermine PSPs and lack a
clear statutory basis. He recommended removal of PIL
references from the
Wyndham Plan until a clearer statutory or strategic justification was
demonstrated.
The evidence of Mr Fetterplace was that PILs could complicate sequencing and
density implementation already governed by PSPs. He
did not support the
inclusion of PIL references in the Planning Scheme.
Council’s Final Version of the Amendment varied the language used in
the Clause 74.02 Schedule to provide further clarity around
the purpose of a PIL
and how it would be prepared.
The submission by Leaks Road and SIG following circulation of Council’s
Final Version of the Clause 74.02 Schedule maintained
its concerns regarding the
inclusion of PILs within the Wyndham Plan and Clause 74.02.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel understands from the evidence of Mr
Glossop that a PIL is a new local planning tool developed by Wyndham City
Council and
born out of the Wyndham Plan. The Panel acknowledges that a PIL is
not a statutory plan such as a PSP, Activity Centre Structure
Plan or UDF but
rather a future framework to guide how different parts of Wyndham evolve, based
on local input and broader city goals.
The Panel supports Council’s intent to undertake further strategic work
to better plan for Wyndham’s growth across broader
catchments or networks
of places such as the Wyndham City Heart, Urban Pulses, Village Pulses and
Derrimut Road Boulevard including
their surrounding catchments. Given the scale
and ongoing growth of the municipality, this approach is considered logical.
inclusion of such work within the Clause 74.02 Schedule will allow Council
to undertake further strategic planning to inform future
planning scheme
amendments and is consistent with the municipality’s strategic
directions.
The Panel is not persuaded by submissions that inclusion of the PILs within
the Clause 74.02 Schedule will duplicate or undermine
Practitioner’s Guide clearly identifies that further strategic work does
not form part of the MPS, nor can it be
considered by the responsible authority
in decision making. Any framework plans prepared through this process would be
scrutiny if they are to inform future planning scheme amendments.
The Panel understands the acronym PIL was derived from the language of the
Wyndham Plan and intended to signify a remedy to aid in
the delivery of
20-minute neighbourhoods. The Practitioner’s Guide directs that the
scheme content should be written in clear,
concise and plain English. Where the
Victoria Planning Provisions already provide a terminology, such as Structure
Plan or Framework
Plan, Council should adopt those terms.
The Panel accepts Mr Negri’s evidence that a more appropriate
terminology is Local Area Framework Plan (LAFP). This aligns
with established
practice, Council’s final version of the Clause 74.02 Schedule (in part)
and recognises that Council may prepare
LAFPs that extend beyond a narrowly
defined area to broader catchments or networks of places.
On this basis, the Panel is satisfied that the Clause 74.02 Schedule include
a requirement to prepare LAFPs to deliver 20-minute neighbourhoods,
refined form presented in Council’s Final Version. This will provide the
necessary signal of Council’s intent
to progress the further strategic
work required to manage growth and deliver 20-minute neighbourhoods, while
ensuring that such work
will be grounded in evidence, aligned with State policy
and subject to proper community and stakeholder engagement.
(v) Conclusions and recommendation
The Panel concludes:
term Place Intervention Logic lacks clarity and does not accord with the
Practitioner’s Guide. The established term Local
Area Framework Plan
should be adopted in place of PILs.
identification of the preparation of Local Area Framework Plans for the Wyndham
City Heart, Urban Pulses, Village Pulses and Derrimut
Road Boulevard (including
their catchments) in the Clause 74.02 Schedule is appropriate and strategically
The Panel recommends:
Replace Clause 74.02 Schedule with
the Panel recommended version in Appendix E
3.4 The Wyndham Plan as a background document
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Wyndham Plan is an appropriate background document.
(ii) Background
Submissions referenced the Practitioner’s
Guide which identifies :
6.4.2 Policy composition
Policy Documents
Background documents provide information to explain the context in which a
particular policy has been framed. A background document
may explain why
particular requirements are in the planning scheme, substantiate a specific
issue or provide background to a provision.
As background documents are not
part of the planning scheme, the substantive planning elements of the document
(such as built form
guidelines or the like) will have been included in the
planning scheme in either a local policy or a schedule.
Where a background document is directly related to a policy in Clauses 10 to
19 it may be referenced in that specific policy as well
as the schedule to
clause 72.08. If a background document relates to a substantial number of
policies (such as a Regional Growth
Plan) it should not be repetitively
referenced in the PPF. The schedule to clause 72.08 enables a consolidated list
of local background
documents to be maintained in the planning scheme.
6.6.2 How to refer to a background document
What is a background document?
A background document provides information that helps to understand why a
particular policy or control has been included in the planning
Background documents were previously referred to as ‘reference
documents.’
A background document is not part of the planning scheme and must not be
directly relied on for decision making. If a background
document contains
content that is necessary for decision making (such as strategies or decision
guidelines) then these must be extracted
and placed in the relevant policy or
When should a document be mentioned as a background document?
If a document gives useful information that will help a user understand the
planning scheme, it may be suitable for mention as a background
document. These
documents are however, most relevant at the planning scheme amendment stage and
are generally not needed at the
decision making stage. As with incorporated
documents, avoid referencing background documents wherever possible to keep the
user-friendly and self-contained.
A background document can explain why a particular policy or provision is in
the planning scheme. For example, a flora and fauna
study that documents the
reasons for applying an Environmental Significance Overlay may be usefully
referenced as the basis for the
statement of environmental significance in the
A background document must relate directly to a specific policy or provision.
A document that includes a lot of information that is
not directly relevant to
the specific provision of the scheme will not generally be suitable for mention
as a background document.
Do not make a document a background document if the substantive elements of
the document have been included in the scheme and require
explanation.
Avoid general references to a type or source of document, including under
policy documents in the PPF. Instead, if needed, name the
actual documents that
informed the policy.
How is a document made a background document?
A background document is one that is referred to in the planning scheme but
is not incorporated under Clause 72.04.
To refer to a background document, use the same format prescribed for an
incorporated document in Chapter 6.6.1 above.
A planning scheme amendment is required to amend a background document
Where a background document has directly informed the creation of a
provision, then it may be referenced directly by that provision
as well as being
listed in the Clause 72.08 schedule. Where a background document has informed
numerous provisions, such as a Regional
Growth Plan or a housing strategy, then
the document only needs to be listed in the Clause 72.08 or its schedule rather
repetitively referenced throughout a series of provisions. If a
document has already been referenced by the VPP, it does not have
referenced again at the local level in a policy or a schedule.
To make the background document list easier to use, the schedule to clause
72.08 should be compiled alphabetically.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Council submitted that the Wyndham Plan is an
appropriate background document. In referencing the Practitioner’s Guide,
added that a background document, listed in the Clause 72.08 Schedule, will
“not form part of the Planning Scheme
“ but will provide the
strategic context for the Amendment.
In addition, as made clear in the Practitioner’s Guide, a background
document cannot be used to guide decision making. In support
proposition Council referenced the report of the Glen Eira C220glen (PSA) Panel
While a strategic plan adopted by Council may be given some limited weight
section 60(1A)(g)
Planning and Environment Act 1987
power exists irrespective of a document’s status as a background document
in the Planning Scheme. The inclusion of a background
document in the schedule
to Clause 72.08, recognises that the document has informed the history and
strategic context of certain
provisions in the Planning Scheme.
Council identified that a number of submissions sought changes to the Wyndham
Plan. It said the Panel process was not the appropriate
place to seek changes
to a background document because it does not form part of the Planning Scheme.
Nevertheless, it was open to
the Council to make changes to its strategic
document as the need arises.
Council recommended that the Panel adopt the approach similar to that taken
by the Wyndham C267wynd Panel, that:
(a) the role and purpose of a background document is to provide context as to
why certain provisions have been included in the Planning
(b) it is not the Panel’s role to recommend changes to a background
Council observed that while both Mr Negri and Mr Fetterplace sought changes
to the Wyndham Plan neither suggested:
...that the Wyndham Plan does not provide context for the Amendment or
express any
in principle
objection to it being included as a background
Council submitted that Mr Glossop supported the inclusion of Wyndham Plan a
background document. Mr Glossop’s evidence referenced
Practitioner’s Guide which informed his decision to support the inclusion
of the Wyndham Plan as a background document
(a) it has a role to play in future strategic planning work
(b) has no substantive role in guiding the exercise of discretion for
planning permits.
Mr Glossop added that some of the outcomes detailed in
Targets) sat outside the realm of the Planning Scheme. However, the Wyndham
Plan was helpful in setting the context for
the big ideas and notifying
landowners of Council’s future direction. Mr Glossop supported the
Wyndham Plan as a background
document subject to the following changes:
description of Place Intervention Logics to be consistent with the proposed
references to any reallocation of Development Contribution Plan (DCP) funds to
pay non-DCP projects.
Leakes Road and SIG submitted that the Wyndham
Plan formed the fundamental justification for the Amendment but that it
contained a
number of inappropriate elements including dwelling density targets,
out of sequence development and PILs. The submission referenced
the following
provisions of Clause 72.08:
A background document may:
have informed
the preparation of, or an amendment to, this planning scheme
information to explain the context within which a provision has been framed
understanding of this planning scheme.
Leakes Road and SIG concluded
...on the face of these provisions that, inter alia, a decision maker can
consider a background document to assist with interpreting
a provision of the
Background Documents are therefore important, and they should not escape
detailed assessment and scrutiny before their inclusion as
such, particularly in
a context such as this where the relevant document,
the Wyndham Plan,
the fundamental basis for the proposed Amendment.
Further, it submitted that the Wyndham Plan should not include key targets or
metrics that have not been robustly justified, particularly
because, as the
basis for this Amendment and as a background document it may inform future
planning scheme amendments. The submission
proposed that following elements of
the Wyndham Plan be removed:
the dwelling
density targets
the criteria for
out of sequence development
reference to
Mr Fetterplace recommended the Wyndham Plan be amended because
of its role as a background document. He recommended a review of the:
proposed density
the PILs role,
process and approach to implementation.
Ranfurlie submitted that it
is important to review the role of the Wyndham Plan and its contents because it
is proposed to be a background
document. However, it added that the Wyndham
Plan should not be included as a background document because it lacks an
evidence base
and introduced concepts such as pulses and PILs which were foreign
to the Planning Scheme.
Mr Negri’s evidence that some of the terms used in the Wyndham Plan
were bespoke terminology and not plain English and should
not be used in the
Planning Scheme. He acknowledged that promoting higher density around activity
centres was a sound strategic
objective. Nevertheless, there is a risk:
... that the specific housing targets contained in a background document will
be used to assist the understanding of this planning
scheme by defining the
density targets for the specific locations nominated in the Municipal Planning
Peet Ltd submitted that the density targets should be removed from the
Wyndham Plan, or it be removed as a background document.
(iv) Discussion
While there was some discussion in the Hearing about
whether the Panel could or should amend a background document Council submitted
that the Panel should not involve itself in proposing amendments to the
background document, it argued that was the responsibility
of the Council and
that it was:
...not uncommon for a Council to make changes to a strategic document
incidentally to a planning scheme amendment process, because
the process
necessarily involves some level of analysis of the strategic documents
underpinning the amendment. As a result, a Council,
acting as Council rather
than as Planning Authority, may decide to make a change to that strategic
document (whether to correct an
error, amend it for consistency or to make a
more substantive change). However, that is a matter for the Council and its
not a matter for a panel considering changes to the planning scheme
through a planning scheme amendment.
The Panel agrees with Council’s submission that it is not the
Panel’s role to consider the merits of changes to the Wyndham
is consistent with the conclusions of the Wyndham C267wynd Panel. However, it
is appropriate for the Panel within the
scope of the Amendment to consider the
suitability of the Wyndham Plan as a background document.
The Panel notes that the Wyndham Plan contains material that does not
directly relate to the Planning Scheme. Council argued that
inconsequential. The Practitioner’s Guide states the following:
A document that includes a lot of information that is not directly relevant
to the specific provision of the scheme will not generally
be suitable for
mention as a background document
Unfortunately, the Practitioner’s Guide does not provide any further
guidance on how much is ‘a lot.’ Nevertheless,
parts of the Wyndham
Plan are not directly relevant to the specific provisions of the Planning
All three opposing submissions advocated for changes to the Wyndham Plan
focused on the issues of density, out of sequence development
and PILs. Leakes
Road and SIG, supported by the evidence of Mr Fetterplace and Peet wanted these
elements removed as a precondition
of including the Wyndham Plan as a background
document. Ranfurlie argued that the document was unsuitable as a background
although Mr Negri concluded that with significant change it could be
included in the Planning Scheme.
The Panel has considered the issues relating to density, out of sequence
development and PILs and concluded that some of the content
in the Wyndham Plan
is unsuitable for a background document.
In the Panel’s view, the cumulative effect of the content of the
Wyndham Plan and the issues around density, out of sequence
development and PILs
makes the Wyndham Plan, in its current form, unsuitable for inclusion in the
Planning Scheme as a background
(v) Conclusion and recommendation
The Panel concludes the
Wyndham Plan is not an appropriate background document.
The Panel recommends:
Amend Clause 72.08 Schedule to remove the
reference to the Wyndham Plan.
4 Changes to Clause 02
(i) The issue
issue is whether the proposed changes to Clause 02 are appropriate.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Council submitted that in response to submissions it
made a number of post exhibition changes to the following Clauses:
Strategic Framework Plan.
These changes were reflected in the Day 1
version of the Amendment documents (Document 19).
Leakes Road and SIG, Ranfurlie and Peet submitted that the changes included
in the Day 1 version of the Amendment documents did not
resolve all of their
concerns. In response to Council’s Final Version, Leakes Road and SIG
stated that its concerns had not
been addressed and it maintained its position
that the seventh dot point of the strategic directions of Clause 02.03-1 and the
strategic work relating to the development of sequencing criteria should
be deleted.
Mr Negri observed that the Amendment included the introduction of
“bespoke terminology”
including the following:
Wyndham City
Urban Pulse
Neighbourhood
Intervention Logic.
He stated that these terms:
...are not plain English terms. ‘Heart’ appears to be used as a
metaphor for the city. ‘Pulse’ appears to
be used as a metaphor for
an activity centre.
He referenced the Ministerial Direction on the Form and Content of Planning
Schemes and the Practitioner’s Guide, both of which
state that a planning
scheme should be written in plain English. He stated:
The Wyndham City Heart is an attempt to describe a strategic precinct
comprising three activity centres, an employment precinct and
a mixed restricted
retail/industrial precinct. I accept that there is a benefit in preparing a
cohesive plan for this strategic
precinct. In my view, referring to this
precinct as Wyndham City would provide a simple, plain English descriptor of the
Activity centre is a commonly used descriptor in the VPP, Plan Melbourne and
other planning documents. It should be applied as an
alternative to
‘Pulse’ to provide a simple plain English descriptor.
Council submitted that the expression Wyndham City Heart was used to describe
this collection of activity centres and their connections
and associated
residential areas. From this perspective heart has a plain English meaning, as
the core or centre of something.
Council acknowledged that the term pulse was
more problematic but it:
...was part of the narrative and “talks to the community.” But
perhaps more importantly, it is the collective noun used
to describe the centres
(other than the Wyndham City Heart) that will play a central role in supporting
20-minute neighbourhoods.
Council added that the pulse title does not apply to all activity centres in
the municipality and therefore it is a convenient term
that created the idea of
connectivity to the heart. It submitted that there was:
... no real disadvantage in using it, especially where the ordinance clearly
explains the link between the expression “urban
“neighbourhood pulse” and the various types of activity centres
identified in Plan Melbourne.
Mr Glossop supported the use of the terms and stated that the:
...objective of creating a heart is that it takes on an equivalent
‘central city’ role within the municipality. It is
the preferred
location for business, community and transport investments, supported by the
highest density housing. The goal of
connecting what are currently three
disparate Major Activity Centres is to have them operate synergistically rather
than in competition
with one another, as is currently said to be occurring. I
think the concept is innovative and sets an appropriate framework for
structure planning to come.
He added that the pulses were intended to replicate 20 minute neighbourhoods
and reflect the level of activity within each centre.
He stated that the
identification of the pulses reflected the existing activity centre hierarchy
and was appropriate.
(iii) Discussion
In terms of the changes to Clause 02 the Panel notes
that the only issue raised by the parties was whether the seventh dot point in
the strategic directions of Clause 02.03-1 should be deleted. The strategic
directions of Clause 02.03-1, the further strategic
work relating to the
development of sequencing criteria in the Clause 74.02 schedule and the PILs
have been discussed above and will
not be repeated here.
The only remaining issue in relation to Clause 02 is then the use of the
words ‘heart’ and ‘pulse’.
In the Panel’s view, heart is an acceptable and plain English term
which in this context refers to a precinct which incorporates
activity centres,
an employment precinct and a mixed restricted retail/industrial precinct. The
Panel agrees with Council that Mr
Negri’s alternative of
would be confusing and that the addition of the word heart
identifies the precinct as the core of the municipality.
The use of the term pulse is a more difficult issue. The term itself is
plain English, unlike Place Intervention Logic and applies
to select activity
centres. From this perspective the Panel accepts Council’s submission
that pulse differentiates activity
centres that are part of the 20-minute
neighbourhoods which have a connection to the heart. The Panel understands that
an evolving language and that Council advised of the community
support for the terminology in the development of the Wyndham Plan.
acknowledges that the terms heart and pulse are defined by planning terms in
Clause 02.02 and for these reasons the proposed
changes to the Planning Scheme
are supported.
(iv) Conclusion and recommendation
The Panel concludes that
the proposed Final Day changes to Clause 02 are appropriate.
The Panel recommends:
Replace Clause 02 with Panel recommended
version in Appendix D.
A Submitters to the Amendment
Represented by
Moorabool Shire Council
Country Fire Authority
Lotus Oaks Development Pty Ltd
Greater Western Water
Casaccio Egg Farm
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action
Development Victoria
Lignum Field and 1 and 4 Lignum Road
ZL International Investment Pty Ltd
Dennis Family Corporation
1228 Leakes Road Land Pty Ltd
Fountainstone Group
Ranfurlie Asset Management Pty Ltd
Dahua Group
SIG Oak Pty Ltd
Frasers Property Australia
Brimbank City Council
Department of Transport and Planning (Transport)
Abiwood MTC Pty Ltd
Appendix B Parties to the Panel Hearing
Represented by
Wyndham City Council
Juliet Forsyth and Tara Hooper of Counsel instructed by Kim Piskuric of
Harwood Andrews, calling the following expert evidence:
- Planning from
John Glossop of Glossop Town Planning
- Economics from
Sean Stephens of Ethos Urban
1228 Leakes Road Land Pty Ltd and SIG Oak Pty Ltd
Nick Sutton of Norton Rose Fulbright, calling the following expert
- Planning from
Marco Negri of Contour
Ranfurlie Asset Management Pty Ltd
Nicola Collingwood of Counsel instructed by Jarryd Gray of Minter Ellison,
calling the following expert evidence:
- Planning from
Jonathan Fetterplace of A Different City
Paul Beeson of HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
Appendix C Document list
Description
Provided by
Letter confirming resignation of the previous Panel Chair
Planning Panels Victoria (PPV)
Hearing adjournment letter
Proposed directions
Proposed orders and correspondence on post exhibition changes
Further submission from Leakes Road Pty Ltd and SIG Oak Pty Ltd on post
exhibition changes
Norton Rose Fulbright
Email from Leakes Road Pty Ltd and SIG Oak Pty Ltd confirming expert
witness (Direction 7)
Norton Rose Fulbright
Email from Ranfurlie Asset Management Pty Ltd confirming expert witness
(Direction 7)
Minter Ellison
Panel Directions and Hearing Timetable version 1
Email from Peet confirming no expert witness being called (Direction
HWL Ebsworth
Email about previous work undertaken by the Panel Chair
Response from the Panel Chair to Council’s email (D10)
Amended Hearing Timetable and distribution list
Consolidated and redacted post-exhibition submissions (Direction 5)
Part A submission
Attachment 1
a) Post-exhibition changes – May 2025 consultation version
Attachment 2
b) 24 October 2023 Council meeting minutes Council officer report
c) Wyndham Plan engagement report (and addendum)
d) Council’s response to submissions regarding the Wyndham Plan
e) Wyndham Housing Density Review
f) The Wyndham Plan (October 2023)
Attachment 3
g) Tracked changes on Explanatory Report
Attachment 4
h) East Werribee Employment Precinct Structure Plan
Melbourne 2017-2050 Draft Western Metro Land Use Framework Plan
j) Werribee City Centre Structure Plan (June 2013)/Refresh (September 2024)
k) West Growth Corridor Plan
of Wyndham Activity Centres Strategy 2016
m) Tarneit Major Town Centre UDF (December 2023)
n) Principal Public Transport Network 2017 (map)
o) Network Development Plan – Metropolitan Rail (2012) and Metropolitan
Train Network Map (August 2018)
p) Wyndham Bus Network
q) East Werribee Employment Precinct Structure Plan 2013
r) Wyndham Integrated Transport Strategy 2023
s) VPA Precinct Structure Planning Guidelines
t) Wyndham 2040 Vision
Attachment 5
u) Table summarising submissions and Council responses
Expert evidence statement of Marco Negri
Minter Ellison
Expert evidence statement of Jonathon Fetterplace
Norton Rose Fulbright
Expert evidence statement of John Glossop
Expert evidence statement of Sean Stephens
Day 1 version of the Amendment documents
Part B submission
Attachment 1
a) VPA Guidance Note – Infrastructure Coordination - Infrastructure and
Development Staging (February 2025)
Attachment 2
b) Wyndham C267wynd Panel Report (20 December 2024)
Submission on behalf of 1228 Leakes Road Land Pty Ltd & SIG Oak Pty
Attachment 1
a) Glen Eira C220glen Panel Report (22 June 2022)
Attachment 2
b) VCAT Decision Vivace Property Group Pty Ltd v Glen Eira CC
[2022] VCAT 919
Attachment 3
Meeting Agenda (C265wynd)
Attachment 4
d) Council Meeting Minutes (C265wynd) – 23 April 2024
Norton Rose Fulbright
Submission on behalf of Ranfurlie Asset Management
Minter Ellison
Submission on behalf of Peet Ltd
HWL Ebsworth
Submission on behalf of Ranfurlie Asset Management Pty Ltd
Attachment 1
a) Peet No. 1895 Pty Ltd v Wyndham CC
[2023] VCAT 168
Minter Ellison
Attachment 1
a) Tracked changes on Explanatory Report – (closing) version
Attachment 2
b) Activity Centre Table
Attachment 3
02 tracked changes – closing) version
d) Clause 02 clean – (closing) version
e) Schedule to Clause 74.02 tracked changes – (closing) version
f) Schedule to Clause 74.02 clean – (closing) version
g) Schedule to Clause 72.08 clean –(closing) version
Response to Council’s Part C Final Version of the ordinance
Norton Rose Fulbright
Appendix D Panel
recommended version of Clause 02
Colour Legend:
Existing ordinance content
–Existing text that was proposed for removal in the exhibition
– Content from the exhibited version
– Post-exhibition changes, including new changes and text proposed to be
removed from the exhibited version (shown with a red
strikethrough)
– Day 1 deletions
Day 1 insertions
10/02/2022-
Wyndham stands on the Lands of the Bunurong and Wadawurrung Peoples as
Traditional Owners of the land on which Wyndham is being developed
City of Wyndham is located on the coastal plain to the west of Melbourne,
between the metropolitan area and Geelong. It is
adjacent to the municipalities
of Greater Geelong, Moorabool, Melton, Brimbank and Hobsons Bay.
Wyndham covers an area of 542 square kilometres.
Wyndham has strong industrial and technology districts, major retail
precincts, key activity centres, established agricultural land
and important
tourist attractions. Werribee South is one of the most significant market
garden regions in the State, while Laverton
North is a key major industrial
Wyndham has a number of significant rivers and waterway corridors, such as
Skeleton Creek, Werribee River, Lollypop Creek, Little
River, a small section of
Kororoit Creek, the Port Phillip Bay coastline and the habitats and wetlands of
Point Cook and the Western
Treatment complex. Wyndham contains several
biological assets and its native grasslands are considered highly significant.
Wyndham also has four dominant Ecological Vegetation Classes
(EVC’s), coastal salt marsh, plains grassy woodland, floodplain
woodland and plains grassland
Wyndham is one of metropolitan Melbourne’s designated growth
corridors. The City comprises the suburbs of Werribee, Hoppers
Crossing, Point
Cook, Laverton, Laverton North, Williams Landing, Truganina, Tarneit and Wyndham
Vale, which are all within the Urban
Growth Boundary.
Werribee South, Cocoroc, Little River, Mambourin, Quandong, Eynesbury and
Mount Cottrell are predominantly outside the growth area.
is the largest growing municipality in Victoria, adding
13,216 residents between 2015-2016. The population is forecast to grow from
217,122 people to 435,832 by 2036
has one of the highest population
growth rates among Victorian municipalities and is one of Australia's
fastest-growing areas
In 2020, Wyndham was home to 283,294
residents, with projections indicating it will reach a population of 512,591
people by 2041
In 2021, Wyndham was home to 296,190 residents, with
projections indicating it will reach a population of 472,120 people by
Wyndham City Existing Context Plan
The Wyndham City Plan 2017-21 sets out the priorities to guide the
work of Council over a four-year period. Its themes, strategies
and initiatives
provide a roadmap for Council’s Annual Integrated Plan and Budget.
Wyndham Plan 2023 will deliver the Wyndham 2040 Community Vision to
connect people and places and encourage development in areas supported
infrastructure and services. The Wyndham Plan 2023 comprises four pillars
(connectivity, concentration, capacity and choice)
and six 'Big Ideas' which
include objectives to support the delivery of the Wyndham 2040 Community Vision.
The six ‘Big Ideas’
for Wyndham are identified
on Map 1 at
Clause 02.04 and areas follows:
Wyndham City’s planning vision is for a healthy, liveable
future-focused and plans for sustainable development.
diversity and is welcoming and inclusive.
of connected, vibrant neighbourhoods that provide for the cultural, social,
economic and recreational needs of the community.
a healthy and active lifestyle.
the diverse educational needs of the community.
the community to lead.
central urban location of Wyndham to deliver jobs, housing,
services, and facilities)
to transform Wyndham from a 2-hour to a
20-minute city
City Pulses (major activity centres, neighbourhood centres and rural villages
located at the centre of communities)
to deliver 20-minute
neighbourhoods
Transport Network (to better connect people and places).
Road Boulevard (proposed as the City’s iconic boulevard concept to
integrate transport and development and connect
the central parts of
Residential Neighbourhoods (deliver quality residential development and link
people to the places they need).
Lungs, Coast and Country (
celebrate and connect
people with Wyndham’s rural areas and natural
environment)
STRATEGIC DIRECTION
Urban Growth
Population growth in Wyndham is a significant issue requiring careful
planning and management to ensure equitable and timely delivery
of services,
jobs and infrastructure to support a liveable community.
Growth Corridor Plans have been developed at the metropolitan level,
setting the strategic direction for the future urban development
of land within
Melbourne’s Urban Growth Boundary. Precinct Structure Plans (PSPs) are
progressively being prepared and completed
for all of the growth areas within
the West Growth Corridor being, Wyndham West (urban area west of the Werribee
River); East Werribee
Employment Precinct; and Wyndham North.
Development of concentrated urban centres and
the proposed
Derrimut Road Boulevard
to service large areas of suburban
development is required
consistent with Map 1 at Clause 02.04
is required
provide a range of housing densities and to
service large areas of suburban development,
infrastructure and services closer to where people live
The geographic spread of development fronts across the municipality has
presented challenges for the provision of infrastructure and
services. Careful
and transparent management of development sequencing is required in Wyndham to
align development with the provision
of infrastructure and services.
Management of development fronts and defining a preferred sequence
of development and what constitutes out of sequence development
is required to
limit urban sprawl and direct growth to concentrated urban centres, Derrimut
Road Boulevard and activity centres that
are supported by infrastructure and
Council’s strategic directions for urban growth are to:
Prioritise and
encourage development in locations that are supported by infrastructure and
residential growth with key infrastructure and the delivery of economic and
employment growth.
Create a central city area (Wyndham
City Heart) to support Wyndham’s future population of more than 500,000
people consistent
with the area’s designation as a National Employment and
Innovation Cluster (NEIC)
Plan for each
Wyndham City Pulse, the Wyndham City Heart and the proposed Derrimut Road
Boulevard and their respective catchments
through an integrated and holistic
planning approach appropriate to its scale.
medium and high density
urban development
in and around activity centres serviced by rail
and bus interchanges (Urban and Neighbourhood Pulses) and
future, the proposed
Derrimut Road Boulevard
concentrated, vibrant, attractive, high amenity urban places including high
amenity public realm that can attract investment
and enable people to come
together, meet, connect with one
another, or just relax and enjoy.
for growth on a scale and form consistent with maintaining the containment,
compactness, accessibility and affordability of
Prepare a Structure Plan [Place
Intervention Logic (PIL)] as defined in The Wyndham Plan 2023 for the Wyndham
City Heart, Urban Pulses,
Neighbourhood Pulses, Village Pulses and Derrimut Road
the number of development fronts at any one time to assist in the timely
provision of infrastructure.
Manage the number of
development fronts at any one time to assist in the timely provision of
infrastructure.
Manage the sequence of development in Wyndham’s growth areas to
align with infrastructure
planning and funding, ensuring a coordinated
and timely provision of services
the sequencing for development in growth areas and criteria to be used for the
assessment of subdivision and development applications.
proponents causing subdivision or development to be out of sequence to bear
infrastructure
required to service the out of sequence
development
associated with bringing development forward
compact, contained and diverse urban environments which are well connected,
serviced and designed.
infrastructure in partnership with state and federal
governments.
to State and Federal
Governments and agencies for changes to the State transport network and
development of
infrastructure
in partnership with state and federal
governments
industrial and residential activities from encroaching on each
jobs closer to where people live especially in the new employment
Facilitate diverse employment close to where
people live, particularly within urban centres
Activity centres
Activity centres provide a range of functions including retail,
commercial, community, cultural, transport, education, social, entertainment,
leisure and civic services. Activity centres also support higher density
housing. These roles are vital to community and business
development, and to
growth and diversification of local employment.
Wyndham has identified an activity centre hierarchy that contains a
network of existing, planned and proposed activity centres. These
centres are identified on Map 1 and Map 5 at Clause 02.04.
Wyndham City Heart
'Wyndham City Heart' is central to the activity centre network. It
includes the following three key activity centres and two precincts:
City Centre (Major Activity Centre)
committed to the reinvigoration and redevelopment of the Werribee City Centre as
its principal activity centre and as a
major retail, commercial and residential
hub. Map 6 to Clause 02.04 indicates council’s preferred outcomes for the
development
of the centre.
The vision for the development of the Werribee City Centre is for a
vibrant city centre that takes full advantage of its immediate
connections to
both the East Werribee Employment Precinct and the Werribee River. Activated
street frontages combined with multi-level
commercial, retail and residential
uses will secure Werribee City Centre as a major employment centre.
Werribee Employment Precinct (EWEP)
The EWEP will
consist of diverse land uses including international education research, health,
medical technology, pharmaceuticals,
science, business services, high-tech
manufacturing, information technology, and higher density housing.
The vision for EWEP includes high-quality public realm comprising tree
lined streets, local parks and botanical gardens as well as
recreation, leisure and cultural pursuits.
Werribee (Werribee Plaza) (Major Activity
Pacific Werribee is the largest retail centre
in Wyndham comprising over 100,000 square metres of leasable floor space. It
potential to develop a broad mix of uses consistent with the major
activity centre classification.
Crossing Town Centre (Major Activity Centre)
for Hoppers Crossing town centre is for improved urban amenities including
public spaces, parks and services. An increase
in employment and business
opportunities will be encouraged at Hoppers Crossing town centre.
Geelong Road Precinct
The Old Geelong Road Precinct
includes a mix of restricted retail homemaker stores and light industrial
including manufacturing, engineering
and service repair centres. It also
accommodates churches, gymnasiums, play centres and indoor sports. Capacity for
future development
exists along Old Geelong Road east of Skeleton
The vision for the Old Geelong Road Precinct is to undertake urban
revitalization within walkable distances of Hoppers Crossing train
subject to the preparation of an Urban Design Framework or Structure Plan for
Other major activity centres in the hierarchy include existing
major activity centres at Point Cook and Williams Landing, as well
major activity centres at Tarneit, Riverdale and Manor Lakes. Future
neighbourhood level activity centres will be located
in highly accessible
locations at Tarneit West, Truganina and Mambourin.
Council’s strategic directions for activity centres and
precincts are to:
Consolidate
activity centres as the focus for retail and commercial
functional, attractive and accessible activity centres connected to surrounding
communities, including cycling and walking routes.
a network of activity centres supporting a range of retail, commercial,
community and
residential uses.
an Urban Design Framework (UDF) or Structure Plan for each of the activity
centres within the central city area (Wyndham City
Heart) and each of the Urban
Neighbourhood Pulses.
City Pulses
'Wyndham City Pulses’ are points throughout Wyndham that are
existing and future hubs of activity serving the surrounding residential
neighbourhoods. They include major activity centres neighbourhood centres and
rural villages located at the centre of communities.
Wyndham City Pulses will be connected to the Wyndham City Heart via the
Wyndham Transport Network and are divided into three categories:
Wyndham City Pulses
Description
Urban pulses
District level neighbourhoods comprising one or two major activity
centres to provide daily and higher order services to surrounding
residential
catchment areas
Manor Lakes
Williams Landing
Neighbourhood pulses
20-minute neighbourhoods (Neighbourhood Activity Centres) that will
service the daily needs of surrounding residential catchment areas
through small
local shopping centres.
Tarneit West
Point Cook South
Village pulses
Rural townships that will service most of the daily needs of surrounding
rural catchment areas, but not higher order needs.
Little River
Werribee South
Council’s strategic directions for activity centres and precincts
Consolidate
activity centres as the focus for retail and commercial activity.
functional, attractive and accessible activity centres connected to surrounding
communities, including cycling and walking
network of activity centres supporting a range of retail, commercial, community
and residential uses.
Urban Design Framework (UDF) or Structure Plan for each of the activity centres
within the central city area (Wyndham City
and each of the
Urban Pulses and Neighbourhood Pulses that do not have an approved
Structure Plan or equivalent strategic plan in place or where the
existing plan
is outdated.
Local places
Derrimut Road Boulevard
Derrimut Road
is the main north-south
city axis of Wyndham, linking Tarneit train and bus interchange to the north and
future public transport hub
in East Werribee to the south
advocating to convert it
It is planned
city’s iconic boulevard which is serviced by an innovative public
transport system and is suitable for higher density
and mixed-use
development.
Council’s strategic directions for
the proposed
Derrimut Road Boulevard are to:
Advocate to
State agencies, seeking support for the development of a boulevard
corridor strategy for Derrimut Road investigating the necessary changes required
to the transport network in support of
delivering a boulevard.
Urban Design Framework or Structure Plan for Derrimut Road Boulevard or specific
portions of the boulevard.
elements of the boulevard and strengthen connection between the inner suburbs of
Wyndham and its urban growth areas to the north.
major landscaped greenway supporting higher density housing serviced by nearby
local neighbourhood activity centres.
Little River, Eynesbury Station, Werribee South Township and
Wyndham Harbour
Little River, Eynesbury Station, Werribee South Township and Wyndham
Harbour are all small settlements located in the rural Green
Little River is partly located within the municipalities of Wyndham
and Greater Geelong. The town provides a basic level of services
to residents
and is remote from employment and services areas.
The townships of
Little River and Werribee South provide basic level services to residents and
are remote from employment and service
areas. The Werribee South Township
retains a distinctly coastal feel and the proximity of the township to the
intensive agricultural
precinct results in a sensitive residential-rural
Growth of Little River is constrained by the location of Avalon
Airport and lack of access to reticulated sewage.
Council’s strategic directions for
Little River
Little River
Provide for
limited consolidation in the Little River area, subject to resolution of airport
noise from Avalon Airport, infrastructure
constraints and development of a
township plan.
development of Little River to avoid overdevelopment, protect adjoining rural
precincts from development impacts and prevent
further expansion of the township
into the surrounding rural precincts.
Council’s strategic directions for
Werribee South
township in a way that protects agricultural land and retains the potential for
infill development and infrastructure upgrades.
overdevelopment, protect the adjoining rural precincts from development impacts
and prevent further expansion into the surrounding
Eynesbury Station has a total site area of
7420 hectares and it lies partly within the municipalities of Melton and
Wyndham. Eynesbury
Station will be developed ensuring
The portion of
Eynesbury Station located within Wyndham will be planned to ensure the
retention of productive agricultural
environmental problems are addressed and
protection of heritage and environmental assets.
A residential
community has been developed on the balance of the land.
Werribee South Township
The Werribee South Township retains a distinctly coastal feel, with
strands of cypress pines lining the Werribee South Coastal Reserve.
proximity of the township to the intensive agricultural precinct results in a
sensitive residential-rural interface.
Council’s strategic directions for the Werribee South
Township are to:
township in a way that protects agricultural land and retains the potential for
infill development and infrastructure upgrades.
the development to avoid overdevelopment, protect the adjoining rural precincts
from development impacts and prevent further
expansion into the surrounding
rural precincts.
Wyndham Harbour is one of the largest marinas on Port Phillip Bay with a
residential community. The harbour comprises a breakwater,
marine berths, boat
storage, commercial uses, dwellings, car parking and public beaches.
Council’s strategic directions for
Wyndham Harbour
Wyndham Harbour
tourism and new transport initiatives through the Wyndham Harbour
development.
Prevent further
expansion of the Harbour into the surrounding rural precincts.
Contain urban
development within the boundaries of the Special Use
Green Wedges
There are two designated Green Wedges in Wyndham:
Werribee South
Green Wedge and
Western Plains South
Green Wedge. These two areas make
up a large percentage of Wyndham’s land area and accommodate a diverse
range of land uses.
Land uses range from intensive agriculture to dry cropping, grazing and
quarrying. Coastal parks and biodiversity in grasslands and
wetlands are key
values of Wyndham’s Green Wedges.
Sustainable management of Green Wedges requires an understanding and
consideration of the relationships between land uses, both within
and adjoining
the Green Wedge areas.
Council’s strategic directions for the Green Wedges are to:
Wyndham’s Green Wedges from inappropriate development and urban
Create physical
buffers or use natural barriers to ensure protection of the Green Wedge.
strategic buffer between the Werribee South Green Wedge and urban development
north of the RAAF base.
Activity centres provide a range of functions including retail,
commercial, community, cultural, transport, education, social, entertainment,
leisure and civic services. These roles are vital to community and business
development, and to growth and diversification of local
employment.
Wyndham is committed to the reinvigoration and redevelopment of the
Werribee City Centre as its Principal Activity Centre and as a
major retail,
commercial and residential hub. Map 6 to Clause
02.04 - the Werribee City Centre Activity Land Use and Built Form
Map indicates council’s preferred development of the
The vision for the development of the Werribee City Centre is for a
vibrant city centre that takes full advantage of its immediate
connections to
both the Werribee Employment Precinct and the Werribee River. Activated street
frontages combined with multi-level
commercial, retail and residential uses will
secure Werribee City Centre as a major employment centre.
Precinct Structure Planning for Wyndham North and Wyndham West
provides for commercial and retail activities centres, community facilities
Wyndham’s other activity centres are identified on Map 1 -
Strategic Framework Plan and Map 5 - Activity Centres Map at Clause
Plaza the largest retail centre in Wyndham comprising 70,000 square metres of
leasable floor space.
Landing Activity Centre with a capacity to house 6,500 residents and is
supported by a rail station and bus exchange with
an integrated retail and
commercial activity centre.
Cook Town Centre comprising of about 30,000 square metres retailing, 5,000
square metres of office space and an integrated Community
Learning Centre and
Crossing which has up to 20,000 square metres of retail uses.
Geelong Road Precinct, Hoppers Crossing with a mix of restricted retail
engineering and
service repair centres. It also accommodates churches, gymnasiums, play centres
and indoor sports. Capacity for
future development exists along Old Geelong
Road east of Skeleton Creek.
Park centre which provides for a range of mixed use
developments.
New activity centres are planned
for the growth areas including Manor Lakes (expansion of existing centre),
Sanctuary Lakes, Tarneit
Central (formerly Rose Grange), East Werribee,
Truganina, Tarneit, Riverdale, Ballan and Westbrook.
Council’s strategic directions for activity centres are
Consolidate
activity centres as the focus for retail and commercial activity.
functional, attractive and accessible activity centres connected to surrounding
communities, including cycling and walking
a network of activity centres supporting a range of retail, commercial,
community and residential uses.
Environmental and landscape values
Biodiversity
Wyndham has a large number of threatened and endangered species that are
classified as either vulnerable, endangered or depleted.
Since European
settlement, over 99 per cent of the native vegetation in Wyndham has been
altered, degraded or cleared.
Wyndham has important wetlands listed under the Ramsar Convention including
the Western Treatment plant lagoons, Point Cook and Cheetham
Wetlands that
provide habitat for many birds including internationally protected migratory
species, and flora and fauna species such
as the critically endangered Growling
Grass Frog. There are coastal areas and foreshores that require ongoing
management and protection.
Biodiversity Conservation Strategy
(Department of Environment
and Primary Industries, 2013) defines how conservation objectives will be
achieved within Melbourne’s
growth corridors. It includes land along the
Werribee River, Lollypop and Davis Creeks to be reserved as habitat corridors
Growling Grass Frog and commits to the development of two nature
conservation areas outside the Urban Growth Boundary. The Western
Reserve is one of these areas, and 78 per cent of its 15,000 hectares is within
Council’s strategic directions for biodiversity are to:
Protect and
restore biodiversity and natural habitats.
Protect and
manage areas of natural biodiversity as identified on Map 2 (Conservation Map)
at Clause 02.04.
Significant environments and
Wyndham’s landscapes include coastal and basalt plains, extensive
grasslands, waterways, wetlands, swamps, dry stone walls and
windbreaks shown on
Map 3 Special Places and Landscapes Map at Clause 02.04. These landscapes
require protection from loss and decline
to ensure Wyndham’s identity and
character is maintained.
Council’s strategic directions for significant environments and
landscapes are to:
Wyndham’s natural environment and landscape with respect to growth, land
use and the impacts of climate change.
Protect and
enhance the distinctive sense of place, cultural identity and landscape within
the growth areas of Wyndham.
Coastal areas
Wyndham City includes significant stretches of coastline fronting Port
Phillip Bay. There is a need to strike a balance between public
use and the
coastal and marine environment to ensure that the coastline is protected. The
Werribee South Green Wedge Policy and Management Plan
(Wyndham City
Council, 2017) sets out a vision and guiding principles for many of these
Council’s strategic directions for coastal areas are to:
Manage urban
encroachment on the coast and its impacts on environmental values along the
Provide for
tourism opportunities along the coast.
Manage the needs
for coastal infrastructure to adapt to climate change and sea level rise.
economic, environmental and social pressures on the agricultural
Environmental risks and amenity
Sustainability
Built form and urban infrastructure contribute substantially to energy
demand. Built form impacts on the energy efficiency of buildings,
particularly
through solar orientation and access. Consolidated urban areas provide for
shorter travel distances, walking and cycling
to more sustainably support
people’s access to services, social connections, recreation opportunities,
education and employment.
Council’s strategic directions for sustainability are to:
environmental sustainability through built form, urban infrastructure and
consolidation.
Climate change
The potential future effects of global climate change include changes in
temperature, rainfall, drought, water resources, fire, winds,
storms and sea
level rise. Planning strategies in Wyndham are designed to help minimise the
City’s per capita contribution
to global warming.
Council’s strategic directions for climate change are to:
‘precautionary principle’ when planning for the City to help avoid
serious or irreversible climate change effects.
Minimise the
City’s contribution to climate change and gas emissions.
Minimise the
impacts of climate change on Wyndham’s natural and built
environment.
Floodplains
The catchments of the various rivers and streams within Wyndham include
areas of flood prone land where flooding has caused substantial
damage to the
natural and built environment. Floodplains need to be preserved to minimise the
deterioration of environmental values
and the long-term flood risk to floodplain
production, assets and communities.
Council’s strategic directions for flood plains are to:
Protect the
community from the economic, social and environmental risks associated with
Maintain the
natural environmental processes within
floodplains.
There are areas of the municipality prone to bushfires.
The Wyndham
Municipal Fire Management Plan
(2020-2023) sets out measures for the
protection of life and property from the threat of fire.
Council’s strategic directions for bushfire are to:
Identify areas
prone to bushfire.
Apply design,
siting and subdivision standards in bushfire prone areas aimed at minimizing
Ensure that new
use and development include adequate fire protection
Amenity protection
Care is required in siting and designing non-residential uses in
residential zones to avoid loss of privacy and amenity, while still
convenience to residents living nearby.
Council’s strategic direction for amenity protection is to:
protection for residential areas and guide uses that have the potential to
change the function and character of residential
development of defacto commercial strips in residential areas.
Ensure that
planning and development of sensitive uses avoid compromising the operation of
existing lawful commercial, industrial
and other uses with potential adverse
off-site impacts.
Natural resource management
Agriculture
The Intensive Agriculture Precinct (IAP) at Werribee South comprises of
total annual
Victorian vegetable production.
In the City’s north and north-west, beyond the urban areas, there is
extensive dryland cropping and grazing. Parts of these
areas, mainly in Tarneit
and Wyndham Vale, have been identified for future urban use.
Many of the City’s remaining dryland farming areas are likely to form
part of a long-term Green Wedge, including about 11,000
hectares of native
grasslands suitable for future restoration. Other farming areas may be suitable
for renewable energy or quarrying
uses, if well buffered.
Council’s strategic directions for agriculture are to:
Minimise the
loss of productive agricultural land.
productive land identified on the Coastal and Werribee South Precinct Map 4 at
Clause 02.04 for agricultural purposes.
Minimise the
impacts of incompatible uses on farming operations.
Protect the
Werribee South market gardens as an area of State agricultural
significance.
Support the role
of rural areas beyond the Urban Growth Boundary to protect and restore
biodiversity and viable future rural land
Council has identified the need to protect its waterway corridors and
waterway view sheds for their environmental, landscape character,
cultural and economic values. The
Wyndham Waterways Strategy Plan
(Thompson Berrill Landscape Design, 2003) and the
Kororoit Creek Regional
2005-2030 (Land Design Partnership, 2006) guide future land use and
development associated with the major waterways. The waterway
corridors provide
biodiversity links in estuarine environments. Environmental buffers beyond the
waterway corridors provide protection
between identified environmental values
and development sites.
Council’s strategic directions for waterways are to:
waterways as significant environmental assets, requiring enhancement and
protection.
Ensure that
development provides an appropriate interface with waterways and open space and
retains connectivity.
waterways, aquatic areas, wetlands, swamps, catchments, riparian land and
waterway valleys.
Built environment and heritage
Urban design
There is insufficiently defined character and thematic urban design in some
of Wyndham’s development. Urban areas often lack
visual appeal due to
ineffective landscaping
Siting, design, mass and scale of buildings, are important in preserving
the character and historical attributes of urban areas.
Major entrances, key
arterial roads and streetscapes are important to the character of urban areas
and should be addressed in the
consideration of new use and development.
Signs have a major impact on urban amenity given Wyndham’s diverse
business activities, with strip shopping centres and stand-alone
Council’s strategic directions for urban design are to:
Improve the
presentation of all urban areas and entrances, particularly from major roads,
gateways and waterways.
Support new
development that preserves the character and historical attributes of urban
areas by improved design, siting and landscaping.
detrimental impacts of signs on the visual
environment.
Wyndham’s heritage places consist of remnants of the
municipality’s Indigenous past and early European settlement of the
Western Plains. These heritage assets help our understanding of the past,
enrich the present and will be of value to future generations.
Wyndham North Heritage Strategy
(Heritage Alliance, 2013)
addresses an area that has historically been associated with agricultural uses,
but that has more recently
been included within the Urban Growth Boundary.
Dry stone walls were among the first European constructions on the western
basalt plains. In Wyndham they are of historical and aesthetic
significance,
and in some cases social and archaeological or scientific significance, for
their association with and physical demonstration
of the process of survey,
subdivision, alienation and development of land from the period of first land
sales to the late nineteenth
Urban development occurring in Wyndham’s growth fronts pose a threat
to the conservation of dry stone walls.
Council’s strategic direction for heritage is to:
Manage heritage
places and dry stone walls to ensure their preservation.
island effects
Heat island effects are the product of high summer temperatures, lack of
canopy or surface vegetation and heat absorbent surfaces
of buildings and
pavements. Together, they are a serious environmental health risk, especially
in heat wave conditions.
Council’s strategic direction for addressing heat island effects is
Define urban
design responses to alleviate heat island
Liveability
Wyndham’s liveability is centred on making it a connected,
people-friendly place where there are employment, recreation and
living options.
A priority is to maintain liveability alongside sustained population
Wyndham’s high birth rate has implications in planning for the needs
of children, young people and their families. Major growth
opportunities to build a strong community for the good health, wellbeing and
safety of residents.
Council’s strategic directions for liveability are to:
liveable, connected and healthy communities in a variety of housing typologies.
Create employment nodes close to where people
Residential development
In addition to the expected population growth in the greenfield
areas, the 2011 population of Werribee is projected to increase from
41,912 residents in 2016 to over 98,900 people by the year 2041 supporting an
additional 20,000 dwellings. The rapid population
growth of Wyndham requires
more housing and a diversity of housing stock to ensure overall community needs
Wyndham aims to address its growing population's housing
needs through the provision of more diverse, and affordable housing
Areas for accelerated population growth at higher densities have been
identified near rail stations, particularly
around the Werribee and
Hoppers Crossing rail stations. In Werribee City Centre, near the Werribee
River, there is potential for
taller residential development addressing the park
and river, without impacting on the natural attributes. Increased residential
densities in this location and the addition of a civic component will revitalize
the town centre
those within the 'Wyndham City Heart', around other
activity centres serviced by existing and proposed rail and bus interchanges and
proposed Derrimut Road Boulevard.
Wyndham seeks to deliver well-planned, accessible, and vibrant
communities, supporting 20-minute neighbourhoods.
New growth areas provide
opportunities for higher density housing around new activity centres
especially transit based centres
Council’s strategic directions for residential development are
Accommodate
a projected population of about 425,000 people by
Accommodate a projected population of about
501,634 by 2041.
the Werribee City Centre as a key commercial and residential centre for
Melbourne’s west.
Identify the 'Wyndham City Heart'
as a key commercial and residential centre for Wyndham.
multi-level development near rail stations.
multi-level development near rail stations.
higher density development in activity
Encourage higher density development in and
around activity centres that are well serviced by infrastructure.
the Princes Highway corridor as an area where higher scale and higher density
residential development may occur.
Identify the
'Wyndham City Heart', Princes Highway corridor and Derrimut Road Boulevard as
areas where higher scale and higher density
residential development may
diverse range of housing typologies
on well located land
new residential development
on land that is
well-serviced by public transport, infrastructure and services
Ensure newly
created and developing residential neighbourhoods are designed and developed as
accessible, liveable, integrated and
vibrant environments connected to their
nearest activity centre.
Housing diversity
Key characteristics of local housing include
a dominance of separate dwellings, a small proportion of renters
and growing levels of unaffordable housing
Wyndham and access
to affordable housing is
increasing concern.
There is presently a mismatch between declining average household sizes and
a lack of smaller dwellings. There is a need
for housing to be built to
‘universal’ standards with designs that are accessible and adaptable
to all stages in the life
Greenfield areas are dominated by small lot sizes, with many having
single dwelling covenants potentially restricting future land
use flexibility.
Opportunity exists to define priority areas for development for multi-unit
housing, based on development capacity
and neighbourhood
for a range of
housing to be built with designs that are accessible and adaptable to all stages
the life cycle.
priority areas for development for multi-unit housing and stacked housing, based
development capacity and neighbourhood character.
to increase
supply and diversity of social housing in infill and greenfield
There is a need for an increased supply and diversity of social housing
l and greenfield
Council’s strategic direction for housing diversity is to:
the supply of one to three bedroom dwellings and the diversity of
Increase the supply of one and two bedroom dwellings in locations that are
supported by infrastructure and services.
increased density and diversity of housing typologies to be delivered across
each development with a focus on medium density
in key locations supported by
essential urban infrastructure.
Neighbourhood
Wyndham Neighbourhood Character Scoping Study
(Planisphere, 2012)
identified five broad neighbourhood character types in the established
residential areas of Hoppers Crossing,
Werribee, Tarneit, Truganina, Wyndham
Vale, Point Cook, Little River and Werribee South.
Contemporary Garden
– comprising modern residential estates
with establishing gardens.
Garden Suburban
– comprising the formally established residential
areas of Wyndham, with a mixture of older buildings located around linear
patterns and pockets of established vegetation.
Garden Court
– comprising street patterns of winding roads and cul
de sacs, with a range of dwellings types set in garden surrounds. In
areas, an established tree canopy as well as wide grass verges at the street
edge, creates a strong landscape character.
Bush Garden
– comprising informal streets with a predominate native
landscape setting. Built form is hidden in larger lots behind well-established
gardens and canopy trees.
Coastal Garden
– comprising informal streets with coastal
landscaping and vegetation surrounding buildings. Streets have views of the
coastal foreshore and market gardens.
Council’s strategic directions for neighbourhood character are to:
Protect areas
with identified neighbourhood character values.
Balance the
tension in policy between urban consolidation objectives and the desire to
respect residential amenity and neighbourhood
Minimise the
loss of backyard areas and established vegetation.
Economic development
Economic growth
Wyndham has a diverse local economy, including major industrial and
logistics development in Laverton North, intensive agriculture
at Werribee
South, busy commercial precincts, an extensive new housing market, and a major
tourism precinct. About one third of
Wyndham’s resident workforce is
employed within the municipality meaning that two thirds leave the municipality
Attracting new investment to the region is critical to the city’s
long-term economic future. The 925ha East Werribee Employment
Precinct (EWEP)
is a designated National Employment and Innovation Cluster with the potential to
generate investment and expand employment
opportunities.
The Wyndham A-League Stadium will provide employment, tourism and
development opportunities and attract investment.
West Growth Corridor Plan
(Victorian Planning Authority, 2012)
outlines significant employment nodes for future development:
The EWEP between
Werribee and Point Cook.
Boundary Road between the Outer Metropolitan Ring Road and planned extension of
Forsyth Road.
immediately west of the Regional Rail Link between Wyndham Vale station and a
potential future station at Tarneit West (Davis
The area bounded
by Bulban Road, the Regional Rail Link and Outer Metropolitan Ring Transport
Council’s strategic directions for economic growth
sufficient land to attract investment and generate additional jobs.
Promote Wyndham
as a place for long term business attraction and expansion.
employment corridor along the Werribee metropolitan rail line to provide jobs
close to where people live.
The Laverton North and Truganina industrial precincts, located within the
western industrial node, are major manufacturing and logistics
hubs offering a
large supply of land.
Laverton North Industrial Precinct is the largest industrial precinct in
the city with a capacity for significant investment and industrial
development.
The Truganina Employment PSP comprises 662 hectares located at the north-eastern
edge of Wyndham to the immediate west
of the existing Laverton North Industrial
Precinct. It is anticipated that between 10,000 and 15,000 new jobs will be
in the Truganina Employment Precinct.
There are also several sites with licences for extractive industry within
the municipality which should be protected.
Council’s strategic directions for industry are to:
industrial precincts from intrusion by inappropriate land uses that put pressure
on lawful existing industrial activities.
Encourage the
growth of Laverton North and the Truganina employment precinct for industrial
development.
Wyndham is home to a range of tourism experiences including the Werribee
Open Range Zoo, Werribee Park Mansion, National Equestrian
Centre and the Point
Cook Coastal Park. New opportunities exist for tourism investment including
water based activities, accommodation,
sporting and recreational activities,
wild life tours and celebrating culture and art.
Council’s strategic direction for tourism is to:
Promote use and
development that supports local tourism, recreation, culture and art that will
build Wyndham’s reputation as
a place to visit and be a source of
community pride
There are currently limited facilities for cultural and arts activities in
Wyndham. Conversely, the city is well represented by electronic
gaming machines
(EGMs). Problem gambling can cause significant community harm and planning is
required to ensure that any proposed
new gaming venues are established in
appropriate areas. Activity centres and shopping areas are highly accessible
locations and
may not be appropriate for gaming venues.
Council’s strategic direction for gaming is to:
Ensure that the
negative impacts of gambling on the health and wellbeing of the community are
Integrated transport networks
Wyndham’s transport network experiences pressure from rapid
population growth. Demand for transport is often met through private
with road and rail transport facing increasing capacity constraints as demand
increases. Effective resolution of major
passenger and freight transport
planning issues requires significant regional co-operation.
Wyndham’s reliance on cars for transport displaces active transport
options like walking, cycling and public transport. The
application of safer
design principles and treatments can encourage
people to leave cars at home, improving activity levels, overall health,
safety and wellbeing and the pressure on health and hospital
services. Public
transport and transport options that meet the needs of the young, elderly and
disabled are especially critical.
Council’s strategic directions for integrated transport networks are
Provide improved
and accessible transport options.
Maintain and
enhance existing road infrastructure.
Link the walking
and cycling network
Infrastructure
Open space in Wyndham ranges from major sports reserves to linear parks
along waterways and small parks in residential areas. The
quality of existing
public open spaces and their connectivity to surrounding areas requires
improvement.
Council’s strategic directions for open space are to:
integrated and accessible open space network.
Design urban
development to connect and capitalise on links such as road, drainage reserves
and waterway corridors.
Provide for the
recreation needs of communities while preserving natural features, sustaining
biodiversity and healthy waterways.
Have parks and
open spaces that will connect people to the outdoors and are inviting
destinations for residents and visitors.
The Wyndham Refuse Disposal Facility is identified within the
Waste and Resource Recovery Infrastructure Plan
(Sustainability
Victoria,2018) as a regionally significant landfill site. It receives
municipal, commercial and industrial waste
(both solid inert and putrescible)
from across Metropolitan Melbourne and the wider regional area and is expected
to continue for
more than 60 years
Council’s strategic directions for waste management are to:
Provide long
term security of well sited, designed and managed landfills such as the Wyndham
Refuse Disposal Facility and protect
against conflicting land uses.
alternate waste and resource recovery treatments in growth area
Community facilities
The provision of cost-effective infrastructure is a major challenge. The
PSP process aims to ensure growth areas are sufficiently
supplied with different
land parcels for the ‘foundation
blocks’ of community centres,
active open space reserves and government schools.
There will be extra demand for frontline health care, hospital and
emergency services and social and emergency housing solutions.
contributes to physical and social infrastructure and the
Disability Access
and Inclusion Strategy 2013-2017
(Wyndham City Council, 2013) has been
developed to build a diverse, inclusive, well designed and accessible local
Council’s strategic directions for community facilities are to:
infrastructure provision with population and housing growth.
facilities that support the health and well-being of the community.
Support the
development of the Wyndham A-League Stadium Training Precinct for community
Development infrastructure
Urban growth requires significant infrastructure investment. While State
government will continue to provide major infrastructure,
Council and developers
will need to invest in infrastructure to service projected growth.
Infrastructure funding will be needed
if long term infrastructure requirements
are to be met for major local roads, pathways, open space, and key community and
facilities.
Council’s strategic directions for development infrastructure are
Provide adequate
physical infrastructure to accommodate future growth.
Stage new growth
so that it aligns with the provision of urban infrastructure.
Minimise any
adverse environmental and health impacts of new physical
infrastructure
STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK PLAN
The plans contained in Clause 02.04 are to be read in conjunction with the
strategic directions in Clause 02.03.
Map 1 - Strategic Framework Plan
Map 2 - Conservation Map
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Map 2 has been removed from
this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels Victoria
to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Map 3 - Special Places and Landscapes Map
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Map 3 has been removed from
this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels Victoria
to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Map 4 - Coastal and Werribee South Precincts Map
Map 5 - Activity centres existing and planned
Map 6 - Werribee City Centre Activity Land Use and Built Form
Appendix E Panel recommended version of Clause
74.02 Schedule
SCHEDULE TO CLAUSE 74.02 FURTHER STRATEGIC WORK
Proposed C266wynd
1.0 Further strategic work
structure plan for the Werribee South Township to establish long term treatment
of the boundary and agricultural buffer.
Investigate
mechanisms to protect and enhance the Werribee South Coastal Reserve and
adjoining agricultural land.
Investigate the
application of SLO to protect the landscape values of the Green Wedge
landscape planning controls for significant boulevards and avenues, registered
significant trees in the public realm environment
and public realm trees over
35cm Diameter at Breast Height.
Investigate
mechanisms to protect and enhance sites of significance in the Green Wedges
including potential vegetation planning controls.
Management Plan for Wyndham’s Section of the Western Plains South Green
Consider the
application of the Bushfire Management Overlay to areas identified by the
Municipal Fire Management Plan.
flooding overlay(s) to identify areas at risk of inundation.
Investigate
application of an ESO in Little River, Williams Landing Wetlands and Grassland
reserves and along Wyndham’s section
of Kororoit Creek.
Implement the
recommendations of the Wyndham Heritage Study 1997 - Volumes 1 and 2 (Context in
association with Dr Carlotta Kellaway,
1997), City of Wyndham Review of Heritage
Sites of Local Interest (Peter Andrew Barrett, 2004) and the Wyndham North
Heritage Strategy
(Heritage Alliance, 2013).
Review the Sign
Policy to address signage in gateway locations.
further housing studies, including a housing strategy and neighbourhood
character study, review of strategies to manage
preferred locations for medium
density housing and means to encourage and guide delivery of housing diversity
to meet community needs.
Prepare design
guidelines for medium density development to improve the standard of building
design and landscaping.
Investigate the
areas around the Werribee Town Centre and within growth areas for increased
medium density housing opportunities.
Residential Design Guidelines: Rear Loaded Lots (Wyndham City Council,
activity centres planning framework to identify the potential role of
Wyndham’s network of activity centres to provide
employment, services,
housing and urban spaces.
Develop design
guidelines for commercial facilities in support of key tourist locations.
strategy to reinforce tourism through planning for urban development and
industrial land use strategy to investigate and identify preferred uses and
options to guide non-industrial uses and development
in industrial land.
industrial design guidelines for existing and proposed industrial areas in the
Little River Strategic Land Use Position Statement.
Identify areas
of constrained land that are not expected to be able to be developed over the
life of the Growth Corridor Plan.
Prepare Local
Area Framework Plans for each of the Wyndham City Heart, Urban Pulses, Village
Pulses and the proposed Derrimut Road
Boulevard including their surrounding
catchments to deliver 20-minute neighbourhoods.
future strategic work to identify the future use and development of the land
identified as priority locations for housing
diversity and intensification on
Map 1 of Clause 02.04, including mixed use development within these
development sequencing criteria and policy for development in growth areas to be
used for the assessment of subdivision
and development
applications.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (20.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter