URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Northern and Western Geelong Growth Areas Projects Standing Advisory Committee Referral 1 -Volume 2 Report (AC) [2025] PPV 30 (20 June 2025)
Draft Greater Geelong Planning Scheme
Amendment C450ggee
Creamery Road Precinct Structure Plan
and Development
Contributions Plan
Northern and Western Geelong Growth Areas Standing Advisory
Committee Referral 1 Report - Volume 2
Planning and Environment Act 1987
20 June 2025
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Northern and Western Geelong Growth Areas Standing Advisory Committee
Referral 1 Report -
Volume 2 pursuant to
section 151
Planning and
Environment Act 1987
Draft Greater Geelong Planning Scheme Amendment C450ggee
Creamery Road Precinct Structure Plan and Development Contributions Plan
20 June 2025
Lisa Kendal, Chair Sarah Carlisle, Deputy Chair Kate Partenio, Member
Glossary and abbreviations
Bisinella Developments Project Pty Ltd
Northern and Western Geelong Growth Areas Standing Advisory Committee
City of Greater Geelong
Day 1 changes
Council initial proposed changes to the place based plan and DCP (Document
Creamery Road Development Contributions Plan
DTP Transport Services
Department of Transport and Planning, Transport Services
Growth Area Infrastructure Contribution
Intersection
Northern and Western Geelong Growth Areas
Creamery Road Precinct
Creamery Road Precinct Structure Plan
Submitters 7 and 11
Rosalia and Simon Nardi and Lovely Banks Development and Growland
Batesford Developments Project Pty Ltd
Volume 1 Report
Volume 1 of the Committee’s Referral 1 Report, dated 21 May
WLRB_[number]
Wetland-retarding basin [number]
Amendment summary
The draft Amendment
Draft Greater Geelong Planning Scheme Amendment C450ggee
Common name
Creamery Road Precinct Structure Plan and Development Contributions
Brief description
Implementation of the Creamery Road Precinct Structure Plan (PSP),
Development Contributions Plan (DCP) and Native Vegetation Precinct
Subject land
Creamery Road Precinct, bounded by the Geelong-Ballarat railway line to the
north, the Geelong Ring Road to the east, the Midland
Highway to the south, and
Geelong-Ballan Road to the west
Planning Authority
City of Greater Geelong
Committee process
The Committee
Lisa Kendal (Chair), Sarah Carlisle (Deputy Chair) and Kate Partenio
Supported by
Gabrielle Trouse, Project Officer, Planning Panels Victoria
Directions Hearing
14 February 2025, by video conference
Roundtable discussions
7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 April 2025
Wurriki Nyal Civic Centre, Geelong and by video conference
Site inspections
First site inspection: unaccompanied, 6 April 2025 (Members Kendal and
Second site inspection: unaccompanied (supervised by landowner
representatives on private property for safety and access only), 10
(all Committee members)
Final submissions received after the roundtable
26 May 2025
Parties to the roundtable discussions
See Appendix C of Volume 1 Report
Northern and Western Geelong Growth Areas Standing Advisory Committee
Referral 1 [2025] PPV – Volume 2
Date of this report
20 June 2025
Executive Summary
Referral 1 to the
Northern and Western Geelong Growth Areas Standing Advisory Committee
(Committee) relates to the draft Greater Geelong
Planning Scheme Amendment
C450ggee. The Minister for Planning requested early advice on whether Creamery
Road Precinct Structure
Plan (PSP) and Development Contributions Plan (DCP)
provide for a balanced development outcome with regard to the extent of
developable
land and the development infrastructure levy. Volume 1 of the
Committee’s Referral 1 Report (Volume 1 Report) describes the
referral and
the Committee’s process including the roundtable in more detail.
Volume 1 and 2 Reports
The Volume 1 Report, covering matters discussed at
the roundtable, was submitted to the City of Greater Geelong (Council) and the
Minister for Planning on 21 May 2025.
This Volume 2 Report considers further submissions received after the
roundtable, as directed by the Committee, in relation to:
appropriateness of including State transport infrastructure in the DCP
infrastructure on property 41 (110 Creamery Road, Bell Post
This Volume 2 Report does not repeat the matters or
recommendations already covered in the Volume 1 Report. To understand the
Committee’s
full findings and recommendations, both volumes should be read
State transport infrastructure
The draft PSP and DCP initially proposed to include
the following State transport infrastructure items:
construction
costs of upgrading the intersection of Geelong-Ballan Road with Midland Highway
setting aside
land for the widening of Geelong-Ballan Road between Midland Highway and the
railway line, and recovering 100 percent
of the land costs through the DCP
setting aside
land for the widening of Midland Highway between Geelong-Ballan Road and the
Geelong Ring Road, and recovering 100 percent
of the land costs through the DCP
Council proposed Day 1 changes to remove all three projects
from the DCP on the basis that they constitute wholly State infrastructure
should be fully funded by the State. The Department of Transport and Planning
– Transport Services (DTP Transport Services)
objected to the proposed
changes, and requested further time to provide a supplementary submission
addressing the proposed Day 1
The supplementary submission from DTP Transport Services referred to
transport modelling that demonstrated that trips generated by
the Creamery Road
Precinct (Precinct) are predicted to account for between 6 and 11 percent of
future traffic flows along the Midland
Highway. No specific modelling was
provided of the proportion of future traffic volumes through IN_05 that are
likely to be generated
by the Precinct.
While it is legally possible for State infrastructure to be included in a
DCP, any infrastructure item included in a DCP must satisfy
the principles of
needs, nexus and equity. Need, nexus and equity should also inform the
apportionment of the costs of any project
to the Precinct.
DTP Transport Services has not demonstrated how an 11 percent contribution to
future traffic volumes on Midland Highway justifies
a 100 percent apportionment
of IN_05 or LA_03 to the Precinct. IN_05 (construction costs) should be removed
from the DCP, as no
information has been provided that enables an appropriate
apportionment to be determined. LA_03 should be apportioned in the DCP
more than 11 percent to the Precinct.
Most of the transport experts agreed that the land required for IN_05 should
be set aside in the PSP. The Committee agrees, and further
work may need to be
undertaken to identify this land. Assuming the intersection upgrades benefit
the whole Precinct, the land costs
should be included in the draft DCP.
The DCP identifies the land required for widening Geelong-Ballan Road (LA_02)
from Creamery Road to the railway line. It is not clear
what land is required
to deliver intersections with PSP roads, and what land is required for general
widening in the mid-block sections.
The land requirements should be separately
identified and their inclusion and apportionment in the PSP and DCP justified
need and nexus.
Drainage infrastructure on property 41
The concerns raised by the landowner of property 41
in relation to the potential relocation of wetland-retarding basin WLRB_06 onto
their land can be addressed in the further drainage work identified in Chapter 7
in the Volume 1 Report.
Recommended further work
In addition to the recommendations in the Volume 1
Report, the Committee makes the following recommendations for further work
public notice of draft Greater Geelong Planning Scheme Amendment C450ggee
1 State infrastructure items
1.1 Introduction
draft Creamery Road Developer Contributions Plan (DCP) includes transport
infrastructure projects along Geelong-Ballan Road and
Midland Highway which are
both declared State arterial roads.
includes a summary of State road infrastructure projects in the draft DCP.
Intersection IN_05, being the intersection of two State
arterial roads, could be
described as ‘State on State’ infrastructure.
State road infrastructure project costs and
apportionment
Project Description
Apportionment and cost in the draft DCP
Geelong-Ballan Road/Connector Road – Signalised
Cross-intersection
50%* - $8,556,500
Geelong-Ballan Road/Connector Road – Signalised T-intersection
50%* - $7,639,000
Geelong-Ballan Road/Connector Road – Signalised
Cross-intersection
50%* - $5,491,500
Geelong-Ballan Road/Midland Highway – Signalised T-intersection
50%* - $12,855,500
Land required for Geelong-Ballan Road widening between Creamery Road and
100% - $5,838,448
Land required for Midland Highway widening
100% - $1,819,085
* 50 percent attributed to the Creamery Road Precinct, 50 percent attributed
to the neighbouring precinct
Source: DTP Transport Services submission to the roundtable discussions
(Document 98)
The City of Greater Geelong (Council) submitted Day 1
on 7 March 2025 proposing
(among other things) to remove IN_05, LA_02 and LA_03, which are wholly State
infrastructure projects,
from the draft DCP.
On 13 March 2025, the Department of Transport and Planning – Transport
Services (DTP Transport Services) wrote to the Northern
and Western Geelong
Growth Areas Standing Advisory Committee (Committee) requesting until 12 May
2025 to respond to Council’s
proposed Day 1
Following discussions at
the roundtable, the Committee agreed to accept a supplementary submission from
DTP Transport Services by
Other parties were invited to respond by 26 May 2025. The Committee received
responses from:
305 Bat Pty
Rosalia and
Simon Nardi and Lovely Banks Development and Growland (Submitters 7 and 11)
Developments Project Pty Ltd (Villawood), Adbri Limited and Bisinella
Developments Project Pty Ltd (Bisinella) jointly.
Committee’s discussion and findings on transport infrastructure matters
other than IN_05, LA_02, and LA_03, see Chapter
6 of the Volume 1 Report.
1.2 Unresolved issues
The unresolved issues
whether State
infrastructure can be included in a DCP
whether projects
IN_05, LA_02 and LA_03 should be included the DCP
if they are
included, whether and how they should be apportioned
design and cost
considerations.
1.3 Can State infrastructure be included?
(i) Discussion
Ministerial direction on the preparation and content of development
contributions plans
Ministerial reporting requirements for
development contributions plans
allows the following to be funded from a
development infrastructure levy:
acquisition of
land for roads and public transport corridors
construction of
roads, including active transport paths and traffic management and control
It does not specify that State roads or transport
infrastructure items cannot be included.
Development Contributions Guidelines
(June 2003, amended March
2007) state that development contributions are “
one of a number of
options for funding infrastructure available to local
”, and that a DCP “
may include infrastructure
to be provided by a council
or State Government agency
(Committee’s emphasis).
The parties and experts generally agreed at the roundtable that while
unusual, there is no legislative barrier to State infrastructure
‘State on State’ infrastructure) being included in a DCP. The
Committee agrees, noting that the Northern
and Western Geelong Growth Areas
(NWGGA) DCP Items Principles
envisages State
infrastructure may be funded if need and nexus can be clearly identified.
(ii) Finding
The Committee finds:
It is legally
possible for State infrastructure to be included in a DCP.
1.4 Should this State infrastructure be included?
(i) Submissions and evidence
position on whether projects IN_05, LA_02 and LA_03 should be included in the
draft DCP was succinctly put in its
DCP (developers) should not be paying for acquisition of DCP land for planned
State projects.
The traffic experts considered these three projects in the traffic expert
meeting before the roundtable. Most agreed:
construction
costs for IN_05 should be excluded from the draft DCP (and funded by the
the land for the
ultimate intersection including flaring should be set aside in the draft PSP
(which it is currently not)
LA_03 may not be
required, as the existing 41 metre road reservation for Midland Highway to
accommodate a six lane duplicated highway
sufficient for the
delivery of the
Transport Services explained at the roundtable that it had proceeded on the
basis that all three projects would be fully funded
by the DCP, and
Council’s Day 1 position represented a significant change made without its
agreement. It referred to other
DCPs in the Greater Geelong municipality that
include State transport infrastructure, citing examples of intersections along
Surf Coast Highway in the Armstrong Creek growth area.
The supplementary submission from DTP Transport Services (D179) referred to
transport modelling that demonstrated that trips generated
by the Creamery Road
Precinct (Precinct) are predicted to account for between 6 and 11 percent of
future traffic flows along Midland
DTP Transport Services submitted IN_05 should be retained in the draft DCP
with 100 percent apportionment to the Precinct because:
the Midland
Highway upgrades (a broader State project being undertaken by DTP) do not
include the upgrade of this intersection
the need to
upgrade IN_05 is generated by the development in Creamery Road and surrounding
development in
the Precinct would “
” the need for IN_05 to be
DTP Transport Services’ supplementary submission did
not present figures for the proportion of draft PSP generated traffic predicted
to use IN_05.
Villawood initially supported inclusion of a scaled down version of IN_05 in
the draft DCP on the basis that the intersection would
need to be upgraded to
service lots in the Precinct in the later stages of its development. Villawood
revised its position in light
of the modelling provided in D179. In a joint
submission with Bisinella and Adbri, Villawood
as a matter of
principle, an arterial-to-arterial intersection should be funded by the
IN_05 should be
removed altogether from the draft DCP
included, it should be apportioned to reflect the very minor contribution the
Precinct will make to the need for the intersection
Regarding LA_02 (the proposed widening of Geelong-Ballan
Road) DTP Transport Services submitted it has no plans to duplicate
Geelong-Ballan
Road, therefore LA_02 should remain 100 percent funded by the
Regarding LA_03 (the proposed widening of Midland Highway) DTP Transport
Services reassessed the land requirements based on a DTP
concept design that had
regard to the updated modelling, and concluded that more land will be required
than provided for in the draft
DCP. It submitted that because development of
the Precinct directly impacts the need to widen the Highway, it is not
appropriate
to allocate 100 percent of the funding for the land to the
(ii) Discussion
Any infrastructure item included in a DCP must
satisfy the principles of needs, nexus and equity. As noted in the
Committee’s
Volume 1 Report, need, nexus and equity should also inform the
apportionment of the costs of any project to the Precinct.
In the Committee’s experience, it is unusual for State infrastructure
(particularly ‘State on State’ intersections)
to be included in a
DCP. These are generally funded by the State, and the Committee notes the
several examples of this pointed to
in the Villawood joint submission. That
said, those examples are all in metropolitan Melbourne, where the Growth Area
Infrastructure
Contribution (GAIC) applies. GAIC provides an alternative source
of funding for State infrastructure that is not available in regional
as Greater Geelong.
The absence of GAIC funding in regional areas does not justify a departure
from the need, nexus and equity principles when considering
whether State
infrastructure items should be included in a DCP.
There may be cases where State infrastructure meets
the need, nexus and equity principles, and it is appropriate to include at least
some proportion of the cost of State infrastructure in a DCP. However in this
case DTP has not justified how a 6 percent contribution
from the Precinct to
future traffic volumes in Midland Highway justifies a 100 percent apportionment
of the costs of upgrading IN_05
to the Precinct.
The Committee’s findings on funding shared infrastructure in Chapter
5.2 the Volume 1 Report included:
External usage
should be taken into consideration in determining appropriate
apportionment.
Amendment and supporting documents should include sufficient information to
clearly understand the basis for proposed apportionment
of shared infrastructure
items across the Precinct and wider NWGGA.
DTP’s position on
IN_05 does not accord with these principles, or the principles of need, nexus
and equity.
The Precinct will no doubt generate traffic movements through IN_05, but
apportioning 100 percent of IN_05 to Creamery Road (or 50
percent to Creamery
Road and 50 percent to Batesford North) cannot be justified as it fails to take
account of external usage.
While the modelling referred to in D179 indicated the Creamery Road Precinct
is likely to contribute somewhere between 6 and 11 percent
to traffic using
Midland Highway, this modelling is not sufficient to justify retaining IN_05 in
the DCP, even with a lower apportionment.
This is because DTP Transport
Services has not:
analysis of proportional traffic volumes expected to use IN_05 (as opposed to
Midland Highway)
provided the
details of the traffic modelling (for Midland Highway), making it very difficult
to assess the validity of the modelling.
The construction costs of
IN_05 should therefore be removed from the DCP. If DTP intends to pursue
inclusion of the construction
costs for IN_05 through the next stage of the
draft Amendment process, it will need comprehensive modelling that demonstrates
proportion of traffic expected to use IN_05 that is generated by the
Precinct, and the construction costs will need to be apportioned
accordingly.
Experts had differing opinions on whether it is appropriate to include the
land required for IN_05 (in its ultimate design) in the
draft PSP and draft DCP.
Most of the traffic experts who considered this issue thought the land should be
included. Traffic expert
Mr Humphreys and DCP experts Mr Bursill and Mr Black
disagreed, and thought that if the intersection (construction) is not included
then nor should the land costs be included.
The Committee accepts the position expressed by Ms Marshall in her response
to the DTP submission:
If the land is not set aside during the development of the PSP, then the
State would have to compulsorily acquire the land at a future
date, resulting in
significantly higher costs to the department and State.
The Committee therefore concludes the draft PSP should set aside the land
within the Precinct (on the east side of Geelong-Ballan
Road and the north side
of the Midland Highway) that is required for the ultimate intersection design,
including flaring and turn
lanes. This has not yet been identified, and may
require adjustment of the precinct boundaries.
The draft DCP contains no land costs for IN_05. Assuming the upgraded
intersection will benefit the whole Precinct (as opposed to
the particular
parcel(s) of land in which the land is located), land costs should be included
in the draft DCP. This will allow
the costs to be shared across the Precinct
rather than being effectively born solely by the affected landowners. Any land
for IN_05 included in the draft DCP should be apportioned to reflect the
proportion of need generated for the upgraded intersection
by the Precinct.
The draft PSP and DCP identify the land required for
widening Geelong-Ballan Road (LA_02) from Creamery Road to the railway line.
is not clear what land is required to deliver intersections with Precinct roads,
and what land is required for general widening
in the mid-block sections.
The land requirements should be separately identified in the draft PSP and DCP
and their inclusion justified
based on need and nexus. Land costs for LA_02
should be apportioned to reflect the proportion of need for the upgraded
intersections
and mid-block sections that is generated by the Precinct.
Regarding the Midland Highway widening (LA_03), the
Committee notes the experts’ view that Midland Highway can be widened
the existing 41 metre road reservation sufficient for the delivery of the
Precinct. There is therefore some doubt as to whether
the development of the
Precinct generates a need for Midland Highway to be widened. This should be
explored through the next stage
of the draft Amendment process.
If the land is to remain set aside in the draft PSP and land costs included
in the draft DCP, the costs should be appropriately apportioned.
The modelling
in D179 indicates that no more than 11 percent of traffic volumes expected on
Midland Highway will be generated by
the Precinct. As noted above, the details
of the traffic modelling have not been provided and it is very difficult to
validity of the modelling. However, given the modelling represents
the best available information at this point, the draft DCP should
be amended to
apportion no more than 11 percent of the land costs for LA_03 to the Precinct.
Whether this apportionment is appropriate
can be tested through consultation on
the draft Amendment.
(iii) Findings and recommended further work
The Committee finds:
construction costs should be removed from the draft DCP.
required for the ultimate intersection design including flaring should be
identified and set aside in the draft PSP.
- If the land is
set aside in the draft PSP, land costs should be included in the draft DCP so
that costs are effectively shared across
the Precinct rather than being born
solely by the affected landowners.
- Land costs (if
included in the draft DCP) should be adequately justified and appropriately
apportioned.
required for intersection upgrades and the land required for widening mid-block
sections should be separately identified.
should be set aside in the draft PSP only if the need for the upgrade or
widening results from development of the Precinct.
- Land costs in
the draft DCP should be adequately justified and appropriately
apportioned.
required should remain set aside in the draft PSP at this stage, but the need
for it should be tested through the next
stage of the draft Amendment
- Land costs in
the DCP should be adequately justified and appropriately apportioned. Based on
the modelling in D179 (which is the
best available information at this point),
no more than 11 percent of the land costs should be included in the
The Committee recommends the following further work
before the draft Amendment is finalised and public notice is given:
the Creamery Road Development Contributions Plan to:
a) remove Intersection IN_05
(construction)
b) apportion the land costs for the Midland
Highway widening (LA_03) at no more than 11 percent to the Creamery Road
Precinct (and
89 percent external).
the land within the Creamery Road Precinct required for the ultimate design of
Intersection IN_05. Amend the Creamery Road
Precinct Structure Plan (including
the Precinct boundaries if required) to set the land aside.
completing the further work in Recommendation 2 above and in Recommendation 5 in
the Committee’s Volume 1 Report, amend
the Creamery Road Development
Contributions Plan to:
a) include an appropriately apportioned
contribution to the land costs for Intersection IN_05
b) include an appropriately apportioned
contribution to the land costs for LA_02 (Geelong-Ballan Road widening)
c) adjust (if necessary) the 11 percent
apportionment for LA_03 (Midland Highway widening).
1.5 Design and cost considerations
proposed an alternative design for IN_05 prepared by OneMileGrid dated 14 March
which it had costed at
$12.95 million (rather than the $25.71 million in the draft DCP). It submitted
IN_05 was overengineered in
the draft DCP, and that if it is included in the
DCP, it should be developed and costed according to the more efficient
OneMileGrid
Based on the Committee’s recommendation in the previous subchapter that
IN_05 be removed from the DCP altogether, this is a
moot point. However if DTP
Transport Services wishes to pursue the inclusion of IN_05 in the DCP (on an
appropriately apportioned
basis), the OneMileGrid design (and costings) may
warrant further investigation through the next stage of the draft Amendment
2 Drainage matters affecting 110 Creamery Road
2.1 Introduction
draft PSP identifies wetland-retarding basin WLRB_06 as being located within
property 45 to the south of Bingley Court, in the
southeast corner of the
precinct. In its Day 1 changes Council proposed to consolidate WLRB_06 with
WLRB_07 in the northeast corner
of the Precinct, removing WLRB_06 from property
The drainage experts agreed that consolidating WLRB_06 with WLRB_07 would not
provide an improved outcome, and the assets should remain
separate. However,
experts agreed the outfall arrangements and location of WLRB_06 require further
investigation and consideration.
They considered WLRB_06 could potentially be
relocated within property 45 but closer to Midland Highway, or to the north of
Court (into properties 41 and 42) or other locations. See Chapter 7 in
the Volume 1 Report for more detail.
The landowner of property 41 (110 Creamery Road, Bell Post Hill) was invited
to take part in the Committee’s process and chose
not to participate, but
asked to be kept informed. Due to an administrative error, the landowner did
not receive correspondence
during the Committee’s process.
On 15 April 2025, the landowner requested and was provided with copies of
documents relating to drainage that were tabled during the
discussions. On 6 May 2025, the landowner requested to make a late submission
to the Committee on the basis that the
documents showed a proposed change
affecting property 41.
The Committee accepted a late written submission from the landowner on 17 May
Other parties were
invited to respond to any new matters raised by 26 May 2025. Responses were
received from Council and 305 Bat
Pty Ltd (landowner of property
2.2 Unresolved issue
The unresolved issue is
the location of wetland-retarding basin WLRB_06 and its outfall.
2.3 Discussion
The landowner of
property 41 submitted that WLRB_06 should be retained within property 45 as:
water naturally
pools on property 45 being a low lying area
the relocation
of WLRB_06 into properties 41 and 42 would be an unreasonable burden on these
small properties
property 41 is
unlikely to be redeveloped in the medium to long term.
305 Bat Pty
Ltd (landowner of property 45) submitted:
The Draft PSP also needs to allow for sufficient flexibility to ensure that
alternative locations and interim drainage solutions associated
construction or relocation of the WLRB_06 can be considered and implemented that
ensure the 305 Bat Land can be developed with
as little impact to its net
developable area (NDA) as possible.
305 Bat understands the concerns of [the landowner of property 41]. Equally,
305 Bat does not want the intentions (and rights) of
[the landowner of property
41] to not develop his land to prevent the development potential of 305
Bat’s Land. Accordingly,
305 Bat is not ultimately opposed to the
retention of WLRB_06 on the 305 Bat Land, but we submit that further technical
be undertaken to ensure it is in the most appropriate and feasible
location and that the Draft PSP has the necessary flexibility
to enable the
future drainage of the 305 Bat Land to be undertaken with as little impact as
possible to the NDA of 305 Bat’s
Council submitted that:
it is committed
to reviewing the drainage strategy
deliverability
of the asset is a relevant consideration
once the further
work is advanced interested parties will have an opportunity to comment on the
The Committee notes the concerns of the landowner of
property 41. These should be taken into account in the further work identified
in Chapter 7 of the Volume 1 Report.
For the Committee’s full discussion and
findings on drainage and water issues other than relating to property 41, see
7 of the Volume 1 Report.
2.4 Finding
The Committee finds:
The concerns
raised by the landowner of property 41 can be addressed in the further work
identified in Chapter 7 in the Volume 1
A Document list
For details of Documents 1 to 177 and a list of referred materials, refer to
Appendix D in the Volume 1 Report.
Description
Presented by
Letter regarding late submission from owner of 110 Creamery Road
Supplementary submission, enclosing attachments:
a) Land requirement comparison
b) Land requirement comparison (detail)
c) Concept intersection design, Midland Highway and Geelong-Ballan Road
DTP Transport Services
Submission regarding 110 Creamery Road, enclosing attachment:
Landowner of property 41
Response to DTP Transport Services supplementary submission
305 Bat Pty Ltd
Response to 110 Creamery Road submission
305 Bat Pty Ltd
Response to DTP Transport Services supplementary submission and 110
Creamery Road submission
Response to DTP Transport Services supplementary submission
Villawood, Adbri Limited and Bisinella Developments
Response to DTP Transport Services supplementary submission
Submitters 7 and 11
Document 23
Document 34
Document 179
Documents 183, 181, 185 and 184
respectively
Document 22a
Document 23
Document 93
Document 184
Document 181
Document 52
Document 23
Documents 180 and 180a
Documents 183 and 182
respectively
Document 182
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter