URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICmr/2025/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:32:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
'FV3' and Department of Justice and Community Safety (Freedom of Information) [2025] VICmr 21; (30 April 2025)
Notice of Decision and Reasons for Decision
Department of Justice and Community Safety
Decision date:
30 April 2025
Provisions and exemption considered:
Sections 25A(5)
Freedom of Information Act 1982
section 104ZZA
Corrections Act 1986
'FV3' and Department of Justice and Community Safety
(Freedom of
Information)
[2025] VICmr 21
(30 April 2025)
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION – prison intelligence – Centurion
Intelligence System – all documents would be exempt –
section 104ZZA
Corrections Act 1986
All references to legislation in this document are to the
Information Act 1982
) unless otherwise stated.
Notice of Decision
I have conducted a review under section 49F of the
Agency’s decision to refuse access to documents requested by the Applicant
under the FOI Act.
My decision on the Applicant’s request is the same as the
Agency’s decision.
I am satisfied that section 25A(5) applies, as it is apparent from the nature
of the documents described in the Applicant’s
request, that all of the
documents, should they exist, are exempt and access to an edited copy of any of
the documents cannot be
Please refer to the end of my decision for information about review rights
through the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
My reasons for decision follow.
Penny Eastman
Public Access Deputy
Commissioner
30 April 2025
Reasons for Decision
Background to review
Applicant made a request to the Agency seeking access to a copy of an
intelligence report and their Centurion Intelligence System
Agency refused the request under section 25A(5), without having identified any
or all documents, as it considered any documents
relevant to the request, should
they exist, would be exempt from release under section 38 in conjunction with
section 104ZZA
Corrections Act 1986
Corrections
Agency’s decision letter sets out the reasons for its
Review application
Applicant sought review by the Information Commissioner under section 49A(1) of
the Agency’s decision to refuse access.
Applicant and the Agency were invited to make a written submission under section
49H(2) in relation to the review.
have considered relevant communications and submissions received from the
undertaking my review, I have had regard to the object of the FOI Act, which is
to create a general right of access to information
in the possession of the
Government or other public bodies, limited only by exceptions and exemptions
necessary to protect essential
public interests, privacy and business
Review of section 25A(5)
agency may refuse a request without processing it, if:
(a) it is apparent from the nature of the documents described in the request,
of the documents are exempt; and
(b) the agency cannot provide access to an edited copy of any of the documents,
or the applicant does not want to receive an edited
copy of the documents.
section 25A(5) applies, it allows an agency to refuse the request
(a) having identified any or all of the documents to which the request relates;
(b) specifying, in respect of each document, the exemption(s) that make the
document exempt.
agency may only rely on section 25A(5) in clear and limited
circumstances.
An agency must
interpret and apply section 25A(5) consistently with the FOI Act’s objects
to extend, as far as possible, the
right of the community to access government
held information through a general right of access to
element – apparent on the face of the request that all documents exempt
– section 25A(5)(a)
section 25A(5) to apply, the first element is: it is apparent from the nature of
the documents as described in the request that
all of the documents to which the
request is expressed to relate are exempt documents.
What is the
nature of the requested documents?
nature of a document refers to the ‘inherent or essential quality and
character of the documents as
described’.
An agency cannot
‘go behind the description of the documents in the
must be objectively apparent from the face of the request that all requested
documents are exempt by their nature (under one or
exemption).
Applicant seeks access to a prison intelligence report and information within
their file held on the CIS, which the Agency’s
decision letter describes
as a database that the Agency uses to gather and assess intelligence and
information about the activities
of prisoners.
such, it is apparent the Applicant is seeking access to prison intelligence
information. Therefore, I must consider if documents
containing prison
intelligence are exempt under section 38.
Would the requested
documents be exempt under section 38?
document is exempt under section 38 when three conditions are
(a) there is a section of a Victorian Act (an enactment) that is in force; and
(b) the enactment applies specifically to information contained in the document;
(c) the enactment prohibits specific persons from disclosing the specified
information.
Is there an enactment in force?
Corrections Act
is an enactment in force.
enactment refer specifically to the information in the requested documents,
should any exist?
Corrections Act
104ZZA Offence to use or
disclose personal or confidential information unless authorised
A person who is or has been a relevant person must not use or disclose
personal or confidential information unless that use or disclosure
is authorised
section 104ZY
Penalty: 120 penalty units.
term ‘personal or confidential information’ is defined in
Corrections Act
and includes the following, which I consider are
relevant in this matter:
(a) information relating to the personal affairs of a person who is or has been
an offender or a prisoner;
(c) information –
(i) that identifies any person or discloses his or her address or location or a
journey made by that person; or
(ii) from which the person’s identity, address or location can reasonably
be determined.
(i) information concerning the management of prisons;
(j) information concerning –
(i) security systems and security measures in, or in relation to, a prison;
(ii) security measures taken to protect the community from offenders;
Intelligence
gathering is essential to the management and security of prisons and prisoners.
Its purpose is to ensure the safety,
security and integrity of the prison, its
systems, prisoners and staff and inform the Agency’s decision making
regarding these
note the Applicant is no longer incarcerated and the prison is no longer
operating. Nevertheless, any intelligence gathered is likely
to still have
relevance to the management of prisoners who are still incarcerated, albeit at
another prison, and would contain information
concerning the security of and
management that is applicable to other prisons. If intelligence documents were
released, the management
and security of prisons could be exploited and
compromised.
such, the enactment refers specifically to the information that would be
contained in the requested documents, should any exist.
enactment prohibit persons from disclosing the information in the requested
documents, should any exist?
secrecy provision must prohibit a person from disclosing the specified
information.
Corrections Act
operates to protect the privacy of individuals who
are identified in documents generated in connection with the management and
administration
of the corrections system, as well as ensuring that the security
and management of prisons is not compromised. The section imposes
confidentiality requirements on Agency officers, among others, which apply in
all but certain limited circumstances.
Corrections Act
prohibits ‘a person who is or has been a
relevant person’ from disclosing ‘personal or confidential
information’
unless authorised.
phrase ‘relevant person’ is set out in Schedule 5 and includes
‘[a] person employed in the Department under
Administration Act 2004
such, the Agency is a ‘relevant person’ for the purposes of
Corrections Act
Are there any exceptions to the
secrecy provision?
Corrections Act
set out exceptions to the prohibition on
relevant persons disclosing ‘personal or confidential information’.
reviewed these exceptions, there is no information before me to suggest an
exception applies to authorise disclosure of the
documents to the Applicant
where the documents concern the security and management of the prison,
irrespective of whether they relate
to the Applicant personally and the
Applicant authorises disclosure of information that relates to them, noting
section 104ZY(2)(b)
Corrections Act
Accordingly,
I am satisfied
section 104ZZA
Corrections Act
prohibits Agency officers
from disclosing the requested documents, should any exist, and I am satisfied
the documents would contain
information that is exempt from release under
section 38.
summary, I am satisfied that the first element is met, as it is apparent from
the nature of the documents described in the request,
documents, should they exist, would be exempt under
in conjunction
section 104ZZA
Corrections Act
Second element
– no obligation to provide an edited copy of any document – section
second element in section 25A(5)(b) relates to providing access to edited copies
of a requested document.
25A(5) can only be applied if:
(a) it is not practicable to provide an edited copy of any of the documents that
removes the exempt information;
(b) it is apparent from the request or through consultation with the applicant,
that the applicant does not want access to an edited
copy of the document that
removes the exempt information.
must be objectively apparent from the nature of the documents, as described in
the request, that it would not be practicable to
provide an edited copy of any
of the documents, under
section 25.
am satisfied it would not be practicable to provide an edited copy of any of the
documents to remove exempt information, as they
would be exempt in their
entirety under
, based on their objective
am satisfied that section 25A(5) applies, as it is apparent from the nature of
the documents described in the Applicant’s
request, that all of the
documents, should they exist, are exempt and access to an edited copy of any of
the documents cannot be
provided. Therefore, access to the requested documents
is refused.
Timeframe to seek a review of my decision
the Applicant is not satisfied with my decision, they are entitled to apply to
VCAT for it to be reviewed.
Applicant may apply to VCAT for a review up to 60 days from the date they are
given this Notice of Decision.
Information
Alternatively, VCAT may be contacted by email at
admin@vcat.vic.gov.au or by
telephone on 1300 018 228.
Agency is required to notify the Information Commissioner in writing as soon as
practicable if the Applicant applies to VCAT for
a review of my
Knight v Corrections
[2010] VSC 338
Freedom of Information
Knight v Corrections
[2010] VSC 338
Knight v Corrections
[2010] VSC 338
Knight v Corrections
[2010] VSC 338
Information Act 1982
sections 25(b)
Information Act 1982
sections 25(c)
(5)(b)(ii).
Corrections Victoria
[2010] VSC 338
Section 50(1)(b).
Section 50(3FA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (301 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter