URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2006/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
07-041 [2006] VMHRB 6 (1 September 2006)
In the review of P
An involuntary patient at
Clinic – Inner West Mental Health Service
[2006] VMHRB 6
Date of Hearing:
1 September 2006
Ms L Coulson Barr
Involuntary patient –
Mental Health Act 1986
(1)(d) – insight – consent
P has a long history of involvement with psychiatric services in New Zealand
from 1992, when he was admitted to a forensic facility
following an assault on a
lawyer, who he believed had defrauded him of money, and whose actions he
believed had led to his bankruptcy.
In July 2003, P was admitted to the Bleuler
Unit of Royal Melbourne Hospital following an assault on a Salvation Army
has been an outpatient on a community treatment order
(“CTO”) since 8 July 2005.
Dr RY in the report on involuntary status diagnosed P as suffering from a
delusional disorder. P in his appeal claimed that he did
not have a mental
illness. Dr RY said that P had openly said until the hearing that he would not
take treatment voluntarily, and
his son had said that he would like to see his
father without treatment. Dr RY said there was a history of assaults when not
treated; the most recent was the assault of a Salvation Army officer, at
an employment agency.
Ms Shalit, on behalf of P, submitted that his belief system is not
delusional, but resulted from a bankruptcy, which had ruined him.
She said that
P claimed that it is true that he was wrongly treated by his lawyer and others
at the time of the bankruptcy.
Ms Shalit submitted that the decision of McDonald J of the Supreme Court of
[1998] VSC 1554
was authority for the view that a person can be found
to consent to treatment, even when the person does not accept that he suffers
the diagnosed disease and therefore lacks insight into his disease, and when he
is only consenting
“because it is a requirement of his leave rather
than he believes it necessary”.
(1) The history of assaults of people who P believed had done him some
injustice, and some other matters in the clinical file, for
instance the attempt
to interest the United Nations in helping him obtain justice, satisfied the
Board that P does have some form
of mental illness. Even if the beliefs about
the bankruptcy are not delusional, the Board was satisfied that some of
P’s actions
following from that injustice do indicate that he suffers from
mental illness.
(2) The Board was satisfied that P does need involuntary treatment subject to
a community treatment order for his health and for the
protection of members of
the public. His attempts to seek justice in respect of the decline of his
financial affairs have caused
him harm. The ways in which he has gone about it
have not been in his best interests, the assault on his former lawyer led to
charges and the more recent assault on a Salvation Army officer led to
admission as an involuntary patient to Bleuler Unit.
(3) The Board found this a difficult issue. On the one hand P told the Board
that he did not have a mental illness, and in his opinion
did not require
medication. On the other hand he said that he would continue with treatment,
even as a voluntary patient. As explained
by McDonald J, in the case relied on
by Ms Shalit, a person can consent to having treatment, even if he does not
believe that he
suffers from the illness being treated, and thus does not
believe that he needs treatment. The fact that a patient does not agree
needs treatment, does not prevent him consenting to the treatment others
consider necessary for him. Nor will it necessarily
matter if the only reason a
person consents to treatment is that he understands that he will have to
consent, if he wants to achieve
a certain result (a non-custodial supervision
order in the Supreme Court case, discharge of a CTO in this matter). But where
consent is given in a somewhat ambivalent way, the Board is entitled to take
into account past history in deciding how to interpret
the consent.
(4) The Board was conscious of the fact that each instance of being an
involuntary patient gives rise to rights of appeal, and that
the Board must
decide the current appeal on the evidence given at the hearing. That evidence
is of more relevance than a past history.
This is important, because if the
past history were always to be seen as preventing reliance on P ’s consent
to treatment,
he would never be able to succeed on an appeal.
(5) Two further factors led the Board to conclude that P was still unable to
consent to the necessary treatment for his mental illness.
The first was that,
in spite of saying that he had some concern about side effects, he also said
that he was not prepared to try
a new medication which may suit him better,
because it would require an injection every two weeks instead of every three
That seemed to still show some resistance to treatment.
(6) The second reason is linked to P’s son’s strong belief that his
father would have a better life if he were not on
medication. The Board had no
doubt that he genuinely wants what is best for his father. He has been very
supportive of his father
since they have renewed contact. The Board however
considered that, as he was not in contact with his father for much of the period
during which P has been suffering a mental illness, he might not appreciate how
ill his father could be, if he were not on medication.
P’s son was frank
in acknowledging that he did not think his father should be taking
anti-psychotic medication.
Appeal against involuntary status - appeal dismissed.
P was represented by Ms Barbara Shalit, of the Mental Health Legal
Date of Decision:
1 September 2006
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
Waratah Clinic – Inner West Mental Health Service
HEARING NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
1 September 2006
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: Ms J Dwyer
Community Member: Ms L Coulson Barr
Psychiatrist Member: Dr F Stamp
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 1 September 2006:
Patient: Mr P
Patient’s son Mr PX
Legal representative: Ms Barbara Shalit of Mental Health Legal Centre
Doctor: Dr RY
Case Manager: Ms SHL
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary
patient subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
The appeal of P and his son was therefore dismissed.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
1 September 2006
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P continues to be treated as an involuntary patient subject to a
community treatment order.
The appeal of and on behalf of P is dismissed.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
on Involuntary Status dated 27 July 2006 prepared by Dr RY and presented to the
Plan of P dated 31 May 2006, prepared by Ms SHL and authorised by Dr RY on 27
June 2006 and presented to the Board.
4. Oral evidence at the hearing.
5. Report of Dr RZ, second psychiatric opinion, dated 28 August
of and on behalf of Mr P, dated 25 July 2006 and lodged with the Board on 26
, if the Board is satisfied that a person subject to a community
treatment order does not satisfy the criteria specified in
, the Board must
discharge the person from the community treatment order. Therefore, the Board
considered:
P appear to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P subject to a
community treatment order necessary for his health
or safety (whether to prevent
a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the
protection of members
of the public; and
P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of his freedom of decision and action?
, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
The appeal lodged with the Board stated, in the part
signed by P
, “I have no mental disorder”
. The section signed
by his son, Mr PX, stated that there were significant reasons why his father
should not be an involuntary patient.
The hearing of the appeal had been adjourned on 4 August 2006 to allow the
obtaining of a second psychiatric opinion. The report
of Dr RZ was provided to
the Board at the hearing. The community member of the Board was a member of the
Board at the adjourned
hearing. There was no objection by the parties to her
sitting as a member of the Board at this hearing.
P has a long history of involvement with psychiatric services in New Zealand
from 1992, when he was admitted to a forensic facility
following an assault on a
lawyer, who he believed had defrauded him of money, and whose actions he
believed had led to his bankruptcy.
He is said to have also assaulted the
lawyer’s secretary, and a prison officer while on remand in relation to
the assault
In July 2003, P was admitted to the Bleuler Unit of Royal Melbourne Hospital
following an assault on a Salvation Army worker. He
has been an outpatient on a
community treatment order (“CTO”) since 8 July 2005.
Dr RY in the report on involuntary status diagnosed P as suffering from a
delusional disorder. P in his appeal claimed that he did
not have a mental
Submissions on behalf of P
Ms Shalit stated that P does not believe he has a
mental illness and therefore does not think he needs treatment. She submitted
his belief system is not delusional, but resulted from a bankruptcy, which
had ruined him. She said that P claimed that it is true
that he was wrongly
treated by his lawyer and others at the time of the bankruptcy.
Ms Shalit said that her client was realistic in understanding that he would
be required to have treatment due to his past history,
but she said he wanted it
voluntarily, not on a CTO. She said that he saw the CTO as additional
persecution and
“a bugbear”
. Ms Shalit said she was
instructed by her client and his son that when P says he will accept treatment,
he will be reliable about
Ms Shalit provided the Board with a copy of the decision of McDonald J of the
Supreme Court of Victoria,
[1998] VSC 1554.
There is a suppression order as to
the name of the applicant and therefore the decision cannot be further
identified. She submitted
that the decision was authority for the view that a
person can be found to consent to treatment, even when the person does not
that he suffers the diagnosed disease and therefore lacks insight into
his disease, and when he is only consenting
“because it is a
requirement of his leave rather than he believes it
necessary”.
The applicant in that case had been found not guilty of murder by reason of
insanity. For more than ten years, he had been living
in the community on leave
under a custodial supervision order, with strict conditions as to treatment,
reporting and home visits.
The issue was whether the custodial supervision order
should be varied to a non-custodial supervision order. The question came down
mainly to a decision whether the different form of order would endanger the
safety of members of the public.
McDonald J rejected a submission on behalf of the Attorney-General that
because of the applicant’s lack of insight into his
medical condition, and
his reluctance to take medication, except as necessary for him being released on
leave, the court should not
vary the custodial supervision order. His Honour
[T]hat which motivates the applicant to be compliant with medical
treatment... is that it is necessary for him to do so if he wishes
to enjoy the
freedom of movement that he presently enjoys. It is in consequence of this that
he accepts the prescribed treatment
and by accepting the same the treatment has
the effect as sought by his treating psychiatrist. This demonstrates that the
has in this respect insight. He appreciates that it is necessary to
be compliant with treatment to be able to live in the circumstances
presently enjoys.”
The evidence was that the applicant retained some underlying beliefs that he
had in the past, but while he was on treatment, they
did not worry him unduly,
and the beliefs were much less intense than they had been at the time of the
death of the victim. His
Honour went on to emphasise the importance of past
history in making a judgment as to future circumstances and evaluating risks.
In assessing the same the past and present circumstances
relevant to the applicant must provide a guide as to what the future is likely
His Honour gave weight to the long history of
compliance with medication, the absence of any history of further violence and
the positive
reports of his treating psychiatrist and psychiatric nurse who
visited the applicant weekly.
Evidence of P
In evidence, P said that it was a
unhappiness”
to him that he had to take medication. He said that his
medication had been quite significantly reduced over the last year or two,
that he had been offered a newer treatment, but that would require a fortnightly
injection. His treatment at the time of the
hearing was a three weekly
injection, and he said that he does not want it more frequently. He said that
six months before the hearing
he had told Dr RY that he would take the
treatment, even if he became a voluntary patient. Ms Shalit found the entry to
that effect
in the clinical file.
Evidence of treating team
Dr RY acknowledged that he had never seen P floridly
ill and that he had been quite settled while a patient of Waratah Clinic, but
said that the file contained quite significant documentation of episodes of
florid illness. Both Dr RY and Ms SHL said that until
P said at the hearing
that he would consent to treatment, they had never heard him say that he would
continue with treatment as a
voluntary patient. Dr RY said that P had openly
said until the hearing that he would not take treatment voluntarily, and his son
had said that he would like to see his father without treatment.
Dr RY said there was a history of assaults when not being treated; the most
recent was the assault of a Salvation Army officer, at
an employment agency. Dr
RY said that when P was taken to hospital after that incident he appeared to
“clearly psychotic”.
In answer to Ms Shalit, Dr RY said that he had reduced the dose of medication
in May this year and he had not noticed any change in
behaviour since then. Ms
Shalit showed Dr RY his note on file dated 24 May 2006, in which Dr RY had noted
that P had told him that
he would still attend for treatment if not on a CTO,
although he had also said that in his opinion he did not need treatment and
not want it.
Dr RY acknowledged that it had not been correct to say that he had never
heard P say that he would continue to attend for treatment,
even if he was not
on a CTO. He explained that he had found that in the conversation on 24 May
2006 P had appeared to him to be
ambivalent about taking his medication. He
said that a psychiatrist has to believe a person’s behaviour, and in the
treatment has not been compulsory, P had not attended for
He agreed with Ms Shalit that P is reliable in attending his appointments,
and that if he cannot attend as agreed, he rings up and
advises the treating
team. Dr RY said that he thought that Mr PX might support his father in going
off treatment, in the hope that
he would then be more outgoing.
Ms SHL said that she is a psychologist, which is relevant because of the
suggestion by Mr PX that his father might benefit from seeing
a psychologist.
Other evidence
Mr PX gave evidence that he had not been in touch
with his father for many years, but they had renewed contact about 18 months ago
and he and his girlfriend now see his father every week or fortnight, or every
three weeks. He said he wants his father to have
a better life. He does not
want to see him psychotic or upset. He said that neither he nor his mother had
ever seen his father
aggressive. He said his father seemed very rational to him
and understands money concepts.
Mr PX said that he believes his father has the potential to lead a fruitful
happy life if he comes off medication. He said it would
benefit his father to
come off the CTO because he has been feeling persecuted since the events which
led to his bankruptcy, and he
sees the CTO and the requirement that he take
medication as further persecution. He said that he did not believe his father
delusional but perhaps he was seeing a link, which did not exist in some
respects. He said that he thought his father would benefit
from seeing a
psychologist.
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board considered the exclusionary criteria in
and decided that
these were not relevant in this case.
The history of assaults of people who P believed had done him some injustice,
and some other matters in the clinical file, for instance
the attempt to
interest the United Nations in helping him obtain justice, satisfied the Board
that P does have some form of mental
illness. Even if the beliefs about the
bankruptcy are not delusional, the Board was satisfied that some of P’s
actions following
from that injustice do indicate that he suffers from mental
illness. The Board also considered that the 2003 assault of the Salvation
officer, who had no connection with the bankruptcy, indicated the presence of
mental illness.
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
The Board was satisfied that P does need ongoing treatment, in view of the
history of violence and irrational behaviour at times when
P has not been having
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
Because of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment
of P subject to a community treatment order necessary for his health
(whether to prevent a deterioration in his physical or mental condition or
otherwise) or for the protection of members
of the public?
The Board was satisfied that P does need involuntary treatment subject to a
community treatment order for his health and for the protection
of members of
the public. His attempts to seek justice in respect of the decline of his
financial affairs have caused him harm.
The ways in which he has gone about it
have not been in his best interests, the assault on his former lawyer led to
criminal charges
and the more resent assault on a Salvation Army officer led to
admission as an involuntary patient to Bleuler Unit. These assaults
assisted him in obtaining the justice to which he believes he is entitled. His
assaults have caused harm to others, even
to a prison officer and Salvation Army
officer who had nothing to do with his bankruptcy.
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
Has P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness?
The Board found this a difficult issue. On the one hand P told the Board
that he did not have a mental illness, and in his opinion
did not require
medication. On the other hand he said that he would continue with treatment,
even as a voluntary patient. As explained
by McDonald J, in the case relied on
by Ms Shalit, a person can consent to having treatment, even if he does not
believe that he
suffers from the illness being treated, and thus does not
believe that he needs treatment. The fact that a patient does not agree
needs treatment, does not prevent him consenting to the treatment others
consider necessary for him. Nor will it necessarily
matter if the only reason a
person consents to treatment is that he understands that he will have to
consent, if he wants to achieve
a certain result (a non-custodial supervision
order in the Supreme Court case, discharge of a CTO in this matter). But where
consent is given in a somewhat ambivalent way, the Board is entitled to take
into account past history in deciding how to interpret
the consent. P’s
past history, as to compliance with treatment when a voluntary patient, is not
encouraging. The history
before the Board is that after discharge from Connolly
Psychiatric Unit in Auckland, P was lost to follow-up after six months. In
October 2002, P is said to have absconded after being recommended for
The Board was conscious of the fact that each instance of being an
involuntary patient gives rise to rights of appeal, and that the
decide the current appeal on the evidence given at the hearing. That evidence
is of more relevance than a past history.
This is important, because if the
past history were always to be seen as preventing reliance on P ’s consent
to treatment,
he would never be able to succeed on an appeal. However there
were two further factors that led the Board to conclude that, P was
still unable
to consent to the necessary treatment for his mental illness. The first was
that, in spite of saying that he had some
concern about side effects, he also
said that he was not prepared to try a new medication which may suit him better,
because it would
require an injection every two weeks instead of every three
weeks. That seemed to still show some resistance to treatment.
The second reason is linked to Mr PX’s strong belief that his father
would have a better life if he were not on medication.
The Board had no doubt
that Mr PX genuinely wants what is best for his father. He has been very
supportive of his father since
they have renewed contact. The Board however
considered that, as he was not in contact with his father for much of the period
which P has been suffering a mental illness, he might not appreciate how
ill his father could be, if he were not on medication.
Mr PX was frank in
acknowledging that he did not think his father should be taking anti-psychotic
medication.
The Board considered that P’s ambivalent feelings about consenting to
have medication as part of his treatment, have not yet
been adequately worked
through. He and his son need to come to a clear understanding about his
attitude to consenting to treatment,
and they need to work through the issue of
consent with P’s treating team, either with Dr RY or with the psychologist
The Board was encouraged by the fact that Dr RY had been reducing
P’s dose of medication, and that he had not noticed any
adverse change in
The Board hoped that further discussion between P and his treatment team
might impress upon him the importance of continuing to take
his treatment, and
make him less ambivalent about his medication. Then the Board would feel more
confident that P was really able
to consent to continue with treatment, even if
he were no longer an involuntary patient on a CTO.
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
Is P unable to receive adequate treatment for the mental
illness in a manner less restrictive of his freedom of decision and
Because of its concern about P’s ambivalent attitude to his treatment,
the Board was satisfied that at the time of the hearing,
P was not able to
receive adequate treatment in a manner less restrictive of his freedom of
decision and action.
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a
patient’s treatment plan, the Board must be satisfied that the
requirements of
have been met. The Board considered each of
the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
The authorised psychiatrist had sufficiently complied with
The Board noted that the treatment plan was brief and included P’s
attendances at appointments, discussion about other treatment
options and
trialling reduction of medication. The Board however noted that the treatment
plan should refer to the presenting problem
and diagnosis as something other
than the fact that P “
believes he does not have any problem”.
The Board also noted that
section 19A
required consideration of the wishes
of P and his son in the treatment plan. The planned reduction of medication
appears to reflect
some of P’s wishes in respect of his treatment, given
concerns expressed by P and his son, Mr PX, on the side- effects of medication.
Mr PX also told the Board that he would like his father to have psychological
counselling, because he thinks it might help him.
The Board noted at the
hearing that the treating team could consider this request particularly given
that P’s case manager
is a qualified psychologist.
Accordingly, this requirement was met.
Section 35A(1)(b)
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
It appeared that there had been no difficulty with P attending to receive
treatment. The Board was satisfied that the treatment plan
implemented. It recommended that psychological counselling be considered as an
additional treatment, in accordance with
the expressed wish of P’s
Therefore, the Board was satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist had
complied with
in making, reviewing or revising the plan, and the plan is
capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
As a result, as all the
criteria were met and the treatment required
for P can be obtained through him being subject to a community treatment order,
Board made the determination set out on page 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (68.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter