URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2019/253.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:24:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DPP v Ristevski [2019] VSC 253 (18 April 2019)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
BORCE RISTEVSKI
DATE OF HEARING
27 March 2019
DATE OF SENTENCE
18 April 2019
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
DPP v Ristevski
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2019] VSC 253
CRIMINAL LAW – Sentence – Manslaughter by unlawful and dangerous
act – Plea of guilty – Offender killed wife
of 27 years in the
marital home – Post offence conduct included disposal of body which was
not found for eight months –
Cause of death unable to be determined due to
decomposition of body – How or why offender killed wife unknown –
has no criminal antecedents – Good prospects of rehabilitation
– Total effective sentence of nine years’ imprisonment
Non-parole period of six years.
APPEARANCES
For the Crown
Mr B Kissane QC with Mr M Fisher
Office of Public Prosecutions
For the Accused
Mr D Hallowes SC with
Mr S Norton
Stary, Norton, Halphen
HIS HONOUR:
Circumstances of offending
1 Borce Ristevski, on the morning of 29
June 2016, you and your wife Karen Anne Ristevski, to whom you had been married
for some 27
years, were at home at 23 Oakley Drive, Avondale Heights. Your
21-year-old daughter Sarah, who also lived there, spoke to both of
she headed off to work. Sarah was never to see her mother alive again. Within a
couple of hours of Sarah’s departure,
you had killed your wife, disposed
of her body in a forest in the Macedon Regional Park and started down a road of
deceit that you
were to continue on for nearly three years.
2 Although, by your plea of guilty to manslaughter,
you have finally accepted responsibility for killing Karen, you have not
how or why you killed your wife. You may have turned off the road of
deceit but you have not taken the high road of full and frank
consistent with true remorse. This explains in large part why the discount for
your plea of guilty will be less than you
might otherwise expect.
3 You accepted the accuracy of the lengthy
prosecution summary given at your plea hearing. Much of that summary was
understandably
taken up with your deceitful post offence conduct. The following
condensed summary of your offending and post offence conduct comes
in part from
the concluding section of the prosecution summary.
upon CCTV footage, mobile telecommunications data and network communication
towers and the varying accounts given by you and
a number of witnesses, you
killed Karen inside your home sometime between 8.58 and 10.43 on the morning of
29 June 2016.
5 Within a very short time of killing
Karen, you put her body into the boot of her own car and then drove from the
house. You left
the house at about 10.43am in search of a location to dispose of
Karen and conceal her body. This search ultimately led you to isolated
in Loch Road, Macedon.
6 A short time into the
journey, you turned off your mobile telephone to avoid being traced or detected.
A little later, Karen’s
mobile telephone was also deactivated either
because it was deliberately switched off, placed into airplane mode or the
battery ran
out of power.
stage, you disposed of Karen’s telephone, handbag and wallet. They have
never been found.
7 Upon arriving at Loch Road in
the Macedon Regional Park, you disposed of Karen in an isolated and remote
location. You concealed
her body between and under logs and sticks and foliage
to such an extent that she was not discovered for eight
You then returned to Oakley
Drive, only activating your mobile telephone when you reached Keilor Park at
12.51pm. You arrived home
at about 1.03pm.
8 When your daughter arrived home from work at
that Karen had left home in a huff and that you had no idea as to her
whereabouts.
9 In the days, indeed months and years
that followed you continued spinning your web of lies – lying not only to
your daughter,
but to extended family, friends, police and even the public in a
media conference organised by the Police Missing Persons Unit.
10 When Karen’s body was eventually discovered
after eight months, and she was finally given a proper funeral and burial, you
acted as a pallbearer, playing the part of the innocent, grieving widower.
11 The pretence – the rank deceit – only
ended a few weeks ago when you pleaded guilty to manslaughter, which carries
maximum penalty of 20 years’ imprisonment.
Post offence conduct
12 Your counsel submitted that I must not
allow your post offence conduct to overwhelm or dominate the sentencing
exercise. I accept
that submission but it is still fair to say that your
disposal and concealment of Karen’s body and the many lies you have told,
worst of all to your daughter, constitute a circumstance of significant
aggravation, as the cases on post offence conduct
Victim impact
13 Victim impact statements have been
provided by:
(a) Karen’s brother,
Stephen Williams;
(b) Karen’s former
sister-in-law, Kerry Williams;
(c) Karen’s
nephew, Lachlan
(d) Karen’s
aunts, Patricia Gray and Marguerite
(e) Karen’s uncle, Gregory
(f) Karen’s cousins, Stephen Richardson, Lisa
Gray and Nevada Knight.
14 I have given careful consideration to
all of those statements. Shortly, I will highlight some points made in those
statements,
but first, what am I to make of the fact that no victim statement
was provided by your daughter, Sarah? It does not mean, of course,
that she is
not a victim. Indeed, after your wife, she is your principal victim, as Sarah
and her mother were very close. Out of
love for you, no doubt, Sarah has
declined the invitation to make a victim impact statement and has provided you
instead with a glowing
character reference. I mean no criticism of Sarah. Anyone
with a modicum of compassion must understand that her predicament is an
agonising one. Regrettably the sentence I must pass on you will add to her
15 Turning to the victim impact statements
I have received, let me first record my complete acceptance of the
prosecution’s
submission that they are “eloquent... measured...
powerful and moving... with one voice, they speak of the profound impact
killing of Karen has had upon those family members, and will for the rest of
their lives.”
16 Moreover, your protracted post offence conduct
has according to Marguerite Knight, “compounded the sheer grief” of
Karen’s family. In the months after your wife’s killing, Patricia
Gray said you would often “rave and rant about
the police and the
media” rather than make any meaningful effort to locate your wife, and
that you would make angry calls to
them demanding that they stop talking to the
police or the media.
17 Your disposal and
concealment of Karen’s body in Macedon resulted in family members not only
having to cope with the anguish
of her inexplicable disappearance but also with
the fact that her remains were significantly decomposed when she was found, 8
after her disappearance. For example, Marguerite Knight explains that
“being advised that Karen was in such a decomposed state
heart”, and Kerry Williams explains that “Even to this day, the
hardest part to understand is how he left Karen
out there, the way he did to the
18 Karen’s family also had
to contend with significant media interest in your wife’s disappearance.
Lisa Gray recounts
how the “ridiculous stories being entertained by some
of the media outlets” were never countered by
19 Your post offence conduct has also been
destructive of familial ties. Lisa Gray explains that “family dynamics
have changed,
relationships have been broken, probably never to be
healed.” Your daughter Sarah’s relationship with Karen’s side
of the family has also suffered.
20 A constant
source of anger and disbelief referred to in the statements was your active
participation in your wife’s funeral,
including the fact that you not only
comforted so many in the family when you secretly knew that you were the cause
of their grief,
but that you also carried your wife’s casket in the
knowledge that you killed her. Kerry Williams explains: “the audacity
showed that day was difficult to watch and I will never forget that he had the
nerve to do this all while knowing exactly that
he was the cause...of all of our
pain.” Karen’s brother, Stephen Williams, who suspected your
involvement in the killing
around the time of the funeral, states that “it
was so difficult to lead my sister’s casket out of the church, knowing
was leading on the other side.”
21 Even now,
the possibility of some degree of closure for the family is complicated, if not
cruelled, by the fact that they do not
know exactly how or why Karen died. As
Lisa Gray explains: “if Borce could do anything for Karen and her side of
the family,
it would be for him to help take away the constant stream of images
I experience almost daily, of Karen struggling for her last breath.
knowing is worse than knowing.” Stephen Richardson noted that because
“there is no closure of knowing how Karen
died I often think of different
scenarios of how it happened and how distraught her mind would have been as she
had her life taken
away from her from the person she loved for so many years. I
pray that it was quick but unfortunately I will never know.” In
statement, Lisa Gray asks how “does someone find peace and acceptance when
we will now spend the rest of our lives wondering...
what happened that
22 It is conceded by your counsel,
given your failure to make full and frank disclosure, that your plea of guilty
is not evidence
of remorse. There is an understandable bitterness expressed in
some of the victim impact statements about your failure to demonstrate
remorse. For example, Nevada Knight writes that “you’ve had almost
3 years to come forward and many months in solitude”
and that “you
only have admitted to doing the act when it suited your case.”
Karen’s brother, Stephen Williams,
explains that after you pleaded guilty
to manslaughter he expected “to see some regret or remorse” but
instead he observed
you staring back at him with “only anger and
hatred” in your eyes. Stephen Richardson observes that “to see a
go up at the very end to justify their actions in the hope of leniency is
heart-breaking and will ensure that I won’t ever
23 Unfortunately, no sentence that I can impose
will undo the suffering you have caused, and continue to cause, to those who
and loved Karen.
Procedural history
24 At this point, it is necessary to say
something about the procedural history of your case. You were arrested and
charged with murder
on 13 December 2017 and remanded in custody.
25 A contested committal was conducted in July and
August 2018. At the conclusion of that committal, you pleaded not guilty to
26 You made a written offer to the
prosecution to plead guilty to manslaughter on 10 September 2018, which was
I was told it was
rejected because you were not prepared to disclose how or why you killed your
27 On 12 March 2019, the day your trial for
murder was listed to commence, I heard legal argument about the use that could
of your post offence conduct. It was the only evidence on which the
prosecution relied to prove that when you killed your wife, you
intended to kill
her or at least cause her really serious injury, as is required for the offence
28 On the morning of 13 March 2019, I
ruled that whilst your post offence conduct could be used to prove that you
killed your wife
unlawfully, it could not be used to prove that you did so with
murderous intent.
After my ruling,
the prosecution and the defence asked for some time. When the case resumed at
2.15pm that same day, the prosecution
did not announce an intention to challenge
my ruling on appeal. Instead, the prosecution filed over an indictment for
manslaughter,
to which you pleaded guilty immediately.
29 In those circumstances, and particularly having
regard to your offer approximately one month after the committal to plead guilty
to manslaughter, I accept your counsel’s submission that I should not
treat your plea as a late plea.
Objective seriousness of the offence
30 All manslaughters are serious
offences, because each involves the taking of a human life. But the
circumstances of such killings
vary enormously: some manslaughters are plainly
worse examples of the offence than others, though, in every case, bereaved
and friends may feel, as the poet Hopkins says: “No worst, there is
Because there is a
spectrum of seriousness for manslaughter, like any other offence, it has been
common for sentencing judges over
many years to try and determine, if possible,
where the manslaughter in question falls on that spectrum of seriousness.
31 That practice of trying to work out whether a
particular manslaughter is a low, mid or upper range example of the offence
informed the prosecution and defence submissions in this case, and
some of the discussion during the plea hearing, even though it
is an approach
that has been deprecated by our Court of Appeal in more recent
32 Despite that legal development, it is
appropriate, given the way the plea hearing played out, that I briefly summarise
the submissions
which were made regarding the objective seriousness of your
33 The prosecution submitted that this
was an upper range example of the offence of manslaughter, notwithstanding the
complete absence
of information as to how you killed your wife. The prosecution
based its submission on the following considerations: domestic violence
aggravated form of violence;
this is a particularly bad instance of domestic violence because it involved the
taking of a life; your victim was your wife of 27
years, the longevity of that
relationship magnifying the breach of
you killed her in her
and protected”;
rapidity, extent and duration of your post offence conduct was inconsistent with
it being “a low end
manslaughter.”
34 In written submissions, your counsel submitted
that, because of a lack of
information,
I could not place
your offence anywhere on the spectrum of seriousness for manslaughter:
“There is no basis for making any finding as to
the circumstances of the killing and therefore no basis to assert any particular
level of offending within the range of different examples of unlawful and
dangerous act
manslaughter.”
35 In oral submissions, your counsel
arguably shifted his positon, suggesting yours was a mid-range example of
manslaughter.
domestic violence aspect, on which the prosecution relied so heavily, your
counsel emphasised that, unlike many domestic
violence killings, there was no
history of domestic violence in your relationship with your wife; on the
contrary, the unchallenged
character references indicated a history of relative
domestic peace. Whatever happened on the morning of 29 June 2016, your counsel
submitted it must be viewed as an isolated instance of domestic
The fact that Karen
had been your wife for some 27 years was said by your counsel to be
“irrelevant”: he submitted that
the “length of time that
someone is married to a person doesn't make it one of the worst examples of
domestic violence,”
a submission with which I agree although, in my view,
the longevity of a marriage can magnify the breach of
36 Ultimately, the view that I have arrived at is
that I have insufficient information to say whether your offence is a mid or
range example of manslaughter, although it is clearly not a low range
example of manslaughter because of the aggravating domestic
violence aspect.
Without knowing the level and duration of the violence perpetrated by you which
caused your wife’s death,
I simply cannot say whether your offending was
mid or upper range. I do not regard your silence as to how you killed your wife
providing a sufficiently firm basis for drawing the inference that yours must
have been an upper range example of the offence of
manslaughter. Whilst the
community and the courts rightly abhor domestic violence, it is simplistic to
suppose that all domestic
violence manslaughter cases necessarily fall into the
upper range on the spectrum of seriousness for manslaughter. It takes little
imagination to think of circumstances where a domestic violence manslaughter
– for example, one involving a momentary loss
of control and a
comparatively low level of violence – could not reasonably be viewed as an
upper range example of the offence
of manslaughter.
37 There are, however, several things I do know
indicated, elevate the objective gravity of your offence above the low
(a) first, this is a serious
case of domestic violence – notwithstanding its isolated character –
because it resulted
in your wife’s death;
(b) second, Karen was not only your wife –
she was, as the prosecutor described her and you accepted, the “devoted
of your daughter Sarah, with whom she was very
(c) third, Karen was killed by you by an
unlawful and dangerous act in her own home, a place which should have been a
sanctuary for
(d) fourth, your wife was 47
years of age and, in the ordinary course of events, should have lived for many
more years.
Personal history
38 I now turn from the circumstances of
your offending to your personal circumstances and history.
39 You were born on 14 March 1964 in Macedonia and
are currently 55 years old.
40 You moved to
Australia with your parents and your older brother when you were six years old,
and grew up in Footscray.
41 You completed Year 11
at Footscray Technical College. After school you commenced work for three years
as an instrument technician
at Smorgon’s Paper Mill.
42 Prior to meeting Karen Ristevski, you had a
relationship with Kerry Rickard. In 1984, Kerry Rickard gave birth to your son,
Rickard. You never lived with Kerry Rickard, but continued to reside
with your parents in Maidstone. Your relationship with Kerry
Rickard ended
approximately eight months after your son’s birth. At around this time,
you and your brother bought a garment
pressing business in
Collingwood.
43 In 1986, you met Karen. In 1988, you
bought a house together at 2 Davitt Drive, Deer Park. At around this time, you
and your brother
again went into business together, starting a denim clothing
manufacturing business. Shortly afterwards, you closed your garment
44 You married Karen on 15 January 1989,
and in June 1994, purchased a vacant block of land together at 23 Oakley Drive,
Heights. About a year later, your daughter, Sarah, was born. In 1997,
you moved into the house you built with Karen at Avondale Heights.
Anthony, moved into your marital home at age 15 and lived at the home for
approximately five years.
45 Your denim clothing
company went into liquidation in 2000. Again you started a small business, this
time with your wife. This was
a clothing wholesale business located at
Highpoint. In 2009, you opened clothing retail stores, trading as Bella Bleu.
managed the Bella Bleu business. Bella Bleu initially traded out of a
store at Highpoint, but over time this store was moved to Moonee
later this store was closed and moved to Watergardens. In 2013, the company you
set up in connection with the clothing
wholesale business went into liquidation.
In 2015, you opened a second Bella Bleu store in Broadmeadows, which closed in
2016. From June 2015 onwards, you did casual work as an Uber driver.
46 Whilst the small businesses you have set up over
the years may not have prospered, you have clearly led an industrious life,
is commendable.
Summary of character references
47 Five character references, the
contents of which were not challenged by the prosecution, were tendered on your
behalf. The authors
of those references are Sarah Ristevski and a friend of
hers; your niece (who is also your god daughter) and her husband; and another
your god daughters.
48 The most striking reference
is of course Sarah’s. Sarah describes you as “loving, caring,
sympathetic, protective
and charismatic.” She explains that she was
“extremely lucky to have two loving parents who did everything they could
for each other”, adding that “the love they had for each other and
the marriage that they shared is something I hope
to one day experience for
myself.” She also says “I can confidently say that in my 23 years I
have never witnessed any
form of violence between my mum and dad.”
49 Sarah is not alone in the depiction of you as a
loving father and husband. The other references suggest much the same. They also
depict you as a loving uncle and god father.
50 Collectively, the references show you to have
been a person of good character, well-liked and involved in your local
including as a player and coach in both football and
51 The fact that you are 55 years of age
and have no criminal antecedents supplements and reinforces what your character
have said about you. In summary, I accept that, apart from the
commission of your crime and your post offence conduct, you have been
of good character.
Summary of mitigating circumstances
52 As well as your previous good
character, your counsel relied on your plea of guilty and your prospects of
rehabilitation in mitigation
53 In relation to your plea of guilty, your
counsel, as previously mentioned, did not submit it indicated remorse. Your
circumspection was sensible, given your secrecy regarding how
and why you killed your wife which has compounded the grief of Karen’s
loved ones. But, as the law recognises, your plea of guilty is still deserving
of a significant discount for its utilitarian benefits.
It has spared family and
friends the ordeal of a trial. Witnesses have also been spared the stress of
testifying, and the community
has been saved the considerable expense of a trial
which was anticipated to run for about five weeks. Whilst the prosecution at
baulked at the notion that your plea of guilty should attract a
significant discount, it eventually accepted that your entry of a
plea of guilty
was “no small
But, of course,
you cannot expect the kind of sentencing discount you would have received had
you made full and frank disclosure,
enabling me to find that you were truly
remorseful and doing all that you could to ease the pain of Karen’s loved
54 As for your prospects of rehabilitation,
I find, on the balance of probabilities, that they are good, given your lack of
antecedents and the unchallenged character references.
Comparable cases
55 Since I am obliged to have regard to
current sentencing practices in sentencing you, I have reviewed a significant
number of manslaughter
They were of some assistance but I do not intend here to trawl through the facts
and sentences of the cases I have considered. However,
I will say this. Many of
the domestic violence homicides that I have looked at involve a history of
domestic violence, not an isolated
outburst of violence. In that regard, your
case is atypical.
General sentencing principles
56 As was conceded by your counsel the
principles of general deterrence, denunciation and just punishment must loom
large in sentencing
I find that your prospects of rehabilitation are good, I do not place much
weight on specific deterrence or the need to protect
the community from you,
though specific deterrence has some part to play given the seriousness of your
offence, your post offence
conduct and your continuing secrecy
57 You were originally charged with
murder. Ultimately that charge was downgraded by the prosecution to
manslaughter. Accordingly,
in sentencing you, I must do so on the basis that,
when you killed your wife, you did not do so with murderous intent (that is,
an intention to kill or cause really serious injury).
58 Borce Ristevski, please
59 For the offence of manslaughter, I
sentence you to nine years’ imprisonment.
60 I declare a nonparole period of six years.
61 I declare that you have already served 491 days
by way of presentence detention.
62 Pursuant to
Sentencing Act
, I declare that, but for your plea
of guilty, I would have imposed a sentence of 10 years’ imprisonment with
a nonparole period
of seven years.
Ancillary Orders
63 In relation to the forensic sample
order sought by the prosecution (namely, a saliva sample), I am satisfied that
it is appropriate
to make such an order given the seriousness of your offence
and your consent to the order. Accordingly, I order you to undergo the
procedure and inform you that, if you do not cooperate in the provision of the
saliva sample, a police officer may use reasonable
force to enable a blood
sample to be taken. A copy of the order will be provided to you.
The first four paragraphs of
my condensed summary are based on [95] to [98] of the Prosecution Summary.
This sentence is taken from
[64] of the Prosecution Summary.
Some forest workers located
Karen’s body.
Cases involving post offence
conduct to which I have had regard are:
R v BA & Stanley
[2009] VSCA 289
(2009) 26 VR 219
R v Boroviak
[2018] VSC 793
[2003] VSC 499
DPP v England
[1999] VSCA 95
R v Mochenigo
[2013] VSCA 231
[2004] VSC 276
R v Veerman
[2015] VSC 193.
Lachlan Williams did not wish
his victim impact statement to be read out during the plea hearing.
Consequently, I have not included
any comments from his statement in these
Gregory Knight did not wish
his victim impact statement to be read out during the plea hearing.
Consequently, I have not included
any comments from his statement in these
Transcript of Proceedings,
DPP v Ristevski
(S CR 2018 0213, Beale J, Wednesday 27 March 2019),
Transcript of Proceedings,
DPP v Ristevski
(S CR 2018 0213, Beale J, Wednesday 27 March 2019),
DPP v Ristevski (Ruling No
[2019] VSC 165.
“No worst there is
none. Pitched past pitch of grief”: Gerard Manley Hopkins.
DPP v Weybury
[2018] VSCA 120
, [34] per Maxwell P and Hargraves JA, and [54] per
Priest JA. The Court of Appeal also referred to these paragraphs from
with approval in
Lee v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 343
Cases of domestic violence
to which I have had regard are
R v Eustace
[2019] VSC 189
[2001] VSCA 96
R v Mochenigo
[2013] VSCA 231
Pasinis v R
R v Postolovski
[2016] SASCCA 69;
(2017) VSC 358.
Transcript of Proceedings,
DPP v Ristevski
(S CR 2018 0213, Beale J, Wednesday 27 March 2019),
Defence counsel relied on
[2003] VSC 499
, especially at [7] and
R v Veerman
especially at [7]
Borce Ristevski,
“Outline of Plea Submissions”, Submission in
DPP v Ristevski
S CR 2018 0213, 26 March 2019, 4.
See Transcript of
Proceedings,
DPP v Ristevski
(S CR 2018 0213, Beale J, Wednesday 27 March
2019), 73-74 and 81. Defence counsel said it is “not at the higher end of
of offending for manslaughter.” He also said the post office
conduct does not “elevate it from what otherwise couldn't
be said to be at
the high end of the mid-range or even that, [does not] elevate it from somewhere
in that mix to the higher end of
offending for manslaughter.” Certainly,
the prosecutor took your counsel’s oral submissions to amount to a
that this was at most a mid-range example of manslaughter. The
prosecutor said “We take issue, Your Honour, with the submission
somehow or other Your Honour puts all of these matters into the mix and come up
with a conclusion that this is mid-range offending.”
Transcript of Proceedings,
DPP v Ristevski
(S CR 2018 0213, Beale J, Wednesday 27 March 2019),
Transcript of Proceedings,
DPP v Ristevski
(S CR 2018 0213, Beale J, Wednesday 27 March 2019),
R v Mochenigo
[2013] VSCA 231
[2018] VSCA 343
[2004] VSC 508
(2017) VSC 358
[2016] VSC 116
R v Veerman
(2015) VSC 193.
Transcript of Proceedings,
DPP v Ristevski
(S CR 2018 0213, Beale J, Wednesday 27 March 2019),
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (209 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter