URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/31.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:24:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mornington Peninsula C243morn (PSA) [2025] PPV 31 (24 June 2025)
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme
Amendment C243morn
Somerville Technology, Industry and Business Park
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
24 June 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the subject land on which
our office is located.
We pay our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme
Amendment C243morn
Somerville Technology, Industry and Business Park
24 June 2025
Con Tsotsoros, Chair Elizabeth McIntosh, Member
List of Figures
Buffer Area Overlay
Country Fire Authority
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council
Design and Development Overlay
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action
Development Plan Overlay
Green Wedge Zone
Mornington Peninsula Industrial Land Use and Infrastructure Assessment and
Rezoning Strategy
Industrial 3 Zone
Melbourne Industrial and Commercial Land Use Plan
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning Scheme
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme
Procter Investments No 2 Pty Ltd
Preliminary Site Investigation
RTA guidelines
Roads and Traffic Authority Guide to Traffic Generating Developments,
October 2002
Special Control Overlay
section 173
an agreement between Council and the subject land owner enabled by section
173 of the PE Act
Safety Management Study
Special Use Zone
Note: A number following the zone or overlay refers to the schedule
Amendment summary
The Amendment
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme
Amendment C243morn
Common name
Somerville Technology, Industry and Business Park
Brief description
Use and develop the subject land for the Mornington Peninsula (Somerville)
Technology, Industry and Business Park by applying new
local policy, the
Industrial 3 Zone and Development Plan Overlay Schedule 24
Subject land
79 and 83 Bungower Road, Somerville
The Proponent
Procter Investments No 2 Pty Ltd
Planning Authority
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council
Authorisation
8 September 2022, with conditions
30 March to 12 May 2023
Submissions
Panel process
Con Tsotsoros (Chair), Elizabeth McIntosh
Supported by
Gabrielle Trouse, Planning Panels Victoria
Directions Hearing
Online by video conference, 2 April 2025
Panel Hearing
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council Chambers, 12, 13, and 15 May 2025
Site inspections
Unaccompanied, 2 May 2025
Parties to the Hearing
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council (Council) represented by Jack Chiodo of
Jackson Lane Legal, who called expert evidence on:
engineering from John-Paul Maina of Impact Traffic
Investments No 2 Pty Ltd (Proponent) represented by Marita Foley SC and Adele
Patterson of Counsel, instructed by Ritsa Balfoort
of Macpherson Kelley, who
called expert evidence on:
- economics and
strategic planning from Brian Haratsis of Macroplan
engineering from Simon Davies of PJA Australia
Joan Ebbels
Robert Clarke
Sharon Thresher
Karin Mullenger
Liza Murray-Clarkson
Simone Nash
Heather Browning
Frederick Crump
Mornington Peninsula PSA C243morn [2025] PPV
Date of this report
24 June 2025
Executive summary
The Mornington Peninsula
Industrial Land Use and Infrastructure Assessment and Rezoning Strategy
identified an urgent need to assess
new opportunities for industrial land supply
within 10 years. The strategy suggests the land in the Special Use Zone
that adjoins the Somerville township may provide an opportunity for
further investigation, subject to appropriate land use and development
Land at 79 and 83 Bungower Road, Somerville (subject land) is:
Melbourne’s urban growth boundary
kilometres from the Somerville town centre, 18 kilometres from the Port of
Hastings and 6 kilometres from the Mornington
Peninsula Freeway
existing heritage homestead (Brunnings)
partly affected
by Special Control Overlay Schedule 10 that facilitates use and development of
land for non-port related industry
for the Sealite Development.
current Special Use Zone Schedule 1 which applies to the subject land restricts
land uses to industry related to the Port of Hastings.
Mornington Peninsula
Planning Scheme Amendment C243morn (the Amendment) seeks to apply planning
provisions to use and develop the
subject land for other industry.
Key issues raised in submissions included land uses on the subject land,
infrastructure including a major pipeline transmission, service
connections and
drainage, ecology and native vegetation, potential land contamination, bushfire
risk, traffic, transport and parking,
potential offsite impacts, interface
issues and heritage.
Strategic issues
The Industrial 3 Zone is appropriate and justified for the subject land.
For the reasons set out in this report, the Panel concludes that the Amendment:
is supported by, and implements, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy Framework
is consistent with the relevant Ministerial Directions and Practice Notes
is well founded and strategically justified
supports the recommendations for increasing the supply of industrial land found throughout State and local planning policies and strategies,
including the Mornington Peninsula Industrial Land Use and Infrastructure Assessment and Rezoning Strategy (September 2020)
facilitates a technology-based industrial precinct, sized to supplement the primacy of the Hastings precinct and facilitate co-location
should proceed subject to addressing the more specific issues raised in submissions as discussed in this report.
Infrastructure
The subject land can be suitably serviced for essential services, drainage and other infrastructure.
The Amendment appropriately responds to the major pipeline infrastructure located on the subject land. A Safety Management Study
inform the development plan for any land use within 200 metres of a transmission pipeline
accompany applications lodged before a development plan has been prepared for any land uses within 200 metres of a transmission pipeline
align with Australian Standard 2885.
Environmental values and risks
The Amendment has appropriately considered:
ecological and native vegetation and includes an appropriate framework for assessing whether development will achieve acceptable ecological
and native vegetation outcomes
potentially contaminated land and bushfire risk, and would benefit from further associated changes.
An Ecological Assessment and Native Vegetation Management Plan that accompanies a permit application lodged before a development plan
has been prepared should identify opportunities for native vegetation retention, the same as when such a plan informs a development
Traffic and transport
The surrounding road network except for the Bungower Road / Frankston-Flinders Road intersection has enough capacity to manage traffic
generated by future development enabled by the Amendment.
Future mitigation works for the Bungower Road / Frankston-Flinders Road intersection can be considered through the Transport and Movement
Plan required by Development Plan Overlay Schedule 24.
The Amendment includes an appropriate planning framework for considering car parking generated by future development on the subject
land. The onsite and offsite pedestrian and bicycle path requirements proposed through Development Plan Overlay Schedule 24 are
appropriate.
The Amendment appropriately facilitates delivery of public transport infrastructure (bus stop) should the Victorian government provide
public transport services to the subject land.
Surrounding area impacts
Noise, dust and odour associated with future industrial uses will not unreasonably impact the amenity of surrounding areas. Further,
Development
Plan Overlay Schedule 24:
will enable
future development that will not unreasonably impact the visual amenity of the
surrounding green wedge area and low density
residential area
should apply a
setback of a discretionary 50 metres to Bungower Road and a setback of a
discretionary 30 metres to Lower Somerville
should include
criteria to clarify when a lesser setback is acceptable.
Other impacts
The Amendment will adequately manage heritage impacts.
The Special Control Overlay Schedule 10 should remain on the subject land to enable the Sealite development to progress without the
need for a permit.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
does not enable the Amendment to revise a state planning provision, as requested by the Port of Hastings Corporation in its submission.
Property value and crime are outside the scope of the Amendment.
Recommendations
Based on the reasons set
out in this Report, the Panel recommends that Mornington Peninsula Planning
Scheme Amendment C243morn be
adopted as exhibited subject to the following:
1 Introduction
1.1 The Amendment
(i) Amendment description
Amendment seeks to facilitate the use and development of 79 and 83 Bungower
Road, Somerville (subject land) as a technology, industry
and business park.
Specifically, the Amendment proposes to:
introduce new
local policy 17.03-2L (Industrial Land Supply – Mornington Peninsula
(Somerville) Industry, Technology and Business
Park Precinct)
subject land from Special Use Zone Schedule 1 – Port Related Uses (SUZ1)
to Industrial 3 Zone (IN3Z)
apply a new
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 24 (Mornington Peninsula (Somerville)
Technology, Industry and Business Park Precinct)
(DPO24) to the subject
amend Clause
72.08 Schedule to include the Industrial Land and Infrastructure Assessment and
Rezoning Strategy (Mornington Peninsula
Shire, 2020) as a background
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council (Council) prepared the
Amendment at the request of Procter Investments No 2 Pty Ltd (Proponent).
proposal is intended to create local employment opportunities, improve
infrastructure, and provide open space.
(ii) The subject land
The Amendment applies to 79 and 83 Bungower Road,
Somerville shown in
subject land). The subject land is:
kilometres southeast of Melbourne’s Central City area in the north-western
corner of the Mornington Peninsula
kilometres southeast of the Somerville town centre
within an area
set aside for uses associated with the Port of Hastings.
comprises a mix of general residential and low-density residential areas and
green wedge and agricultural land, with an
existing industrial precinct to the
north-east of the town.
Subject land and context
Source: Planning Panels Victoria
1.2 Background
The below table
summarises the background events associated with the Amendment.
Background to the Amendment
Description
9 July 2015
Council issued Planning Permit P14/1846, permitting Sealite Pty Ltd to use
and develop the north-eastern corner of the subject land
for manufacture of
marine products. The endorsed plans included a 7,000 square metre, two-storey
factory and office building. The
permit has expired.
30 April 2018
Council adopted the
Mornington Peninsula Industrial Areas Strategy
(Essential Economics Pty Ltd, April 2018), which set out an assessment and plan
for industrial areas on the Mornington Peninsula.
The strategy did not consider
potential rezoning of port-related SUZ1 land, as it considered it unavailable
for general industrial
use and development.
December 2018
2018 Port Development Strategy
(Port of Hastings Development
Authority, December 2018) was released which identified the need to retain the
SUZ1 land immediately
around the port in reserve but earmarked the SUZ1 land at
the periphery for investigation for future industrial uses.
Somerville Township Structure Plan
(Mornington Peninsula Shire
Council, 2019) was adopted by Council to guide land use and development in
Somerville.
The Proponent applied to Building Victoria’s Recovery Taskforce with
a proposal for a technology and business park at 83, 79,
75 and 73 Bungower
Road, Somerville. The proposal did not proceed through the Taskforce approval
August 2020
Melbourne Industrial and Commercial Land Use Plan
(Department of
Environment, Land, Water and Planning, 2020) was adopted, setting out the supply
and demand for commercial and industrial
land within metropolitan
September 2020
Council adopted the
Industrial Land Use & Infrastructure Assessment
Rezoning Strategy
(Hansen Partnership, September 2020) which reviewed the
supply and demand of industrial land in the Mornington Peninsula, this time
including the potential of rezoning port-related SUZ1 land.
Late 2020 – early 2021
Council applied to the Minister for Planning in September 2020 to prepare
an amendment to implement the findings of the
Industrial Land Use &
Infrastructure Assessment Rezoning Strategy
and exempt the Amendment from
exhibition and notice. The Minister for Planning directed the Amendment go
through the normal amendment
November 2021
Council’s application to the Minister in September 2020 also
requested that an amendment be prepared to allow the Sealite Development
used for general industrial purposes, rather than be limited to port-related
uses under the SUZ1. Council requested this amendment
also be exempt from
exhibition and notice.
This was endorsed by the Development Facilitation Program and Amendment
C283morn was gazetted on 18 November 2021, facilitating the
use and development
of the subject land for non-marine related industry.
Navigating our Port Futures: The Victorian Commercial Ports Strategy
(Department of Transport, 2022) was published in July 2022 and set out a vision
and plan for Victoria’s commercial ports. The
strategy confirmed that Bay
West is the preferred site for Melbourne’s second container port, and that
the subject land set
aside around the Port of Hastings would not necessarily be
required for port-related uses and could be released for other industrial
September 2022
The Minister granted authorisation to prepare the Amendment.
30 March to 12 May 2023
The Amendment was publicly exhibited.
February 2025
Council resolved to refer all submissions to a Panel.
Source: Council Part A submission
1.3 The Panel’s approach
Panel has assessed the Amendment against the principles of net community benefit
and sustainable development, as set out in Clause
71.02-3 (Integrated decision
making) of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment, observations from site visits, and
submissions,
evidence and other material presented to it during the Hearing. It has reviewed
a large volume of information, and
has had to be selective in referring to the
more relevant or determinative material in the Report. All submissions and
have been considered by the Panel in reaching its conclusions,
regardless of whether they are specifically mentioned in the Report.
This Report deals with the issues under the following headings:
Infrastructure
Environmental
values and risks
Traffic and
Surrounding area
DPO24 versions
This report refers to the following DPO24
– the version which submissions responded to
as considered at the 25 February 2025 Council meeting
– provided by Council on 8 May 2025 (Document 24)
– provided by Council on 14 May 2025 (Document 43)
– provided by Council on 15 May 2025 (Document 48).
1.4 Expert reports
Council called John-Paul
Maina of Impact Traffic as an expert on traffic engineering.
The Proponent called the following experts:
Brian Haratsis
of Macroplan on economics and strategic planning
Simon Davies of
PJA Australia on traffic engineering.
At the direction of the Panel,
Mr Maina and Mr Davies met on 6 May 2025 to confirm any agreed statements. They
agreed on all documented
items, as confirmed in the expert meeting
The Proponent did not call Mr Davies to present at the Hearing after the
Panel and other parties confirmed they had no questions to
ask of him.
2 Strategic issues
2.1 Planning context
chapter identifies planning context relevant to the Amendment.
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
- section 4 of
Municipal Planning Strategy
- Clause 02.03-6
(Economic Development), Clause 02.02 (Vision Strategic)
Planning Policy Framework
- Clauses 11.01
(Victoria), Clause 11.01S (Settlement), Clause 11.02 (Managing growth), Clause
11.02-1S (Supply of urban land)
12.01-2S (Native Vegetation Management)
- Clause 13.02
(Bushfire), Clause 13.02-1 (Bushfire planning), Clause 13.04 (Soil degradation),
Clause 13.04-1S (Contaminated and
potentially contaminated land)
- Clause 17.01
(Employment), Clause 17.01-1S (Diversified economy), Clause 17.01-1R
(Diversified economy – metropolitan Melbourne),
Clause 17.01-2S
(Innovation and research), Clause 17.03 (Industry), Clause 17.03-1S (Industrial
land supply), Clause 17.03-1L (Industrial
land supply – Mornington
- Clause 18
(Transport), Clause 18.01 (Land use and transport integration), Clause 18.01-3
(Sustainable and safe transport), Clause
18.02 (Movement networks), Clause
18.02-1S (Walking)
19.02-6S (Open Space)
Other planning strategies and policies
- Plan Melbourne
Direction 1.1, 1.2, 5.1, 5.2, 5.4, Policies 1.1.6 and 1.2.2,
- Melbourne
Industrial and Commercial Land Use Plan, 2020
Hastings Development Strategy, 2018
- Navigating our
Port Futures: The Victorian Commercial Ports Strategy, 2022
Growth Statement – Victoria Open for Business, 2024
- Mornington
Peninsula Industrial Areas Strategy, 2018
- Mornington
Peninsula Industrial Areas Strategy, 2020
- Somerville
Township Structure Plan, 2019
Planning scheme provisions
- Industrial 3
- Development
Plan Overlay
Control Overlay
Ministerial directions
- Ministerial
Direction on The form and content of planning schemes
- Ministerial
Direction 1 (Potentially contaminated land)
- Ministerial
Direction 9 (Metropolitan strategy)
- Ministerial
Direction 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments)
- Ministerial
Direction 15 (The planning scheme amendment process)
- Ministerial
Direction 19 (Amendments that may result in impacts on the environment, amenity
and human health)
Planning practice notes
Practice Note 23 (Applying the Incorporated Plan and Development Plan
Practice Note 46 (Strategic Assessment Guidelines, September 2022)
Practice Note 30 (Potentially contaminated land)
2.2 Relevant strategies
(i) Melbourne Industrial and Commercial Land Use Plan
Melbourne Industrial and Commercial Land Use Plan (MICLUP) sets out the supply
and demand of commercial and industrial land within
metropolitan Melbourne. The
estimates a 23
year supply of zoned industrial land and a 17 year supply of unzoned land for
future industrial use
found that the
southern region, including the Mornington Peninsula municipality, has 21 years
of zoned industrial land and 12 years
supply excluding land zoned SUZ1
designates land
around Port of Hastings as State Significant Industrial Land and the broader
SUZ1 land as Regionally Significant Industrial
consultation with the Port of Hastings Corporation and Council to investigate
broader industrial uses for SUZ1 land outside
the Hastings State Significant
Industrial Land.
(ii) Port Development Strategy (2018)
The Port Development Strategy was prepared by the
Port of Hastings Development Authority and provides an overview of the current
future development of the Port of Hastings area. The document succeeded the
Industrial Areas Strategy 2018 and is intended to be
updated as regular
intervals. The document:
reserves land
around the port for port-related purposes
acknowledges the
purpose of the reserve land was to support the Port of Hastings as
Melbourne’s second container port (which
has since been designated in Bay
recognises the
potential for alternative industrial uses with lower amenity impacts on nearby
communities for peripheral reserve land
(which includes the subject land and
surrounding land).
(iii) Mornington Peninsula Industrial Land Use and
Infrastructure Assessment and Rezoning Strategy (2020)
The Mornington Peninsula Industrial Land Use and
Infrastructure Assessment and Rezoning Strategy (ILARS) was prepared by Council
investigate the suitability of rezoning some of the SUZ1 land from
port-related industrial uses to other industrial uses. The document
industrial land
take-up occurred at a faster rate than anticipated by the Industrial Areas
Strategy 2018 and six years of industrial
land supply remained
at least 60
hectares of industrial land was needed to provide a 15-year land supply
when dividing
the SUZ1 land into three precincts for assessment, namely Hastings, Tyabb and
Somerville, the Hastings is the preferred
key strategic opportunity for
the Somerville
precinct is less suitable for industrial growth due to potential market garden
encroachment and increased traffic through
settlements
supplementary precinct in Somerville, around 10 to 15 hectares, could support
the Sealite Development (not yet constructed)
and co-locate allied
businesses.
(iv) Mornington Peninsula Industrial Areas Strategy
The Industrial Areas Strategy was prepared by
Council to provide a framework for managing industrial land across the
municipality.
The document:
assesses current
industrial zones, forecasted demand and identified constraints
excludes the
SUZ1 land due to its (then) unsuitability for general industrial
development
urges Council to
explore new industrial land opportunities within the next 10 years
notes no major
industrial land supply issues in Somerville but highlighted future expansion
constraints due to environmental and planning
suggests the
SUZ1 land east of the Somerville is removed from the Port of Hastings, and may
be suitable for non-port related industrial
2.3 Industrial 3 Zone
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Industrial 3 Zone is appropriate and justified for the
subject land.
(ii) Background
The IN3Z purposes include to:
provide a buffer
between Industrial 1 Zone or Industrial 2 Zone and communities, allowing for
uses that are compatible with the nearby
allow limited
retail including convenience shops and small supermarkets
ensure safety
and amenity for adjacent sensitive land uses.
The SUZ1 purposes
include to:
host port and
industrial uses which benefit from Westernport's deep-water channels
allow interim
rural use while preserving land for future port development.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Several submissions questioned the proposed
industrial use and requested alternative zones. They explained:
generally inappropriate
farming, green
wedge or residential uses are preferred
industrial uses
should be located in Hastings or Tyabb as intended by ILARS
Somerville has
sufficient industrial land supply
the rezoning
will undermine Somerville’s rural character and identity
the Amendment
will trigger similar rezoning requests on SUZ1 land, potentially altering
Somerville’s rural and residential
Council submitted that the IN3Z:
appropriate zone
between sensitive land uses and industrial zones that permit heavier (more
offensive) land uses, such as Industrial 1 Zone
or Industrial 2 Zone
provides for
some retailing and supermarkets in appropriate locations
will work with
DPO24 to ensure a comprehensive and sensitive response to
In response to a Panel question, Council considered the
subject land should not be treated as part of the State's agricultural land
supply. It explained:
the subject land
has not been zoned for rural use since the new format planning scheme
its historical
agricultural use is incidental
indicates agricultural uses are temporary until port-related uses are
being within the
Urban Growth Boundary (UGB), the subject land is not governed by the State
planning policy for agricultural, rural
or green wedge land.
Proponent submitted the IN3Z is appropriate because:
the subject land
is located on the road network and at the periphery of the Somerville
it will buffer
the potentially heavy port-related uses on SUZ1 land from sensitive uses in the
residential areas.
The Proponent added:
the subject land
has been designated for port-related uses since the 1970s and zoned (as SUZ1)
for such uses since 1999
the rezoning is
consistent with the site's designation in MICLUP as existing regionally
significant industrial land intended to meet
future demand for industrial
ILARS earmarks
the site for investigation for industrial uses
the proposed
rezoning, coupled with the DPO24, facilitates a more appropriate use of the
subject land than the current SUZ1 (which
includes container storage and
transport depots)
the IN3Z and
DPO24, and proposed local policy, will encourage the preferred uses of
technology-based industries, research and development,
manufacturing and
strategic industries and will avoid offensive or dangerous industries, retail
premises and homemaker centres.
Through his economic assessment, Mr
Haratsis found that there was demand for technology-based industries and a
shortage of industrial
land in Melbourne’s southern region. His evidence
detailed the subject land’s long history of being designated for
uses. He supported the IN3Z and DPO24 for reasons they would:
non-technology-related and heavy industrial uses
ensure a supply
of larger lots
promote high
amenity outcomes (open space and landscaping)
limit retail
premises to bulky goods retailing related to technology industries.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel agrees with submissions that SUZ1 already
enables industrial uses on the subject land, as supported by relevant planning
policy. Of note, it has already been determined that part of the subject land
is suitable for industrial and business-related uses
through a previous permit
approval and application of SCO10.
The Amendment therefore does not seek to allow industrial uses. Rather, it
seeks to apply IN3Z to enable industrial uses that are
not related to port
activities.
The issue is whether IN3Z is suitable for the subject land. The Panel
considers that it is for numerous reasons. The subject land
is strategically
on the edge of
the Somerville settlement
next to other
SUZ1 land reserved for both non-port and port-related industrial purposes
arterial (Bungower Road) which provides direct access to the Mornington
Peninsula Freeway, forming part of the metropolitan
and statewide freeway
Strategic policy designates the subject land for continued
industrial use and characterises it as a buffer site consistent with the
purposes. The Port Development Strategy identifies the periphery SUZ1 land for
non-port related uses that can address sensitive
residential interfaces. The
IN3Z purpose to
“provide a buffer between the Industrial 1 Zone or
Industrial 2 Zone and local communities”
directly translates that
strategic direction.
IN3Z is intended for land that is near residential land like the subject land
which is across the street from LDRZ land. The zone’s
provisions:
permitted uses to consider the impact on amenity of nearby communities
enable uses that
cause lesser amenity impact compared to those permitted by
These provisions are sufficient to ensure future industrial
uses on the subject land can exist harmoniously with the nearby residential
land. However, amenity impact considerations will be further strengthened by
the proposed DPO24 provisions.
Mr Haratsis’ evidence demonstrates a need for technology-related uses
in Melbourne’s southern region. Such uses would
be consistent with the
IN3Z purposes and provide uses for which amenity impacts can be suitably
managed. Applying DPO24 is important
in this regard and will:
encourage the
preferred uses and discourage unfavourable uses permitted by IN3Z, such as
retail, bulky goods retailing, supermarkets
amenity design outcomes, including open space and landscaping, vital to a
technology-related business precinct.
The Panel’s role is to
consider whether IN3Z is suitable for the subject land. It is not to consider
alternative preferred
uses. Having said that, planning policy does not
anticipate further residential growth in the Somerville township including the
subject land. The residential area near the subject land:
is physically
constrained by the abutting Green Wedge Zone (GWZ) and SUZ1 land
policy support for continuing its agricultural and industrial
Council comprehensively and soundly explained why agricultural
uses are unsuitable on the subject land. The subject land:
designated for industrial uses for some time
is intended for
urban purposes through its location within the UGB
has historically
had agricultural uses, however SUZ1 identifies these as interim uses.
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes that
the Industrial 3 Zone is appropriate and justified for the subject land.
2.4 Strategic justification
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment is strategically justified.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
There were objecting submissions that
considered:
there was no
demonstrated shortage of industrial land
adequate local industrial land supply, particularly in Hastings
ILARS favoured
industrial uses establishing in the Hastings precinct
the Amendment
may not provide local job benefits
the vision for
the subject land may not be feasible if there was no committed anchor tenant
such as Sealite.
Council and the Proponent noted there were many
submissions that supported the Amendment. Recurring reasons include the urgent
for industrial land, local employment opportunities in the science and
technology sector, and economic development.
Council submitted:
the Amendment is
strategically justified by a comprehensive suite of strategies and planning
policies which identify a significant
need for additional industrial land
there is primary
support in ILARS, which establishes the strategic basis for rezoning the subject
land, supplementary to the Hastings
precinct as the main growth area
the Amendment
promotes economic growth and local employment, which are key planning policy
industrial land strategies indicate a shortage of unconstrained industrial land,
especially within the municipality
MICLUP, the Port
Development Strategy and ILARS endorse the investigation of surplus SUZ1 land
for non-port-related industrial uses
there is local
demand for light industrial and technology-based employment
opportunities.
The Proponent submitted:
there are many
planning policies and strategies that support rezoning the subject land to
enable a technology and business park
the subject land
has more immediate development potential than the Hastings
Mr Haratsis found strong State and local planning policy
support for a technology-focussed business park on the subject land. He
calculated a critical shortage of industrial land in the municipality and
considered that technology uses could:
establish in
Somerville by benefiting from land transfer from other regional industrial
precincts at capacity
be viable with
or without Sealite as the anchor tenant
provide better
amenity impacts than current SUZ1 uses, which can be unsightly and generate
environmental impacts
construction, 187 technology information sector and 1,110 ongoing jobs
hectares, rather than 10 to 15 hectares guided by ILARS, to beneficially cluster
uses and provide the high amenity vital
to attract corporate
businesses.
In response to Panel questions, Mr Haratsis stated:
the proposed
precinct and the Hastings precinct would be complementary by attracting
different business types due to their distinct
the new precinct
would draw technology-related firms that benefit from high amenity and
clustering, which Hastings lacks
small businesses
needing exposure to main roads will prefer Hastings since the proposal avoids
this condition and favours larger lots
complementary nature alleviates concerns about development timing and
competition.
The Port of Hastings Corporation’s submission
supported the Amendment without conditions regarding the precinct purpose or
uses. In response to the Panel’s request for clarification, the
Corporation reaffirmed its support for the Amendment and explained
Development Strategy review:
has been delayed
and is expected by late 2026
will identify
the land needed for port planning.
(iii) Discussion
The Panel agrees with Council, the Proponent and Mr
Haratsis that there is strong strategic justification to support the
State and local planning strategies such as MICLUP, ILARS and the 2018
Industrial Strategy all consistently identify a shortage of
industrial land
supply across Melbourne’s southern region including the municipality.
Without more industrial land, there
is limited ability to deliver on key policy
objectives for economic growth and local employment opportunities close to where
live. The Amendment delivers on these objectives.
The Panel agrees with Council that while the Port Development Strategy does
not explicitly identify the subject land as surplus to
port needs, the intent to
repurpose the subject land from port-related uses is guided by the later
strategies of MICLUP and Plan
Melbourne. Most notably, the Port of Hastings
Authority supports the Amendment and associated rezoning.
The Panel agrees with Mr Haratsis that a technology-based industry precinct
is needed. This is supported by:
reports of local
and regional industrial land shortages in MICLUP and ILARS
policies which promote economic growth in innovation and research
indicating demand for technology-based industries in Somerville due to lack of
land in the region
submissions from businesses reporting a lack of industrial land.
Haratsis considered the precinct remains viable without Sealite as an anchor
tenant, though its presence would be beneficial.
The subject land is
strategically located in an area with strong demand for the proposed uses.
DPO24 facilitates various technology
industries, including manufacturing,
research and development, ensuring viability regardless of Sealite. This is
The Panel questioned the suitability of the proposed 37 hectares precinct
since ILARS supports a smaller precinct. It accepts Mr
Haratsis' evidence that
the larger size is necessary to attract preferred tenants with suitable lot
sizes and layout, and to facilitate
the benefits of clustering uses. DPO24
provisions suitably guide this outcome by:
prioritising the
delivery of larger lots
landscape and open space plans to achieve high amenity outcomes sought by
corporate businesses.
Mr Haratsis considered the location and
planned attributes of the proposed precinct mean it will not strategically
undermine from
the Hastings precinct. Attracting businesses away from the
Hastings precinct could impede on its economic viability and result in
underutilised land and infrastructure. Consistent with Mr Haratsis’
reasoning on how economic competition between the precincts
can be managed,
DPO24 prefers the creation of larger lots and directs smaller lots away from the
Bungower Road interface. This is
a critical requirement of DPO24 to ensure the
two precincts are complementary, and to attract preferred industries and
non-preferred industries in the proposed precinct. Mr
Haratsis’ findings that both precincts can develop independently and
without negative economic impacts is accepted.
Providing local employment offers several economic and social benefits, such
as regional economic growth, technology jobs in areas
with limited industrial
land and reduced travel for residents. Employment opportunities will emerge
throughout the precinct's development,
including short-term construction roles
and ongoing technology positions from local and relocated businesses. These
benefits are
considered positive, align with planning policy and contribute to
the Amendment’s net community benefit.
(iv) Conclusions
For the reasons set out
in this report, the Panel concludes that the Amendment:
supported by, and implements, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy
consistent with the relevant Ministerial Directions and Practice Notes
well founded and strategically justified
the recommendations for increasing the supply of industrial land found
throughout State and local planning policies and strategies,
including the
Mornington Peninsula Industrial Land Use and Infrastructure Assessment and
Rezoning Strategy
facilitates
a technology-based industrial precinct, sized to supplement the primacy of the
Hastings precinct and facilitate co-location
proceed subject to addressing the more specific issues raised in submissions as
discussed in the following chapters.
3 Infrastructure
3.1 Major pipeline infrastructure
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment appropriately responds to the major pipeline
infrastructure located on the subject land.
(ii) Background
A 15-metre-wide major transmission pipeline easement
traverses the northwest corner of the subject land. It contains multiple
of high-pressure oil and high-pressure gas. Energy Safe Victoria is
the major pipeline regulator and there are multiple pipeline
Clause 19.01-3S (Pipeline infrastructure):
aims to safely
transport gas and oil with minimal risk to people, infrastructure and the
environment
strategies to recognise existing transmission pipelines in planning schemes and
protect them from further encroachment by
sensitive uses, unless suitable
additional pipeline protection is provided.
(iii) Submissions
Energy Safe Victoria, Esso and Viva Energy did not
oppose the Amendment. Their submissions focussed on maintaining the safe
of the major pipelines to mitigate future risks through requested
revisions to DPO24 which related to:
when a Safety
Management Study (SMS) should be required
the degree to
which sensitive uses are managed (either avoided or prohibited)
the extent of
the buffer area to which the SMS applies
responsible for consenting to works within 3 metres of the
Energy Safe Victoria stated:
IN3Z allows
several, currently prohibited sensitives uses that may conflict with the major
the uses are
considered sensitive as they allowed crowd gathering or are a potential source
of ignition
ILARS does not
provide significant guidance regarding new development near the
Energy Safe Victoria requested DPO24 be revised to:
require a formal
safety assessment, overseen by the relevant pipeline operator, to inform
development of specified sensitive uses
within 200 metres of a pipeline (the
specified uses are in DPO24)
avoid childcare
centre use within 200 metres of the transmission pipelines, distinct from the
sensitive use list
gain consent
from the pipeline owner or operator for works within 3 metres of the
transmission pipeline corridor.
Esso, which operates two oil
pipelines within the corridor, explained these pipelines may cause potential
hazards of fire, gas and
oil production disruption and significant environmental
impacts. It requested DPO24 be revised to:
require a SMS
regardless of whether sensitive uses are proposed, in accordance with Australian
Standard AS2885, in consultation with
the relevant pipeline owner/operator and
to the satisfaction of the relevant authority
avoid locating
specific sensitive uses within 200 metres of the licensed pipeline corridor
Ministerial consent for any structures within 3 metres of a
Esso requested that the pipeline easement and 15 metres of
land to either side be located in public open space reserves to provide
separation distance from sensitive uses. This was generally reflected in DPO24,
though the 15 metre metric was not.
Viva Energy operates high-pressure oil and high-pressure gas pipelines within
the easement. It requested DPO24 be revised to:
require a SMS
for all buildings and works within 152 metres of the licensed pipeline area in
accordance with Australian Standard S2885
education centre, place of assembly and place of worship uses within 152 metres
of the pipelines
require a permit
for supermarket, shops, retail and convenience store uses within 152 metres of
the pipelines (as INZ3 does not require
a permit for their use if certain size
and location conditions are met).
Viva Energy emphasised the
importance of being consulted and having its requirements met to ensure adequate
risk mitigation measures
are in place to protect the community and the
The Port of Hastings Corporation supported DPO24 including for reasons that
it prohibited the subdivision of land west of the pipelines.
DPO24 (Version 1)
allows exceptions if the subdivision excises the land west of the pipeline or
creates community precinct lots.
DPO24 (Version 1) included many of Energy Safe Victoria’s requests. It
also introduced requirements under 'Major Pipeline Infrastructure
protect and manage the pipeline corridor. The plan must address how development
mitigates impacts on the operational safety
of the transmission pipelines and
must inform the preparation of the development plan. A key component of this
plan is preparation
of an SMS when the specified sensitive uses are proposed
within 200 metres of a transmission pipeline. The specified sensitive uses
informal outdoor
industry with
potential adverse impacts with a threshold distance more than 250 metres from a
sensitive use.
Council submitted that DPO24 (Version 1) responded to
the pipeline regulator and operators’ submissions and that the
provisions requested by Energy Safe Victoria
included some of
the provisions requested by Esso and Viva Energy
incorporated
performance-based measures for sensitive uses permitted by IN3Z.
Panel asked Council if it consulted further with the pipeline regulator and
operators about submission discrepancies. Council
sent the resolved
to the three submitters.
Energy Safe Victoria confirmed the resolved DPO24 satisfied its response, while
Esso and Viva Energy did
not reply. Correspondence from the further
consultation was not tabled.
Council considered the explanatory report should be revised to list Clause
19.01-3S Pipeline infrastructure as a relevant policy to
the Amendment.
The Proponent submitted:
building and works proposed near the pipeline will be managed by the
Pipeline Regulations 2017
appropriately considers the presence of and management of impacts to the
pipeline by:
- requiring the
site context plan to identify the pipeline easement
- including
various requirements requested by Energy Safe Victoria, Esso and Viva Energy
- requiring any
proposed uses and building and works near the pipeline to be referred to the
pipeline authorities and managed by the
pipeline legislation and
regulations
- prohibiting
subdivision of land west of the pipeline
Council's suggestion (at its 25 February 2025 Council meeting) for a Buffer Area
Overlay (BAO) to address pipeline issues
instead of DPO24
the 25 February
2025 Council meeting minutes explained that Planning Practice Note 92 advises
that a BAO can be used to manage land
use and development around licensed
the BAO should
be implemented on a municipal-wide basis rather than in a fragmented
Council did not present any submission to the Panel on
applying the BAO.
(iv) Discussion
There is legislation and statutory regulations for
managing major pipelines in Victoria. DPO24 should not replicate them, but
ensure that future planning aligns with this statutory framework.
DPO24 appropriately responds to the major pipeline infrastructure on the
subject land. Its provisions:
plan for the
practical management of pipeline matters from site planning stages
drafted generally in response to the differing pipeline regulator and
operators’ requests.
Outstanding considerations are when a SMS
should be required; which sensitive uses should it be required for; and
consenting responsibilities
for structures on land near the pipelines.
The site context plan is a key first step to preparing a development plan for
the subject land. DPO24 suitably requires the presence
of the pipelines to be
considered at this early design stage.
For sensitive uses assessment, planning policy focuses on protecting pipeline
assets by preventing encroachment by sensitive uses.
An SMS is a key tool to
assess the impact of such encroachments. DPO24 requires an SMS for specified
sensitive uses, in line with
Energy Safe Victoria's request, however Esso and
Viva Energy requested extending this requirement to all uses or works.
The anticipated uses on the subject land are mainly non-sensitive, however
sensitive uses like informal outdoor recreation and shops
are contemplated in
. Future sensitive uses
should be known at the development plan stage when the list of preferred uses is
prepared. As well as the
sensitive uses specified by DPO24, other requests to
manage other sensitive uses near the transmission pipelines were:
Viva Energy
requested to:
education centre, place of worship and place of assembly
- require a
permit for supermarket and shop in all instances
Energy Safe
Victoria sought to avoid childcare centre uses (which DPO24 does), education
centres, places of assembly and fuel depots.
Regarding the
supermarket and shop uses, the PE Act does not enable a Panel to recommend
changes to statewide provisions such as those
in IN3Z. The IN3Z provisions
enable a supermarket and shop without the need for a permit subject to
conditions.
It is unclear whether Council informed Energy Safe Victoria about other
sensitive uses specified by the pipeline operators during
the post-exhibition
consultation. This could have allowed the regulator to determine if additional
sensitive uses needed SMS assessment.
Nor is it clear whether Viva Energy and
Esso considered their submissions resolved following further consultation.
However, it is apparent that DPO24 may not:
list all the
sensitive uses needing assessment or those that will be proposed for the subject
reflect the
proper management of these uses.
This creates a level of uncertainty
that the Panel considers justifies preparation of a SMS for all land uses within
200 metres of
the transmission pipeline. It sees other benefits of requiring a
SMS in this way, including to:
ensure that the
findings guide site planning effectively
facilitate the
preparation of an integrated land use and development framework
manage potential
land use conflicts and spatial arrangements from the outset (informal outdoor
recreation spaces are typically large
and challenging to rearrange at later
suitability of locating near the pipelines the uses that Viva Energy sought to
be prohibited or require a permit, and the
uses Esso sought to be avoided
determine the
differences in appropriateness of placing sensitive uses within 152 metres (as
requested by Viva Energy) compared to
200 metres of the transmission
long-term development outcomes effectively, addressing the possibility that
future revisions of development plans might
inadvertently compromise pipeline
reduce potential
conflicts during later permit stages.
The SMS could also:
determine the
extent of land on either side of the transmission pipelines to be designated as
public open space, in response to Esso’s
provide guidance
on limiting the number of transmission pipelines crossings, being an outcome
sought by DPO24.
An SMS should inform applications lodged before a
development plan has been prepared. Land use incompatibility between sensitive
uses and the transmission pipelines is relevant to both permits and development
plans. A suitably qualified pipeline licensee who
prepares an SMS to inform
permits can conduct a proper assessment.
DPO24 should ensure the SMS is prepared in accordance with Australian
Standard 2885. This addresses Esso and Viva Energy’s
request and aligns
with other DPO24 provisions that refer to relevant regulations where
applicable.
The Panel supports the request by Energy Safe Victoria to require the
pipeline operator’s consent for works within 3 metres
of the pipeline.
Any consent requests can be redirected to other consenting bodies, such as
ministers, as needed at that stage.
The Panel accepts that restricting the subdivision of land west of the
pipelines and the associated exceptions are necessary, noting
no technical
reasons were explained. It observes land west of the pipeline generally falls
within the area where other matters will
inform development including the
Heritage Overlay as discussed in Chapter
and the landscaped setbacks as
discussed in Chapter
The Amendment does not propose to apply the BAO so the Panel makes no
findings on this matter.
(v) Conclusions and recommendations
Panel concludes:
Amendment appropriately responds to the major pipeline infrastructure located on
the subject land.
Safety Management Study should inform the development plan for any land use
within 200 metres of a transmission pipeline.
Safety Management Study should accompany applications lodged before a
development plan has been prepared for any land uses within
200 metres of a
transmission pipeline.
Safety Management Study should align with Australian Standard
The Panel recommends:
Development Plan Overlay Schedule 24, as shown in
the development plan requirements to include a Major Pipeline Infrastructure
Plan that demonstrates how the development
responds to the transmission
pipelines easement including:
the pipeline easement within a public reserve and managing vegetation
to mitigate the impact of development on pipeline safety
restricting
the number of transmission pipelines crossings
clear access on and either side of the transmission pipelines
consent for works within 3 metres of the transmission pipeline
childcare centre use within 200 metres of a transmission pipeline
a Safety Management Study for any land uses.
b) revise the
requirements of the Major Pipeline Infrastructure Plan to include a Safety
Management Study, prepared in accordance
with Australian Standard 2885, for any
land use within 200 metres of a transmission pipeline.
c) revise the
requirements of applications lodged before a development plan has been prepared
to include a Safety Management Study,
prepared in accordance with Australian
Standard 2885, for any land use within 200 metres of a transmission
3.2 Service connections, drainage and other
infrastructure
(i) The issue
issue is whether the subject land can be appropriately serviced with essential
services, drainage and other infrastructure.
(ii) Background
Clause 19 Infrastructure calls for planning for the
development of physical infrastructure to be provided in a way that is
equitable, accessible and timely.
The Infrastructure Assessment that supported the Amendment determined that
the subject land:
was suitable for
the essential service connections of sewerage, electricity, water and
telecommunications, as well as gas if ultimately
developed with appropriate drainage and transport infrastructure
preparation of a Stormwater Management Strategy (SWMS) to consider measures for
flood mitigation
preparation of a Traffic Impact Assessment to inform functional layout plans for
transport infrastructure.
Sewerage and drainage were a key focus of
the Assessment as the subject land:
extensive sewerage headworks from existing infrastructure and a sewer pump
is outside a
Melbourne Water Drainage Scheme and not scheduled for investigation due to
current zoning
contains no
drainage infrastructure, requiring suitable drainage and stormwater systems
including detention basins.
DPO24 includes various reports to be
prepared in relation to infrastructure including:
a SWMS, to the
satisfaction of Melbourne Water and the responsible authority, which:
- addresses
drainage catchments, flood mitigation, water quality and downstream impacts
- incorporates
Water Sensitive Urban Design and aligning with Best Practice Environmental
Management and Integrated Water Management
- identifies key
infrastructure integrated into the precinct design.
a Transport and
Movement Plan which must include designs of the two intersections and existing
and future roadworks, and which plans
for cycling and pedestrian
infrastructure
a Staging Plan
which must include indicative staging and timing and trigger points for key
infrastructure, servicing, internal roads,
landscape works and public realm as
well as the primary and secondary access points along Bungower Road
a report, to
accompany applications lodged before a development plan has been prepared, to
demonstrate the proposal will not prejudice
the provision of necessary
infrastructure and development contributions.
DPO24 requires the
development plan to include a section 173 agreement, entered into by the
developers, that provides for the construction
of all identified infrastructure
works. This includes drainage and transport infrastructure.
(iii) Submissions
Several submissions suggested the subject land
lacked essential services and appropriate infrastructure to support development.
questioned who would fund required connections.
Council stated there were no drainage issues that required resolution as part
of the Amendment and the subject land can be serviced
for both drainage and
sewerage. It submitted:
Infrastructure Assessment shows that drainage and sewerage matters can be
managed in future land development
investigations were conducted on stormwater flow impacts
drainage issues
will be first addressed through the SWMS, then development plan approval and
again at the permit stage
Melbourne Water nor the sewerage authority objected to or raised concerns about
the Amendment
appropriate for further infrastructure matters to be resolved at the development
plan stage, consistent with the DPO framework.
Further, Council
submitted the section 173 agreement required by DPO24 obliges the owner to
provide for the construction of all identified
infrastructure works.
The Proponent submitted the Infrastructure Assessment assessed the necessary
services and infrastructure, and that associated delivery
will be at the cost of
the developer under the section 173 agreement required by DPO24. Delivery
a sewer pump
station and rising main to connect to the existing network
the stormwater
management infrastructure as part of the SWMS, including treatment systems and
retarding basins
intersection works along Bungower Road.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel accepts that the subject land can be
suitably serviced for essential services and needed infrastructure. This is
with the findings of the Infrastructure Assessment. The developer
will likely pay the costs of connections and infrastructure through
the section
173 agreement.
As highlighted by Council, the DPO establishes a staged planning process,
allowing detailed matters, such as drainage design, to be
addressed through the
development plan rather than resolved upfront. The level of assessment required
at the Amendment stage is
strategic and high-level, while more detailed
evaluations occur later against the DPO framework when specific proposals are
At this stage, the key question for the Panel is whether drainage
can be appropriately managed and how required infrastructure will
These matters were adequately addressed by Council and the Proponent.
Regarding sewerage, drainage and transport infrastructure:
Council and the
Proponent confirmed that sewerage connections are feasible, necessary works are
funded, and consultations with relevant
authorities are complete, leaving no
unresolved issues for the Panel concerning sewerage servicing
requirements in DPO24 align with the Infrastructure Assessment recommendations,
and must be to the satisfaction of Melbourne
Water and the responsible
authority's satisfaction which provide appropriate oversight
the Transport
and Movement Plan outlines essential considerations for infrastructure planning,
including requiring consultation with
the Department of Transport and Planning
and the responsible authority to ensure technical accuracy and
consistency.
The Staging Plan mandates planning infrastructure
delivery timing relative to development, enabling the coordinated and timely
of essential services including drainage, sewerage, and transport.
The DPO24 section 173 agreement requirement includes a ‘catch
all’ requirement for delivering ‘all other infrastructure
contributions’ to the satisfaction of Council and the service authorities.
This provision enables any unforeseen infrastructure
issues that may arise later
to be addressed.
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes the
subject land can be suitably serviced for essential services, drainage and other
infrastructure.
4 Environmental values and risks
4.1 Ecology and native vegetation
(i) The issues
issues are whether the Amendment:
appropriately considered ecological impacts and native vegetation
includes an
appropriate framework for assessing whether development will achieve acceptable
ecological and native vegetation outcomes.
(ii) Background
Planning policy seeks to ensure there is no net loss
of biodiversity as a result of native vegetation removal (Clause 12.01-1 Native
vegetation management). The key strategy is to apply the three-step approach of
avoiding, minimising and offsetting native vegetation
The Existing Ecological Conditions Report that supported the Amendment
the subject land
has a long history of agricultural use with much of it modified by grazing and
cropping, though some ecological values
the development
footprint includes 8.425 hectares of native vegetation, 15 scattered trees and
28 large trees
vegetation in adjacent areas includes Damp Sands Herb-rich Woodland, Swamp
Scrub, and Plains Grassy Wetland Ecological Vegetation
remnant trees provide moderate to high-quality habitat for native fauna,
including species that may use tree hollows for
foraging and refuge
some patches may
support nationally or state-significant species (though low likelihood) and
further ecological assessment may be
needed at the permit stage
Clause 52.17
requires a permit to remove native vegetation
the Proponent
must secure offsets in line with the relevant guidelines
the current
masterplan must be revised to better demonstrate avoidance and minimisation,
with emphasis on retaining large old trees.
DPO24 requires an
Ecological Assessment and Native Vegetation Management Plan to inform the
development plan, or applications lodged
before a development plan has been
prepared. The plan must:
identify and
assess ecological values
recommendations for retaining and protecting native vegetation
make provision
for offsets where native vegetation is removed
opportunities to avoid and minimise impacts on native vegetation of most
The last dot point is a requirement when the plan informs a
development plan but not for applications lodged before a development
been prepared.
Other relevant DPO24 requirements to inform development plans are:
a Landscape Plan
which must identify vegetation and natural features to be retained based on the
Ecological Assessment and Native
Vegetation Management Plan, and include a full
flora species list for planting, preferably using species from the appropriate
ecological vegetation class
Environmentally Sustainable Development Strategy which must include
considerations of urban ecology and green infrastructure including
landscaping
a Construction
Environmental Management Plan which must show how retained trees will be
protected, including through tree protection
zones, water runoff and weed
developer to agree to enter into a section 173 agreement that makes provision
for the ongoing protection of vegetation with
high biodiversity value in
accordance with the recommendations of the approved ‘Native Vegetation
Management Plan’.
(iii) Submissions
Several submissions considered the Amendment would
enable development that:
destroys the
natural environment and landscape
impacts local
fauna and wildlife including wedge-tailed eagles, koalas and sugar gliders
displaces fauna
through lighting and operating hours.
Department of Energy,
Environment and Climate Action (DEECA) did not object to the Amendment, and was
satisfied with the DPO24 requirement
to prepare an Ecological Assessment and
Native Vegetation Management Plan. It provided various instructions for
calculating vegetation
values and conducting vegetation surveys as part of the
Ecological Assessment and Native Vegetation Management Plan.
DEECA requested that DPO24:
opportunities to avoid and minimise impacts on native vegetation
require the
Landscape Plan to list flora species and include local species where
require the
Construction Environmental Management Plan to plan for and protect retained
native vegetation during construction.
DPO24 (Version 1) generally
included changes sought by DEECA.
Council submitted the Amendment appropriately deals with ecological matters
and the Clause 52.17 provisions would apply. It stepped
out several ways in
which the DPO24 requirements will appropriately manage ecological impacts
the Ecological
Assessment and Native Vegetation Management Plan which must consider avoiding,
minimising and offsetting native vegetation
requirements for
the Master Plan to identify areas set aside for vegetation retention and
restoration
a Landscape Plan
that includes local species where possible
the Construction
Environmental Management Plan which requires details of how retained vegetation
will be protected during construction
a section 173
agreement which includes the provision for the ongoing protection of retained
native vegetation
‘failsafe’ requirement for applications lodged before a development
plan has been prepared to be accompanied by a site-specific
Assessment and Native Vegetation Management Plan and a Construction
Environmental Management Plan.
The Proponent submitted:
the Amendment
would appropriately manage impacts on ecology
the Existing
Ecological Conditions Report identifies any implications the Amendment may have
on ecological values and how to address
requirements that relate to ecology will inform the site layout and incorporate
areas of retained native vegetation into
open spaces and landscaped
(iv) Discussion
The Panel is satisfied that sufficient and
appropriate ecological considerations have been made, and the Amendment will
manage potential ecological impacts associated with using and
developing the subject land.
Like DEECA, the Panel has no reason to question the findings of the Existing
Ecological Conditions Report. The Report recommends
that opportunities to avoid
and minimise impacts on native vegetation be considered, as translated in DPO24
at the request of DEECA.
Suitably, the Ecological Assessment and Native
Vegetation Management will focus on identifying opportunities that focus on
of higher value vegetation.
However, DPO24 (Version 3) does not require the Ecological Assessment and
Native Vegetation Management Plan that accompanies applications
lodged before a
development plan has been prepared to identify opportunities for native
vegetation retention. This appears to be
an omission that should be corrected.
Opportunities to retain native vegetation should apply to permits and
development plans, as
sought by planning policy.
The Ecological Assessment and Native Vegetation Management Plan will serve as
the foundation for flora and fauna considerations across
the subject land.
Ecological values will be assessed, including the presence of significant fauna.
The plan will inform the layout
of the precinct and facilitate ecological
outcomes at a precinct level, rather than a site-by-site basis which would occur
a development plan. This approach allows for the retention of larger
patches of native vegetation and is supported by policy strategies
strategically plan for biodiversity
Retained native vegetation will be protected and managed during the
construction phase and will continue indefinitely, as required
by the DPO24
provisions. This is an important outcome. Construction activities will include
measures to control polluted runoff
and mitigate weeds, being two potential
threats to the health and viability of retained native vegetation. The section
173 agreement
requires the protection of retain native vegetation areas which
will ensure ongoing management and accountability.
The development plan and ecological assessments required by DPO24 will
adequately inform the potential impact the future industrial
precinct may have
on observed fauna to ensure an appropriate response to fauna values. This
includes appropriately managing land
use, development and site operations.
(v) Conclusions and recommendations
The Panel concludes:
Amendment has appropriately considered ecological and native vegetation and
includes an appropriate framework for assessing whether
development will achieve
acceptable ecological and native vegetation outcomes.
Ecological Assessment and Native Vegetation Management Plan that accompanies
applications lodged before a development plan has
been prepared should identify
opportunities for native vegetation retention, the same as when such a plan
informs a development plan.
The Panel recommends:
Amend Development
Plan Overlay Schedule 24, as shown in
a) revise the
application requirements for permits lodged before a development plan has been
prepared and revise the development plan
requirements to require the Ecological
Assessment and Native Vegetation Management Plan to identify opportunities to
avoid and minimise
impacts on the highest value native vegetation
b) revise the
Landscape Plan requirements to include a full flora species list for planting
and including local species
c) revise the
Construction Environmental Management Plan requirements to include:
of how retained native vegetation will be protected
pollutant runoff is not discharged into retained native vegetation
of how weeds will be controlled.
4.2 Potentially contaminated land
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment has appropriately considered potentially
contaminated land.
(ii) Background
Clause 13.04-1S aims to ensure potentially
contaminated land is used and developed safely and strategies include to protect
uses from the effects of contamination. The Clause defines childcare
centres, kindergartens and children’s playgrounds as
sensitive uses even
if they are ancillary to another uses.
Planning Practice Note 30 (Potentially contaminated land) outlines how to
deal with potentially contaminated land during the amendment
process. This can
be summarised as:
exhibition, Councils must identify if land proposed for rezoning may be
contaminated and note this in the explanatory report.
Before approval,
appropriate investigations are required which depend on contamination levels and
are typically a Preliminary Site
Investigation (PSI) for non-sensitive uses and
Preliminary Risk Screen Assessments or environmental audit for sensitive
Before use or
development starts and if contamination is confirmed, conduct an environmental
audit and complete recommended actions.
A PSI Report was prepared to
inform the Amendment and assess the subject land as guided by Planning Practice
Note 30. The Report:
assessed the
historical uses, potential for onsite and offsite contamination sources and
potential for uncontrolled fill
subject land has a medium risk for potential contamination from uncontrolled
concluded that
the subject land is suitable for rezoning, subject to further site-specific
testing before development
recommended
conducting an Intrusive Soil Contamination Assessment before
development.
DPO24 requires preparation of an Intrusive Soil
Contamination Assessment that ‘assesses the potential for impact to human
and ecological receptors and appropriate mitigation measures’. The
Assessment must inform the development plan and applications
lodged before a
development plan has been prepared. DPO24 also requires suitable buffers to
adjacent agricultural properties.
Council consulted with the Environment Protection Authority (EPA) before the
exhibition period in accordance with
Ministerial Direction
. The EPA’s response
included that:
indicates the subject land could fall under a ‘high’ or
‘medium’ risk of potential contamination,
though high risk is
A high risk of
potential contamination where non-sensitive uses are proposed requires
conducting a PSI (as already occurred)
Council should
consider the recommendations of the PSI and how to implement these before
development, and follow the steps in Planning
Practice Note 30.
post-exhibition explanatory report stated that future land use and development,
for which industry is the ‘primary’
use, will be managed by the
Intrusive Soil Contamination Assessment. Regarding potential sensitive uses, it
Under the IN3Z, a permit may also be granted for a childcare centre or
kindergarten which are within the MD1 definition of a ‘sensitive
use’. Such uses will be supporting uses to the dominant uses of
technology-based industries, manufacturing, research and development.
contamination assessment will ensure that any potential site contamination is
addressed and managed prior to the commence
of development.
(iii) Submissions
As part of its submissions to the exhibition, the
EPA reiterated its response to the Ministerial Direction 19 consultation and
that the explanatory report be updated to:
DPO24’s consistency with advice in Planning Practice Note 30
remove reference
to the EPA providing a peer review as this is not the authority’s
The post-exhibition explanatory report included the changes as
Council’s submissions regarding potentially contaminated land were
limited to the proposed changes to the Amendment documentation.
These addressed
the EPA’s request and included two further changes of:
requiring an Intrusive Soil Contamination Assessment to inform the development
plan, not just applications lodged before
a development plan has been
explanatory report, listing Clause 13.04-1S as a relevant policy to the
The Proponent’s submission:
highlighted that
the EPA did not object to the Amendment
Council’s proposed changes to the Amendment documentation in relation to
potentially contaminated land
considered that
explicitly excluding offensive or dangerous industries and many heavy industrial
uses from the list of preferred uses
required by DPO24 will assist in reducing
the risk of contamination into the surrounding sites.
submitters raised concern about the potential for potentially contaminated land
to impact nearby market gardens. Another
concern was potential contamination
impacts to past visitors to the subject land.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel considers the potential for contaminated
land has been adequately assessed and the Amendment appropriately guides future
land use and development in this regard. It accepts the PSI was undertaken in
accordance with Planning Practice Note 30. A key
consideration however is
whether the appropriate level of assessment has been prepared and contemplated
if sensitive uses eventuate
on land where a high risk of potential contamination
is possible.
The subject land is mainly intended for non-sensitive uses aligning with the
IN3Z purposes, but sensitive uses are permissible with
a permit (and subject to
other land conditions like the major pipeline infrastructure as discussed in
). Though the likely
risk is medium, a potential high risk of contamination should be considered.
Planning Practice Note 30 seeks an appropriate assessment of sensitive uses,
whether primary or ancillary uses, despite a different
interpretation outlined
in the explanatory report. If the subject land is developed for non-sensitive
uses only, a PSI is the highest
required assessment and has already been
completed. For sensitive uses, an environmental audit is needed for high-risk
and Preliminary Risk Screen Assessments for medium-risk scenarios.
Instead, DPO24 mandates an Intrusive Soil Contamination Assessment.
Policy guides that the level of assessment of contaminated land should match
the level of risk for proposed uses. The Panel accepts
the proposed Intrusive
Soil Contamination Assessment is proportionate to the risk, which is likely
medium, even if sensitive uses
are proposed. The Assessment can follow Planning
Practice Note 30 and determine, if necessary, whether further other assessment
is needed for any proposed sensitive use (noting DPO24 requires the development
plan is informed by a list of preferred uses).
The Amendment ensures appropriate measures are in place to identify and
manage any potential contamination risks to nearby market
gardens. The PSI
identifies neighbouring agricultural properties, including market gardens, as
potential receptors of contamination.
This recognition can inform the scope of
the Intrusive Soil Contamination Assessment and guide the consideration of
offsite impacts.
Further, DPO24 guides for suitable buffers to agricultural
properties.
Concerns for historical occurrences of human contact with potentially
contaminated land is beyond the scope of the Panel to consider.
(v) Conclusion and recommendation
The Panel concludes that
the Amendment has appropriately considered potentially contaminated land and
would benefit from further changes.
The Panel recommends:
Amend Development
Plan Overlay Schedule 24, as shown in
, to revise the requirements of
the development plan to include an Intrusive Soil Contamination Report that
a) potential
for impact to human health
b) appropriate
mitigation measures.
4.3 Bushfire risk
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment has appropriately considered bushfire risk.
(ii) Background
Clause 13.02-1S seeks to manage bushfire through
risk-based planning that prioritises the protection of human life. The key
include to:
bushfire hazards and undertake an appropriate risk assessment by consulting with
the relevant fire authority and implementing
appropriate bushfire protection
amendments and development plan approvals properly assess bushfire risk and
include appropriate bushfire protection measures
development to low-risk locations.
A Clause 13.02-1S Assessment
informed the Amendment. It concluded the Amendment met the requirements of the
clause and DPO24 would
manage bushfire risk effectively. Key findings were:
the subject land
is in a bushfire prone area but not affected by a Bushfire Management
the subject land
is a low-risk bushfire landscape
development of
land will be managed through defendable space requirements
provisions provide for efficient egress from the site
development will reduce fire risk through vegetation management and built
development will
achieve less than Bushfire Assessment Level 12.5 if any revegetation program is
managed to consider bushfire risk.
Follow up advice to the Clause
13.02 Assessment was prepared to assess the concerns raised by the Country Fire
Authority (CFA) during
the exhibition period. The concerns related to existing
road network, defendable space setbacks, perimeter road, building envelopes
vegetation management requirements. The advice found:
provided suitable access to the existing road network
defendable space
setbacks should be specified in DPO24 and be applicable to development plans and
a perimeter road
is not needed because:
- the bushfire
risk is low
- the road would
result in only one access and egress point adjacent to vegetation which would
place firefighters and the community
- the road could
increase ignition risk and illegal activity in currently inaccessible vegetated
envelopes are not needed to manage vegetation on lots other than on the southern
and eastern boundaries, as the overall development
will achieve defendable space
requirements
management requirements can be suitably addressed through the management of
defendable space along the southern and eastern
boundaries.
confirmed the revised DPO24 resolved it concerns.
DPO24 (Version 1) requires the following for development plans and
setbacks of 19
metres from the grassland hazards at the eastern boundary
setbacks of 27
metres from the scrub hazard at the southern boundary
each lot along
the eastern and southern boundaries to include a continuous internal accessway
to allow emergency vehicles to reach
those boundaries
defendable space
along the eastern and southern boundaries to ensure a bushfire risk is not
created over time.
(iii) Submissions
CFA did not object to the Amendment and raised
several concerns regarding likely bushfire scenario from the southwest. They
ultimately resolved after further consultation with Council. The CFA
supported the:
Clause 13.02-1S
Assessment to apply setbacks of 19 metres from the eastern boundary and 27
metres from the southern boundary
Follow up advice
to manage internal accessways and defendable spaces for lots along the eastern
and southern boundaries.
Council’s submissions regarding
bushfire risk were limited to the proposed changes to the Amendment
documentation. These addressed
the CFA’s request and included one further
change to list Clause 13.02-1S in the explanatory report as a relevant policy to
the Amendment.
No other submission raised bushfire related concerns.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel acknowledges the CFA’s confirmed
resolution that affirms the Amendment appropriately addresses bushfire
considerations. Council is commended for its approach in resolving
these matters with the CFA.
The primary considerations for bushfire matters are that the Clause 13.02-1S
Assessment addressed the relevant planning policy and
found the subject land is
low-risk. This forms the basis of needed measures to manage bushfire risk in a
developed setting.
The DPO24 provisions, as supported by the CFA, will help guide future
development on the subject land. These focus on managing the
eastern and
southern boundaries where bushfire threat is the greatest, and various layout
and access measures are proposed in response.
The Panel also supports this
approach. Importantly, the DPO24 provisions require the continued assessment of
bushfire risk which
will likely change through successive development
(v) Conclusion and recommendation
The Panel concludes that
the Amendment has appropriately considered bushfire risk and would benefit from
further changes.
The Panel recommends:
Amend Development
Plan Overlay Schedule 24, as shown in
, to revise the permit
requirements and the Subdivision and Development Plan requirements to
a) development
setbacks along the eastern and southern boundaries
b) a continuous internal accessway for lots on
the southern and eastern boundaries
c) defendable space for the lots along the
eastern and southern boundaries
d) building envelopes and vegetation management
along the southern and eastern boundaries.
5 Traffic and transport
5.1 Traffic generation, impacts and access
(i) The issue
issue is whether the surrounding road network has enough capacity to manage
traffic, including heavy vehicles, generated by future
development enabled by
the Amendment.
(ii) Background
Traffic Technical Assessment (Stantec, April 2022)
key findings:
The subject
land’s location from a transport perspective is suitable to support
industrial land uses given it is near future
freight routes and key arterial
roads, notably the Western Port Highway.
Council and the Port of Hastings Authority plans and policies which support
Bungower Road becoming a key east-west port
access route suitable to cater for
industrial traffic.
A preliminary
transport assessment supports the development of the subject land (subject to
typical planning documentation being prepared
and approved) to accommodate the
proposed development.
recommended that further analysis is undertaken to determine a suitable access
strategy for the proposed site access point with
Bungower Road after the subject
land is rezoned.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions:
Bungower Road
does not have capacity to accommodate traffic generated by future development on
the subject land.
There will be
increased traffic and heavy vehicles travelling through Somerville’s local
traffic, particularly trucks and heavy vehicles, will negatively impact
pedestrian safety.
Truck drivers
will prefer to drive through the Somerville town centre than use other roads
because it is a shorter distance to the
Peninsula Link.
Davies’ evidence:
Council and
Department of Transport and Planning, as managers of the local and arterial road
network, are required to maintain their
respective roads.
development occurs in an undeveloped area, there is often a requirement to
upgrade the current road pavement standard to cater
for additional traffic
and/or heavy vehicles.
planning documents including the Port Development Strategy and the Somerville
Township Structure Plan highlight the potential
for Bungower Road to be upgraded
to provide an east-west link between the Peninsula Link and Port of
- carries about
8,500 vehicles each day including 9 to 14 per cent heavy vehicles, and appears
to be in good condition
ultimately upgraded to an arterial road standard (not necessarily duplicated) at
some stage in the future because it has
full-diamond interchange with Peninsula
Link and connects with Western Port Highway to the
At the direction of the Panel, the two traffic
experts met on 6 May 2025 and documented their agreed facts and opinions. They
on every statement, as follows:
Traffic generation
The proposed
rezoning does not change the traffic generation potential of the subject land
given both the existing SUZ1 and proposed
IN3Z facilitate industrial land
The preliminary
concept development plan comprising approximately 140,000 square metres of
development floor area is anticipated to
generate in the order of 700 to 800
vehicle movements each hour (0.5 to 0.56 trips for every 100 square metres)
during the morning
and afternoon peak hours and 6,000 to 7,000 vehicle movements
The traffic
distribution originally proposed by SALT3 and adopted by Stantec in the
Preliminary Transport and Movement Plan and by
IMPACT is considered an
appropriate preliminary assessment.
Traffic impacts
The following
intersections are expected to operate satisfactorily following full development
of the subject land including assumed
background traffic growth:
- Bungower Road
/ Western Port Highway
- Bungower Road
/ Lower Somerville Road.
The Bungower
Road / Frankston-Flinders Road intersection is expected to require mitigation
works to cater for growth in background
traffic and traffic generated by
development of the subject land based on the current assumed development
feasible options for mitigation works within the existing road reserve that
could include one of the following:
- additional
lanes to existing roundabout, subject to compliance with relevant detail design
(signalising) the existing roundabout
- conversion to
a signalised cross-intersection.
Any required
mitigation works can be appropriately determined as part of the Transport and
Movement Plan prepared as part of the development
plan as required by DPO24 and
to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
Bungower Road
currently carries in the order of 8,500 vehicles each day.
Accounting for
future growth of 10 percent over 10 years and full development of the subject
land, Bungower Road is anticipated to
carry in the order of 13,000 vehicles each
day to the west and 10,000 vehicles each day to the east of the subject
If future growth
is 20 percent over 10 years with full development of the subject land, Bungower
Road is anticipated to carry in the
order of 15,500 vehicles each day to the
west and 12,000 vehicles each day to the east of the subject land.
Under either
scenario, the future traffic volumes on Bungower Road are anticipated to remain
below the indicative capacity of 18,000
vehicles each day for a two-lane,
two-way road.
Irrespective of
the proposed rezoning of the subject land, Bungower Road is anticipated to
potentially perform an arterial road function
in the future as a key east-west
route between the Port of Hastings and Peninsula Link as identified in the Port
Development Strategy
and the Somerville Township Structure Plan.
It is understood
that Council and the Department of Transport and Planning have commenced a
process of freight corridor planning with
the aim of reducing freight movements
through Somerville.
The requirement
to prepare a Transport and Movement Plan to the satisfaction of the responsible
authority is appropriate to ensure:
- development is
suitably and safely planned
- transport
treatments are provided to address the capacity and safety requirements that
arise from the additional traffic generated
by the use including heavy vehicles,
pedestrians and cyclists.
Regarding access, DPO24 (Version
3) revised the relevant requirements to:
Transport and Movement Plan
traffic volumes anticipated on local and arterial roads, including heavy
Identification
of a suitable location and design of intersection treatment of the main access
point to the site from 79 Bungower Road,
including the provision of any interim
measures to accommodate initial access formation. The design of the intersection
must be suitable
to accommodate signalisation to be installed at the time of
completion of accessway formation at the head of the development site
Bungower Road.
Staging Plan
The indicative
staging of development including main access intersection and signalisation at
79 Bungower Road, internal roads, infrastructure,
servicing, public realm, and
landscape works, including any interim measures to accommodate initial access
formation at Bungower
Road and the trigger points for the provision of all other
required infrastructure.
The indicative
staging of the secondary access point and internal roadway at 83 Bungower Road,
infrastructure, servicing, public realm,
landscape works, restriction of use to
certain vehicle classes from the development at 79 Bungower Road in relation to
the Transport
and Movement Plan findings and the trigger points for the
provision of all other required infrastructure.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel acknowledges the traffic experts agreed on
every item in the expert meeting statement. No party disputed the methodology
or figures in either traffic expert’s report.
The Amendment itself will not generate additional traffic. Potential impacts
of traffic generation can only be known at the permit
stage, at which time each
application will be assessed for potential impacts on the surrounding road
network and parking requirements.
Relevant considerations at the Amendment stage
whether the
surrounding road network can broadly accommodate potential future development in
its ultimate form
whether the
DPO24 provisions are appropriate for assessing future traffic related
The Panel generally agrees with the traffic experts that
the subject land will change from one type of industrial zoned land to another.
The experts agree that this does not change the subject land’s traffic
generation. However, industry associated with the
Port of Hastings, as required
by the existing SUZ1, may enable industry of a scale and nature that generates
different traffic volumes
to that of broader industry enabled by IN3Z. However,
the difference between the two is not enough to raise any concern.
Taking the high growth rate figure, when the subject land is fully developed,
Bungower Road is expected to carry about 15,500 vehicles
each day which is well
below its indicative capacity (based on a two-lane, two-way road) of 18,000
vehicles each day. This increased
traffic volume will be noticeable, however,
this does not make it unacceptable.
Left unmitigated, the Bungower Road / Frankston-Flinders Road intersection is
likely to be negatively impacted by the increased traffic
generated by the
subject land. The Panel is satisfied with the potential options for mitigating
works within the existing road reserve.
These works should be investigated in
more detail through the Transport and Movement Plan that DPO24 requires as part
of the development
The Panel acknowledges the local community’s concern regarding heavy
vehicle movements using local streets. This issue can
be addressed through
offsite traffic management by the responsible road managers. The outcomes of
Council and the Department of
Transport and Planning’s freight corridor
planning should help reduce freight movements through parts of Somerville
to be inappropriate for heavy vehicles. However, it cannot be
resolved through the Amendment because the subject land’s zone
and overlay
provisions cannot manage issues beyond its boundary.
Truck drivers are less likely to drive through the Somerville town centre to
access the subject land than from the Peninsula Link.
This is because a driver
is more likely to select the fastest and simplest route rather than selecting
one where they may be delayed
by more traffic and turns through the town centre.
In this instance, the subject land is located on Bungower Road which provides
vehicles direct access to Peninsula Link.
There was no information presented to the Panel to support submissions that
future traffic generation will negatively impact pedestrian
safety in the
Somerville township. The responsible road manager would review and consider any
safety issues related to their roads.
The DPO24 provisions relating to site access and associated works will ensure
the Transport and Movement Plan and Staging Plan carefully
consider the main and
secondary access points. This includes the signalised main access at 79
Bungower Road. The crossing points
and traffic breaks created by the signals
may improve safety for drivers, pedestrians and cyclists.
(v) Conclusions and recommendations
The Panel concludes:
surrounding road network except for the Bungower Road / Frankston-Flinders Road
intersection has enough capacity to manage traffic
generated by future
development enabled by the Amendment.
mitigation works for the Bungower Road / Frankston-Flinders Road intersection
can be considered through the Transport and Movement
Plan that will be required
by Development Plan Overlay Schedule 24.
The Panel recommends:
Amend Development Plan Overlay Schedule 24, as
a) revise the Transport and Movement Plan
requirements to require:
indicative traffic volumes to include heavy vehicles
details about access arrangements
identification
of a suitable location and design of intersection treatment of the secondary
access point to the site from 83 Bungower
location and design of any mitigation works to address the impacts of predicted
heavy vehicle traffic increases on local and arterial
b) revise the Staging Plan requirements to add
further details regarding the main and secondary access points.
5.2 Car parking
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment includes an appropriate planning framework to
consider car parking that will be generated by future
development on the subject
(ii) Background
Traffic Technical Assessment (Stantec, April 2022)
key findings:
The subject land
is anticipated to generate car parking demand for about 2,500 car spaces if
applying the parking rates guided by
the Planning Scheme.
Applying the
Roads and Traffic Authority Guide to Traffic Generating Developments, October
2002 (RTA guidelines) for business parks
would result in a total car parking
demand of 2,100 car parking spaces.
Empirical rates
for the warehouse and industrial land uses could be expected to result in a
total demand for 1,250 spaces for the
Planning Scheme
Clause 52.06 (Car parking) will apply to a future permit seeking a proposal
specified in subclause 52.06-1.
The exhibited DPO24 requires a Transport and Movements Plan that
A car parking
provision and management strategy, having regard to the range of potential uses
and the need to ensure adequate on-site
carparking and to address potential
changes in car parking demand resulting from changes in use over time.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions:
currently insufficient car parking in Somerville.
The proposed
open space should have car parking provided for all its users.
Davies’ evidence:
requirements consider car parking through the Master Plan, Development Design
Guidelines and Transport and Movement Plan.
Planning Scheme
Clause 52.06 requires the provision of car parking.
Council will be
required to assess whether a future permit application is providing suitable car
parking in accordance with Clause
There will be an
opportunity to respond to actual demand levels over time because the subject
land will be developed in stages.
Mr Maina’s evidence:
specifically address car parking in his expert report
referred to
earlier Stantec traffic report that contemplates prohibiting parking along
Bungower Road and Lower Somerville Road as
appropriate.
traffic expert identified car parking as an issue in their expert statement.
Council submission:
Car parking will
be required to be addressed as part of the Transport and Movement Plan that will
form part of the development plan
and through any future permit application that
will be assessed against Clause 52.06.
Clause 52.06
provides an appropriate mechanism to deal with car parking at the permit
application stage.
It would be
inappropriate to attempt to further resolve car parking through the
(iv) Discussion
As noted earlier, future permit applications
proposing development on the subject land will be assessed for car parking
against the relevant requirements. This requirement exists at Clause
52.06 of all Planning Schemes. The RTA Guideline and empirical
rates are valid
measures that will be considered when determining the appropriate car parking
provision at the permit stage. Based
on the traffic assessment to date, the
Panel is satisfied the subject land can accommodate future car parking
The Panel is satisfied that DPO24 will appropriately manage car parking by
a Master Plan
that provides for onsite car parking for all development
Development
Design Guidelines that provide for car parking including the design and location
of car parking areas
a Transport and
Movement Plan that includes a car parking provision and management strategy
which will ensure that car parking can
be co-ordinated across the subject
These requirements will form an appropriate planning framework
for assessing car parking needs when considering future permit applications.
Accordingly, the Panel agrees with Council and the traffic experts on this
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes
that the Amendment includes an appropriate planning framework for considering
car parking generated by future
development on the subject land.
5.3 Pedestrian and bicycle paths
(i) The issue
issue is whether the onsite and offsite pedestrian and bicycle path requirements
proposed through DPO24 are appropriate.
(ii) Background
Planning Scheme Clause 18.02-2S (Cycling) is
relevant to this issue, and seeks:
To facilitate an efficient and safe bicycle network and increase the
proportion of trips made by cycling.
The Amendment explanatory report states:
The introduction of the new local policy and Development Plan Overlay
(Schedule 24) will guide the future use and development of the
subject land
The provision of
recreational open space which will contain facilities such as a sporting oval
with walking and cycling tracks that
will enhance the experience of workers,
visitors to the area and residents
The exhibited DPO24 requires a
Transport and Movements Plan that includes:
A pedestrian and
cycling network plan, indicating the location of shared paths within the site
and provision for future connections,
including the provision for the
construction of a shared pedestrian and bicycle path connection within the
Bungower Road reserve
from the site to Frankston Flinders Road and publicly
accessible toilet and changing facilities, all to the satisfaction of the
responsible
authority and at the cost of the subject landowner.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions:
There is no
pedestrian or cycling path proposed along Lower Somerville Road or Bungower Road
to access the proposed amenities.
Pedestrian and
bicycle paths are needed along Bungower Road:
- eastbound
between Western Port Highway and Tyabb-Tooradin Road
- from Frankston
Flinders Road to access the subject land.
The proposed
pedestrian and bicycle path may be unsafe if not appropriately managed.
Frankston-Flinders Road shared path is considered unsafe because it has not been
maintained to resolve cracks and bumps created
by tree roots.
Davies’ evidence:
The subject
relatively limited connections for pedestrian and cyclist movements
- lacks any
pedestrian facilities at its Bungower Road frontage due to its nature as a major
road with limited land uses that create
demand for pedestrian
pedestrian and bicycle path connection required by DPO24 will:
alleviate the lack of pedestrian options on Bungower Road
- cater for the
ultimate pedestrian/cycle activity that will be generated by the subject
land’s full development and any adjacent
further development along
Bungower Road.
Frankston-Flinders
Road has good provision for pedestrian and bicycle movement, including the
existing Western Port Bay Trail shared
path on the west side of the
(iv) Discussion and conclusion
The Panel accepts Mr
Davies’ evidence on pedestrian and bicycle paths. The shared pedestrian
and bicycle path connection required
by DPO24 will encourage subject land users
to consider walking or cycling.
The Panel concludes the onsite and offsite pedestrian and bicycle path
requirements proposed through Development Plan Overlay Schedule
appropriate.
5.4 Public transport
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment appropriately responds to any public transport
(ii) Background
The exhibited DPO24 requires a Transport and
Movements Plan that includes:
Provision to
encourage and support access by public transport to and within the site by
provision for future bus stop infrastructure.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions:
There is no
public transport so:
- people will
either drive private vehicles to work or not go at all if they do not have
access to a vehicle
- the subject
land should not be developed with industry.
The area has
inadequate public transport services with an hourly service that operates until
early evening to Frankston or Flinders
with no cross-peninsula service.
There should be
planning guidelines requiring a public transport plan to allow people to get to
work from a future train station in
The subject land
- not serviced
by public transport
- about 2.5
kilometres from Somerville Railway Station
kilometre from the nearest bus stop for the route 783 bus that travels along
Frankston-Flinders Road.
appropriate for DPO24 to require the Transport and Movement Plan to include
provision to encourage and support access by public
transport to and within the
subject land by provision for future bus stop infrastructure.
appropriate that the details of the bus stop location can be determined as part
of future functional design and in consultation
with the Department of Transport
and Planning which is responsible for reviewing and expanding bus services to
meet future demands.
The need for
improved public transport in the area is identified in the Somerville Township
Structure Plan which includes the following
A11: Council will advocate to Public Transport Victoria
(PTV), the Victorian Government and private bus providers for additional public
transport options to the township and to surrounding townships to better access
community and support services.
A19: Council will advocate to the Victorian Government to deliver
improvements to the bus network throughout the region to provide
for greater
access to more destinations with higher frequency services.
Council submission:
The lack of
public transport:
- is a shortfall
of the proposal, however this is a wider issue that exists throughout the
municipality
- would be a
negative factor for any industrial rezoning in the municipality.
Notwithstanding,
DPO24 requires the Transport and Movement Plan to provide for a future bus stop
on Bungower Road to ensure transport
infrastructure is ready should public
transport routes connect to the subject land.
Public transport
routes fall outside the scope of the Amendment and are beyond Council’s
power to effect.
DPO24 (Version 3) revised the relevant requirement
to replace ‘Provision’ with ‘Measures’ as follows:
Measures to encourage and support access by public transport to and within
the site by provision for future bus stop infrastructure.
(iv) Discussion
The Transport and Movement Plan will encourage the
location of, and design for, a bus stop on the Bungower Road frontage and
access by public transport to and within the subject land.
The Victorian government is responsible for introducing a bus service to this
location, not Council or the Proponent. However, including
requirements in
DPO24 to consider a bus stop may support a future business case to justify a bus
service when there is enough demand
generated at this location.
The Panel supports replacing ‘Provision’ with
‘Measures’ in DPO24 because it clarifies the requirement’s
(v) Conclusions and recommendation
Victorian government is responsible for introducing a bus service to the subject
land rather than the Mornington Peninsula Shire
Council or Proponent.
Amendment appropriately facilitates the delivery of public transport
infrastructure (bus stop) should state government provide
public transport to
the subject land.
The Panel recommends:
Amend Development Plan Overlay Schedule 24, as
, to replace
‘Provision’ with ‘Measures’ to the requirement
associated with encouraging and supporting public
6 Surrounding area impacts
6.1 Potential offsite emissions
(i) The issue
issue is whether noise, dust and odour associated with future industrial uses
will unreasonably impact the amenity of surrounding
(ii) Background
Planning policy supports managing the effects of
noise, air emissions and offsite impacts by ensuring appropriate separation
high-impact uses and sensitive uses. Clauses 13.05-1S, 13.06-1S,
13.07-1S, and 53.10 collectively aim to minimise risks to amenity,
safety by promoting land use compatibility and careful siting of potentially
adverse uses.
No technical reports were prepared to assess the potential for offsite
DPO24 (Version 1) requires the lists preferred uses to exclude offensive or
dangerous industries. The types of uses sought for exclusion
are listed in
the table at Clause 53.01 without a specified threshold distance
exceed a fire
protection quantity under the relevant dangerous goods regulations
notification under the relevant occupational health and safety regulations
license under relevant dangerous goods regulations.
(iii) Submissions
The EPA’s response to Ministerial Direction
19 included that future industrial uses will need to have regard to Clause 53.10
and the EPA guidelines for separation distances for industrial air
Council submitted the IN3Z and DPO24 work together to ensure a sensitive
response to amenity is incorporated into the development
plan, including
measures to discourage offensive or dangerous industries. It submitted the
revisions to DPO24 provide clarification
on what is an offensive or dangerous
industry for the purposes of excluding these types of uses on the subject
The Proponent submitted that DPO24 safeguards the Low Density Residential
Zone (LDRZ) land to the west from pollution. This is achieved
by explicitly
excluding certain types of uses from the list of preferred uses. These include
bitumen and concrete batching plants,
shipping container storage, transfer
stations, materials recycling facilities and refuse disposal sites.
The Proponent added DPO24 promotes environmentally sustainable practices
through an Environmentally Sustainable Development Strategy.
Key considerations
of the Strategy include:
construction
materials, methods, and building orientation
use of solar
energy and electric vehicle charging
conservation and recycling
integrated Water
Management and Water Sensitive Urban Design
minimisation and resource recovery.
Submissions expressed concern
that industrial activities could lead to various emissions, such as noise, odour
and dust. Concerns
were also raised about the impact of site operations.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel considers that the Amendment adequately
addresses potential offsite amenity impacts. IN3Z, DPO24 and policy clearly
that amenity impacts on surrounding land are key considerations for
site planning and issuing permits for the subject land. Relevant
IN3Z aims to
ensure uses do not impact the amenity of adjacent, more sensitive areas.
DPO24 specifies
industrial uses that are not preferred.
Clause 53.10
requires certain industrial uses to be buffered from residential zoned
State planning
policy indicates that impacts on human health, including noise and air quality,
must be managed.
Further amenity protection is enabled by the large
precinct area which provides opportunity to adequately separate uses with
impacts from sensitive uses.
The relevant provisions plan for uses with notably lesser amenity impacts
than the current provisions and will enable offsite amenity
impacts to be duly
considered in development proposals.
(v) Conclusion and recommendation
The Panel concludes
noise, dust and odour associated with future industrial uses will reasonably
impact the amenity of surrounding
The Panel recommends:
Amend Development
Plan Overlay Schedule 24, as shown in
, to revise the requirements of
the Master Plan to exclude specific types of offensive and dangerous industry
uses from the list of
preferred uses.
6.2 Visual amenity
(i) The issue
issue is whether DPO24 will facilitate future development that will unreasonably
impact the visual amenity of the surrounding
green wedge area and low density
residential area.
(ii) Background
Clause 15.01-2S aims to ensure building design and
siting contributes positively to the local context and strategies include
development provides site-responsive
landscaping
DPO24 generally manages visual impact through requirements of the development
plan, including:
a Subdivision
and Development Plan which must include:
- no development
of land within 30 metres of Lower Somerville Road, other than for landscaping
and open space
- a minimum
setback of 50 metres from Bungower Road, and landscaping in the first 15
Development
Design Guidelines which should address treatment of visual impacts of
development adjacent to the precinct boundaries
through a combination of scale,
built form, building setbacks, treatment of visual appearance of development
adjacent to precinct
boundaries and landscaping.
A Landscape Plan
which must include:
- indicative
landscape areas, including front setbacks
- landscape
buffer areas where required to adjoining properties and which must be
established and landscaped within the initial subdivision
or development of
An Open Space
Plan and details indicating the location of all open space areas and the future
maintenance and management of these
Existing provisions that
apply to the surrounds set a range of setbacks. These are:
Development Overlay Schedule 6 (DDO6) and Design and Development Overlay
Schedule 7 (DDO7)
discretionary 50 metres from the south side of Bungower Road
discretionary 25 metres from Lower Somerville Road
- to ensure new
development and subdivision respects the existing streetscape, building form and
landscape context, and to support
integration with surrounding buildings, open
space and view lines where reasonable and practical.
SUZ1 mandates
setbacks to LDRZ and GWZ land:
- of a minimum
30 metres from car parking and internal roads
- of a minimum
60 metres from other buildings and works
‘buffer area’ which must be planted with trees.
(iii) Submissions
Council submitted the proposed buffers were key to
achieving positive visual impacts on the subject land. The DPO24 buffer metrics
were intended to achieve:
building setback along to the south of Bungower Road to that guided by DDO6 and
a consistent
setback along Lower Somerville Road to what the existing SUZ1
Council submitted the setback to Lower Somerville Road:
replicates the existing restriction that applies to the subject land and is a
reasonable expectation of residents on the
western side of Lower Somerville
is required to
ensure an appropriate transition and buffer to the LDRZ and GWZ land in equal
The Proponent requested the proposed setback to Lower
Somerville Road be changed to:
30-metre setback adjacent to LDRZ land
setback to 15 metres adjacent to GWZ land.
The Proponent
GWZ is less
sensitive than LDRZ
land opposite
the GWZ land and south of the pipeline easement is unlikely to be developed in a
way that causes offsite impacts
reducing the
buffer allows for car parking in a landscaped setting beyond the setback, which
is an entirely acceptable interface to
allowing car
parking in a landscaped setting beyond the setback would maintain the intent of
providing a visual buffer
the reduced
setback would enable an additional 5,500 square metres to be developed
there are many
examples of building encroachments where the DDO6 and DDO7 setbacks
The Port of Hastings Corporation supported the subject
landscaped buffers in general terms because they ensure an appropriate
occurs between the precinct and adjoining properties.
Submissions were mixed in relation to whether the proposal would result in
positive or negative visual impacts. The concerns for
negative outcomes
included impacts on rural character. One submitter from a nearby GWZ property
expressed preference to retain the
30-metre setback required by the existing
provisions. Other submissions considered that future development would result
in positive
built form outcomes on the subject land.
(iv) Discussion
No evidence was tabled to test the appropriateness
of the setbacks. Instead, the Panel’s findings are based on the intent
outcomes of the setbacks and the site context. The Panel supports the
proposed setbacks but recommends the metrics be discretionary.
The intent of the proposed setbacks is to align with existing provisions,
which comprise both discretionary and mandatory setbacks.
DDO6 and DDO7 focus
on creating a consistent streetscape and open landscaping using the same
discretionary metrics. SUZ1 requires
a landscaped setback and mandates a
minimum metric. The Panel observed varied results on adjoining the subject
land, with some lots
contributing to open landscape character while others have
well established, tall landscaping blocking views or structures within
Despite consistent metrics, implementation has led to diverse landscaped
The Panel supports maintaining a 50-metre setback to Bungower Road. This
setback was neither tested through evidence, nor contested.
However, the
current provisions apply the setback on a discretionary basis, allowing
decision-makers to consider site-specific conditions
without enforcing
uniformity. The Panel supports the metric but considers applying it on a
discretionary basis aligns with the provision
which Council seeks to
The Panel endorses retaining a 30-metre setback from LDRZ land along Lower
Somerville Road, which remains uncontested. Discretionary
application of this
metric is deemed appropriate, considering that a setback with a discretionary
metric of 25 metres applies on
the opposite land.
The need for flexible metrics is further supported by the discrepancy between
the proposed 30-metre setback and the requested 15 metre
setback to GWZ land
along Lower Somerville Road. This is particularly so when balancing amenity
expectations of GWZ land, which
are lower than LDRZ land, and development
potential of the precinct. Both setbacks, it was submitted, would achieve an
and landscaped result. The Panel considers that a 15 metre
to GWZ land may
produce a suitable visual amenity outcome, particularly if it is well landscaped
with low-scale structures positioned
could achieve
similar visual impacts to a 30 metre setback in both short range and long-range
with acceptable
visual amenity outcomes would avail a considerable amount of land for
development.
Further, DPO24 requires the Landscape Plan to include
landscaped setbacks and:
a maintenance
schedule which can ensure the visual appearance and health of the vegetation
along the road interfaces
for landscaping
to form part of the initial stage of subdivision to ensure it establishes early
in the development stages.
Since this setback hasn't been thoroughly
tested, the Panel concludes that a 30 metre setback to the GWZ land is
appropriate, but
the metric should be discretionary.
It would be helpful for DPO24 to include criteria for when lesser setbacks
could be deemed appropriate to both road interfaces. This
approach can guide
future developments while preserving the intent of setbacks. The Panel would
support this.
(v) Conclusions and recommendation
The Panel concludes
that Development Plan Overlay Schedule 24:
enable future development that will reasonably impact the visual amenity of the
surrounding green wedge area and low density
residential area
apply a setback of a discretionary 50 metres to Bungower Road and a setback of a
discretionary 30 metres to Lower Somerville
include criteria to clarify when a lesser setback is acceptable.
Panel recommends:
Amend Development
Plan Overlay Schedule 24, as shown in
, to revise the Master Plan
requirements to include:
discretionary setback of 50 metres to Bungower Road, including landscaping
within a discretionary 15 metres from the site boundary
b) a discretionary
setback of 30 metres to Lower Somerville Road to be used for landscaping and
open space.
7 Other issues
7.1 Heritage
(i) The issues
issues are whether the Amendment has appropriate considered, and appropriately
responds to, existing heritage values on the subject
(ii) Background
The Heritage Overlay (HO269) applies to 83 Bungower
Road to recognise the ‘Thomas Brunning’s Farm’. The site
mature planting. The Statement of Significant states the place holds
historic significance for:
its strong link
with the regionally prominent Brunnings family
being a good
example of an early twentieth century farm house.
The Heritage
Overlay includes a purpose that development does not adversely affect the
significance of heritage places and requires
a permit for most buildings and
DPO24 requires that the development plan include provision for the house, any
associated fabric and trees on the heritage listed property.
Clause 15.03 (Heritage) seeks to conserve places of heritage significance by
retaining elements that contribute to the importance
of heritage places.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Several submissions were concerned about heritage
protection and future use of the farmhouse.
Council referred to the explanatory report which states that incorporating
the Brunnings Homestead heritage site into the open space
area will protect the
The Proponent submitted:
the Heritage
Overlay (HO269) affects all of 83 Bungower Road and will be retained
DPO24 includes
provisions for retaining the farmhouse
proposed for the farmhouse yet, but the Heritage Overlay requires a permit for
any proposed use to readapt and restore the
(iv) Discussion and conclusion
The Amendment does not seek revise the existing
Heritage Overlay (HO269) on the Brunnings Homestead site. This means the
protection will continue to apply when a future permit application is
lodged before a development plan has been prepared.
The Panel is satisfied that the Amendment suitably provides for the long-term
protection of the farmhouse, and appropriately considers
adaptive re-use within
the broader precinct. Integrating the farmhouse into future open space may
assist in protecting its heritage
The Panel concludes the Amendment will adequately
manage heritage impacts.
7.2 Property value and crime
(i) The issue
issue is whether property value and crime are within the scope of the Amendment
and can be managed through the PE Act.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions:
The increased
traffic and decreased living environment will decrease property value.
How will owners
be compensated if properties are devalued?
industrial park on the subject land may increase crime and attract
‘hoons’ to the park at night.
Criminals have
recently been caught targeting industrial areas for ram raids and illicit drug
storage and production.
The Amendment
will reduce the existing high crime rate by introducing business and jobs in the
Council’s response to property value:
The rezoning and
planning provisions are applied having regard to the planning objectives of
Victoria and must be approved by the
Minister for Planning.
The objectives
of planning include:
(c) to secure a pleasant, efficient and safe working, living and recreational
environment for all Victorians and visitors to Victoria;
(f) to balance the present and future interests of all Victorians.
Property value
is generally not a planning consideration, reflects many factors, and is not
determined by a single planning provision.
Council’s response
industrial precinct when developed will have lighting of internal roads and
individual businesses may engage security services
for their premises.
require the approval of Development Design Guidelines which will include
lighting and fencing.
Crime related
activity is beyond the scope of the Amendment.
(iii) Discussion and conclusion
The Panel agrees with Council’s submission
regarding the issues of property value and crime. Nonetheless, no submission
information to support claims that the Amendment would affect property
value or increase crime.
The Panel concludes that property value and crime
are outside the scope of the Amendment.
7.3 Special Control Overlay Schedule 10
(i) The issue
issue is whether Special Control Overlay Schedule 10 (SCO10) should remain on
the subject land.
(ii) Background
SCO10 applies to part of 79 Bungower Road to
facilitate the use and development of land for non-port related manufacturing
uses, otherwise
known as the Sealite Development. Amendment C283morn introduced
SCO10 into the Planning Scheme.
The letter of Authorisation to the Amendment stated:
Your council should consider whether [SCO10] and incorporated document could
be removed from the planning scheme as part of Amendment
C243morn as it may no
longer be required if the subject land is rezoned.
DPO24 requires the development approved by SCO10 to be included in the first
development stage, with a commitment for completion before
the issue of
statement of compliance for further subdivision of land. DPO24 gives discretion
to the responsible authority to approve
(iii) Submissions
The Panel asked Council:
for its response
to the letter of authorisation comments
how it envisages
DPO24 and SCO10 would operate together and whether there was any potential
contradictions or incompatibilities between
the provisions.
SCO10 should
remain on the subject land, otherwise the Proponent would need to obtain a
permit for development
Council recently
extended the expiry of the control to expire if development has not commenced by
11 March 2028
there is no
inconsistency between the two provisions
the provisions
would work hand-in-hand to facilitate the future development of the subject
DPO24 was not
intended to replace SCO10 and:
designed to facilitate the ‘anchor’ tenant in the location of the
Sealite development
- includes no
requirements that conflict with the development facilitated under SCO10, apart
from some minor matters that can be readily
addressed through amendments to
plans as allowed by SCO10 (through secondary consent)
- accounts for
SCO10 in the Staging Plan which requires that the development approved by SCO10
to be included in the first stage of
development.
(iv) Discussion
For reasons outlined by Council, the Panel agrees
SCO10 should remain on the subject land. The Panel agrees with the principle
condition of authorisation sought to achieve, which was to remove any
redundant provisions. However, after further exploring this
matter, SCO10 is
needed to enable the Sealite development to commence construction without the
need for a permit.
SCO10 and DPO24 can operate harmoniously together. DPO24 will provide a land
use and planning framework for the industrial precinct
while SCO10 will
facilitate a specific development. The latter is like a permit being issued for
the subject land before a development
plan has been prepared, which DPO24
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes
that the Special Control Overlay Schedule 10 should remain on the subject
7.4 Port of Hastings Precinct
(i) The issue
issue is whether the state planning provision should be revised to change the
name of the Port of Hastings Precinct through the
(ii) Background
Clause 17.03-3S seeks to protect significant
industrial land including the ‘Port of Hastings Industrial
Precinct’. The
Port of Hastings Corporation requested for the precinct
name to be changed.
The Port Development Strategy divides the SUZ1 land into two categories:
‘Investigate
for future industrial uses’ refers to land on the periphery (which
includes the subject land)
Hastings Future Port Development Area’ refers to the remaining SUZ1
(iii) Submissions
The Port of Hastings Corporation requested the name
of the Port of Hastings Precinct be changed:
of Hastings Industrial Precinct’
of Hastings Future Port Development Area’.
The Corporation
stated there was no precinct called the Port of Hastings Industrial Precinct and
requested the name be corrected to
one that directly correlates to the Port
Development Strategy.
Council did not make submissions on this matter.
The Proponent submitted the name change affects a statewide planning
provision that required the Port of Hastings Corporation to request
(iv) Discussion and conclusion
The Port of Hastings Corporation's request affects
a statewide planning provision applicable to all planning schemes, not just the
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme. The PE Act does not enable the Panel to
recommend a change to a state provision through a
local planning scheme
The Panel concludes the
Planning and
Environment Act 1987
does not enable the Amendment to revise a state
planning provision, as requested by the Port of Hastings Corporation.
8.1 DPO24 drafting issues
DPO24 provisions need to be drafted to align with Ministerial Direction 7(5) and
to include provisions enabled by the head provisions
in the parent DPO. Various
drafting revisions to DPO24 are considered necessary to:
consistency with the guidance on drafting planning provisions
interpretation without changing the intent of the provisions.
8.1.1 Background
The Practitioner’s Guide to Victoria’s
Planning Schemes (Practitioners Guide) provides guidance on the preparation of
planning scheme provisions. It relevantly guides that provisions must:
clearly set out
its purpose and the intended planning outcome
be user focussed
and consistent
not conflict
with or duplicate other planning scheme provisions
be clear in
their application
be clear and
unambiguous in their requirements
be clear and
unambiguous in their structure
be written to be
clear and unambiguous.
8.1.2 Objectives
(i) Background
The exhibited DPO24
listed five objectives for the precinct, and DPO24 (Version 2) reduces the list
to four objectives. The revised
list generally simplified the objectives.
(ii) Panel comments
The four objectives of DPO24 (Version 2) are
preferred to the exhibited five objectives because they align better with the
Practitioners
Guide and precinct vision. The changes include to:
delete parts
that describe how to meet the objectives, as this guidance belongs in
development requirements
precinct name since the provision already includes it
delete parts
that relate to co-locating technology uses, as rezoning the subject land and
applying DPO24 inherently facilitates the
co-location of these uses.
8.1.3 Requirement before a permit is granted
(i) Background
The requirements before a
permit is granted relate to the event when applications are lodged before a
development plan has been prepared
to the satisfaction of the responsible
authority. The requirements changed between the exhibited and DPO24 (Version
2), reducing
from three to one. The provisions are listed below and have been
simplified for discussion.
The exhibited DPO24 listed requirements of:
A permit may be granted to use [and develop] land, including minor works
necessary for the continuation of an existing use of the
subject land before a
development plan has been prepared ...
Before granting a permit the Responsible Authority must be satisfied that the
permit will not prejudice the future use and development
of the subject land in
an integrated and orderly manner.
A permit must not be granted to subdivide land before a development plan has
been prepared ...
DPO24 (Version 2) listed requirements of:
A permit may be granted to use land [and develop the subject land] before a
development plan has been prepared ...
The parent DPO provision sets requirements before a permit is granted and
relevantly requires:
A permit must not be granted to use [and develop] land, or subdivide land
until a development plan has been prepared ...
This does not apply if a schedule to this overlay specifically states that a
permit may be granted before a development plan has been
prepared. ...
(ii) Panel comments
The DPO24 (Version 2) provision is preferred
because it removes duplication with the parent DPO provision while preserving
discretion for the responsible authority. The changes are necessary
and appropriate to:
ability to issue permits for use and development before a development plan has
been prepared, using the discretion allowed
by the DPO parent provision
prohibition on issuing permits for subdivision before a development plan has
been prepared, as this is already covered
by the DPO parent provision
additional tests for granting permits before a development plan is prepared,
such as minor works and integrated and orderly
land use and development, as
these are implicit in permit application assessment and some were alternatively
added as a permit requirement.
8.1.4 Requirements for development plan – Subdivision
and Development Plan
(i) Background
The Department of
Transport and Planning's role changed between the exhibited and DPO24 (Version
1) regarding access points in the
Subdivision and Development Plan. The
proposed access points to Bungower Road must be:
satisfaction of the department in the exhibited DPO24
following consultation with the department in DPO24 (Version 1).
department’s name was listed as ‘Department of Transport’ in
the subject provision.
Bungower Road is zoned Transport Zone Schedule 3, which is the zone
designated to significant municipal roads.
(ii) Panel comments
The Department of Transport and Planning's revised
role in planning for access to Bungower Road is supported as it aligns with its
statutory responsibilities. Since Bungower Road is a municipal road, Council
should oversee access point planning, although consulting
the department on
infrastructure designs remains beneficial. DPO24 (Version 2) is supported.
Further, the department’s name should be corrected to Department of
Transport and Planning.
8.1.5 Requirements for development plan – Open Space
Plan and Landscape Plan
(i) Background
The way in which the
requirements of the Open Space Plan and Landscape Plan are listed changed
between the exhibited and DPO24 (Version
1). The provisions are listed below
been simplified for discussion.
The exhibited DPO24 required:
details indicating the location of all open space areas ...
A Landscape Plan
... including ... [various matters].
DPO24 (Version 1) revised this
An Open Space
Plan that must include the location of all open space ...
A Landscape Plan
that must include ... [various matters].
(ii) Panel comments
The DPO24 (Version 2) provisions are supported for
reasons that they:
distinguish the Open Space Plan as a standalone required document, rather than
referring generically to ‘a plan’
set a clearer
expectation of the content that ‘must be included’ in the Open Space
Plan and Landscape Plan
consistency by adopting the same naming conventions and wording as other plans
required by the DPO24.
Section 173
(i) Background
The exhibited DPO24
section 173
agreement for the ongoing protection of vegetation in
accordance with the approved ‘Native Vegetation Management
No change to this requirement was proposed in DPO24 (Version 2).
(ii) Panel comments
The native vegetation plan to be approved as part
of the development plan is called the Ecological Assessment and Native
Management Plan. The
section 173
agreement requirement should list
the same name of the plan for consistency and to remove ambiguity.
8.2 Recommendation
Panel recommends:
Design and Development Overlay Schedule 24, as shown in
, to make drafting changes that
improve its clarity, consistency and operation.
A Document list
Description
Presented by
Directions Hearing notice letter
Planning Panels Victoria (PPV)
Late submission from Simone Nash (Submission 115)
Simone Nash
Panel Directions and Hearing Timetable
Letter to Port of Hastings Corporation requesting information
Documents in response to Direction 10:
a) Authorisation Letter, 8 September 2022
b) Port Development Strategy (2018)
c) Somerville Township Structure Plan, 18 July 2019
d) Technical Assessment - Fire Risk, Feb 2022
e) Technical Assessment - Greencap Preliminary Site Investigation, Feb 2022
f) Technical Assessment - Ecology, 20 April 2022
g) Technical Assessment - Infrastructure, 14 April 2022
h) Technical Assessment - Traffic, 14 April 2022
Assessment - Town Planning Report, May 2022
j) Technical Assessment - Ecological Conditions Report (Extract), May 2022
k) Technical Assessment - Traffic, Preliminary Transport and Movement Plan, 7
Assessment - Traffic, Base Case 2033 (Existing + 10 Yr Growth), 24 June
m) Technical Assessment - Traffic, Post Development 2033 - Mitigation, 24 Jun
n) Technical Assessment - Traffic, Post Development 2033, 24 Jun 24
o) Technical Assessment - Traffic, Site Access - Design Options, 24 Jun 24
p) Technical Assessment - Traffic, Somerville Traffic Surveys, 31 August 2023
q) Technical Assessment - Traffic, 25 July 2024
r) Technical Assessment - Fire Risk, 16 August 2024
s) Submission 95 - ESSO letter, 12 May 2023
t) EPA Referral Response, 31 May 2022
u) Statement of Significance - Thomas Brunnings Farm (HO269)
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council (Council)
Submitter map – Melbourne and Mornington Peninsula (provided to the
Panel and Proponent only)
Submitter map – Somerville (provided to the Panel and Proponent
Site inspection locations request
Site inspection locations request
Sharon Thresher
Site inspection locations request
Liza Murray-Clarkson
Site inspection requests
Robert Clarke
Hearing Timetable and Distribution List (Version 2)
Port of Hastings response to Panel request for information
Port of Hastings Corporation
Panel Directions, Hearing Timetable (Version 3) and Distribution List
(Version 2)
Part A Submission
Site inspection map
Expert witness report – Brian Haratsis
Expert witness report – Simon Davies
Expert witness report – John-Paul Maina
Panel Directions, Hearing Timetable (Version 4) and Distribution List
(Version 3)
Traffic joint expert statement
Council and Proponent
Part B Submission
Explanatory report – Version 1
(tracked changes, 25 February
DPO24 – Version 1 (tracked changes)
Written submission
Elizabeth Murray
Main submission
Evidence presentation of Brian Haratsis
Robert Clarke
Evidence presentation of Simon Davies
Redacted submission and petition (31 March 2025)
Simone Nash
Council webpage – Position on the Future Role and Development of the
Port of Hastings
Simone Nash
Somerville precinct map (from Industrial Land Use & Infrastructure
Assessment and Rezoning Strategy)
Simone Nash
Extract from Mornington Peninsula Localised Planning Statement
Simone Nash
Panel Directions, Hearing Timetable (Version 5) and Distribution List
(Version 3)
Summary of 2020 petition regarding proposed marine industrial
Simone Nash
DPO24 – Panel draft version
Land Use and Infrastructure Assessment and Rezoning Strategy (May
Liza Murray-Clarkson
Mornington Peninsula Safer Roads Somerville graphic
Liza Murray-Clarkson
Mornington Peninsula Housing and Settlement Strategy Refresh 2020-2036
(July 2020)
Liza Murray-Clarkson
Committee for Frankston and Mornington Peninsula submission to Port of
Hastings Port Development Strategy 2024 (22 July 2024)
Liza Murray-Clarkson
Mornington Peninsula magazine article – Somerville's business park
set to boom
Joan Ebbels
DPO24 – Version 2 (tracked changes, 14 May 2025)
Karin Mullenger
Sharon Thresher
Closing submission
Simone Nash
DPO24 – Version 3 (tracked changes, 15 May 2025)
Liza Murray-Clarkson
Joan Ebbels
Submission, with attachment:
a) Council Planning Services Committee Meeting Minutes (10 August 2021)
Robert Clarke
B Panel recommended version of Development Plan Overlay Schedule 24
Tracked changes are marked as:
Tracked Added
Tracked Deleted
SCHEDULE 24 TO CLAUSE 43.04 DEVELOPMENT PLAN OVERLAY
Shown on the planning scheme map as
MORNINGTON PENINSULA (SOMERVILLE) TECHNOLOGY, INDUSTRY AND BUSINESS PARK
1.0 Objectives
facilitate the use and development
of the Mornington Peninsula
(Somerville) Technology, Industry and Business Park.
To encourage and support the establishment and co-location
technology-based industries, manufacturing, research, and
development.
To ensure that lots and buildings with a diverse range of sizes are available
to suit the needs of different industries and businesses,
including industries
and businesses requiring larger lots and floor areas.
To ensure the use and development of the land in a way which achieves a high
standard of sustainability and amenity
, including through the retention
of areas of significant biodiversity value, high standards of environmentally
sustainable design,
and the provision of open space and facilities that will
enhance the experience of people working within the precinct and which will
be available to the public
To ensure that use and development within the precinct has proper regard to
the safety and amenity of adjoining roads and areas.
2.0 Requirement
before a permit is granted
A permit may be granted to use land,
construct a building or construct or carry out works
, including minor
works necessary for the continuation of an existing use of the land
before a development plan has been prepared to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority.
Before granting a permit the Responsible Authority must be satisfied
that the permit will not prejudice the future use and development
of the land in
an integrated and orderly manner.
A permit must not be granted to subdivide land before a development
plan has been prepared to the satisfaction of the responsible
3.0 Conditions
and requirements for permits
The following conditions and/or
requirements apply to permits:
A permit for
subdivision and
or development
located along the eastern
and southern boundaries of the land that is subject to this schedule must
meet the following
requirements:
Identification
of setbacks from classified vegetation
ensure radiant heat exposure of no greater than
kilowatts per square metre:
res from the grassland hazards at the eastern
from the scrub hazard at the southern boundary.
lot located along the eastern and southern boundaries is to incorporate
Incorporation of an internal continuous accessway for each lot to
enable access for emergency service vehicles to the eastern and
boundaries.
Creation of
defendable space
will be created for the
along the eastern and southern boundaries to ensure a bushfire
risk is not created over time.
All proposals
land, or construct a building or construct or
carry out works before a development plan has been prepared to the satisfaction
responsible authority must be accompanied by the following, to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority:
- A report which
demonstrates that the proposal addresses the requirements outlined in
of this schedule and will not prejudice the future development of
the precinct, including the provision of all required infrastructure,
transfers and development contributions
to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority
- An Intrusive
Soil Contamination Assessment that assesses the potential for impact to human
health and ecological receptors and appropriate
mitigation measures
the satisfaction of the responsible authority
- An Ecological
Assessment and Native Vegetation Management Plan that includes the
identification and assessment of the ecological
value of flora, fauna and
habitat areas on the land
recommendations for the
retention, conservation and management of native
the provision of
offsets for the removal of vegetation where necessary
satisfaction of the responsible authority
; and the identification of
opportunities to avoid and minimise impacts on native vegetation, focused on
areas of native vegetation
with the most value
Management Plan for land within 200 metres of the transmission pipeline and a
Construction Environmental Management Plan
Section 4.0
of this schedule as relevant to the proposal
the satisfaction of the responsible authority
4.0 Requirements
for development plan
A development plan must include the
following requirements
, to the satisfaction of the responsible
Intrusive Soil Contamination Assessment
An Intrusive Soil Contamination Assessment
to the satisfaction
of the responsible authority
that must include:
of the potential for impact to human health and ecological receptors.
Appropriate
mitigation measures.
Ecological Assessment and Native Vegetation Management Plan
An Ecological Assessment and Native Vegetation Management Plan
satisfaction of the responsible authority
that must include
he identification and assessment of the ecological value of
flora, fauna and habitat areas on the land
ecommendations for the retention, conservation and management
of native vegetation
he provision of offsets for the removal of vegetation where
identification of opportunities to avoid and minimise impacts on native
vegetation,
and that efforts to avoid and minimise
focussed on areas of native vegetation with the most value.
satisfaction of the responsible authority. The recommendations of the approved
Native Vegetation Management Plan must be
incorporated into the Master Plan to
the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
A Master Plan that must include
, to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority
A site context
and survey plan noting the location of the site and incorporating:
buildings and works.
easements and major pipelines.
features such as vegetation, topography, drainage lines, areas subject to
relationship between the site and existing or proposed uses on adjoining
A list of the
preferred uses that are proposed or likely to be developed
including specific provisions relating to 83 Bungower
that encourages the establishment of
technology-based industries, manufacturing, research and development and
- Offensive or
dangerous industries
, including uses that:
for a purpose listed in the table to Clause 53.10 with no threshold distance
a fire protection quantity under the
Dangerous Goods (Storage and Handling)
Regulations 2022
notification under the
Occupational Health and Safety Regulations
a licence under the
Dangerous Goods (Explosives) Regulations 2011
a licence under the
Dangerous Goods (HCDG) Regulations 2016
- Bitumen/concrete
batching plant, shipping container storage, transfer station, materials
recycling or refuse disposal.
premises (other than convenience shop, landscape garden supplies, trade
supplies, manufacturing sales, takeaway food shop
and restaurant).
- Supermarkets
and shops on land adjoining or within 30 metres of land in a Transport
- Restricted
retail premises where such uses will limit the availability of land for
technology-based industries and advanced manufacturing.
Provision for
the house, any associated fabric and trees on the heritage listed property at 83
Bungower Road, Somerville (HO269).
A Subdivision
and Development Plan including:
- A subdivision
layout having regard to the types of uses that are proposed, the provision of
suitable buffers to adjoining agricultural
properties and the provision of
suitable lot sizes
to the satisfaction of the responsible
- Provision of
all required easements, road widenings and other land transfers
satisfaction of the responsible authority
- No subdivision
of the land to the west of the existing gas pipeline
, except for any initial
subdivision to excise this land and any subsequent subdivision to facilitate any
separate lots required for
a community
- The provision
of a tree reserve along the Lower Somerville Road frontage to prevent direct
access except in emergencies.
development of the land within
A setback which should be
Lower Somerville
Road. These areas
be used and developed
only for the purpose of a landscaped buffer area, or for open space.
- A diverse
range of lots within the precinct across the following lot size ranges:
- 2,000 to 5,000
square metres
10,000 square metres
- 10,000 square
metres and above
- Provision of
at least half the developable land for the creation of lots with an area of
5,000 square metres or greater.
development must make
Provisions for
landscaping, waste storage, access and on site carparking
all development
provision of smaller premises and associated subdivision into smaller
may be considered as part of the overall Master Plan
ots with an area of less than 2000 square metres
must not be
located adjacent to Bungower Road or on the main
internal roads serving the precinct.
- Provisions to
ensure that
, to the satisfaction of the responsible authority,
the majority of lots created with an area of more than 5
metres will be retained as larger lots suitable for larger premises and not
further subdivided or developed for buildings
with a floor area of less than 500
square metres.
- A minimum
building setback
which should be
50 metres from the
Bungower Road frontage,
that includes landscaping which
from the property
of the setback landscaped
- The proposed
access points to Bungower Road and entry/intersection treatments
satisfaction of the Department of Transport and the responsible authority and
following consultation with the
of Transport and Planning
- Access to all
lots within the subdivision provided
internal roads with no direct access to Bungower Road.
- No direct
access to Lower Somerville Road, except for an emergency access if
- The proposed
internal road network, including provision for heavy vehicle movements within
the precinct, the design of internal
intersections and proposed kerbside parking
- Details of
pedestrian and bicycle network, including provision for the construction of a
shared pedestrian and bicycle path connection
within the Bungower Road reserve
from the site to Frankston Flinders Road and the provision of end of trip
facilities within the
- The areas set
aside for drainage, surcharge routes, retarding basins and water sensitive urban
design (WSUD) infrastructure as per
the approved Stormwater Management Strategy
and Environmentally Sustainable Development Strategy.
- The areas set
aside for vegetation retention and restoration, landscape buffers and
landscaping.
- The areas
proposed to be set aside for passive recreational space for the benefit of
persons employed within the precinct.
Identification
of setbacks from classified vegetation that will ensure radiant heat exposure of
no greater than 12.5
kilowatts per square
from the grassland hazards at the eastern boundary.
from the scrub hazard at the southern boundary.
lot located along the eastern and southern boundaries is to incorporate
An internal continuous accessway for each lot along the eastern and
southern boundaries of the land that is subject to this schedule
access for emergency service vehicles to the eastern and southern
boundaries.
will be created
for the lots along the eastern and
southern boundaries of the land that is subject to this schedule to ensure a
bushfire risk is not
created over time.
Management Strategy
A Stormwater Management Strategy (SWMS) to the satisfaction of Melbourne
Water and the responsible authority:
Identifying the
site’s internal and external drainage catchments, the potential downstream
stormwater impacts from development
and any necessary flood mitigation
proposals for the protection of natural systems the treatment of stormwater and
water quality and the reduction of run-off
and downstream flows having regard to
Best Practice Environmental Management (BPEM) objectives and Integrated Water
Management (IWM)
opportunities.
Incorporating
Water Sensitive Urban Design principles and the “major/minor”
approach to stormwater management.
Integrating
stormwater management within the precinct design, with identification of the key
drainage infrastructure required, including
relevant surcharge routes, retarding
basins and water storage and recycling
infrastructure.
Environmentally Sustainable Development
An Environmentally Sustainable Development Strategy
satisfaction of the responsible authority,
outlining proposed measures
in relation to:
materials and construction practices.
orientation and energy conservation.
Use of renewable
energy, including provision for the use of solar energy and electric vehicle
recharging.
conservation and recycling.
environment quality.
Integrated Water
Management and Water Sensitive Urban Design (WSUD).
Sustainable
minimisation and waste and resource recovery.
Urban ecology
and Green Infrastructure including landscaping considerations.
resilience.
Universal design
for access and mobility.
Development Design Guidelines
Development Design Guidelines
, to the satisfaction of the responsible
for all land within the precinct which provide guidance and
requirements for future development, having regard to the implementation
approved Environmentally Sustainable Development Strategy, the visual impact of
development on adjoining roads and surrounding
areas and appropriate provision
for parking, loading and storage. In addition to the Environmentally Sustainable
Development Strategy,
the guidelines should address:
The appropriate
scale, form, height, and materials of construction of buildings.
setbacks and the siting and orientation of buildings.
Treatment of
visual appearance of development adjacent to the precinct boundaries through a
combination of built form and elevations,
materials, fencing and
landscaping.
Site access and
on-site manoeuvring.
The location and
design of car parking areas.
Provision for
loading and unloading areas.
Provision for
servicing and waste storage.
lighting, and fencing.
Transport and Movement Plan
A Transport and Movement Plan
to the satisfaction of the responsible
authority including
consultation with the Department
of Transport and Planning
An integrated
transport plan in accordance with Clause 18.01-1S of the
Planning Policy
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme
Engineering Report
to the satisfaction of the responsible authority
that must include
- Indicative
traffic volumes anticipated on local and arterial roads
, including heavy
- Identification
of a suitable location and
intersection treatment
main access point
providing access
to the site from
Bungower Road
, including the provision of any interim measures to
accommodate initial access formation
. The design of the intersection must be
suitable to accommodate
signalisation
to be installed
at the time of completion of accessway formation at the head of the development
site with 79 Bungower Road
Identification
of a suitable location and design of intersection treatment of the secondary
access point to the site from 83 Bungower
Road including the demonstration of
the largest anticipated design vehicle swept path analysis in relation to the
Lower Somerville
Road intersection and methods to ensure limitation of use to
identified maximum vehicle class including during construction stages.
access point is to be designed to commence at a minimum of 100 metres from the
Lower Somerville Road intersection.
- Identification
of all required road widenings and road works to the satisfaction of the
Department of Transport and the responsible
- The location
and design of all existing and proposed future roadworks, road widenings and
intersections, including provision for
a bus stop on the Bungower Road
and any mitigation measures required to address the impacts of
predicted increases in heavy vehicle traffic on local and arterial
Provision for
the transfer of all land required for road widenings and other road improvements
to the relevant road authority free
of cost and to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority.
A car parking
provision and management strategy, having regard to the range of potential uses
and the need to ensure adequate on-site
carparking and to address potential
changes in car parking demand resulting from changes in use over time.
to encourage and support access by public transport to
and within the site by provision for future bus stop infrastructure.
A pedestrian and
cycling network plan, indicating the location of shared paths within the site
and provision for future connections,
including the provision for the
construction of a shared pedestrian and bicycle path connection within the
Bungower Road reserve
from the site to Frankston Flinders Road and publicly
accessible toilet and changing facilities, all to the satisfaction of the
responsible
authority and at the cost of the landowner.
n Open Space
and details
that must include
the location of all open space
areas and facilities intended to serve the precinct and which will also be made
available to the public,
and the provision for future maintenance and management
of these spaces and facilities to the satisfaction of the responsible
Landscape Plan
A Landscape Plan
to the satisfaction of the responsible authority,
that must include
vegetation and natural features to be retained, having regard to the ecological
assessment and native vegetation management
landscape areas including land within front setbacks and road reserves, with
indicative planting layouts and cross-sections.
buffer areas where required to adjoining properties, waterways, or natural
features. The buffer area must be established
and landscaped in conjunction with
the initial subdivision or development of the land but may be incorporated
within the private
lots, to be maintained as part of those sites.
A full flora
species list for planting, not just a tree species list. Species should be from
an appropriate local EVC wherever possible.
Tree species list, which
is to predominantly consist of locally indigenous and other native
lanting and maintenance requirements
satisfaction of the responsible authority.
Pipeline Infrastructure Plan
A Major Pipeline Infrastructure Plan that sets out how
Subdivision or
any development
must provide
provides for the major transmission gas and oil pipeline
corridors and easements, that must include:
major transmission gas and oil pipeline corridors or
easements located within a public reserve.
Measures to
mitigate the impact of development on the operational safety of transmission
pipeline infrastructure in consultation with
the pipeline operator.
A layout that
restricts the number of transmission pipeline crossings required.
Clear access
on and either side of transmission pipeline corridors.
consent must be obtained from the pipeline
owner/operator for
within 3 metres of a transmission pipeline corridor or easement.
other than light grasses along the pipeline corridor
development of a childcare centre should be avoided
within 200 metres of a transmission pipeline.
Management Study prepared in accordance with Australian Standard 2885, reviewed
by a suitably qualified pipeline licensee
and incorporated into the design and
development of land uses within 200 metres of a transmission
Staging Plan
A Staging Plan
that must include
The indicative
staging of development including
main access intersection and signalisation
at 79 Bungower Road, internal
, infrastructure, servicing,
public realm,
landscape works, including
any interim
measures to accommodate initial access formation at Bungower Road and
trigger points for the provision of all
infrastructure.
indicative staging of the secondary access point and internal roadway at 83
Bungower Road, infrastructure, servicing, public realm,
landscape works,
restriction of use to certain vehicle classes from the development at 79
Bungower Road in relation to the Transport
and Movement Plan findings and the
trigger points for the provision of all other required infrastructure.
That, except
with the approval of the responsible authority, the development of
79 Bungower Road (part lot 2, LP200254), as approved under Special
Control Overlay 10
, must be included in the first stage of the
development, and must be commenced, with a commitment to completion to the
satisfaction
of the responsible authority, before the issue of any statement of
compliance for further subdivision of the land within the precinct.
A mixture of lot
provided within each
Construction Environmental Management Plan
onstruction
nvironmental
must include:
Details of any
staging of the proposed construction.
Details of how
the site is to be accessed during construction.
Details of tree
protection zones for significant trees to be retained on the land.
how native vegetation to be retained on the land will be protected, not just
significant trees and tree protection zones.
That polluted
and/or sediment-laden runoff is not to be discharged into native vegetation to
be retained (in addition to drains or
watercourses).
how weeds and weed spread both on and off the site will be controlled during
construction activities.
The location of
any site office, off-street parking for construction vehicles and
Details for the
collection and disposal of construction waste and the storage of construction
The methods to
control adverse environmental effects including erosion and sediment run-off. No
polluted and/or sediment laden run-off
is to be discharged directly or
indirectly into drains or watercourses. Appropriate pollution or litter traps
must be provided on
the land at appropriate points along the drainage system or
drainage lines.
Details of how
the amenity of the surrounding area is to be protected during construction,
including consideration of hours of work.
Section 173
An agreement entered into by
Prior to the approval of the
development plan,
the owners of the land to which the plan applies
must enter into a Section 173 Agreement with
responsible authority
section 173
Planning and Environment Act
that makes provision for the construction of all identified
infrastructure works, the transfer of all required lands and the payment
required contributions, with respect to, but not limited to
, the following to
the satisfaction of the responsible authority
The provision of
required road works on Bungower Road
identified in the Transport
and Movement Plan and Staging Plan prepared and approved in accordance with this
to the satisfaction of the Department of Transport and the
responsible authority
in consultation with the Department of
Transport and Planning
. This must include
provision of traffic signals at the
main access to 79 Bungower Road to be
installed at the time of completion of the main access road formation at the
intersection of
the development with Bungower Road, and
intersection within three years of the date of completion of the new entry road,
or at such other time agreed to the satisfaction
of the responsible
Access road
intersection treatment at 83 Bungower Road and methods to ensure limitation of
use to identified maximum design vehicle
class including during construction
Provision for
the construction drainage infrastructure and payment of drainage contributions
to the satisfaction of Melbourne Water
and South East Water.
Provision for
the construction of all cycling paths, including the shared pedestrian and
bicycle path connection between the site
and Frankston Flinders Road, as set out
in the approved Transport and Movement Plan.
Provision of all
other infrastructure and contributions to the satisfaction of all other relevant
servicing authorities and the responsible
Provision for
the ongoing protection of vegetation with high biodiversity value in accordance
with the recommendations of the approved
Native Vegetation Management Plan.
Payment of a
public open space contribution, as per Clause 53.01 of the Mornington Peninsula
Planning Scheme
and to the satisfaction of the responsible
All to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority.
The owner must meet all expenses in relation to preparation and registration
of the agreement, including the reasonable costs of the
responsible
DPO24 version resolved at the
25 February 2025 Council meeting
Clause 12.01-1S
Ministerial Direction on the
Preparation and Content of Amendments that May Significantly Impact the
Environment, Amenity and Human
Health and the Ministerial Requirement for
Information for Authorisation or Preparation of Amendments that May
Significantly Impact
the Environment, Amenity and Human Health
EPA Publication 1518:
Recommended separation distances for industrial residual air emissions.
Clause 15.01-2S
Design and Development Overlay
Schedule 6 Low Density – Landscape and Design and Development Overlay
Schedule 7 Low Density
– Environmental
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (16.4 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter