URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Carr v BHP Steel (JLA) Pty Ltd [1998] VADT 15 (17 September 1998)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LIST
No. 14 of 1996; and
No. 21 of 1998
COMPLAINANT
BHP Steel (JLA) Pty Ltd
FIRST RESPONDENT (No. 14 of 1996)
RESPONDENT (No. 21 of 1998)
Christopher Warwick
SECOND RESPONDENT (No. 14 of 1996)
REASONS FOR DECISION ON THE HEARING OF
A COMPLAINT UNDER THE
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY ACT 1995
17 September 1998
Mr John Wolters
Senior Member
Dr Julie Dawson
Ms Jan King
Catchwords:
discrimination - impairment - back injury - employment -
ss17, 18 and 21
Equal Opportunity Act
victimisation - denial of overtime - failure to advertise new position -
ss96 and 97
Equal Opportunity Act
The proceeding
On 2 December 1994 the complainant lodged with the Equal Opportunity
Commission (the Commission) a complaint (No. 14 of 1996) against
the first and
second respondents under the
Equal Opportunity Act
('the 1984 Act'
or 'that Act', as appropriate), claiming unlawful discrimination on the grounds
of impairment in the area of employment
(the first complaint).
On 30 October 1997 the complainant lodged a further complaint (No. 21 of
1998) under the
Equal Opportunity Act
' or 'the Act',
as appropriate) (the second complaint) against BHP Steel (JLA) Pty Ltd only,
claiming victimisation in the area of
employment ('discrimination by reason of
action under the (1984) Act') from 29 December 1994 in relation to the offering
of overtime
and claiming victimisation in May 1997 by being prevented from
applying for promotion within the company.
On 26 March 1996 the Commission referred the first complaint to the Tribunal
pursuant to s45(5) of the 1984 Act enclosing the original
complaint form and the
complaint documentation.
A preliminary conference was held on 10 May 1996 at which the parties were
directed to serve and file particulars of complaint and
defence. The complainant
served and filed particulars of complaint with regard to the first complaint on
3 June 1996. These particulars
detailed instances of alleged discrimination
prior to 3 December 1993.
However, under s44(5) of the 1984 Act a complaint under s44 of that Act may
not be lodged later than 12 months after the date on which
discrimination complained of is alleged to have been committed unless the
Commission extends the time pursuant to s44(6).
By undated letter to the parties
the Chief Conciliator indicated that the Commission had considered an extension
of time application
on 11 April 1995 and that it had decided that there was not
good cause for the extension of time to be granted. The respondents served
filed particulars of defence with regard to the first complaint on 19 June 1996.
On 6 February 1998 the Commission referred the second complaint to the
Tribunal pursuant to s108(3) of the Act also enclosing the
original complaint
form and the complaint documentation. A preliminary conference was held on 17
March 1998 at which the parties
were directed to serve and file particulars of
complaint and defence. The complainant served and filed particulars of complaint
regard to the second complaint on 11 May 1998.
Although the complainant's particulars relating to the second complaint
referred in their title to both respondents they did not otherwise
refer to or
make allegations against the second respondent. The first respondent served and
filed particulars of defence with regard
to the second complaint on 4 June 1998.
The Tribunal heard the two complaints together. For the sake of convenience
the Tribunal in these reasons for decision has referred
to the respondents
either as the first or second respondent, or as BHP, the company or Mr Warwick,
as appropriate.
The legislation
The relevant provisions of the
Equal Opportunity Act
' or 'that Act' as appropriate) and of the
Equal Opportunity Act
', as appropriate) that apply in this matter are as
Definitions
(1) In this
unless the contrary intention appears-
"employment"
means employment under a contract of service or a
contract personally to execute any work or labour and this
shall apply in
relation to an independent contractor as if that person were an employee;
"impairment"
) total or partial loss of a bodily function;
) malfunction of a part of the body;
Criteria for discrimination
(1) A person discriminates against another person in any circumstances
relevant for the purposes of a provision of this
if on the ground of the
status or by reason of the private life of the other person the first-mentioned
person treats the other person
less favourably than the first-mentioned person
treats or would treat a person of a different status or with a different private
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1) a comparison of the cases of persons
of another status or with a different private life shall
be a comparison where
the relevant circumstances in the one case are the same, or are not materially
different, in the other.
Discrimination by reason of action under this
(1) A person discriminates against another person in any circumstances
relevant for the purposes of a provision of this
if the first-mentioned
person treats the other person less favourably than in those circumstances the
first-mentioned person treats
or would treat other persons and does so by reason
that the other person-
) has brought proceedings against the first-mentioned person under
) has given evidence or information in connection with proceedings
brought by any person against the first-mentioned person under
) has otherwise done anything under or by reference to this
relation to the first-mentioned person or any other person; or
) has alleged that the first-mentioned person or any other person
has committed an act which (whether or not the allegation so states)
amount to a contravention of this
or by reason that the first-mentioned person knows the other person intends
to do any of those things or suspects the other person
has done or intends to do
any of them.
(2) Sub-section (1) does not apply to treatment of a person by reason of a an
allegation made by that person if the allegation was
false and not made in good
Discrimination against applicants and employees
(2) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an employee on the
ground of status or by reason of the private life of
the employee-
) by denying the employee access, or limiting access by the
employee, to opportunities for promotion, transfer or training or to
benefits connected with employment; or
) by dismissing the employee or subjecting the employee to any other
Prohibition of victimisation
A person must not victimise another person.
What is victimisation?
(1) A person victimises another person if the person subjects or threatens to
subject the other person to any detriment because the
other person, or a person
associated with the other person-
(a) has made a complaint against any person;
(b) has brought any other proceedings under this
against any person;
(c) has given evidence or information, or produced a document, in connection
with any proceedings under this
(d) has attend a preliminary conference under
(e) has otherwise done anything in accordance with this
in relation to
any person;
(f) has alleged that any person has contravened a provision of
unless the allegation is false and was not made in good faith;
(g) has refused to do anything that would contravene a provision of
or because the person believes that the other person or the associate has
done or intends to do any of those things.
(2) It is sufficient for sub-section (1) (f) that the allegation states the
act or omission that would constitute the contravention
without actually stating
, or a provision of this
, has been contravened.
(3) In determining whether a person victimises another person it is
irrelevant-
(a) whether or not a factor in sub-section (1) is the only or dominant reason
for the treatment or threatened treatment as long as
it is a substantial
(b) whether the person acts alone or in association with any other
Dealing with new complaints
(1) A complaint may not be lodged with the Commission in respect of an
alleged contravention of the old
(2) If an alleged contravention of the old
, if proven, would also have
been a contravention of this
been in operation at the time, a
person may lodge a complaint with the Commission under this
in relation to
the alleged contravention as if this
had been in operation at the time.
(3) Sub-section (2) does not apply-
(a) if the person had lodged a complaint under the old
in relation to the
same subject matter; or
(b) if the Commission had refused to extend the time for the lodging of a
complaint under the old
in relation to the same subject matter.
(4) This section applies despite anything to the contrary in
Interpretation of Legislation Act 1984
Applicable principles of law
What must the complainant prove to succeed with the first
To establish his case, the complainant must satisfy the Tribunal on the
balance of probabilities that the respondents unlawfully discriminated
him on the ground of an attribute, in this case his impairment, in circumstances
relevant for the purposes of the
, in this case his employment, by
treating him, a person with an impairment, less favourably than they would treat
someone without
an impairment when the impairment is a substantial reason for
the less favourable treatment. The first applicable section is s17.
With regard to the requirement of s17(1) that discrimination (on the ground
impairment) is prohibited only in certain circumstances 'relevant
for the purposes of a provision of (the)
', it is now well established by
Waters & Ors v Public Transport Corporation
[1991] HCA 49
[1991] EOC 92-390
the section includes reference to provisions of that
dealing with such
matters as employment, education, goods and services, accommodation and sport
(ss20 to 33).
The operative words in subsection 17(1) are wide: 'treats the other person
less favourably than the first mentioned person treats
or would treat a person
of a different status'. The subsection does not require the existence of two
different kinds of actual treatment
in the same relevant context; all that is
required is for the Tribunal to be satisfied that a person of a different status
not have been treated in the same way.
Subsection (2) requires any comparison of the different cases of treatment to
be one where the relevant circumstances are not materially
different, so that
the respondents could not say that people at the same workplace who did not
suffer from a permanent partial disability
were treated no differently, or that
other people with such a disability were not treated as alleged by the
complainant, if the circumstances
of the others were not the same as those of
the complainant. The treatment of person without a partial disability or of
another person
with a partial disability must have occurred in not materially
different circumstances as that of the treatment of the complainant.
regard a predecessor of this Tribunal, the Equal Opportunity Board (the Board),
Oyekanmi v National Forge & Anor
(EOB of Vic, No 20 of 1994)
at p6, in dealing with the provisions of s17 of the
'the proper comparison is with the normal or usual way in which (persons with
a different attribute) are treated, or with the way
in which the majority of
(them) are treated. It may be, in some cases, that there is no normal or usual
treatment, or treatment of
the majority of the relevant class which can be used
for comparison. In such a case it might be possible to find that differential
treatment existed, but not less favourable treatment'
The expression 'less favourable treatment' was also discussed in
Oyekanmi's case
. At pp8 and 9 of its decision the Board said the
'We now comment on what is meant by less favourable treatment. ... The first
thing to be said is that the
focuses on treatment that is less favourable
rather than treatment that is different or equal. The words "treats....less
favourably"
call for a comparison of the treatment of the alleged victim of
discrimination and other persons. Indeed, s17(2) (of the
) makes the
need for a comparison clear. That sub-section deals with the kind of comparison
to be made. It requires a comparison in
relevant circumstances that are the same
or not materially different. It would appear from this sub-section that the
circumstances
in each of the cases used for the purposes of the comparison need
not be identical. Only the relevant circumstances of each case
must be the same
or not materially different. Again, a difference in the circumstances of each
case that is not material can be ignored.'
'Who are the persons between whom the comparison is to be made? One is
obviously the alleged victim of discrimination. The other is
a person with a
different status (in this case, race or colour) from the alleged victim of
discrimination. It is clear from the use
of the words "treats or would treat"
that this person of a different race or colour from the alleged victim of
discrimination may
be real or hypothetical (
Boehringer Ingelheim v.
[1984] EOC 92-108
at page 76, 052;
Haines v. Lewes
at page 76, 842).'
The less favourable treatment must also be on the grounds of the attribute,
which in the present case is impairment. In that regard
the Board in
said at pp10 and 11:
'Section 17(1) does not make all kinds of less favourable treatment
discrimination. It only deals with less favourable treatment on
the ground of
status (including race or colour) or by reason of private life. Other kinds of
less favourable treatment may be relevant
in other forums but are not covered by
. What does the complainant have to prove to establish less favourable
treatment on the ground of race or colour? It is clear that
"on the ground of "
indicates a connection between the treatment and race or colour. But what kind
of connection? Is it simply cause
and effect, or is some kind of intention or
consciousness necessary on the part of the discriminator?'
'The authorities on the subject are conflicting and difficult to reconcile.
Australian Iron and Steel v. Banovic
[1989] HCA 56
[1989] EOC 92-271
Gaudron and
Dean JJ, in considering similar provisions in the New South Wales
Anti-Discrimination Act
, indicated that a ground prescribed in the
must be the "true basis" of less favourable treatment, whether or not the
discriminator was actuated by a motive to discriminate
(see pages 77, 732-733).
Their Honours went on
"and there may be other situations in which habits of thought and
preconceptions may so affect an individual's perceptions of persons
particular characteristics that generally assigned reasons for an act or
decision may in fact mask the true basis for that decision".'
Waters v. Public Transport Corporation
(cited above) Mason CJ and
Gaudron J, with whom Dean J agreed, came to a similar view. They approved the
approach of Gaudron and
Banovic' s case
. They also approved a
statement by Lord Goff in
Birmingham City Council ex parte Equal
Opportunity Commission
[1989] 2WLR 520 at 525-526 which indicated that, if
motive were relevant in discrimination cases, a discriminator could escape the
by justifying his or her action on the basis that it was necessary, for
example to save money or for customer preference. Mason CJ
and Gaudron J
concluded in
Waters' case
that to find that motive for discrimination is
relevant would be to hinder or impede the objectives of the Victorian
were to eliminate discrimination and to protect human rights. However, they
emphasise that there must be a link between the
prescribed ground and the less
favourable treatment by saying (at page 76, 674)-
"it is enough that the material difference in treatment is based on the
status or private life of the person".'
'We note that McHugh J thought that motive on the part of the discriminator
was necessary and that the other Judges did not consider
the matter. ...The high
point of the approach that holds that motive is unnecessary to establish
discrimination is
X v. McHugh
[1994] EOC 92-623
, where the Human Rights
and Equal Opportunity Commission of the Commonwealth found discrimination to
have existed on the ground of
impairment even though the relevant employer did
not know that the impairment existed.'
In asking what test should be applied, the Board then concluded that less
favourable treatment would be on the relevant grounds if
these were found to be
the true basis for the treatment; a discriminator might not be conscious of the
fact that this was the true
basis for the treatment because of a preconception
or because the decision to treat on that basis was justified in some other way,
but the relevant grounds had to be a factor in the decision.
In this complaint the question is whether in the same or materially similar
circumstances the respondents would have treated a person
without a partial
permanent disability in the same way as they allegedly treated the complainant?
Did they treat all other people
with a disability the same way? If the answer is
'yes' to those questions then there can be no discrimination under s17. If the
is 'no' however, then the Tribunal should ask 'was the complainant's
disability the substantial basis for the alleged discriminatory
treatment?'. If
the answer is 'yes', the requirements of s17 would be met.
The Tribunal has already noted that
Waters' case
is now settled
authority for the proposition that s17 includes reference to the provisions in
ss20 to 33 of the
that deal with such matters as employment, education,
goods and services, accommodation and sport. It was not in dispute that any
instances of alleged discrimination took place in an employment context. The
next applicable section is s21.
Section 21(2)(a) makes it unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an
employee on the ground of status by denying or limiting
access by the employee
to opportunities for promotion, transfer or training or any other benefits
connected with employment and (b)
makes it unlawful to dismiss the employee or
subject them to 'any other detriment'. Section 21(3) provides
status includes impairment which arises during employment, which covers the
agreed circumstances of this case.
The expression 'detriment' has been discussed in
O'Callaghan v Loder &
[1984] EOC 92-023
, where the NSW Equal Opportunity Tribunal in dealing
with the jurisdiction of that Tribunal to hear a matter considered the views
the United Kingdom Court of Appeal on the comparable provision of the English
Sex Discrimination
which is nearly identical to that of 21(2)(b).
Ministry of Defence v Jeremiah
[1979] 3WLR 857 the Court of Appeal
firstly rejected any suggestion that 'detriment' should be read
with 'dismissal'. Next, (per Brandon LJ at p863) it said that
'subjecting to any other detriment' meant no more than 'putting under
disadvantage' The NSW Tribunal, dealing with an identical section in NSW,
adopted the construction of Brandon LJ and treated the
words as requiring that a
complainant has been placed under a disadvantage in comparison with employees of
the opposite sex. The
NSW Tribunal then added: 'The disadvantage must be a
matter of substance; the legislation is not directed to trivial distinctions
the treatment afforded to men and women.' This Tribunal shares that view.
Matthews J, in
O'Callaghan's case
, also considered the effect of
harassment with regard to the equivalent provision to s21(1)(b) of the
Observing that this was the first case in which the Tribunal was asked to define
the concept of detriment, he continued:
'However, I can say this: that in the context of sexual harassment, the type
of conduct which I described as creating an "unwelcome
feature of the
employment" and therefore falling under (the equivalent section to s21(1)(b))
would also, in my view, lead to a detriment
under (that section).'
, when dealing with Matthews J's observation in
O'Callaghan
the Board said that while care was to be taken not to equate
the concept of detriment with that of less favourable treatment in s17(1),
favourable treatment should be taken to be an instance of detriment. It
concluded that the term 'detriment' was wide enough
to include any disadvantage
suffered by an employee at the hands of an employer, disadvantage needing to be
determined objectively,
and that the term 'benefits' included not only those
things to which an employee was entitled but also any other advantage provided
in connection with employment.
On the basis of authorities cited 21(2)(a) therefore has a wide scope to
include matters of the kind alleged by the complainant in
the present case such
as constant surveillance by the employer, restriction on movement within the
workplace, denial of access to
overtime, the creation of an atmosphere of
insecurity in employment, suspension of rights to medical expenses, requiring
the performance
of unsuitable work and placing of undesirable and inaccurate
memoranda on a personnel file.
What must the complainant prove to succeed with the second
complaint? (against the first respondent only)
Part of the second complaint concerns matters that arose at the time the
was in operation. S218(1) of the
prohibits the lodging of a complaint in
respect of an alleged contravention of the old
. Section 218(2) permits the
lodging of the complaint where the alleged contravention of the old
proven, would also have been a contravention of the new
if it had been in
operation at the time. Because the alleged acts of unlawful 'discrimination by
reason of action under the (1984)
' (s18) would also have been victimisation
under the provisions of the new
, the complaint may be brought as if the new
had been in operation at the time.
Victimisation is prohibited by s96 of the
. What constitutes victimisation
is dealt with in s97. The complainant must establish that he was subjected to or
threatened with
a detriment by the first respondent, because he or an associate
had made a complaint against any person, or had done or refused to
do a number
of other things, in connection with the
. The prohibition against
victimisation is wide, and does not require a causal link to a complaint or
other action or inaction against
the first respondent.
However, the complainant needs to prove that it was the complaint that he had
lodged with the Commission in 1994 or the fact that
he had brought proceedings
(etc) that caused the first respondent to subject him to detriment
or threat of detriment. The complainant must do so on the balance
probabilities. As has been observed by this Tribunal and its predecessors in
earlier matters, it is in the nature of things difficult
to establish any causal
link between a complaint (etc) and any subjection to detriment by a respondent.
Short of being told directly that a detrimental measure was implemented for a
particular reason, or short of an outright admission
by a respondent, direct
proof will always be difficult. The complainant may therefore have to rely on an
inference he asks the Tribunal
to draw from the primary facts available to it.
However, it is well established that an inference can not be drawn if a more
and innocent explanation for the detrimental conduct is available on
the evidence. Although that matter dealt with discrimination,
victimisation, this Tribunal is of the view that
Department of Health v
[1988] VicRp 42
[1988] V.R. 319
is authority for the proposition put.
In setting aside the orders of the Board in which it held that the
complainant had been discriminated against on the ground of race
by the failure
to appoint him to a position in a hospital where the interview panel had
recommended a less qualified applicant, the
Supreme Court found that the Board
had misdirected itself in law by finding that the mere fact that an employer had
selected a less
qualified candidate for an advertised position indicated
discrimination of some kind.
the Board had found that because the reason for the
decision to appoint a particular applicant was peculiarly within the knowledge
of the employer that reason had to be disclosed if inferences of discrimination
arising from the failure to appoint the better applicant
were to be dispelled.
The Board had not accepted the reasons put forward by the majority of the
interviewing panel, which conclusion
the judge did not find justified by the
Fullagar J found that the Board, by unspoken inference, imputed a racist
antagonism against the complainant by two members of the
interviewing panel that
influenced the other members of the panel but found that the evidence before the
Board could not sustain
such an inference. Undue influence and conspiracy had to
be clearly established before they could be relied upon.
Fullagar J concluded that 'they (undue influence and conspiracy motivated by
racist antagonism) could not be inferred whilst more
probable and innocent
explanations were available on the evidence' and observed with regard to
unspoken inferences of 'unconscious
racism' and 'unconscious influence' that
'the "ground" of one's discrimination must be conscious to fall within the
proscriptions
.' (both at p327).
Oyekanmi's case
the Board adopted the statements of Fullagar J in
as the proper approach but added that the court's approach to
inference was predicated on there being one explanation for the discriminatory
treatment which is more probable than all others. At p18 of the decision in
it said in that regard:
'When an innocent explanation is equally probable, an inference of
discrimination on the ground of race cannot be drawn. Where the
primary facts
raise an inference of discrimination on the ground of race as the most probable
explanation, then that inference can
be drawn. The basis of this approach is
that there can only be one more probable explanation for an act, and that
explanation may
either be discriminatory (in terms of the
) or innocent.
However, as we have already seen, s4(7) clearly recognises that there can be
two or more grounds or explanations for an act. In our
view, in the light of
s4(7), it would be possible to find that an act was done on two or more grounds,
all or some of which might
be inferred from the primary facts. However, to make
such a finding we would need to be satisfied that each of those reasons did
by itself form a complete explanation for the act. In such a case the question
would then be, are all the reasons together the
most probable complete
explanations for the act?'
This Tribunal accepts that approach and will accordingly apply it to the
present case.
The Tribunal also observes that section 97(3) makes it irrelevant, in
determining victimisation, whether the making of a complaint
any other factor, was the only or dominant reason for the detrimental treatment
or threatened treatment, as long as it was a
substantial reason.
The standard of proof
The burden of proof of the complaints rests on the complainant, who must
prove his case on the balance of probabilities. It is well
established, however,
that in applying this standard of proof normally applicable in civil issues the
nature of the issue may influence
the degree of satisfaction of proof that a
tribunal may require.
In other words, the seriousness of the allegations and their consequences for
a respondent with regard to, say, their professional
reputation or standing in
the community must be taken into account. In
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] C.L.R. 336
, which is the long standing authority for this proposition,
Dixon J at p361 said that 'when the law requires the proof of any fact,
tribunal must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or existence before it
can be found.'
His Honour then referred to the 'indefinite gradations of certainty' that
have led to attempts to define the certainty required by
the law for certain
purposes but that, fortunately, in his view, have not led to the development of
a third standard of persuasion.
Proof of a fact must therefore be to the
reasonable satisfaction of a tribunal. His Honour does not find that to be a
state of mind
that is reached independently of the nature and consequences of
the facts to be proved. At p362 he then says:
'The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters "reasonable satisfaction" should not be produced by
inexact proofs,
indefinite testimony, or indirect references. Everyone must feel
that, when, for instance, the issue is on which of two dates an
occurrence took place, a satisfactory conclusion may be reached on materials of
a kind that would not satisfy any sound
and prudent judgment if the question was
whether some act had been done involving grave moral delinquency.'
The evidence and findings of fact
Background and matters prior to 3 December 1993
The complainant, Mr John Carr, gave evidence that he was a boilermaker
employed by the first respondent ('BHP' or 'the company') for
the past 11 years
at its Westernport steel sheet and coil products plant. In 1987 he suffered a
work injury that caused a prolapsed
lumbar disc in respect of which he had
ongoing work restrictions from that time to the present day. The restrictions
have prevented
him over the entire period since a time shortly after the
accident in 1987 from doing any heavy lifting, bending or sitting for prolonged
Subsequent to the accident Mr Carr underwent a rehabilitation program under
BHP's rehabilitation policy. Pending his full rehabilitation
Mr Carr was given
an applications parts listing (APL) job that involved collecting drawings from
the drawing room and, guided by
reference numbers on the drawings, the
identification of the constituent parts of all cranes used at the plant and the
entry of the
crane assemblies and constituent parts into a computer database. Mr
Carr understood the APL job to be a long term ongoing job. The
supervisor on the
APL job, Mr Ken White, had told Mr Carr that overtime was available for the work
if Mr Carr wanted it. He was later
told that he would not be allowed overtime on
that job while he was on a WorkCare certificate.
Mr Carr was however taken off the APL job and given new work that involved
counting computer coils and feeding reference numbers into
a computer. This work
appeared to aggravate his condition and his doctor suggested that he try to get
the APL job back. However,
a fully fit worker had meanwhile been put on that
job, and it was no longer available. His doctor then said that he would put him
company, Mr Peter Buffham, then offered him work
on 12 September 1989 in the
fabricating shop of the central engineering workshop as a boilermaker. Overtime
was generally available
but Mr Carr was not offered any because he was on a
WorkCover certificate. However, Mr Carr said that other people with injuries
were working overtime, such as Mr Col Ritchie, Mr Derek Pattison and Mr Ian
From 1989 to 1998, Mr Carr said, he remained a boilermaker. In 1991 Mr Carr's
impairment was confirmed as being a 15% permanent impairment
due to back injury.
He was that year also offered a number of new positions, some of which he
declined on medical grounds, others
because they were not sufficiently permanent
or were part time and yet others because he regarded the work as a demotion. It
then suggested to him by Mr Buffham that he apply for a job as welfare
officer. He was interviewed for that job but was unsuccessful.
Mr Carr said that he had his 'right to medical and like expenses' suspended
or challenged three times over the period and that it
was a constant bone of
contention with Mr Warwick to attend physiotherapy in his own time rather than
during work time. The latter
arrangement suited Mr Carr because he then had an
opportunity to pick up his children from school. This matter had been put to an
appeals board three times which ruled each time that Mr Carr could attend during
working hours. However, Mr Warwick could not accept
the board's decision. Mr
Warwick continually harassed him, Mr Carr said, about performing work at the
plant that was outside his
medical restrictions. Mr Warwick maintained, Mr Carr
said, that since the injury was only 15% he would be able to do 85% of the work.
Mr Warwick gave evidence at p178 of the transcript that he was the works
maintenance engineer for BHP Westernport from 1989 to (early)
1996. He was
responsible for 9 departments with a total of 181 employees; the fabrication
shop where Mr Carr worked was one of the
nine departments within Mr Warwick's
area of responsibility. During relevant times Mr John Moloney was the supervisor
of the fabrication
shop, reporting to Mr Warwick, and Mr Gary Plant was its
leading hand, reporting in turn to Mr Moloney.
Mr Carr said that he did perform work in the workshop but there was one
particular job he had concerns about with regard to safety.
This was submerged
arc welding. Mr Carr described this as heavy work that involved lifting buckets
of flux up a flight of steps and
emptying the flux into a hopper and handling a
big turnstock on a lever, tightening chucks and doing heavy grinding work when
was a defect in the weld. When Mr Warwick became aware that this was the
particular job Mr Carr was concerned about, Mr Carr said,
that became the job Mr
Warwick wanted him to perform and he was constantly asked to do submerged arc
Mr Warwick was saying to him that he thought it was unfair that Mr Carr
should be able to say one job was within the limitations and
another not. Mr
Carr said that he had an agreement with Mr Buffham and Mr John Moloney, a
supervisor, that his doctor would be able
to inspect the work before he did any
submerged arc welding. He was then told to do the submerged arc welding work or
He performed the work which then resulted in an aggravation of the
back injury. He was 10 days off work. Mr Carr tendered,
number of documents that he said he had obtained in 1994 from the company after
he asked to see what was on his personal file.
Among them were 5 documents that
were written by Mr Warwick between November 1991 and October 1992 and that
concerned Mr Carr (Exhibits
"E", "F", "G", "H", "IJ" and "L").
In some of these memoranda Mr Warwick appears to have expressed himself
critical of and frustrated with the attitude shown by Mr Carr
towards the work
he considered himself able or not able to do as a result of the medical
restrictions put on him by his doctor. The
Tribunal notes that the evidence so
far, including the documentary material, does not directly concern any alleged
incidents of discrimination
by the respondents that are within the time limit
imposed by s44(5) of the
. Insofar as the complaint disclosed any
alleged acts of discrimination prior to 3 December 1993, therefore, the Tribunal
take into consideration any of such allegations to base findings of
discrimination.
The complaint of discrimination on the basis of
The meetings of 2 and 4 November 1994
Mr Carr then gave evidence of a meeting which he said took place on 4
November 1994 between himself, Mr Warwick and Mr Steve Timmings,
the purpose of
which was to discuss minutes from a boilermaker review meeting that had been
held on 2 November 1994. Mr Carr told
the Tribunal that he was a shop steward of
the Australian Metal Workers' Union (AMWU) at that time. Mr Carr said that the
indicated that he had said at the meeting that he wanted to run the
workshop. He spoke to Mr Warwick about the minutes to explain
that what had been
said at the meeting was that the AMWU wanted more input into the forward
planning of the area.
He said to Mr Warwick on 4 November that he could assure him that he did not
want to run the workshop, whereupon Mr Warwick said,
repeating the statement
three times, that he could assure Mr Carr that he would never be anything (at
BHP) other than a boilermaker.
Mr Carr tendered a note apparently signed by Mr
Timmings and dated 13 July 1995 in which Mr Timmings recorded that comments were
made by Mr Warwick 'to the extent that J Carr would not be allowed to be
employed here as anything but a boilermaker if he had anything
to do with it.'
And that 'He would not be used in the office, to help with the labour sourcing
on the boilermaker issue, which I
believe would speed up the issue.' (Exhibit
Mr Timmings later produced Exhibit "18" which he said constituted a photocopy
of a note taken 3 to 5 days after 4 November 1994 that
was the basis for the
subsequent transcription of Exhibit "M".
Mr Carr took Mr Warwick's comments to mean that he would use his influence
'to sabotage any moves I made to progress in any area'
and that it would not
matter what kind of training or opportunities arose, he would not get anywhere
because Mr Warwick would make
sure he did not get anywhere with it (pp30-31 of
the transcript). Mr Carr said that he thought it was wrong that because he had a
back injury he 'should be victimised in that manner'.
In cross examination at p95 of the transcript Mr Carr agreed that at the
boilermaker review meeting on 2 November a discussion had
taken place about an
administrative assistant, Pat Scott, compiling three months' work of statistics
contractors. Mr Carr had been interested in
verifying the figures. He could not recall any discussion as to whether the
should cover 3 months' or 9 months' figures but recalled that Mr
Warwick got angry.
Mr Warwick may have said something to him about coming back to the same
question repeatedly and being worse than a nagging woman,
Mr Carr agreed. He
also agreed that Mr Warwick had said that he was not going to give him a free
hand to sit in an office to do clerical
duties when he was of more use as a
boilermaker. He denied that there was then a heated exchange between him and Mr
Warwick which
ended in Mr Warwick saying to him 'I hope you like your job as a
fucking boilermaker' and that he asked 'Why' and that Mr Warwick
'Because the way you are carrying on that is all you'll ever be at BHP'.
The Tribunal notes that Exhibit "16", the minutes of the meeting of 2
November make reference to Mr Carr insisting on three occasions
that figures for
the past 9 months should be used. After the third occasion, the minutes note
that 'At this point in time some of
the participants tolerance levels had nearly
been reached and voices began to raise to an unnecessary level'.
Mr Carr next said that Mr Timmings may have asked Mr Warwick to calm down but
Mr Carr denied that the discussion about his job as
a boilermaker took place
then. Something similar was however said at the meeting on 4 November. Mr Carr
said that the issue at the
4 November meeting had been changes to the minutes of
the boilermaker review meeting; that when he told Mr Warwick that a comment
in the minutes that Mr Carr wanted to run the shop was inappropriate and that he
did not want to run the shop, Mr Warwick had
said 'I can assure you that you
will never be here other than as a boilermaker' repeating it three times.
Because of concerns about
Mr Warwick's views Mr Carr had then consulted his
personnel records.
Mr Drago Perkovic gave evidence that he was a trademen's assistant in the
fabrication shop and that on one occasion Mr Warwick had
said to him that Mr
Carr would go 'one way or another' from the workshop. In cross examination at
p131 of the transcript Mr Perkovic
said however that this remark would have been
made five years ago, maybe longer. It was made in the context of an
authorisation Mr
Perkovic needed from Mr Warwick for a scrap metal purchase,
when Mr Warwick asked him 'How is John going?' and he had replied 'John
working', whereupon Mr Warwick said 'That's bullshit. You know he's not
In re examination at p141 of the transcript Mr Perkovic said that Mr Warwick
often made remarks to him about his work, saying he was
doing a good job, and
then adding 'I bet John Carr can't do it'. Given that in his view there was no
boilermaker who could match
Mr Carr, Mr Perkovic was left with the impression
that Mr Warwick thought that Mr Carr was 'a bludger'.
Mr Timmings said at p146 of the transcript that the note in Exhibit "18" was
written by him at the request of Mr Carr, who had said
to him 'I'm not going to
be kept on my bench through (Mr Warwick's) instructions and I want you to record
it for me'. Mr Timmings
said as soon as the comment had been made regarding Mr
Carr remaining a boilermaker, he had walked out of the room. Asked whether
Warwick discussed Mr Carr with him on other occasions he said that Mr Carr's
name had not been mentioned directly but that 'the
reference was there'. Mr
Warwick said that 'we could do with one less boilermaker'; although the person
was not specified he knew
who Mr Warwick meant.
Mr Warwick said at p243 of the transcript that he may well have made the
remark about the one less boilermaker to Mr Timmings. He
denied that it was a
reference to any person by name. He said that as part of the rationalisation in
the maintenance service department
the boilermaker numbers had been brought down
from 19 to 11. The remark would have referred to his view that the number was
too high and that it could be reduced to 10.
The practice at BHP was however not to force people to leave but to wait
until people left and then not replace them. He certainly
did not refer to Mr
Carr, nor was any reference implied.
The discussions with Mr Timmings were held because he was the union delegate;
as the delegate he was interested in employing more
boilermakers. From time to
time the plant did need more than 11 boilermakers, Mr Warwick said. The
requirements during shutdowns
were such that 50 or more contractor boilermakers
were on site. During normal times, however, it was occasionally hard to find
even for all eleven permanent boilermakers, who were then given odd jobs
fixing doors, catches, gates and hinges.
In cross examination at pp 154-56 of the transcript Mr Timmings told the
Tribunal about his recollection of the 2 November 1994 meeting.
recall voices being raised at that time, he said, because if that had been the
case he would have walked out of the meeting,
as he did not abide by that. He
did not recall swearwords being used by Mr Carr, and said that he had never
heard Mr Carr swear in
Asked whether Mr Warwick might have said words like 'I hope you like your job
as a fucking boilermaker, John, because the way you
are carrying on that's all
you'll ever be at BHP' Mr Timmings said that he did not recall Mr Warwick saying
'the word effing'. He
did not recall any swearwords. Mr Timmings then said that
voices may have 'slightly gotten raised' but as he did not walk out of
meeting they were 'not too high'.
The remarks Mr Timmings noted down following the meeting on 4 November 1994
were made in the context of a particular clerical task
which needed to be done,
a task that had been suggested for Mr Carr by Mr Timmings. Mr Timmings conceded
that if Mr Carr had been
taken off his job as a boilermaker to do clerical work,
a contractor might have had to be hired in to replace him, as the work that
had proposed for Mr Carr was data checking on the use of contract boilermakers
by the company.
He conceded that it would make sense from a management point of view that it
might have been that Mr Warwick did not want to get a
contractor to do the
boilermaking when he had a boilermaker who could do the job. The work would have
involved 'probably two to three
weeks' and necessitated going through a thousand
forms and clarifying by telephone with individual contractors what trade was
Mr Warwick gave evidence at p206 of the transcript that there were issues
within the maintenance service area from time to time about
contractors rather than ordinary employees. This was a bone of contention with
riggers, fitters and boilermakers alike.
This was an industrial issue at
Westernport and he had been involved in meetings that looked at the number of
contract riggers that
were used, leading ultimately to the hiring of two
additional permanent riggers. This process was also applied to contract
boilermaker
use by the company, but the process got bogged down by arguments
that through improved management of contract labour through the rest of the
plant it could reduce the number of contractors
it needed to hire. Mr Warwick
said that it was proved that this was the case. The issue had been discussed at
a number of boilermaker
review meetings. The 2 November 1994 meeting was one of
them, and it was chaired by Mr Warwick, who also took the minutes. Exhibit
was the original version of the minutes of that day.
Mr Warwick said that there was a discussion at the meeting about the number
of contract boilermakers and BHP boilermakers that were
working overtime at
Westernport in the September-October period. There was a union claim that
figures for the last 9 to 12 months
should be used rather than the last 2
months. Mr Carr did not agree with the way the figures were being compiled, Mr
Warwick said,
'and questioned that pretty severely', wanting to present the
figures in a way that justified the hiring of additional (BHP) boilermakers.
Mr Carr had refused to accept certain figures (that represented a management
rationalisation of boilermaker use in the plant) because
they indicated that
fewer boilermakers were required. There was a debate about the integrity of the
figures. The discussion moved
to other matters, but Mr Carr repeatedly raised
the same issue about the use of the past 9 months' figures. Mr Warwick said that
he then, unfortunately, referred to Mr Carr as 'a nagging woman' and Mr Carr had
replied that he had to keep on nagging him so as
to get the answer he wanted. Mr
Warwick said that Mr Carr was seeking to obtain an increase in boilermaker
numbers from the present
11 to19, the figure it had been in 1989.
Mr Timmings had suggested that Mr Carr compile the 9 months' figures. Mr
Warwick said that given the size of the job involved it was
not appropriate that
Mr Carr, as a good boilermaker, should be taken off his duties and be given a
clerical task for which he had
two other people who were both willing and
Mr Warwick said that after the comment referring to Mr Carr as a nagging
woman, Mr Carr had made a comment about it being alright
for Mr Warwick to 'sit
on (his) arse and do nothing all day' but that it was not all right for Mr Carr
to sit in an office and do
a few hours work. Mr Warwick said that Mr Carr swore
at him, calling him 'nothing but a fucking cunt' and that he replied 'Well John,
you don't know what my job is and I hope you like your job as a boilermaker'.
When Mr Carr asked 'Why', Mr Warwick had replied 'Because
the way you are
carrying on that is all that you will ever be'. Mr Warwick said that the comment
was made in anger.
Mr Timmings had then called the meeting to order and had asked him to calm
down, which Mr Warwick said he did. Mr Warwick said that
at the end of the
meeting he certainly did not bear any animosity towards Mr Carr - the events, he
said, were 'just part of the normal
bartering that goes on in these meetings,
and I didn't have any indication whatsoever that he had harboured any bad
feelings towards
me for what I had said to him'.
Mr Warwick said that he did not regard his loss of temper as appropriate and
he had apologised to the company for doing that and had
been spoken to by the
human relations department and he had previously indicated preparedness and was
still prepared to apologise
to Mr Carr for his behaviour in 1994. Swearing at
meetings occurred occasionally but it was descriptive, in an industrial
environment,
but in itself probably not appropriate, Mr Warwick said.
Regarding the allegation by Mr Timmings that he made the remarks about Mr
Carr at a 4 November meeting Mr Warwick said he certainly
had not said the words
on that day. He had said them on 2 November, in anger, and suggested that it had
been misconstrued as that;
he had not said the words three times. He added that
he implied during that meeting that he would not let Mr Carr go off and do
work when he needed him as a boilermaker.
Mr Warwick said that he had never had the intention to prevent Mr Carr from
following one career path or another within BHP; in fact,
he said, he had been
instrumental in the past in suggesting a number of career options for Mr Carr
when the latter had suffered his
injury and returned to work. However, none of
these had been accepted. He had never used any influence to prevent Mr Carr from
another sort of job within the works and had never been asked for or
given a reference regarding Mr Carr.
Mr Ian Baker gave evidence at p378 of the transcript that during 1994 he was
the maintenance supervisor of the maintenance service
group. He had been present
at the boilermaker review meeting of 2 November 1994. The background to the
meeting was that there had
been a strong disagreement between management and
union representatives about the numbers of boilermakers to be hired by BHP for
Westernport.
Originally a claim had been made for 9 additional boilermakers, which was
rejected by the company. Mr Baker said that his role at
earlier meetings was to
present the charts with figures showing boilermaker use, including boilermakers
that were hired in as contractors.
The union had concluded that additional
boilermakers were hired in, based on figures derived from the maintenance
service group.
There was a dispute as to the way the figures were arrived at. In
the end a call was made for an additional 4 boilermakers, but that
rejected by management.
There was next a request by the unions that the company seek data from the
suppliers of contract labour. Originally these suppliers
had just put the names
of the contract workers on the forms, a copy of which went to the union saying
that the particular union member
was on site, but that did not disclose the
trade type the worker represented. There was a request to review that
information and
there was a dispute over who would do that.
At the 2 November meeting there was tension in the issues that were the
subject of keenly felt views, but the company was determined
to stick to a
rational process as distinct from an emotive process. Mr Baker said that the
discussion then 'got fairly raised' and
next Mr Timmings interjected and
'settled that discussion'. The basis of the heated discussion was that Mr Carr
told management that
the figures it produced on boilermaker numbers were
inaccurate.
Mr Baker said that the figures had been produced in conjunction with the
plant union delegate, Mr Timmings. Mr Baker had worked with
him to review all
the information coming in regarding the process of getting the contract
boilermakers on site. The issue of information
preceding the review was
discussed quite heatedly, and there was discussion about who should do that. Mr
Baker said that it was already
recognised as a difficult process and there was
some exchange between management and Mr Carr over how it should be processed. Mr
Warwick was involved in that discussion.
Mr Carr had a strong view that he should be involved in the collection of the
data. There was disagreement on that, as Mr Timmings'
involvement was thought to
be adequate. However, with regard to the preceding figures the amount of work
was fairly intensive, Mr
Baker said, and the company already had someone on
other duties who was reasonably capable of doing the work which involved
the previous providers by telephone and clarifying people that had
come onto the Westernport site by trade type instead of just by
Mr Baker said that Mr Carr was trying to position himself to take up that
work and Mr Warwick had stated quite strongly that he would
not accept him and
that the company had someone who would do that work. As a result there was a
strong exchange of words. Mr Carr
had said 'You fucking cunts are trying to
screw us' and Mr Warwick had said "Boilermakers will always be boilermakers if
shift your position to take up some of the new things that we want to
That exchange climaxed the discussion and Mr Timmings then suggested that the
discussion get back on track as it was going nowhere.
The meeting then settled
down and progressed in a normal way. Mr Baker said that swearing happened in the
workplace and that that
thought that Mr Carr was no different from any other worker, Mr Baker said.
In cross examination at p387 of the transcript Mr Baker said that he took the
'boilermakers will be boilermakers' remark to mean that
there were moves in the
maintenance service group and that boilermakers had been successfully used in
supervisory roles, with a more
involved interest in their own work rather than
just welding.
Ms Amanda Gillis at p404 of the transcript gave evidence that she was the
manager of employee relations at BHP Steel. After becoming
aware of Mr Carr's
equal opportunity complaint on 5 January 1995 she had met with Mr Warwick on 10
January. When she interviewed
Mr Warwick he was insistent that there had been a
discussion but that it had been at the boilermaker review meeting (on 2 November
1994) at which Mr Eaton and Mr Baker had been present. Ms Gillis also spoke to
Mr Eaton and Mr Baker. Although Mr Eaton could remember
that 'things had been
raised and things had been said' he could not remember any swearing; Mr Baker on
the other hand certainly recalled
swearing on Mr Carr's part and acknowledged
that swearing did take place at meetings.
Ms Gillis recalled from the interviews she gathered that there had been an
argument, that voices were raised both by Mr Carr and Mr
Warwick over a dispute
contract boilermaker usage figures;
that Mr Warwick had indicated that he was
not prepared to release Mr Carr to do that and that he wanted to keep Mr Carr in
his boilermaker
work and that Mr Carr did not like that and that they ended up
in a verbal altercation.
Ms Gillis said that she discussed Exhibit "18" with Mr Timmings and asked him
struck her as a belated
qualification that had been written in a different pen. Mr Timmings had
explained to her that he had added
the words at the same time and that he took
the statement by Mr Warwick to mean 'something broader' than simply refusing to
Carr do the clerical work. When she asked Mr Timmings why, he replied
that 'it was the tone of voice' of Mr Warwick.
The Tribunal notes at this stage that Mr Timmings's recollection of the
meetings on 2 and 4 November 1994 was not good. He relied
on the note (Exhibit
"18") that he told the Tribunal had been written some days after the event, at
the request of Mr Carr. The note
originally read as follows:
'Result from meeting on 2/11/94 over B/M numbers
In a meeting on the 4-11-94 with C. Warwick, J Carr & S. Timmings
comments were made by C. Warwick to the extent that J. Carr
would not be allowed
to be employed here as anything but a boilermaker and he would not be used in
the office to help with the labour
sourcing on the boilermaker issue which I
believe would speed up the issue.
The note was then changed. Ms Gillis' evidence was that Mr Timmings had said
to her that the change was made at the time the note
was written (rather than
some days after the event as Mr Timmings put to the Tribunal in evidence). The
Tribunal observes however
that the addition and the changes do appear to have
been made with a different, thicker, pen from that used for the original text
and do not line up with the remainder of the text where the last two words start
on a new line.
The added words in their final version are "if he had anything to do with
it.', and they are marked for insertion after the word 'boilermaker'
where first
used in the text with the word 'and' having been erased where it appeared after
'boilermaker'.
Taking the above into account, including in particular the minutes of the
meeting of 2 November 1994 (Exhibit "16"), the Tribunal
finds that a heated
exchange did take place at the boilermaker review meeting on 2 November that led
to Mr Warwick making a comment
both regarding his unwillingness to let Mr Carr
review the boilermaker data and to the effect that in his view Mr Carr would
a boilermaker. Although a further heated exchange may have taken place on
4 November 1994 the Tribunal is satisfied on the evidence
before it that the
comments by Mr Warwick in question were made at the earlier meeting.
The Tribunal is satisfied however that any remarks of that nature - and it
should observe that despite Mr Timmings' note made some
days after the November
meetings (Exhibit "18") it cannot be satisfied exactly what words were used -
would have been made as a direct
result of a rising frustration by Mr Warwick at
the meeting about the conduct of Mr Carr at that meeting. The Tribunal is also
that there was great tension between Mr Warwick and Mr Carr at the 2
November meeting and that totally inappropriate language was
used by both
The Tribunal finds however that any comments by Mr Warwick about Mr Carr's
proposal to personally perform the clerical verification
of contract
boilermaker-use figures and about Mr Carr's work at BHP in general, whatever
their nature, were made in the heat of the
moment and only as a result of Mr
Warwick's frustration with Mr Carr's attitude, language and general conduct at
the meeting on 2
November 1994. The Tribunal is satisfied that Mr Carr's
impairment played no role whatever and was of no consideration in the incident.
The Tribunal therefore finds this part of the complaint not proved.
Mr Warwick's memos on Mr Carr's file
After the comments on 4 November 1994 were made by Mr Warwick, Mr Carr went
to the 'top office' and asked the industrial relations
superintendent, Mr Bill
Denniss, to see his personnel file. He saw the documents and told Mr Denniss
that he did not agree with the
information that was on file. He asked Mr Denniss
to remove the material and when the latter said that anything that went into the
files stayed there and therefore refused to do so Mr Carr said that he would be
taking steps to have the documents removed. He was
given copies of the documents
on file by Mr Denniss and then lodged the (first) complaint in this matter. The
Tribunal notes however
that the material referred to: Exhibits "E", "F", "G",
"H", "IJ", and "L", predates 3 December 1993.
In cross examination at p104 of the transcript Mr Carr said that at a
subsequent conciliation meeting with Ms Gillis, Mr Maurice Addison
as the union
representative and Mr Mark Magee, another employee relations officer, some
sections on letters were blacked out and
some documents were removed, but the
writing could still be read through the blacking out and not many documents were
Mr Carr conceded however that there had been some agreement about statements
of fact being retained on the file and the removal of
other material, and that
he had been offered an opportunity to make his own notations about them. He
recalled ripping up one letter.
Shown Exhibit "IJ", Mr Warwick said at p238 of the transcript that he wrote
the document - in which he expresses his frustration and
concerns about the work
performance of Mr Carr - and that it was consistent with his responsibilities to
raise the matters with Mr
Bill Denniss, the industrial relations superintendent
to whom the memorandum was addressed. The same, he said applied to Exhibit
which was written after he received complaints from the workshop floor. The
purpose of the letter was to try and protect the
people on the floor as well as
Ms Gillis said at pp422-25 of the transcript that she had taken part in a
review of a number of documents on Mr Carr's file that had
, in the blacking out of some lines and paragraphs on the copy of
Exhibit "IJ" that was on Mr Carr's personnel file with the company.
The material
blacked out, Ms Gillis said, concerned expressions of personal opinion by the
writer rather than factual statements
of what was said, and it was therefore
agreed to delete it. (In cross examination at p457 of the transcript she agreed
that certain
documents were destroyed, which were therefore not tendered.)
Ms Gillis produced the result of that blacking out, including the removal of
a line in a memo from Mr Warwick to Mr Denniss of 9 February
1993 as part of
Exhibit "36". Exhibit "37", also produced by Ms Gillis, would indicate to the
Tribunal that the blacking out had
occurred on 23 November 1995; that document
is a memorandum to Mr Warwick from Mr Mark McGee outlining what had happened to
the various
documents about which Mr Carr had complained.
Given the above evidence the Tribunal observes first that some of the
language used by Mr Warwick in the documents in question (Exhibits
"G", "H", "IJ" and "L"), notably some of the paragraphs in Exhibit "IJ", appears
to be inappropriately tendentious and
would certainly constitute improper
management practice, particularly as it would have been known by the writer that
such documents
would be added to an employee's personal file. This appears to
have been recognised by the company when in 1995 it agreed to sanitise
documents by blacking out certain paragraphs and to have other documents removed
from Mr Carr's file, and destroyed.
To the Tribunal some of the language in the memoranda concerned appears to
express frustration to breaking point with an employee
who, despite all efforts
by management over a long period to find appropriate alternative work solutions
to accommodate the employee's
injury that had occurred in 1989, appeared to
management resolved to resist any of their suggestions and to remain as
uncooperative
as possible. Mr Warwick, having seen that his and others' efforts
were fruitless, decided to write to Mr Denniss (Exhibit "IJ") to
express his
frustration.
Although some of the contents of the memoranda may of course be perfectly
appropriate, other material is tendentious, as the Tribunal
has observed. The
Tribunal is satisfied, however, that the offending comments, in so far as they
might be categorised as detrimental,
were not made because of the employee's
impairment but because the writer had reached the limit of his patience with
someone whom
he regarded was using his medical restrictions to avoid any work
that he did not feel like doing, and who had been doing that for
a long time. Mr
Warwick had mistakenly seen it as his duty to make such remarks in an official
communication within BHP that was
likely to be kept on Mr Carr's file. The
Tribunal is satisfied that the remarks were not made because of, or in any way
related to,
Mr Carr's impairment; they were made in the Tribunal's view because
of Mr Carr's perceived uncooperative attitude to his work and
his employer.
The Tribunal's conclusion is therefore that the complainant has not succeeded
in proving this part of the complaint.
Close scrutiny by Mr Warwick and restrictions on
Mr Carr said that following the incidents relating to the documents on his
personal file things stayed very much the same. He still
did not work overtime
and said that he was 'still subject to close scrutiny, couldn't move from one
area to the other without informing
my supervisor' (p32 of the transcript).
In cross examination at p90 of the transcript he said that if he moved from
one work area to another the leading hand would come and
say that Mr Warwick had
just seen him walk in another area. This had happened a number of times. The
restrictions did not relate
to normal movements, such as searching for a part or
going to the lavatory, but related to his work as union delegate. He felt under
surveillance because, he said, Mr John Moloney, the fabrication shop supervisor
had told him on instruction from Mr Warwick that
if he moved from one area to
the next on union business Mr Warwick wanted Mr Moloney to inform him.
There was other surveillance, as well. Mr Warwick would make frequent visits
to his work area looking over the top of the work area
and walking into the work
area. It was reported to Mr Carr that comments were made in the office every
morning about what he was
doing. Mr Warwick would normally keep walking; other
times he would come into the work area. He might have walked by other areas
well, Mr Carr said, but Mr Warwick paid his area particular attention.
That was the surveillance he had complained of. Mr Warwick was paying special
scrutiny to what he was doing. He told Mr Carr that
he could get jobs done
cheaper outside the plant and that he was retaining jobs in the fabrication shop
specially for Mr Carr to
do. Mr Carr said that the implication was that he was a
burden on the shop.
Mr Perkovic at p122 of the transcript gave evidence that he had worked for
the company for 22 years. He said that in his opinion since
Mr Carr's back
injury his treatment by company management had been different from that of other
boilermakers in the fabrication shop.
Management frequently asked how he worked,
what he was doing and where he was. With regard to Mr Warwick, he came into the
Mr Carr was working many times, looked over the safety screens and
spoke to Mr Perkovic about Mr Carr.
Mr Timmings in cross examination at p 147 of the transcript said that he
worked in the service shop. When he left the shop on union
business it was his
practice to let his local supervisor know where he was going. These were company
rules, which he followed.
Mr Warwick at p223 of the transcript said that he often walked on one of the
walkways that were adjacent to Mr Carr's workstation.
It could be as often as 30
to 40 times a day. (In cross examination at p355 of the transcript Mr Gary
Plant, the leading hand in
the fabrication shop to whom Mr Carr reported, said
that he did not agree with Mr Warwick on this point saying that on the average
Mr Warwick walked there 'maybe 10' times a day.)
Mr Warwick said he also walked in other directions, towards the machine shop
or the electrical service shop. He denied having a practice
of stopping, staring
at or observing Mr Carr in his work. He admitted that he was stopped at the
crossroads (of the walkways) by
other people who asked questions, and said that
he certainly spent time in the area but there was never an intention to go there
and stand there and spy on Mr Carr. Mr Warwick said he was too busy, and had
work to do.
Nor, Mr Warwick said, did he have someone else in the fabrication shop who
put Mr Carr under surveillance. He did not have a habit
of walking past Mr
Carr's area, he said, that was different from walking past any other work area.
During his time as head of the
maintenance department Mr Warwick said, he might
have gone into Mr Carr's work area eight or ten times over the seven year
At p 233 of the transcript Mr Warwick said that when the protective walls of
Mr Carr's workstation were about 5 feet 6 inches high
- they had been raised to
6 feet later, to prevent sparks and flashes from protruding - the head of the
person in the work station
could be seen; from the workstation the head of those
passing by could be seen. Shorter people would not see very much at all but
someone had to physically go up on tip toes to see the workbench; in addition,
the doorways to such boilermaker work areas were covered
by flash proof
Mr Warwick said that Mr Carr had the habit of looking at people as they
passed on the walkways on the three sides of his workstation.
Any person walking
by could be seen over the (lower) protective shield. There were no restrictions
on Mr Carr's movements out of
his area, but because Mr Carr used to spend a fair
bit of time in the machine shop section talking to Mr Timmings, Mr Moloney had
asked Mr Carr to let him know where he was, as a courtesy, if he went to do
union business out of his area. Mr Timmings had indicated
that he did that
himself. There was no special rule for Mr Carr. When Mr Timmings was away, Mr
Warwick said, and Mr Carr acted as
plant delegate, Mr Carr went around other
parts of the plant, as required. He would let Mr Moloney know that.
It was not his practice to discuss Mr Carr with other boilermakers or trades
assistants, Mr Warwick said, and he certainly had no
practice of discussing Mr
Carr with Mr Perkovic. There may however have been occasions when he saw
boilermakers do a job that he
thought Mr Carr could do, because (Mr Warwick) was
always looking for jobs that fitted into the classification of 'bench work' and
it was not easy to find that kind of work. There may have been observations by
him in that context, from time to time. It was however
not part of his role
directly to assess Mr Carr's work or to direct him. Mr Warwick said that he had
no role in setting the tasks
that Mr Carr did - that was left to the leading
hand and the supervisor. He denied saying to Mr Perkovic that 'John Carr will
one way or another'.
Mr Plant said at p337 of the transcript that he knew of no practice of Mr
Warwick's of paying particular attention to particular people.
He had seen Mr
Warwick walk through the workshop where he might talk to the people working and
ask them how they were going and how
the job was and 'just doing general things
like that through the shop'. He had no knowledge of Mr Warwick passing comments
workers about Mr Carr.
Mr Plant said that if Mr Warwick had had that habit it would have stood out
and someone would have said something to him. Mr Carr
had let other workers know
of his grievance and of his point of view. He did not consider that the company
held Mr Carr back. Mr
Plant agreed that there was a particular working
relationship between Mr Carr and Mr Perkovic. They got on very well; Mr Perkovic
was more with Mr Carr than with the others.
Mr Moloney said at p365 of the transcript that he was aware that Mr Warwick
on occasion walked through the fabrication shop area.
He denied that Mr Warwick
had a practice of watching particular employees and said that Mr Warwick talked
to almost everyone as he
walked around. He did not have anyone, including Mr
Carr, under surveillance or under special watch. Mr Moloney said that he had
expectation that if Mr Carr was to leave his work area to talk to Mr Timmings
of being told. This rule
did not just apply to Mr Carr, it also applied to Mr Timmings and the latter's
successor Mr Ian Thomas.
The same practice applied to the representatives of the
Electrical Trades Union.
Ms Gillis, at pp432-33 of the transcript, said that the company required
employees with union responsibilities to advise their supervisors
if they were
absent on union business. The company's policy was steel industry-wide, Ms
Gillis said. The policy recognised that employee
representatives would be
allowed time to discuss grievances or issues that their members had, but it was
subject to these representatives
advising the company and seeking permission to
leave the job.
The Tribunal viewed the area surrounding Mr Carr's work station at the
Westernport plant on 7 September 1998. It observed that although
some of the
protective walls surrounding work stations - including that of Mr Carr - had
been raised to a height of 6 feet, other
walls, separating work stations from
each other, were still at the lower height. The Tribunal noted that the effect
of the combination
of still existing 5 foot walls and the green curtains
covering the doorways was to make it impossible for a (tall) passer by to see
more than the head and at the most the shoulders of someone working in the work
station while standing in a completely straight position.
A person of reasonable height who wished to observe what a person in the work
area was doing would have to walk right up to the 5
foot wall and stand on tip
toes, leaning their face over the wall into the work station. Such a person
would have attracted attention
and would have stood out, particularly in the
narrow walkway forming the "T" intersection at the north-eastern end of Mr
Carr's work
area. A person of smaller stature would have been able to observe
very little even standing on tip toes. The new 6 foot protective
walls prevented
any view of the work stations and their occupants even to the tallest person.
The Tribunal noted that Mr Carr's large work station had been separated by a
further internal wall extending part of the way across
the width of the station,
obscuring Mr Carr's work bench from view to anyone standing in the doorway
(having removed the protective
curtain). This separation had been added two
On the basis of the above the Tribunal finds that there is no evidence before
it that would satisfy the Tribunal to the standard required
that this part of
the complaint should succeed.
The Tribunal accordingly finds this part of the complaint is not proved.
The complaint of victimisation
Denial of overtime
Mr Carr said he brought up the subject of overtime with Mr Buffham, the
WorkCover Conciliation Board and the WorkCare Appeals Board
but he was not
allowed to work overtime and had lost substantial earnings. This situation had
now been going on for seven years.
He said that the company just ignored this
situation. At p113 of the transcript in re examination he said that he told Mr
that he was available for overtime. Mr Carr said that he did not tell
the leading hand, as he normally considered the supervisors
of the leading hand
would instruct them in what way to allocate work and overtime. He said that it
was his assumption that the leading
hand was not allocating overtime (to Mr
Carr) because he had been instructed not to.
At p114 of the transcript he said in re examination that the fabrication shop
had four boilermakers since 1993, including himself.
All of these were dedicated
to the shop. Mr Carr said that the other three had been offered regular
overtime, but that some of them
chose not to work overtime.
At pp32 and 33 of the transcript he had said that he was not offered overtime
until February 1998, when the hot strip mill shutdown
took place. Intermittently
since that time, Mr Carr said, he had been offered overtime.
Early in February 1998 there had been an issue between him and the leading
hand boilermaker regarding the use of contractors on nightshift.
Asked by Mr
Carr why contractors should be used the leading hand said that all the other
boilermakers had declined the nightshift.
He had then however offered the work
to Mr Carr. When Mr Carr accepted he was told he could have the work if he was
able to get a
clearance from area management with regard to existing medical
restrictions. However, management did not allow him to do that overtime.
In cross examination, at p65 of the transcript Mr Carr said that there was a
system of allocating overtime to boilermakers in the
maintenance services
department. It did not involve putting ones name on a plant list; when overtime
was available the leading hand
would ask individual boilermakers if they wanted
to work. In addition there was an overtime availability list for the plant as a
If people wanted to work overtime in the plant, they would put their name on
the list. Mr Carr said that he had never put his name
down for plant overtime.
In the fabrication shop the system for overtime was the same as for the
maintenance services department,
where the leading hand went out and asked the
boilermakers if they wanted to do overtime on a particular day.
Mr Carr said that he had never let the leading hand, who was one of the four
boilermakers in the fabrication shop and a fellow member
of the union, know that
he was interested in doing overtime. He had however let 'the management' know
that he was interested and
said that he assumed that the leading hand's
supervisors would tell him that Mr Carr wanted to do overtime. Mr Carr said that
did not speak to Mr Moloney about overtime but had mentioned it to Mr Warwick
in 1992 in the course of the discussions about physiotherapy
In all those discussions he had raised the matter of overtime and had said
how much money he was losing. Mr Warwick knew, therefore,
he said, that he was
not getting overtime. Mr Carr said that when in 1997 he raised the matter of
overtime with Mr Graham Cleary,
Mr Warwick's successor, Mr Cleary had pointed
out that his WorkCover restrictions, which had until some months before been 6
per day, were still 8 hours a day and that for that reason Mr Carr needed
a clearance from his doctor to work overtime.
Mr Carr said that he regarded 8 hours as a normal day, and that even if it
were to be taken as a restriction for the normal working
day to 8 hours it could
still be taken as permitting him to work a normal 8 hour overtime shift on a
Saturday. However, Mr Carr did
not regard the change from a 6 hour restriction
to 8 hours as meaning that he was restricted to an 8 hour day only; he took the
to mean he could go back to his normal pre injury duties of 8 hours a day
working on bench work. He saw that as his doctor's view,
not his. Mr Carr said
there was no reason why his doctor should have advised his employer that he was
fit for normal duty; this would
have meant he was treated differently from all
other workers on the site with injuries working overtime who were not required
go through that procedure.
Mr Carr had then written to Mr Cleary asking why he had not been offered
overtime in 10 years. At the same time as he received a letter
from Mr Cleary
regarding the issue of the overtime restrictions on 5 May 1997 Mr Carr said that
he suffered another injury that prevented
him from working overtime during that
period. When the strip mill was shut down early in 1998 Mr Carr said he was
offered overtime
by way of avoiding a dispute over labour sourcing from
contractors. He had intermittently worked overtime since then.
The issue of overtime had been discussed with Ms Gillis, as the industrial
relations manager, in 1995. Ms Gillis had indicated to
him that the reason why
he was not getting overtime offers was that he had not been putting his name on
the (plant) overtime list.
Mr Carr said that there was no list in the
fabrication shop. There was a list for plant overtime, and he could have had
that overtime, but the work available for plant overtime was outside
the limitations laid down in his WorkCover certificate. For
that reason he chose
not to put his name on that list. Overtime in the fabrication shop was allocated
by the leading hand. He could
not remember being told either by Ms Gillis or
through Mr Addison, at the union, that overtime was available to him so long as
was within his work limitations.
The Tribunal observes at this point that Exhibit "14", which is an agreed
summary of Mr Carr's employment and medical dates over a
recent period only,
shows that between 14 June 1995 and 24 June 1998 Mr Carr obtained 37
interlocking WorkCover certificates that
declared him for that whole period
either fit for modified or alternative duties with or without specific physical
restrictions for
4, 6, 8 or unspecified hours, or unfit for any duties. This
situation should then be taken as additional to the 15% permanent disability
that Mr Carr suffered as a result of his injury in 1987. The Tribunal had no
comprehensive evidence before it regarding the situation
prior to 1995.
Mr Perkovic said at p125 of the transcript that he had been injured at work.
When he returned from time off he was on restricted duties.
Despite that he had
ample opportunity for overtime.
(Ms Amanda Gillis however gave evidence at p440 of the transcript that she
had checked the overtime position with regard to Mr Perkovic.
She said that her
research showed that Mr Perkovic had ongoing work restrictions, generally
related to hours, limiting him to 8 hours
a day, no more than 5 days per week
and that at least since 1994 Mr Perkovic had not worked overtime.
Ms Gillis said that it was consistent with being on WorkCover restrictions
limiting an employee to 8 hours per day and five days per
week not to have
access to overtime. These restrictions could not be ignored by the company or a
supervisor. In cross examination
at pp464-68 of the transcript Ms Gillis was
shown Exhibits "ZB", "ZC" and "ZE", WorkCover certificates in respect of Mr
which Ms Gillis said the company might not have sighted, showing Mr
Perkovic to be fit for 'full time modified duties' from 15 January
February 1998 - diagnosis sciatica; subject to 'no bending, no lifting in excess
of 10 kilograms and no pushing' from 16 February
to 16 May 1998 - no diagnosis;
and subject to 'modified duties as before' from 15 May to 15 August 1998 -
diagnosis sciatica.
In Exhibit "ZE" Ms Gillis was further shown a handwritten note dated 23
August (sic) 1998 and apparently signed by Mr Perkovic, stating
that the writer
has a permanent disability to his back; that he has been covered by WorkCover
certificates since his injury in 1994;
and that while on alternative duties
during his time at work, on restricted duties and while covered by a WorkCover
certificate,
he 'continue(s) to be offered overtime'. Ms Gillis conceded that on
the basis of the last two certificates, assuming that they had
been tendered (to
the company) there would be no reason not to offer Mr Perkovic overtime within
the modified duties specified.)
With regard to the offer of overtime to others, Mr Perkovic said that the
system was that where the leading hand got an instruction
from the supervisor
regarding overtime, he would usually ask people 'Who wants overtime?'. He said
however that it was always the
case that if 'they' knew a person who wanted to
work he would be approached first. There were favourites for overtime, which
today. In the past there was a list, more than 10 years ago, but since
that time the approach for overtime had been personal by the
leading hand.
Mr Timmings, in cross examination at p148 of the transcript, said that
overtime was a local issue for which the leading hand and the
supervisor had
responsibility. In his area it was done by means of a list. Where he had
observed people who had a problem getting
overtime, he had asked them how they
wanted it sorted out. As the plant delegate for the union (between 1993 and
1997) he had gone
into discussions with the people concerned to try and resolve
it; it was a problem 'between ourselves', not management, he said.
If it was a
major concern, he would take it up with the management. No grievance procedure
was required.
Permanent workers had to be offered overtime before contractors could be
brought in but there was otherwise no right to overtime.
The award provided for
reasonable overtime, but what constituted reasonable could differ markedly
between individuals. People who
needed overtime could mention this to their
leading hand in his area, Mr Timmings said, but plant-wide there was a list that
up three weeks ahead of time.
Mr Warwick, at p190 of the transcript, denied that Mr Carr had ever raised
the issue of overtime with him. Mr Carr never asked him
directly about overtime,
but Mr Warwick was aware from Mr Carr that the latter felt disadvantaged in not
getting overtime because
of the rehabilitation process, saying that he was
losing money because of it. That would have occurred in 1991, when Mr Warwick
participated
in a rehabilitation team meeting concerning Mr Carr. Mr Carr had
not raised the matter with him subsequently.
Mr Warwick said that the overtime system for the fabrication shop differed
from that for the plant generally, where lists were used,
because the work
concerned four people only. Overtime was arranged amongst themselves, and
coordinated in conjunction with the workshop
planners, the supervisor and the
leading hand. Mr Warwick said that he had not given instructions about Mr Carr's
access to overtime;
he knew from checking the plant lists that Mr Carr had not
put his name forward for plant overtime. Mr Warwick said that he did not
whether Mr Carr had mentioned to the leading hand or the supervisor that he
wanted such work.
Mr Warwick said that he would have expected Mr Carr to have talked to his
leading hand and see whether overtime was available and
to say that he was
interested in working it, and willing to do so, indicating the times he was
available. If that did not work he
would have expected Mr Carr to have taken the
matter up with the supervisor. He could have mentioned the matter at any time to
union delegate.
Given Mr Carr's WorkCover restrictions, which meant that he could not do
repeated bending, lifting, pushing or pulling and that he
had to sit down for a
few minutes every 15 minutes if his back started to hurt him and that he was
prevented from lifting more than
a certain weight, there was not always
sufficient work to keep Mr Carr occupied, Mr Warwick said. He had previously
said that because
of Mr Carr's work restrictions there were tasks around the
plant that Mr Carr was incapable of performing, making it difficult to
him to tasks.
When questioned by the Tribunal, Mr Warwick said at p292 of the transcript
that his practice, when people returned to work after sustaining
an injury, even
if they had been off for only a day, was to make them go to the medical centre
and get a clearance from the works
doctor 'to check out that they were OK, and
that they could come back and resume their normal duties'.
Mr Cleary had taken over Mr Warwick's position as principal engineer
maintenance services at the company's Westernport works in January
1996. He said
at p297 of the transcript that he knew Mr Carr from dealings with him as a union
representative. When he started in
his new job Mr Cleary became aware that Mr
Carr was on restricted duties. The restrictions were 6 hours light bench work
hours of other duties, which were spent in the sub store. At p312 of the
transcript, in cross examination, however, Mr Cleary admitted
that he could not
recall whether Mr Carr was doing 6 hours in the store and then 'basically
knocking off' for the remaining time.
Mr Addison then tendered Exhibit "Y" consisting of two WorkCover
certificates. The certificate for the period 6 March to 6 April 1996
Carr subject to a restriction of light bench work as a boilermaker welder for 6
hours per day and the lifting of weights
smaller than 10 kilograms. The
certificate for 26 July to 26 August of that year showed him fit for
'alternative duties' for 8 hours
per day and for light bench work.
Mr Cleary said that at about the end of May 1996 Mr Carr reverted to 8 hours
per day light bench work. He said that it was necessary
to take account of such
restrictions when deciding on the issue of overtime. This was to safeguard the
welfare of the employee. Mr
Cleary said that he took the 8 hour restriction to
mean 8 hours per day, Monday to Friday. In about mid-April of 1997 Mr Carr had
approached him about overtime.
Mr Carr had asked for a meeting with Mr Cleary and Mr Moloney to discuss the
fact that he had been discriminated against in not being
able to work overtime
in the department. Mr Cleary said that he was quite open in saying to Mr Carr
that he could work overtime as
long as he got the right clearance from his
doctor or the works doctor to ensure that there were no restrictions on the work
he could perform.
Mr Cleary said that he checked to see if the 8 hour restriction was still in
place and found that it was no longer on the WorkCover
certificate but that Mr
Carr was still restricted to light bench work. Mr Cleary said that he wanted a
clear understanding that the
company was not putting Mr Carr in any position of
risk. He made this clear to Mr Carr, who responded by saying that Mr Cleary was
discriminating again because he 'was asking for something that it was not normal
practice to do'. Mr Carr had said that it was not
normal for the employer to ask
for a clearance from a general practitioner to clarify someone's work capacity.
Mr Cleary said he
then went to the human resources department, who agreed with
the direction he had outlined.
The WorkCover certificate at no stage indicated why there had been a real
change in status. As there was no such information, Mr Cleary
said he needed a
clearance. There was a subsequent meeting with Mr Carr at which this position
was outlined. Mr Carr indicated however
that he was not willing to get a
clearance either from his general practitioner or from the works doctor. Mr Carr
raised the 8 hour
issue, saying that it did not prevent him from working on
Saturdays. Mr Carr replied that in Mr Carr's role in the fabrication shop
normal duties were Monday to Friday. Light bench duties were not typically
available on a Saturday.
Mr Cleary then wrote to the works doctor, Dr Kathy Dyne (Exhibit "28"), who
attempted to talk to Mr Carr through his supervisor, but,
Mr Cleary said, that
was declined by Mr Carr. Mr Carr then sent a letter to Mr Cleary (Exhibit "29")
asking why he had not been asked
to carry on his duties as a boilermaker during
overtime, even though there were opportunities for such work, since he first
a back injury in 1987.
Mr Cleary replied by letter (Exhibit "30") pointing out that the company had
not received advice from Mr Carr that he was able to
change his circumstances
pertaining to his job. In the letter Mr Cleary pointed out that over an extended
period medical certificates
issued on his behalf by Dr Gordon had limited his
period of work activities to 8 hours per day and that until medical certificates
were received from Dr Gordon specifically changing the hours of work and
providing comment why the changes were appropriate given
his medical condition
the company was not able to change Mr Carr's working arrangements.
On 5 May 1997, however, Mr Carr sustained an injury to his shoulder and neck,
for which he was off work for a period of a month. After
he returned in mid or
late June 1997 he was again subject to his previous restriction of light bench
In February 1998 Mr Carr had indicated that he was available for overtime
during a major shutdown of the hot strip mill plant at Westernport.
had spoken to Mr Cleary about the situation. The accepted practice within the
labour sourcing principles, before contractors
were brought in for work, was to
consult the local relevant union delegate. Mr Carr, as that delegate, had been
approached to inform
Mr Cleary that it was proposed to bring contractors in for
two night shifts. Mr Carr then offered himself for overtime.
Mr Cleary said that the company had concerns because Mr Carr was fit for
light bench duties but on a night shift he could be called
to work anywhere
within the plant, as the boilermaker needed was to service any shop plus
breakdown work that would have occurred
in other sections of the plant, because
during shutdowns other process units still ran 24 hour operations. Mr Carr would
have been taken out of the controlled environment that he had been in.
Next Mr Cleary received a memorandum from Mr Moloney (Exhibit "31") in which
the latter reported a discussion with Mr Carr regarding
Mr Carr's request to do
overtime during the shutdown and in which Mr Moloney said he had informed Mr
Carr that during the shutdown
boilermakers would service breakdowns and start up
problems such as leaky pipework, work that was outside Mr Carr's medical
restrictions.
Mr Cleary then wrote to Mr Carr (Exhibit "32") saying that prior to the
company confirming nightshift overtime, he needed to know
from Mr Carr that the
medical restrictions that had been in force until then no longer applied or
alternatively whether they might
impact on Mr Carr's ability to perform
overtime, given that breakdown and other work might be necessary in various
parts of the plant.
Mr Carr was subsequently asked to do (a twelve hour shift of) overtime during
a 24 hour shutdown on Sunday 22 February 1998, when
work was available within
the light bench work restriction, as the tasks required were 'very much
restricted to the workshop', Mr
Cleary said. The call was made that Mr Carr
would be able to do the twelve hour shift, because the company was in a
situation where
the work was supervised.
No medical clearance was asked for because it was thought that the situation
could be controlled. Mr Cleary said that it was pointed
out to Mr Carr that if
at any time of the 12 hour shift he felt that things were not right he could cut
it shorter and work 8 hours
or less. Mr Cleary said that Mr Carr worked some
subsequent overtime. To his knowledge Mr Carr had never put his name on a plant
overtime list. Much of that work would have been unsuitable for Mr Carr, given
his restrictions.
Mr Plant gave evidence at p317 of the transcript that he had held his job as
leading hand boilermaker since 1986. As such he was now
in charge of three other
boilermakers, Mr Carr, Mr Charlie Sterry and Mr Max Heritage, as well as one
tradesman's assistant, Mr Perkovic.
He said that there was not much overtime
available in the fabrication shop, whose hours of operation were from 6.50 a.m.
p.m., Monday to Friday. Overtime was worked when crane wheels had to be
done, taking 10 to 12 hours.
In other respects the work of the fabrication shop as a rule did not require
jobs to be done urgently or continuously. During shutdowns,
however, the work in
the shop normally was done in two shifts of 12 hours each. Mr Plant would then
ask boilermakers in the fabrication
shop whether they wished to work day or
night shift; if there was further work to do Mr Plant would ask the maintenance
service group
to supply him with boilermakers (that had been permanently
assigned to the group from the fabrication shop) to fill in the gaps.
was a need for further labour, contract boilermakers would be supplied.
Most of the work during a shutdown, Mr Plant said, was big, heavy work. Mr
Plant would have two boilermakers for the day shift and
two for the nightshift
for anything that came in. The ordinary ongoing work would still get done during
the day. The work coming
in during a shutdown did not normally include light
bench work. Up until last year it was not Mr Plant's practice to ask Mr Carr
do overtime work because Mr Plant's understanding was that Mr Carr's restricted
duties made it impossible for him to do heavy
work - only 'light stuff'.
There had in the past been an issue within the maintenance service department
as to who was getting overtime and who was not. When
the maintenance service
group was formed the boilermakers in that group thought it was their job to do
overtime on the plant, Mr
Plant said. Anything that was tendered for by the
fabrication shop - quotes were required - was claimed as its job by the
maintenance
service group. Before the maintenance service group was formed there
was an overtime list for plant work. After formation of the
group there was no
need for the list, as the group claimed all the overtime, Mr Plant said.
There was no such thing as overtime for the fabrication shop in that sense.
Mr Plant said that Mr Cleary spoke to him about overtime
for Mr Carr in late
1997, asking that if any work came up that Mr Carr could do he could consider Mr
Carr for the overtime. Prior
to that no one had raised the issue of overtime for
Mr Carr with him, including Mr Carr himself. However, others did speak to him
asked Mr Plant to keep them in mind when overtime
Mr Sterry and Mr Perkovic had both asked him about overtime. When such
requests came Mr Plant would do the best he could. Mr Plant
said that Mr Carr
was not able to do every job in the fabrication shop. In some cases in the
allocation of tasks he had to give consideration
to what jobs Mr Carr could and
could not do. When Mr Cleary had asked him to consider overtime jobs for Mr
Carr, Mr Plant had suggested
the job of 'safety man', a worker who was in the
shop as a precaution in addition to a boilermaker doing an urgent job, just in
something happened to the boilermaker.
Such a job might not in itself be dangerous but it could nevertheless be
dangerous working alone, Mr Plant said, so that there were
always two people in
such circumstances. Mr Carr would then be the safety man out of his bench area,
where he would do little jobs
at his bench and keep an eye on the man doing,
say, sub arc welding. When an urgent task came up in February 1998 which was
but nevertheless a bench job, Mr Plant had approached Mr Carr at home about
overtime and Mr Carr had agreed to do it.
When the hot strip mill shutdown occurred, Mr Plant spoke to Mr Carr about
doing overtime. He gave him the option between day and
night shift. Mr Carr
chose the latter, but Mr Moloney had objected because Mr Carr might have to do
line breakdowns and work on the
shutdown itself. It was therefore not regarded
to be in Mr Carr's interest to do the night shift. He therefore did the day
Since that time, Mr Plant said, Mr Carr had been able to do some
overtime, mainly roll rebuild journals on a small lathe, which was
Asked to rank the boilermakers, (all 8 who were formally part of the
fabrication shop) Mr Plant said he would rank Mr Heritage first;
Mr Kevin Wooden
second; Mr Sterry, Mr Phil McCoomb and Mr Dave Wright next, and after that Mr
Johnny Eaton, Mr Steve Mason Mr Carr
and Mr Jeff Cooney. The last four would be
on a line and the previous three would be next up on a line. Mr Plant denied
that overtime
was given to favourites in the areas for which he had
responsibility, that it was given to people who were 'a good boy', or that
you said something or complained you couldn't get overtime. Mr Plant said that
he did all of the overtime allocation himself.
There was no basis for believing
that Mr Carr had been punished for not toeing the line.
In cross examination at pp347-48 of the transcript Mr Plant agreed that
minutes of a meeting with rebuild and manufacture fitters
on 4 July 1996
(Exhibit "Z") referred to overtime being worked in the fabrication shop but not
in the fitting area and that they
made reference to a remark that overtime (in
the fabrication shop) was in the main done by one person and a statement that
we have the wrong people in the fabrication shop'.
Mr Plant said that what that meant was that the fitters wanted to be in the
fabrication shop, to do welding and overtime there. He
agreed that people other
than Mr Carr had injuries from time to time, including Mr Perkovic. The latter
had been asked to work overtime,
but not on a regular basis. Mr Plant said that
the reason why Mr Carr was not offered overtime was that up till the middle of
Mr Plant had been under the impression that Mr Carr was not to work
overtime because of his disability. The understanding had always
been there in
the fabrication shop and in the plant that 'if you were on light duties, you
would not work overtime'. The reason why
Mr Perkovic could be offered overtime
when he returned to work after being injured in 1987 was that he came back on
full duties,
not light duties or bench work.
Mr Moloney gave evidence at p360 of the transcript that he was the supervisor
of the fabrication shop, the fitting shop and the machine
shop, responsible for
the supervision of 31 employees. He said that overtime was normally arranged by
Mr Plant but Mr Plant would
as a rule do this after discussing it with him. Mr
Moloney said that the first time Mr Carr approached him about overtime was
the shutdown early in 1998. Prior to that Mr Moloney had taken it that Mr
Carr was restricted in the hours he could work.
Because of that stipulation Mr Moloney would not have offered Mr Carr
overtime. This was not challenged until the shutdown in January
1998 when Mr
Carr had put his hand up for overtime. Theoretically the overtime hours were for
the workshop as such, Mr Moloney said.
However, if there was not enough work in
the workshop, and there were breakdowns or there was work on the shutdown lines
not bench work then those people (working overtime) would be used for
breakdowns or on the shutdown lines. Mr Carr understood that
his restrictions
did not allow him to go out on the lines. Mr Moloney said that it was his
understanding that Mr Carr could now do
overtime because his WorkCover
certificate only limited him to bench work. There was now no time restriction
and that made the difference.
Mr Baker, at p385 of the transcript said that he had no policy of withholding
overtime or advancement from Mr Carr. He was not aware
of anybody having such an
approach, including Mr Warwick.
Tribunal finds that even on Mr Carr's own evidence there was no serious
effort by him until mid 1997 to seek overtime. Given Mr Carr's
medical history
from 1989 until then it was not unreasonable for the company to have formed the
view that Mr Carr had no interest
in overtime, or that if he had had such
interest, it was impossible for him to perform it given his medical
restrictions. Mr Carr
was a long time and experienced employee who knew that if
he had in any way qualified for overtime there were a number of avenues
him to broach the subject, including as a last resort an approach through the
That Mr Carr, who was himself a union shop steward and did not present
himself to the Tribunal as a shrinking violet when it came
to asserting his
rights should have taken no steps at all of this kind over many years appears to
the Tribunal consistent with him
having no desire to do overtime. The Tribunal
in this respect found less than convincing Mr Carr's assertion that he had made
views on overtime clear to management sometime in the past.
On Mr Carr's own assertion he did not find it necessary either to pursue the
issue by putting his name on the plant list or by informing
either of his
supervisor or his leading hand of his wish to do overtime. He knew how the
system operated but made no effort whatever
up to 1997 to take advantage of it.
In these circumstances it would be very difficult for Mr Carr to assert that he
had been subjected
to any detriment. The Tribunal accordingly finds that the
claim of victimisation with regard to the refusal to allow the complainant
overtime prior to mid 1997 does not succeed.
By 1997, nine years after Mr Carr's injury that had led to a permanent part
disability and that had been followed by innumerable WorkCover
certificates,
both with respect to that injury and to subsequent injuries, imposing
restrictions covering almost the entire period,
it was not surprising that, when
the first expression of interest in overtime came from Mr Carr the company
approached the matter
with some caution and required a medical clearance.
The Tribunal is satisfied that the company's interpretation of the effect of
the WorkCover certificates: that an 8 hour restriction
on duties excluded the
working of overtime, was reasonable in all the circumstances. When the company
found that the 8 hour restriction
had been removed while the restriction
regarding light bench duties remained it was, in the view of the Tribunal,
reasonable for
it to take the precaution of asking what had caused there to be a
change in Mr Carr's medical status. Mr Cleary's subsequent action
in writing to
the works doctor was therefore appropriate given the extended periods over which
Mr Carr had been subject to time restrictions.
There is certainly no evidence, and the Tribunal is unable to draw an
inference to that effect, that the company's reluctance to proceed
with overtime
for Mr Carr was in any way linked to Mr Carr having brought proceedings against
it under the
. The Tribunal finds that the requirement imposed on Mr Carr,
that he obtain a clearance from the works doctor or from his own medical
practitioner in order to clear up the question of any remaining restrictions
before overtime was considered was a reasonable one,
given Mr Carr's history of
The requirement for a clearance was not onerous and the fact that it was not
imposed on others does not necessarily lead to the conclusion
that Mr Carr was
singled out for special treatment, given the fact that Mr Carr had only been
able to perform light duties for nearly
a decade. The fact that the company in
early 1998 decided to allow Mr Carr to do overtime without a medical clearance
may be an indication
of how it had got worn down by Mr Carr's insistence that no
medical clearance was necessary and may also have been contributed to
company's desire to avoid an industrial dispute over the issue of allowing
contract boilermakers on site. The Tribunal accepts
Mr Cleary's version of
events that the company made a call to let Mr Carr do the overtime because it
thought that the situation could
be controlled.
For these reasons the Tribunal accordingly finds this part of the complaint
not proved.
Welding technology department job not advertised
Mr Carr next gave evidence that the company set up a welding technology
department in 1997. The department probably would have required
boilermakers to work in it, Mr Carr said. The normal procedure was for those
notice board. Exhibit "Q" contained
two examples of such an advertisement. Mr Carr said that he possessed a large
number of qualifications
to make him eligible to fill one of the boilermaker
jobs that might have been required in the welding technology department.
The two boilermakers that were appointed to the department held certificates
10 and 1 respectively. Mr Carr said that his qualifications,
given his associate
diploma in technology, put him above certificate 10. Mr Carr said that in his
view the positions were not advertised
so as to prevent him from applying for
the position. He added that he was one of the higher qualified boilermakers at
Westernport.
In cross examination, Mr Carr at pp100 and 101 of the transcript agreed that
he knew little about the work of the group other than
that it had some
consultancy role. The work of the group did not become his concern until someone
came to him with a complaint. He
said that he nevertheless should have had an
opportunity to apply for a job with the group, as should other boilermakers at
Mr Carr agreed that if there was a grievance about the process of
constituting the welding technology group that grievance would have
been shared
by other boilermakers at the plant. He nevertheless felt that the reason why the
job was not advertised was that the
company did not want him to apply for the
job. Although he had not made formal inquiries about job vacancy procedures, he
his own observation that vacancies were always advertised.
Mr Timmings at p151 of the transcript said that it was now company policy to
advertise vacancies in each area of the plant, so that
the best people could be
selected. This policy had come about in the last couple of years. In the past
there had been favouritism
where jobs were created 'and they would give them to
their mates'. The same applied to staff jobs. In the past, however, before
were reduced, people had been promoted off the floor.
Mr Cleary at pp307-08 of the transcript said that the welding technology
group came out of the reorganisation of an earlier maintenance
services group
that operated within the maintenance services department. The earlier group,
which had been an internal contracting
service to the plant consisting of 28 to
30 boilermakers, electricians, fitters and riggers had not been delivering a
value adding
service to the plant; hence the restructuring.
It was ultimately Mr Cleary's decision to select who would go into that
group. What Mr Cleary looked for in the new group was a small
team that needed
minimal supervision, a self directed work team. Mr Cleary did not expect to
spend much time supervising the group
and wanted them to be self sufficient. It
had been working like that since then. Mr Cleary said that he selected Mr Wooden
Wright for the welding technology group. They did not come from the
fabrication shop but had previously been in the maintenance services
Mr Wooden was the most highly qualified boilermaker, being a qualified
welding inspector and a member of the Welding Technology Institute
of Australia.
Mr Wright was a 'reasonably highly qualified boilermaker' too, a young man who
to Mr Cleary showed all the attributes
that were needed in the role, able to
work with minimal supervision and displaying all the correct work ethics that Mr
Cleary believed
were needed for the job.
The two boilermakers were chosen out of six. The remainder of the earlier
group had to be found jobs in the business that were value
adding to the
business; the welfare and the job security of the people concerned also had to
be taken into account. In other BHP
plants (similar) maintenance service groups
had been closed down. The boilermaker jobs had not been advertised because Mr
was working within a restructure of the old group and his only concern
was to restructure the work profile of the (remaining) people
Other specialist groups such as an electrical inspection group were developed
from the former maintenance service group and appointments
were made in all
those situations. The total restructuring was done by appointment, and no person
had to be let go. Although employees
outside the maintenance service group were
considered, such as Mr Heritage from the fabrication shop (cross examination at
the transcript) there had been no advertising and no complaint.
The exception was when a fitter withdrew after being nominated and had to be
replaced. That job, Mr Cleary said in cross examination
at p316 of the
transcript, was subsequently advertised. Mr Cleary did not believe that Mr Carr
would have been a more suitable candidate
for appointment to the welding
technology group, as he did not think that Mr Carr had the interpersonal skills
to interact with the
(internal) customers and suppliers. Additionally, the work
of the group was not limited to light bench work.
Ms Gillis said at pp429-30 of the transcript that it was not out of the
ordinary for the welding technology group vacancies to be
filled without
advertising. She said that in reality the exercise was about using the labour in
a particular department (that was
being restructured) and deciding what work the
(former employees) were going to be put on. It did not involve promotion to a
job as such and the two people who were chosen remained exactly on their old
employee development classification.
The new job was a different deployment of their skills. Six months prior to
the setting up of the welding technology group there had
been an agreement that
the company would expand the list of competencies for which employees could gain
accreditation under employee
development for tradesmen. All employees had an
opportunity to be promoted by having other skills recognised. From October 1996
March 1997 there was a review of all tradespersons against the expanded list
of competencies for their stream. All the boilermakers
had therefore been
assessed against this expanded stream.
Ms Gillis said that she would have been surprised if in those circumstances,
given that by nature the welding technology group involved
a special project
role, the company would go through an interview process when it had the
information already. Mr Carr had been part
of the evaluation process. The next
step was that all employees were advised of the outcome of the peer assessment
against the expanded
range of competencies, advised what to do further and
advised to challenge the results. Mr Carr had been invited in writing on three
occasions to challenge the results.
Because Mr Carr had not responded after the first letter (Exhibit "38"), he
was written to again (Exhibit "39") inviting him to challenge
his accreditation.
From Ms Gillis' knowledge Mr Carr did not agree with the extended list of
competencies, believing that further
extensions should be included. The company
was however satisfied with the extensions that were made. The company did not
and provide training for, extensions that were not relevant to its
business needs at Westernport.
Taking the above into account the Tribunal finds that there is no evidence
that the failure by the company to advertise the position
in the welding
technology group was in any way linked to Mr Carr having brought proceedings
against the company under the
, nor is there any basis whatsoever, in the
Tribunal's view, for the drawing of an inference to that effect. Mr Carr was in
position, as a result of the job not being advertised, than any other
tradesman at BHP Westernport. The fact that Mr Carr was not
considered or
selected for a position in the welding technology group could also in the view
of the Tribunal in no credible way be
linked to any proceedings brought by him
against the company.
The Tribunal accepts Mr Cleary's evidence that the selection process was on
merit and in that regard took account of the evidence
from Mr Plant that he
ranked Mr Wooden, the boilermaker selected for the senior position in the
welding technology group, as second
out of the 8 that were formally attached to
the fabrication shop, with Mr Wright, selected for the junior position, being
in a group ahead of Mr Carr.
The Tribunal accordingly finds that this part of the complaint is not proved.
For the reasons given above the Tribunal concludes that both complaints fail
and that they should be dismissed.
The Tribunal makes no order as to costs.
These complaints having come on for hearing before the Tribunal on 15 and 16
June and on 20, 21, 24 and 31 July 1998, and on a view
being held in the
presence of the parties' representatives on 7 September 1998, and on hearing Mr
Addison for the complainant and
Mr Bunting, solicitor, for the respondents this
Tribunal orders:
That these complaints be
That there is no order as to
Dated this day of
September 1998.
Mr John Wolters
Senior Member
Dr Julie Dawson
Ms Jan King
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (130 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter