URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICCAT/1998/1320.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Templeton v Cardinia CC Templeton v Cardinia CC [1998] VICCAT 1320 (24 December 1998)
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
Administrative Division
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON 18 DECEMBER 1998
NATURE OF APPLICATION
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING / OVERLAY CONTROLS
Current Planning Scheme Controls :
Replacement Planning Scheme Controls (adopted by Council and yet to be approved):
GROUNDS OF REFUSAL
GROUNDS OF APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
APPEARANCES
Nature of this Review
The Site and Locality
The Proposal
Planning Controls
Current planning controls
Proposed planning controls
Brief History of the application
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Appropriateness of Proposed Lot Size
Municipal Tip
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
Administrative Division
PLANNING LIST
NO: 1998/28227
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON 18 DECEMBER 1998
Osborn, Member
for Review/Permit Applicant
("The Applicant")
D Templeton
Responsible
Shire Council
NATURE OF APPLICATION
Application
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(the Act) for review of a
to refuse to grant a permit
Application No. T 970547
Subdivision of the land into two lots
770 Five Mile Road, Pakenham
Site Dimensions
metres to Five Mile Road and 405.5 m to Bald Hill Road
(eastern boundary 670m and southern boundary 716m)
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING / OVERLAY CONTROLS
Current Planning Scheme Controls :
Agricultural
Replacement Planning Scheme Controls (adopted by Council and yet to be approved):
GROUNDS OF REFUSAL
The subdivision would be detrimental to the proper future use and planning of
2. The proposal will result in an undesirable fragmentation of agricultural
3. The proposal is contrary to the purpose and intent of the existing zone in
which it is contained under the Pakenham Planning Scheme
4. The proposed subdivision is contrary to the purpose and intent of the
exhibited Cardinia Planning Scheme and the Municipal Strategic
GROUNDS OF APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
The subdivision application fulfils the guidelines and requirements of the
existing Pakenham Planning Scheme
2. The land is too small an acreage to sustain viability as a dairy farm.
APPEARANCES
Sorenson appeared for the Responsible Authority.
Mr Greg Templeton appeared for himself and called the following witness:
Mr James Naylor, bookeeper and farm manager
Nature of this Review
is a review of the refusal of the Responsible Authority to grant a permit for
the subdivision of land at 770 Five Mile Road Pakenham.
The Site and Locality
submission on behalf of the Responsible Authority described the appeal site as
The review site contains an existing dwelling and associated outbuildings
which are positioned in the north west corner of the property
with access to
this development provided from Five Mile Road. Five Mile road has a gravel
surface and minimal roadside drainage.
The land can generally be described as
flat, sloping slightly to the south and contains a number of plantations along
internal fencelines
and along the road frontage. Other than the vegetation
mentioned above the land is clear and used for grazing purposes. A significant
watercourse crosses from north to south through the appeal site. Melbourne
Water drainage plans indicate that the land in close
proximity to this
watercourse is flood prone.
The appeal site is situated midway between the Pakenham and Nar Nar Goon
townships. Access to the appeal site is gained form Bald
Hill Road which is
sealed and the main access route between Pakenham and Nar Nar Goon.
The topography of the land surrounding the appeal site is flat and sparsely
vegetated. With the exception of a poultry farm and a
private school, the area
surrounding the site is generally used for grazing purposes. Directly opposite
the appeal site is Council's
rubbish tip which has an expected life of between
5 - 10 years.
The Proposal
proposal is to subdivide the review site into two allotments each of which
would have an area of 26.6 hectares.
Planning Controls
Current planning controls
Clause 3.11 Productive Agricultural Land
* To ensure that the State's agricultural land base is protected from the
unplanned loss of high quality agricultural land due to
permanent changes of
* To enable protection of productive farmland which is of high quality and
strategic significance in the local or regional context
High quality productive agricultural land is defined as:
Land which is used for Animal husbandry or Crop raising, and is capable of
continuing to sustain agricultural production, and:
(a) is of prime, or very good, agricultural quality, having regard to soil
and is of sufficient
extent to support agricultural activities on an economically viable scale
Pakenham Planning Scheme
The review site is zoned Agricultural 1 under the Pakenham Planning Scheme.
Pursuant to Clause 6.1.4 a permit is required to subdivide
land with the
minimum lot size being 25 hectares.
The objectives of the Agricultural 1 Zone are:
* To maintain farming activities within an area which is eminently suited for
that purpose;
* To discourage the proliferation of non-agricultural activities on soil of
high agricultural value
* To protect the social characteristics of the rural community from the
pressure of encroachment of urban type development;
Proposed planning controls
exhibited version of the Cardinia Planning Scheme includes the appeal site
within the Rural Zone (Schedule One).
Pursuant to Clause 35.01-4 a planning permit is required to subdivide land and
must meet the minimum lot area specified. Schedule 1 sets out the minimum
subdivision size as forty (40) hectares for the Rural
The purpose of the zone is:
* To implement the State Planning Policy Framework and the Local Planning
Policy Framework, including the Municipal Strategic Statement
planning policies.
* To provide for the sustainable use of land for extensive animal husbandry
(including dairying and grazing) and Crop raising (including
Horticulture and
Timber production)
The following are encouraged in the zone:
* An integrated approach to land management
* Protection and creation of an effective rural infrastructure and land
* Improvement of existing agricultural techniques
* Protection and enhancement of the bio-diversity of the area
* Value adding to agricultural products at the source
* Promotion of economic development compatible with rural activities
* Development of new sustainable rural enterprises
The Municipal Strategic Statement
The Cardinia Municipal Strategic Statement (MSS) highlights the importance of
the Shire's agricultural production. This is summarised
as follows:
* Strong contribution of agriculture to the local economy
* Importance in terms of contribution to the State economy
The objective for agriculture in the MSS is set out in Clause 4.1.2 as
To maintain agriculture as a strong and sustainable economic activity
within the Cardinia Shire"
Of particular relevance to this review is the Land Capability for Agriculture
map (Figure Four in the Municipal Strategic Statement).
Subdivision
Clause 4.3.5 of the MSS ets out the objective for rural subdivision as
To ensure that the subdivision of rural land does not result in a loss of
rural production or viability, environmental degradation,
or a los of amenity
to existing residents.
Brief History of the application
proposal was not advertised and was referred to a number of utilities and to
Melbourne Water Planning Division - Waterways and
Drainage. A refusal to grant
a permit was issued by the Cardinia Council on 16 February 1998.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
the hearing written submissions were read and tendered by the Responsible
Authority and the applicant, Mr TEmpleton. A `Farm Business
Review' prepared
by Julian Slee of Lynch Rural, was also tendered by the applicant. Mr Templeton
called Mr James Naylor, bookeeper
and farm manager.
The main issue in this review is the appropriateness, in terms of relevant
planning provisions, policy and strategic directions,
of a lot size of 26.6 ha
for each lot as proposed in the permit application for subdivision.
Appropriateness of Proposed Lot Size
Templeton, the applicant for Review, put that, the existing acreage at the
review site is too small to sustain a viable dairy
farm. The Farm Business
Review, prepared by Julian Slee of Lynch Rural and tendered by Mr Templeton
For dairy operations operated by a husband and wife partnership, as is the
case with this business, it is currently accepted that
the number of cows that
need to be milked to ensure viability is 150.
Further the Review states:
It is doubtful that this property can sustain 150 cows taking into account
its environmental constraints and need to remain economically
The Review concluded that one option for future business planning would be to
explore the possibility of rural residential or lifestyle
Finance raised from the sale of the lots could then assist Mr Templeton in
relocating to an area where dairying
has greater viability.
In support of the view that viable dairy farming was difficult to achieve at
the review site Mr Templeton called Mr Naylor, a part
owner of a neighbouring
farm. Mr Naylor highlighted difficulties in obtaining sufficient return to
support a family from farms in
the vicinity of the review site. These problems
were described as having been exacerbated by a recent drought and falling
for agricultural produce.
Ms.Sorensen, on behalf of the Responsible Authority, outlined research
undertaken for new Planning Scheme to assist in establishing
appropriate lot
sizes in relation to suitability of land for various types of agriculture. The
result of that research has been incorporated
in the Municipal Strategic
Statement (MSS) of the new Cardinia Planning Scheme.
The submission on behalf of the Responsible Authority states that the review
site falls within the classification of high quality
productive agricultural
land as defined in the State Section of the existing Planning Scheme:
The appeal site has a total area of 53 hectares, is easily accessible to
local and regional infrastructure and has
a soil type which is capable
of sustaining broadacre farming activities.
The review site has been classified as `good' agricultural land in Figure 4:
Land Capability for Agriculture, in the Cardinia Shire
Council Municipal
Strategic Statement. The classification system has four categories being
`high', `good', `fair' and `poor'.
As described in the submission on behalf of the Responsible Authority:
"Council has recognised that there is an integral relationship between
allotment size and the capability of land for sustaining different
agricultural
The review site is in the area described as having a rating of `good'
agricultural land and accordingly a minimum lot size of 40
hectares is proposed
in the new Planning Scheme. Other land in the municipality which is
appropriate for more intensive agricultural
use has been included in the `high'
category with respect to land capability and has been identified as suitable
for smaller lot
size based on the high quality soils and related land
capability.
At the time of the hearing, the proposed new Cardinia Planning Scheme had been
reviewed by an advisory Committee and Panel. A panel
report had been published
and it was expected that the Scheme would be adopted by Council within a week
of the review hearing. The
Responsible Authority confirmed that the Scheme had
been adopted by Council on 21 December, 1998 and advised the Tribunal and the
applicant by letter dated 24 December 1998. As such, the Tribunal considers
that the proposed Scheme is seriously entertained. The
recommendation of
Council with respect to a lot size of 40 hectares, in the relevant schedule to
the proposed Rural zone applying
to the review site, has been endorsed by the
Panel / Technical Advisory Committee in their report on the proposed new
Scheme. The
panel gave consideration to and was supportive of the application
of the Rural Zone to land identified in the Land Capability Study
Cardinia Shire (February 1997) as having either a good or fair rating. The
panel report at 3.4.6 , The Rural Zone, states
the following:
The MSS recognises agricultural production as `one of the municipality's and
Western Port regions economic strengths'. A 40 hectare
minimum lot size for
the majority of the rural land in the municipality was considered appropriate
for the following reasons:
The need to match land use with the capability of the land so that the use
can be sustained and land degradation avoided.
Activities such as beef and dairy farming require 40 hectares of land as a
minimum to remain a viable farming operation.
Much of the area is included in a Farming (Low Intensity) Zone which has a
40 hectare minimum lot size
The land is in the South Eastern Growth Corridor which is earmarked for
long term urban growth, and should not be compromised by small
subdivision
The exhibited version of the Casey, Baw Baw, South Gippsland and Bass
Coast Planning Schemes all specify a 40 hectare minimum lot
size in their main
farming areas
Forty hectares is specified as the default in the Rural Zone
The Tribunal believes the Panel's views should be supported and the proposed
lot size is inappropriate having regard to the proposed
new Cardinia Planning
In summary, the following are additional reasons for the Tribunal's view that
the subdivision would not be appropriate:
* According to the Farm Business Review prepared on behalf of the applicant
for review, Mr Templeton uses the land at the review site
plus an additional
block of 45 hectares for dry cows and heifers. The Tribunal considers that this
practice is indicative of the
likely need for land at least as large and
possibly larger than the proposed 40 hectare minimum if viable agriculture
to the land capability, such as dairying or grazing, is to be
* Mr Naylor, who gave evidence on behalf of the applicant, supported the view
that the land is not really appropriate for intensive
agriculture and was of
the view that, in terms of farming pursuits, the land is best suited to grazing
if properly drained.
* The Farm Business Review tendered by Mr Templeton, while recommending
exploration of the possibility of subdivision, also includes
possibilities for building up the existing operation on the current holding or
sale of the farm as a whole. The review states
"...an increase in numbers to 120 (dairy cows) is planned for the short term
which will generate an extra $20,000 after associated
increased costs".
* If the land at the review site is marginal for viable dairying, and the Farm
Business Review did not in the opinion of the Tribunal
give conclusive evidence
to support this view, it does not follow that it is inappropriate for other
agricultural uses. The review
site could be purchased by another owner of land
to extend their area for grazing or, as indicated in the Review, the existing
could be upgraded or altered.
* An inspection of the site and surroundings showed that grazing is the
predominant land use in the area and that the review site
is not in close
proximity to a township where more intensive residential use may be appropriate
* A lot has already been excised from the property, so that the applicant
already has the potential to sell one or both of the allotments.
Municipal Tip
Naylor's submission included issues relating to the municipal tip opposite the
review site and adjoining the land owned by Mr Naylor's
family in Five Mile
Road. While the Tribunal would be concerned about any existing or future
amenity problems in relation to the
tip or in relation to a possible waste
transfer station, the proposed zoning recommended for the tip site by the Panel
In this zone a permit would be required for a waste transfer
station. Further opportunity for potentially affected landowners to
views considered is likely.
The submission on behalf of the Responsible Authority indicates that the tip
has a likely lifetime of five to ten years. In the view
of the Tribunal it
would not be advisable to subdivide land to create Rural Residential allotments
at the review site where additional
houses may be constructed in close
proximity to the tip. This is in line with Clause15.04-2 of the State Planning
Policy Framework
which sets out the following for General Implementation of the
air quality objective; to assist the protection and improvement of
air quality.
Decision making by planning and responsible authorities must be consistent
with any relevant requirements of the State Environment
protection policy (The
Air Environment) as varied from time to time.
Planning and responsible authorities should ensure that development is not
prejudiced and community amenity is not reduced by air
emissions by ensuring,
wherever possible, that there is suitable separation between potentially
amenity reducing and sensitive land
uses and developments. Consideration
should be given to recommended Buffer Distances for Industrial Residual Air
Emissions (EPA
1990) to determine the extent of separation.
Responsible authorities should have regard to the potential for conflict
between land uses or development within a zone due to air
emission impacts.
concerning the difficulties in earning a living from agricultural pursuits were
expressed during the hearing. The Tribunal acknowledges
these difficulties. It
would appear however to be creating problems for sustaining agricultural
production in the area by reducing
the lot size below a viable level for a
range of agricultural pursuits. A larger lot size increases the potential
flexibility of
agricultural land use. Broadacre pursuits such as grazing, or
other farming activities can be undertaken in line with changing agricultural
markets. The possible short term gain from the sale of rural residential
allotments, in a location which has no particular reason
in terms of local
facilities or other attributes for such use, is outweighed by the need to
increase the opportunities for viable
agriculture on land capable of sustaining
such activity. It would appear that further exploration of different value
added farming
or rural pursuits in the area including the review site may be
In conclusion, the Tribunal notes that the minimum lot sizes for subdivision in
both the existing and proposed Planning Schemes,
25 hectares and 40 hectares
respectively, are the lowest size which may be permitted. Larger lot sizes may
however be required for
viable farming and to meet the requirements of the
objectives of the State policy and zone objectives under the existing and
Schemes. It does not follow that because a minimum has been set, the
smallest possible lot size will be acceptable. In this case
there is well
substantiated support for the view that if the land is to be used for grazing,
which is the most appropriate form of
agriculture in relation to land
capability, then a lot size at least as large as the review site would be
appropriate. The Tribunal
is not convinced that a lot size of 26.6 hectares
would assist in achieving viable agricultural use at the review site.
For the reasons given above, the application for review is disallowed.
were sought by the applicant for review in relation to attendance at the
Tribunal by the applicant for review on 4 December.
The Responsible Authority
failed to appear on that date despite acknowledging receipt of notice of the
date and time of the hearing.
The amount of $160 is claimed by the applicant.
The Tribunal accepts this claim as reasonable and the costs are awarded to the
decision of the Responsible Authority is upheld. It is directed that no permit
The Responsible Authority is directed to pay costs of $160 to Mr Greg Templeton
within 21 days of the date of this order.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter