URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/67.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:47:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ryan v Textile Clothing and Footwear Union and Anor [1996] VicRp 67; [1996] 2 VR 235 (13 March 1996)
RYAN v TEXTILE CLOTHING and FOOTWEAR UNION and ANOR
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA COURT OF APPEAL
BROOKING, TADGELL and HAYNE JJA
30, 31 January, 1 February, 13 March 1996
Brooking JA
This appeal raises important questions in the field of labour law concerning the enforceability of unregistered collective agreements,
by which I mean collective agreements that have not been certified or registered under Federal or State legislation dealing with
industrial relations. The facts are summarised in the judgment of Hayne JA.
I deal first with the Hycraft agreement. This is to be regarded as constituted by the document dated 29 March 1988; Mr Haylen, senior
counsel for the respondents, has not suggested otherwise. It is unambiguous as regards its scope, being shown by the heading to apply
in respect of the sample assembly section. If recourse may be had to the facsimile message from Jennings to Worth dated 30 March
1988, which evidently immediately preceded the signing of the document dated 29 March 1988, then the conclusion about scope is confirmed,
since the proposal which, when signed, became the agreement, is described as "your sample assembly section redundancy proposal".
In an affidavit filed by the respondents, Jennings says: Because the Sample Assembly Section seemed most vulnerable to retrenchments,
the first agreement was made in respect of it.
Worth, in an affidavit filed by the respondents, says that the agreement was negotiated "because we were contemplating redundancies
in the Sample Section". Pennock, in an affidavit filed by the appellant, says that the agreement was made "in relation to the closure
of the Sample Assembly Section". Whatever arguments about admissibility might arise, it was at all events permissible to show that
the company was, to the knowledge of the union, contemplating redundancies in the sample assembly section at the time of the negotiations
which led up to the agreement.
The judge found that negotiations were carried on between Hycraft and representatives of the union in relation to the sample assembly
section and that the agreement was made in relation to the closure of the sample assembly section.
His Honour went on to find "that the 1988 agreement was still operative at Hycraft in 1992 and was intended by management to be a
binding agreement in respect of all employees". It is not clear whether the latter part of this finding relates to the intention
of management at the time of the making of the agreement in 1988 or four years later, although I am disposed to think that the latter
is the correct view.
The argument for the respondents as set out in the written outline appears to be that on its proper construction the agreement was
not confined to the sample assembly section, those words being words which should be disregarded as extraneous. This argument cannot
be accepted.
Mr Haylen submitted that the conduct of the union, the employees and the employer after the making of the agreement of 29 March 1988
had the result that the agreement had been "extended to" all employees of Hycraft. I agree with Hayne JA that this submission should
not be accepted. Mr Haylen submitted in the alternative that the same conduct could be used in the construction of the agreement
of 29 March 1988 so as to reach the conclusion that it was not confined to the sample assembly section. The argument was that the
agreement of 29 March 1988 was ambiguous and that, although the decision of the Full Court in FAI Traders Insurance Co Ltd v Savoy
Plaza Pty Ltd [1993] 2 VR 343 prevented resort to the conduct as an aid to the construction of the agreement, such resort was permissible
by reason of the circumstance that the proper law of the agreement was the law of New South Wales. The law of that State was said
to differ from the law of Victoria, and reference was made to the decision of Santow J in Spunwill Pty Ltd v BAB Pty Ltd
(1994) 36 NSWLR 290.
I shall assume that the proper law of the agreement is that of New South Wales, with the result that its construction is governed
by the law of that State.
There are more answers than one to this submission. The first is that it proceeds on the erroneous basis that the common law of one
Australian State may differ from that of another. In Australia the common law cannot differ from State to State except as a result
of statutory modification. This is the result of the constitutional position of the High Court, which has the unifying power to resolve
differences between State courts concerning the common law. In this respect the Australian position differs from that which obtains
in the United States: Quick and Groom, The Judicial Power of the Commonwealth, at 206-7; Lumb and Moens, The
Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia, 5th ed, at 544; Nygh, Conflict of Laws in Australia, 6th ed, at 9; Lane, The Australian Federal
System, 2nd ed, at 511-2; Tribe, American Constitutional Law, 2nd ed, Foundation Press, 1991, s3.23 and s3.24; Addresses of Sir Owen
Dixon reported in
(1942) 16 ALJ 192
(1943) 17 ALJ 138
at 140; paper by Sir Owen Dixon, "The Common Law as an Ultimate Constitutional Foundation" in
(1957) 31 ALJ 240
at 240-1 and commentary by Professor Derham following at 249; Mutual Life and Citizens' Assurance Co Ltd v Evatt
[1968] HCA 74
(1968) 122 CLR 556
at 563 per Barwick CJ; Cooper v Southern Portland Cement Ltd
[1972] HCA 28
(1972) 128 CLR 427
at 438 per Barwick CJ. Until the High Court determines otherwise, the common law rule in Australia should be taken by a Victorian
court to be that laid down in FAI Traders Insurance Co Ltd v Savoy Plaza Pty Ltd [1993] 2 VR 343 FAI Traders Insurance Co Ltd v Savoy
Plaza Pty Ltd. But there are two further answers to the reliance placed by Mr Haylen on Spunwill Pty Ltd v BAB Pty Ltd
(1994) 36 NSWLR 290
Spunwill Pty Ltd v BAB Pty Ltd. One is that the agreement of 29 March 1988 is unambiguous: subsequent conduct cannot be used to show
that it has a different meaning to that which unambiguously appears on its face. The other is that the subsequent conduct relied
upon is equivocal, as Hayne JA points out.
I turn to the Homfray agreements.
There is no reason in theory why a trade union could not, in making an agreement with an employer dealing with terms and conditions
of employment, do so as agent for some or all of its members. It will usually be found, however, that there are great if not insuperable
difficulties, in a given case, in treating a trade union as acting as agent in entering into a collective agreement. This may be
said to have been inferentially recognised by Brennan CJ and Dawson and Toohey JJ when in Byrne v Australian Airlines Ltd
[1995] HCA 24
(1995) 69 ALJR 797
at 802 their Honours spoke of "collective bargains, which at least involve a measure of agreement albeit not with individual employees".
The matter seems to have received little judicial attention in this country. It was raised, after a fashion, but not considered,
in Ansett Transport Industries (Operations) Pty Ltd v Australian Federation of Air Pilots (No 2) [1991] 2 VR 636, as is recorded
It is clear that to make a contract on behalf of a principal an agent must contract on behalf of a principal who is then ascertainable:
Trident General Insurance Co Ltd v McNiece Bros Pty Ltd
[1988] HCA 44
(1988) 165 CLR 107
at 113 per Mason CJ and Wilson J. This rule lies formidably in the way of the adoption of the view that a trade union has entered
into a collective agreement as agent for its members. For usually the intention will be to benefit future as well as present members
of the union, and the future members cannot be identified as principals when the collective agreement is made. Other difficulties
include the source of
the union's authority from its supposed principals and the closely related matter of the withdrawal of authority. Is the authority
to be found in the rules of the union? If so, must a unionist terminate his membership in order to terminate the authority to contract
on his behalf? If the authority is to be found, not in the rules of the union, but in some act of the members, and a vote at a meeting
of members is relied on as conferring the authority, questions arise about the position as supposed principals of those who did not
attend the meeting and those who attended the meeting but abstained from voting or voted against the proposal. One could take the
example of a meeting attended by only half the members of the union employed at the plant in question, at which a considerable number
of those present abstain from voting and the employer's proposal is accepted by the narrowest possible margin. Who are the union's
supposed principals when it enters into a collective agreement giving effect to the employer's proposal? It is one thing to suggest
that the individuals who voted in favour have authorised the making of the agreement on their behalf; it is another to put forward
a wider group.
Some of the difficulties in treating unions as making collective agreements as agents for their members are discussed in para477
of the Report of the Royal Commission on Trade Unions and Employers' Associations (the Donovan Report, Cmnd 3623, 1968), Wedderburn,
The Worker and the Law, 3rd ed, at 327-8, Elias, Napier and Wallington, Labour Law: Cases and Materials, Butterworths, 1980, 406
and Creighton, Ford and Mitchell, Labour Law, Law Book Co, 1983, at 58-9.
Whether a collective agreement had been made by a union as principal or agent was briefly considered in Gregory v Philip Morris Ltd
(1987) 77 ALR 79.
Gregory, an electrician, was employed in a cigarette factory. Two unions, the Amalgamated Metal Workers Union and the Electrical
Trades Union of Australia, between them covered most of the maintenance workers at the factory, where a closed shop was maintained.
Between 80 and 90 employees were members of the AMWU and about 40 were members of the ETU. The two unions had agreed to act together
in their dealings with management and they negotiated with management by means of a committee known as the closed shop committee.
In 1982 a lengthy formal written agreement, known as the local agreement, was entered into. The local agreement was signed on behalf
of each of the unions and the employer. It had a commencement date and a fixed period of operation. Its terms had been negotiated
by the closed shop committee. Before the agreement was made, and before any variation of it occurred, the results of negotiations
with the employer were conveyed by the closed shop committee to meetings of members of the unions, and adopted by them. Two meetings
were held on each occasion, the first for day and afternoon shift employees and the second for night shift employees. It appears
to have been found as a fact, both with regard to the making of the local agreement and with regard to each variation of it, that
all members of the union who were working on a particular day attended the meeting. There seems to have been no evidence of what
proportion of the total number of members of each union employed at the factory were working on particular days and no evidence of
whether the adoption of the original agreement or a variation was unanimous or on the other hand by a large or small majority. It
seems that separate meetings were held of the members of each union. It appears that the original agreement was for a fixed term
and that this term expired in November 1986 and that the term of the agreement was extended
to 23 November 1989. The variations made to the local agreement and the extension of it were in each case made by written agreement.
Cl4 of the local agreement was as follows: The purpose of this agreement is:
(a) To promote industrial harmony and co-operation between the company and its employees.
(b) To formalise the parties [sic] agreement with respect to:
* Rates of pay and classification Benefits
* Hours of work Conditions of employment to be observed by the company and employees.
(c) To establish working procedures for the settlement of disputes.
(d) To create a working relationship that will prevent work stoppages, lockouts or any other action that will disrupt peaceful co-existence
between both parties.
The agreement dealt with a variety of subjects, some of which bore directly upon conditions of employment. So matters like weekly
wage rates, hours of work, meal breaks and sick leave were dealt with. Other provisions did not bear directly upon conditions of
employment. Thus there were clauses dealing with shop stewards and union procedure, the right of entry of certain union officials,
the right to the use of notice boards and procedures for the settlement of disputes.
For much of the time Gregory was the shop steward elected by members of the ETU. He was one of those who negotiated in respect of
variations to the local agreement and the extension of its term for a further three years in 1986. He signed, on behalf of the ETU,
the document which effected the extension.
The local agreement provided that membership of the appropriate trade union was a condition of employment. A later clause provided
that no employee should be unfairly or unreasonably dismissed. In proceedings in the Federal Court, Gray J held that it was a term
of Gregory's employment that he be a member of the ETU and that he should not be dismissed unfairly or unreasonably. The basis of
that conclusion is, with respect, not entirely clear. At 93-4 Gray J said: In the present case, the local agreement, although entered
into by the unions concerned, was negotiated on their behalf by employees of the respondent and not solely by officials of the union.
The agreement is signed on behalf of the unions by members of the closed shop committee. As I have already stated, before any such
signature, the terms of the agreement, or any variation of it, were the subject of decision by the employees concerned. In these
circumstances, it is much easier than in the normal case to construe the agreement as having been entered into by the union concerned,
or by the negotiators, as agents for the employees. It is even easier to find that the terms of the local agreement became part of
the terms of the contract of employment of the applicant when the applicant himself was a negotiator in respect of variations to
the local agreement, and its extension from November 1986 until 23 November 1989. It is to be noted that the document which effected
that extension, and certain variations to the local agreement, was signed by the applicant on behalf of the ETU.
The conclusion is that the terms of the local agreement became part of the terms of Gregory's contract of employment. The sentence
which immediately precedes this finding appears to show that it is based on the view, not that the terms of the local agreement were
in some way incorporated into Gregory's contract of employment, but that the local agreement was made by the union, or by the union
negotiators, as agent or agents for the unionists. On this approach,
a variation of the contracts of employment of individual unionists resulted from the making by them as principals of the local agreement.
In that case the question which Gray J was considering was that of the terms of employment of Gregory, not that of the terms of employment
of members of the two unions generally. Nevertheless, if one is to conclude that the terms of Gregory's contract of employment were
varied by reason of the mere making of the local agreement, it is impossible to avoid the question of the identity of the principals
who were contracting with the employer. When his Honour found, as he seems clearly enough to have done, that the principals to the
local agreement were "the employees", it is clear enough that the expression is confined to members of one or other of the two unions
concerned. But are "the employees concerned" (his Honour's expression) all members of the union employed in the factory, or all of
them who attended the meeting, or all of them who voted in favour of the proposal? Did his Honour intend to include among "the employees
concerned" future employees who were members of the union?
Having found, as it seems to me, that the local agreement had been entered into by the union concerned or the negotiators as agent
or agents for "the employees", his Honour went on to observe that it was even easier to find that the terms of the local agreement
became part of the terms of Gregory's contract of employment when he himself had negotiated in respect of variations to the local
agreement and its extension and signed one of the contractual documents on behalf of the ETU. If negotiators and signatories are
to be, so to speak, singled out in this way, then it seems to me, with respect, that what is contemplated is the very difficult notion
that, even though the local agreement may not have been made on behalf of all members of the union at the factory, or all members
who attended the meeting, or all members who voted in favour, it should nevertheless be found to have been made on behalf of individual
negotiators or signatories. If this is not what is contemplated, then there seems to me to have been a change of approach, not made
express. The immediately preceding sentence asks whether the local agreement was made on behalf of members of the union. The sentence
now under consideration is concerned with whether facts personal to a particular employee or employees make it appropriate to treat
the local agreement, even though it may have been made by the union as principal, as incorporated into a particular contract of employment.
On appeal, the full Federal Court was principally concerned with the award, not the local agreement. (Its decision must now be read
subject to what the High Court decided in Byrne v Australian Airlines Ltd
[1995] HCA 24
(1995) 69 ALJR 797.)
My impression is that in the Full Court Jenkinson J regarded the two unions as parties to the local agreement as principals: Gregory
v Philip Morris Ltd
(1988) 80 ALR 455
at 457. While the matter of agency is not expressly dealt with in the joint judgment of Wilcox and Ryan JJ, the passage at 469 in
which the local agreement is considered seems to me to be inconsistent with acceptance of the view that members of the two unions
were parties to the agreement as principals.
I return to the present case. Mr Haylen expressly disclaimed any suggestion that the rules of the unions authorised them to make
the four agreements as agents for their members. He relied on what took place at the stop-work meetings. It is necessary to look
closely at the evidence in this regard.
What finding the judge made is not entirely clear. Certainly the finding was that each of the Homfray agreements was, or was in part,
made with members of the union concerned as principals. His Honour seems to have considered that the agent was, not the union, but
the union official who signed the agreement,
although such a finding does not sit well with his Honour's acceptance of the possibility that the second part of the agreement contained
promises made by the union to the employer. It is one thing to contemplate the possibility that a person - the union - has made an
industrial agreement in two capacities, acting as agent for its members as regards part of the agreement and as principal as regards
the remainder. But it is unlikely in the extreme that the employer made an agreement in part with a union official as agent for union
members and in part with the union itself as principal. This says nothing about the difficulty of determining on behalf of which
of its members the union, or its official who signed the agreement, is to be taken as having contracted. The finding here is expressed
as relating to members "who had approved the agreement at a meeting" and - later - as relating to members "who participated in the
agreement making process", or members "who accepted the offer". His Honour's answer to Q4(a) seems to be founded on the view that
the contract was made by the union or union official as agent for all present and future members of the union, a view which, with
respect, cannot be accepted.
The four Homfray redundancy agreements were entered into after several stop-work meetings had been held in August and September 1991.
Although there are one or two loose statements in the material which might be thought to suggest that some non-unionists were present
at the meetings, on the evidence as a whole it seems clear enough that only unionists attended. The first stop-work meeting was held
on 9 August and the second on 17 August; these were meetings of members of the TCFUA. The remaining two meetings, held on 5 September
and 16 September, were meetings of members of all four unions whose officers later executed the redundancy agreements. The meeting
of 5 September considered the second written offer made by Homfray, the first written offer having been rejected at the meeting of
17 August. The judge found that at the meeting of 5 September the employees voted to reject the second offer and resolved to accept
nothing less than the Hycraft redundancy "package". But the evidence does not support a finding in these terms. The evidence on the
point, that of Ms Livingston, is that the members stated that they wanted nothing less than the Hycraft package and that a resolution
was passed that there should be talks again with the company. No doubt this reference to what was stated by the members relates to
what was said by speakers at the meeting. Speeches might give some impression of the attitude of those present at the meeting, but
the fact remains that there was no resolution to the effect that the Hycraft redundancy package would be acceptable. Even if there
had been evidence to support the finding that the meeting of 5 September resolved to accept nothing less than the Hycraft redundancy
package, the difficulty would remain that this was a meeting which considered the second offer, the terms of which in relation to
matters other than redundancy differed from those of the third offer.
The meeting of 5 September is described in Ms Livingston's affidavit as "a stop-work meeting and ... of all employees from all unions".
Doubtless this is intended to convey that the meeting was attended by members of all four unions. The oral evidence of Ms Livingston
shows that the affidavit was not intended to convey that every employee of Homfray who was a member of one of the four unions attended
the meeting. In what sense the meeting was a meeting of employees from all four unions is not clear. It was convened by giving at
least two days' notice by the placing of notices on notice boards. Whether these notices were given only on behalf of Ms Livingston's
union, the TCFUA, does not appear. According to her evidence the meeting of 5 September was well attended.
Again according to the evidence of Ms Livingston, at the meeting held on 16 September a vote was taken on Homfray's third proposed
redundancy package and it was "overwhelmingly approved". Asked about this statement when she gave oral evidence, Ms Livingston said
that she thought that the vote of approval was by 100% of those attending the meeting. The judge found, however, only that the proposal
was overwhelmingly approved at the meeting.
According to the evidence of Kindler, there were at Homfray in the middle of 1991 about 150 members of the TCFUA and in addition
attendants, who were members of the FEDFA. The evidence of the union organiser, Mr Brent, was that in 1991 there were about five
members of the AMWU at Homfray. Ms Livingston was inclined to think that there were only two boiler attendants at the time of the
stop-work meetings in 1991. According to her affidavit those present at the meeting of 5 September included Martin French from the
FEDFA and Eddie Blanchfield from the ETU. These were presumably, not members of those unions employed at Homfray, but union organisers.
According to the same witness, those present at the meeting of 16 September included Neville Brent from the AMWU and a person from
the ETU. Brent's own affidavit shows him to be a union organiser, and the person from the ETU was presumably also a union organiser.
The same affidavit shows that Brian Taylor was present at the meeting of 16 September. He was a member of the AMWU employed at Homfray.
In the absence of a finding that the "overwhelming approval" given on 16 September was in fact given unanimously, it is, in the unsatisfactory
state of the material, not possible to say, with regard to any of the three minor unions, that members of that union present at the
meeting of 16 September voted unanimously or even by majority in favour of the resolution. They may have abstained or voted against
it. It may not even be possible to say, with regard to a given minor union, that more than one of its members was present at the
Levine gave evidence of which blue collar employees were absent from work on 5 and 16 September 1991. The evidence is that all blue
collar employees were unionists. The judge found that nine employees were absent from work on 5 September, that 18 employees were
absent on 16 September and that three employees were absent on both days.
So far as the three minor unions are concerned, the short answer to the suggestion that the agreements were made on behalf of members
is that it fails on the facts, the giving of the necessary authority not being shown. As regards all four unions, while it is shown
in the case of the TCFUA that its members present at the meeting of 16 September voted by a large majority to approve Homfray's proposal,
I cannot accept that the union or its members or Homfray intended that the signed agreement should be made with, and only with, the
members who had voted in favour in the sense that they were to be the principals on one side of the agreement. Hayne JA shows in
his judgment how unlikely such an intended consequence is.
If the Homfray agreements are to be viewed as intended to be legally binding, the parties to them were the union as principal and
the employer. Was there consideration for the employer's promises? There seems to be only one decision in Australia in which the
matter of consideration to support a collective industrial agreement has been considered. This is Re Australian Paper Manufacturers
Ltd Building Tradesmen Annual Leave Award
1960 AR (NSW) 188
, a decision of Beattie J of the Industrial Commission of New South Wales. By exchange of
letters a union and an employer agreed that members of the union who worked at the employer's mill should, unless the agreement was
determined by the giving of four weeks' notice, have applied to them the provisions of a long and complicated industrial agreement
that had been made between the employer and a number of other unions and certified under the Conciliation and Arbitration Act. By
the agreement constituted by the exchange of letters the union agreed that the provisions of the certified industrial agreement "shall
be observed" by it in respect of its members employed at the mill in lieu of the provisions of the awards which would otherwise have
been applicable. Beattie J found consideration for the employer's promise in this express promise of the union that it would observe
the terms of the certified industrial agreement. But the only question which arose in that case was whether the consideration given
by the employer (not the union) was good having regard to the fact that, since the making of the informal agreement, the award had
been varied with the result that in respect of one matter - how many weeks' annual leave was to be allowed - the informal agreement
was no longer more favourable to the employees than the award. Not surprisingly, this was held not to affect the sufficiency of the
consideration furnished by the employer. The certified industrial agreement was, as I have said, a long and complicated one, and
the union's promise, in the informal agreement, to observe the terms of the certified agreement was not the subject of any submission
to or analysis by the judge. The judgment does, however, contain, at 206, this observation: The consideration given by the Union
was that it would observe the terms of the Pulp and Paper Industry Agreement in lieu of the provisions of the State Mixed Industries
or Construction Awards. Consideration therefore moved from both sides and a binding contract came into existence.
Between the two world wars the matter of consideration in collective labour agreements received attention in a number of decisions
in the United States. In 1922 came the notable decision in Schlesinger v Quinto
117 Misc 735
192 NYS 564
(1922); affd 201 App Div 487;
194 NYS 401
(1922), the first reported case in which a union obtained an injunction: Rice, "Collective Labor Agreements in American Law" (1930-31)
44 Harvard LR 572 at 573. The agreement there was between a trade union and an employers' association. It included these clauses:
The Union, believing in the principle of a "fair day's labor for a fair day's pay", obligates itself in all good faith for all its
members that they will perform their work conscientiously, faithfully, and efficiently. The employer may discharge his workers for
causes such as incompetency, misconduct, insubordination in the performance of his work, breach of the reasonable rules to be established,
and soldiering on the job. There shall be no lockout or strike during the period of this agreement, nor shall there be any individual
shop lockout, stoppage or shop strikes pending the determination of any complaint or grievance. Should there be a stoppage of work
or shop strike in any factory, immediate notice thereof shall be given by the Association to the Union. The Union agreed to return
the striking workers to their work within 24 hours after the receipt by the Union of such notice, and until the expiration of such
time it shall not be deemed that the striking workers have abandoned their employment. The consideration of stoppage cases shall
have precedence over all other complaints and grievances arising hereunder.
At first instance the matter of consideration was dealt with briefly by Wagner J, who referred to the mutuality of obligations under
the agreement as compelling
a mutuality of remedy. (In the American decisions the matter of consideration is often run together with the defence of want of mutuality,
as is pointed out, for example, by Witmer, Collective Labour Agreements in the Courts,
(1938-39) 48 Yale LJ 195
at 203.) On appeal, Page J, in the leading judgment, said (194 NYS at 410): This contract has mutual obligations binding on the parties
thereto. Each party knows the obligation that it has assumed and the consequences of failure or refusal to perform those requirements.
Through its control of its members it can compel performance. ... There is in this contract a mutuality of obligation, and there
is also a mutuality of remedy for its enforcement.
In Schlesinger v Quinto
117 Misc 735
192 NYS 564
(1921); affd 201 App Div 487;
194 NYS 401
(1922) Schlesinger v Quinto consideration on the part of the union was presumably found in its express promises. The decision was
applied in Greater City Master Plumbers' Association v Kahme
6 NYS (2d) 589
(1937), where the union called a strike because of the employer's refusal to accept its demands for an increase in wages and change
in hours and an injunction was granted enjoining the union from calling or continuing a strike in violation of its contractual obligations.
According to Witmer, loc cit, at 201, between 1928 and 1938 there were at least 15 successful suits by unions for specific performance
or an injunction against breach of a collective labour agreement in the lower courts of New York: cf Rice, Collective Labor Agreements
in American Law, (1930-31) 44 Harvard LR 572 at 603.
The promise of the union which constituted consideration was undoubtedly express in Gilchrist Co v Metal Polishers, Buffers and Platers
Local Union 113 A 320 (1919), where the informal contract was evidenced by a letter from the employer to the union. Lane VC of the
Court of Chancery of New Jersey observed: The contract was for a valid consideration; the company proposed as a condition that there
should be no further labour troubles, in which the unions would be a party, for a period of one year from the date of the letter,
to advance wages.
In H Blum and Co v Landau
23 Ohio App 426
(1926) at Ohio App 437, a contract between a manufacturers' association and the union was upheld as enforceable by the Court of Appeals
of Ohio. The leading judgment was delivered by Sullivan J, who expressed himself in this way at 157: That such a contract as the
one at bar is enforceable there can be no question. It clearly appears that the contract between the Garment Manufacturers' Association
and the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union was a contract made for the benefit of third parties, and that one of its considerations
was lodged in the purpose and intent to prevent strikes and lockouts deleterious to the contracting parties.
Whether the reference here to one of the "considerations" of the contract is a reference to consideration in the legal sense is not,
I think, clear.
In other cases the promise on the part of the union held to constitute the consideration has been implied. In the important case
of Nederlandsch Amerikaansche Stoomvaart Maatschappij v Stevedores' and Longshoremen's Benevolent Society
(1920), a shipping line sued a union for damages for breach of contract in the District Court. The claim succeeded, Foster J saying,
at 400: The contract is inartificially drawn and in terms imposes no obligation on respondents to furnish labor. It must be given
a reasonable construction, however, and so as to maintain its validity, if possible. The contract absolutely binds all of the ship
agents and employing stevedores of the port of New Orleans to employ none but members of the respondent unions, if they are available.
By it the respondents establish the principle of collective bargaining, obtain the closed shop, 44-hour week, extra rates of pay
for overtime, and their own working conditions, all that union labor, so far, has ever contended for. I think the contract is valid,
and imposes the reciprocal obligation on respondents to work according to the contract in good faith.
Another example of the implication of an obligation of the union held to constitute consideration is to be found in Harper v Local
Union No 520
48 SW (2d) 1033
(1932), where the Court of Civil Appeals of Texas had before it a contract between an employer and a union. The union sued the employer
to enforce a closed shop provision; the defence was taken that the agreement was "unilateral and wanting in consideration". The judgment
of the court was delivered by McClendon CJ and the matter of consideration was dealt with at 1040-1: ... we do not believe the agreement
is unilateral, in that it imposes no obligation upon the union. While it is true that there is no express agreement on the part of
the union to furnish labor at the prices and under the terms and conditions prescribed in the contract, its very purpose and object
was to prescribe terms under which the members of the union would work and the contractors would employ. It was therefore, we think,
a necessarily implied term of the agreement that the union, its officers and members would, collectively abide by the terms of the
agreement, and would not collectively or as an organization exercise any right or do any act it or they might otherwise lawfully
exercise or do, which was in conflict with any of the terms of the agreement; and that the union would enforce the contract to the
extent of its powers over its members under its constitution and by-laws. Clearly, we think, what the contractors were bargaining
for and what they obtained under the agreement was freedom from industrial dispute, strike, or collective adverse action on the part
of the union, its officers and its members during the term covered by the agreement. As we have already pointed out, this right,
if infringed, could be enforced by injunction at the instance of the contractor.
McClendon CJ went on to cite a passage from the Nederlandsch Amerikaansche Stoomvaart Maatschappij v Stevedores' and Longshoremen's
Benevolent Society
(1920) Nederlandsch case which includes that set out above.
Next there is Gates v Arizona Brewing Co
54 Ariz 266
; 95P (2d) 49 (1939), a decision of the Supreme Court of Arizona concerning a contract between an employer and a union in which the
defence that the contract was "unilateral" or "lacking in mutuality" was dealt with at some length. Having referred to mutuality
of obligation and consideration, Lockwood J, in the principal judgment, continued: The question then is whether in the contract in
question... there are sufficient mutual promises, either express or implied, to support it. There is no doubt that defendant made
many promises to the union, but upon a casual reading of the contract it might be imagined that there are no specific promises made
by the union, on behalf of its members, to the defendant. A careful consideration of all of its terms, however, will show that there
are certain definitely implied promises. In the first place, s1 and s5 read, respectively, as follows:
"None but members in good standing in the International Union of the United Brewery, Flour, Cereal, and Soft Drink Workers of America
shall be employed by the party of the first part." "Reason for discharge shall be incompetence, neglect of duty, or disobedience
towards the employer, or any duly authorized heads of departments." We think the only reasonable implication to be drawn from these
sections is that the union promises that its members who work for defendant shall be competent, obedient to the legitimate commands
of their employer, and that they shall perform the duties
imposed upon them in a proper manner, and that if they do not do so, they may be discharged by the employer. Further, s12 provides
a carefully worked out schedule of wages, and s14 is in this language:
"This agreement shall take effect on October 15, 1934, and shall remain in force until April 15, 1935. In the event of any changes
being contemplated by any party hereto, due notice must be given in writing of such intention to the other party, and state conditions
thirty days prior to the expiration of this contract, and unless such notice is given this agreement shall automatically continue
from year to year."
This is clearly a promise on behalf of the union that it will not demand any change in wages or conditions except upon notice given
to the employer thirty days in advance of the annual termination of the contract. We think there can be no question that the union,
and therefore plaintiff who is a member thereof, is under certain very distinct obligations to the defendant. Whether these obligations
are as onerous as those undertaken by the defendant is not a question for our consideration. They are legally sufficient to sustain
the contract as being mutual.
The only two cases cited us, discussing contracts of a like nature, are Nederlandsch Amer SM v Stevedores' and LB Soc DC,
, and Powers v Journeymen Bricklayers' Union No 3 130 Tenn 643; 172 SW 284; LRA 1915E, 1006. While the provisions of the contracts
therein are not identical with those of the one involved in the present case, they do sustain the proposition that implied terms
are just as much a part of a contract as written ones, and that the implications which we have drawn from this contract are legitimate
and enough to sustain it on the ground of mutuality.
Finally, in Wilson v Airline Coal Co
215 Iowa 855
(1933), the Supreme Court of Iowa was concerned with an extremely short and informal agreement: It is agreed between District No
13, UMW of A, and the Airline Coal Company of Ottumwa, Iowa, that the above Coal Company shall pay the wage scale as specified and
operate under the terms and conditions of the Des Moines agreement which expires April 1, 1933. Frank Wilson, President, UMW of A
Airline Coal Co, by JH Genochio.
The employer took the defence that the agreement was not supported by consideration and was wanting in mutuality. In the leading
judgment, that of Stevens J, at
, the matter was dealt with thus: Mutual promises may constitute a consideration for, and will support, a contract. It is obvious
that nothing of value passed from either Wilson or the organization represented by him to appellee that amounted to a consideration.
The obligations assumed are all on the part of appellee. The promise is to pay the wage scale specified and to operate under the
terms and conditions of the Des Moines agreement. It may be assumed that, if the promise was kept and maintained, it would operate
to the direct advantage of appellee's employees, and, generally, to the indirect advantage of the members of District No 13, UMW
of A. Nothing is, however, promised by or on behalf of District No 13. No member of the organization is thereby bound to accept employment
from appellee as miners or for other purposes at the wage scale designated. It is not sufficient in this connection that the agreement
is characterized as a collective bargaining agreement. These agreements are intended to serve and advance the welfare and comfort
of those engaged in coal mining and other forms of industry and to stabilize employment and to contribute to the peaceful adjustment
and settlement of controversies between employees and employers. The object is proper and commendable. Contracts of this character
must, however, to be valid, be supported by a consideration.... It seems to us that the contract in question imports no consideration.
If specific performance thereof would be possible in equity and it were sought by appellee, what relief could the court give it?
In other words, is there anything District No 13 or its
members could do that could, in equity or law, be treated as a violation of the contract? Under it no obligation whatever is assumed
by appellants, so that there is obviously neither pecuniary consideration or [sic] mutual promises to support the agreement. It is
our conclusion that the motion to dismiss upon the ground that the contract in controversy is not supported by a consideration was
proper. A further ground of the motion to dismiss is that the contract is without mutuality. Much that has already been said bears
directly upon this question. There is apparent upon the face of the contract a want a [sic] mutuality, both of obligation and of
remedy. Manifestly, the contract imposes no obligation upon appellants, and there is no remedy available to appellee for any violation
or breach thereof.
It is worth noting that the judgment continued: In addition to want of consideration and of mutuality, invalidity of the contract
is further predicated upon the ground that it is void for indefiniteness and uncertainty. Appellants have not agreed to supply workmen
for the mines of appellee or to aid it in any way to secure employees. It is elementary that an employee may quit his employment
In his valuable article, The Present Status of Collective Contracts in the American Legal System, (1941) Michigan LR 1109, Professor
Lenhoff discusses the problem of consideration at 1116-7. At 1117 Lenhoff says: It is for the union to look after the maintenance
of standards established by the contract even though an express promise on the part of the union may be lacking. In this regard the
collective contract supplies an excellent example of writing "instinct with an obligation". The other party of the contract can require
the union "to do its duty".
The phrase "instinct with an obligation" is one adopted by Cardozo J in Wood v Lucy, Lady Duff-Gordon
(1918), where it is said that a promise may be lacking, and yet the whole writing may be "instinct with an obligation", imperfectly
expressed. In a passage which begins with a reference to the Nederlandsch case Nederlandsch Amer SM v Stevedores' and LB Soc DC,
, Lenhoff says at 1116: We have been told in a careful and thorough opinion that the collective contract must be given a reasonable
construction, no matter how inartistically it may be drawn, and notwithstanding its outward lack of any obligation imposed upon the
union. Such a contract, buttressed by reasonable implications, produces reciprocal obligations. Often, there is no express promise
on the part of the union to force its members to comply with the terms and conditions prescribed in the collective contract. A reasonable
construction, however, is that the union is obliged to abstain from any act which would be in conflict with any of the terms of the
contract. Such a construction of the contract would mean only that the union is obliged to do everything which it may do under its
constitution and by-laws to bring about compliance by union members with those terms and conditions.
The implied term put forward in the second-last sentence in this passage is, as it seems to me, narrower than the implied term put
forward in the last sentence. It would seem that the learned author is to be taken as putting forward the second version of the implied
term, on the footing that an obligation to do everything to bring about compliance includes an obligation to abstain from any act
which would tend to bring about non-compliance.
Lenhoff's suggestion is of an implied promise on the union's part to do everything which it may under its constitution and by-laws
to bring about compliance by its members with the terms of the agreement. This formulation presupposes that the union's obligation
is not to secure compliance but merely to
endeavour to do so. The distinction must be grappled with in any attempt to formulate an implied term. It is drawn in Ch 1 of Kahn-Freund,
Labour Relations and the Law: If one regarded a collective agreement as a contract, a trade union might be made liable for a breach
of the "no strike clause" or peace obligations which, if not implied, as it is believed to be in many foreign countries, is frequently
expressed in the agreement, and this would lead to difficult questions. Would a legal undertaking not to strike merely be an undertaking
not to promote, or perhaps an undertaking to seek to repress a strike, or would it be an absolute guarantee against unofficial or
"wild-cat" strikes on the part of the members of the union? Such an undertaking would, in view of existing conditions in some industries,
be little short of ruinous. Nor would there be anything to say to what extent the Continental view of the "relativity" of the peace
obligation could be read into English law.
Compare para466 and para477-8 of the Report of the Royal Commission on Trade Unions and Employers' Associations (the Donovan Report,
Cmnd 3623, 1968).
Modern collective bargaining agreements in the United States may contain a no-strike clause (Williston, Contracts, 3rd ed, s1024)
and if they do not the question may arise whether such a clause is to be implied where the agreement establishes arbitration as a
means of settling disputes: see Teamsters, Chaffeurs, Warehousemen and Helpers of America v Lucas Flour Co
[1962] USSC 32
(1962); Island Creek Coal Co v United Mine Workers of America
[1975] USCA3 91
507 F 2d 650
I turn now to the agreements in the present case. I did not myself understand Mr Haylen to suggest that the Homfray agreements were
supported by some executed consideration provided by the union: the consideration was in his submission to be found in some promise
on its part. I agree with Hayne JA that it is impossible to treat the agreements as supported by executed consideration. As to the
promise constituting consideration, Mr Haylen did not argue that there was an express promise on the part of the union contained
in the Homfray agreements: he contended that a promise was to be implied according to the principles laid down in BP Refinery (Westernport)
Pty Ltd v Hastings Shire Council (1977) 180 CLR 266, and he submitted in particular that the term was ascertainable with sufficient
precision and could be expressed with sufficient certainty to be enforced within the meaning of those principles. In the course of
argument he formulated several versions of the suggested implied term, each of them differing substantially from the others. The
fact that the supposed implied term was reformulated a number of times is an indication of the difficulties which the argument faces.
The Homfray agreements were reached in settlement of an industrial dispute. Doubtless the employer, the unions and the unionists
expected that they would be carried into effect. As regards consideration, there is no doubt that, as a matter of industrial reality,
the agreements were arrived at by a process of collective bargaining. Common sense and fairness require that the court strive to
uphold them as legally enforceable. But, as has often been observed by writers on labour law, legal doctrines may at times seem inadequate
to cope with the realities of industrial relations. I have considered each of the formulations by Mr Haylen of the suggested implied
term, along with a number of other versions, and have in the end concluded that no such term can be implied as can stand as consideration
moving from the union.
The matter of certainty is important in two respects. No term will be implied unless it can be expressed with sufficient certainty
to be enforced; and a promise cannot constitute good consideration unless it is sufficiently certain to be
enforced. I have anxiously considered whether it is possible to formulate, and to imply, a sufficiently certain promise on the part
of the union, whether in relation to all the matters the subject of the Homfray agreement or in relation to one or more of those
matters, but have decided that the attempt must fail. One of the obstacles to the implication of a sufficiently certain promise on
the part of the union is the circumstance that the first part of the Homfray agreement is concerned only with benefits which the
employees are to receive: so it cannot be said that the union promises by implication that its members will perform, or promises
by implication to do its best to ensure that its members will perform, their part of an industrial bargain. Another difficulty, already
mentioned, concerns the distinction between promising that members will perform and promising to endeavour to ensure that they will
perform their part.
The duration of the agreement also presents a problem. The reported cases show, and Professor Lenhoff in his article observes (at
1121), that in the United States nearly all collective labour contracts are entered into for a specified period of time. The Homfray
agreements say nothing about their duration. Are the redundancy benefits to be paid to future members of the union which is a party
to the agreement? (I have no great difficulty in concluding that the benefits are not to be paid to persons who are not members of
the union in question, whether they are members of one of the other three unions or not unionists at all). It is unlikely that a
union would, in a redundancy agreement intended to operate generally as opposed to intended to deal with the imminent closing down
of some particular part of the plant, or something of that kind, contemplate that the conditions of employment of its present members
should differ from those of new members who become employed after the date of operation of the agreement. This consideration, coupled
with the provision whereby EFT is to be a condition of employment "for all new employees", leads me to conclude that the agreement
is intended to confer redundancy benefits on all present or future members of the union a party to it. Once this conclusion is reached,
the question of duration does arise. Is the agreement to continue indefinitely, until terminated by mutual agreement or (presumably)
by or in consequence of some supervening event, such as a financial collapse of the employer leading to the closing down of the plant?
Other questions arise in relation to duration. If one is to view the consideration provided by the union as, for example, its implied
promise to use its best endeavours to ensure that its present and future members adhere to the compromise embodied in the agreement
in relation to severance pay, including the agreement reached on EFT, "selective redundancies" and shift flexibility in the tufting
department, what is the position of the union, so far as possible breach of contract on its part is concerned, if, six months or
one year or three years after the agreement begins to operate, one of the following events occurs?
1. Certain members of the union contend that the two weeks "up front payment" of severance pay is inadequate and ask it to make a
claim on the employer (or call a stop-work meeting).
2. Because of increases in bank charges or new or increased government imposts the amount agreed to be paid each pay day by the employer
to each employee to compensate for the cost of EFT becomes inadequate and certain members of the union ask it to make a claim on
the employer (or call a stop-work meeting to discuss payment of a larger sum).
3. Certain members of the union contend that the "last on first off" rule should be applied in determining who is to be made redundant,
or at least that the
employer should pay some regard to the date of an employee's engagement, and ask the union to make a claim on the employer (or call
a stop-work meeting).
4. Certain members of the union contend, as regards the tufting department, that the 20 minute break should be increased to 30 minutes
or that the "shift structure" in that department should revert to what it was at the time when the Homfray agreement came into operation,
and ask the union to make a claim on the employer (or call a stop-work meeting).
It is one thing to make an agreement determining conditions of employment for a fixed or ascertainable period. The present agreement
is not expressed to be limited in point of duration, nor has it been suggested that one should imply a term that it is to endure
for a reasonable period, or that it may be terminated by reasonable notice. But the variation of the conditions of employment is
of the essence of industrial relations. And when one comes to consider matters like "shift structure" the need for flexibility is
The question of the identity of the parties to the agreement, the question of consideration and the question of intention to make
a legally binding contract are often closely interrelated: cf Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Ltd v Ken Morgan Motors Pty Ltd
[1994] 2 VR 106 at 132. That is certainly so in the present case. In my opinion the Homfray agreements, unsupported by consideration,
were intended by the unions and the company to have practical industrial, as opposed to legal, consequences.
I am in substantial agreement with what Hayne JA has written on the "industrial instrument" point.
I would allow the appeal and answer the questions asked in the originating motion in the way proposed by Hayne JA.
I agree in the judgment of Hayne JA and in the reasons he assigns.
On 22 December 1992 debenture holders appointed receivers and managers to Homfray Carpets Australia Pty Ltd and Hycraft Carpets Pty
Ltd. Hycraft was a wholly-owned subsidiary of Homfray and both companies manufactured carpet - Hycraft in New South Wales and Homfray
in Victoria. Homfray was later wound up but the detail of that winding-up is not now relevant.
Most, but not all, employees of Hycraft and Homfray were members of trade unions. Most employees of the companies who were union
members were members of what is now the Textile Clothing and Footwear Union Australia but some were members of other unions - the
Construction Forestry Mining and Energy Union, the Automotive Metals and Engineering Union, the Electrical Trade Union of Australia,
the Federated Clerks' Union of Australia, the Transport Workers' Union of Australia and the Federation of Industrial Manufacturing
and Engineering Employees. (It is unnecessary to notice the several changes over recent years in the names of the various unions
concerned. At the risk of inaccuracy, it is convenient to refer generally to the principal union concerned as the Textile Union and
to refer to the other unions without differentiating between them.)
In March and June 1993 persons employed by Homfray and Hycraft were dismissed. The receivers and managers paid those employees the
amounts due to them for redundancy pay under applicable industrial awards but did not pay those
employees amounts of over-award redundancy payments which it was then and is now contended that the companies had agreed to pay.
By notice of motion dated 11 June 1993 one of the joint and several receivers and managers applied to the court for directions. That
notice of motion posed five questions about the effect of the alleged agreements and the priority (if any) that the receivers and
managers should accord to the claims for amounts payable under the agreements it was alleged that the company had made. When that
notice of motion came on for hearing, the Textile Union, the Automotive Metals and Engineering Union and eight former employees of
one or other of the two companies were defendants and appeared by counsel. (Other unions had originally been named as defendants
in the proceeding but in circumstances, and for reasons, which it is not necessary to notice, they ceased to be parties before the
matter came on for trial. Later, by order of the Full Court made on 12 May 1995, the eight former employees who had been parties
to the proceeding below ceased to be parties to the present appeal.)
On 23 May 1994 the learned trial judge ordered that the questions set out in the originating motion should be answered as follows:
Question 1: Whether the document on Hycraft Carpets letterhead dated 29 March 1988 entitled "Hycraft Carpets - Five Dock Redundancy
Proposal Sample Assembly Section", signed by "John Worth, Operations Manager, Hycraft Carpets Pty Ltd" and "Ron Jennings, Assistant
Secretary, Australian Textile Workers Union" (the "Hycraft Redundancy Agreement"), is binding on the Receiver and Manager of Hycraft
or Hycraft.
Answer: Yes.
Question 2: If the Hycraft Redundancy Agreement is binding on the Receiver and Manager of Hycraft or Hycraft,
(a) Which current or former employees of Hycraft ("Hycraft Employees") are entitled to the benefits of the Hycraft Redundancy Agreement.
Answer: All weekly paid employees whose contracts of employment were terminated on the ground of redundancy in 1993 and were members
of relevant unions.
Question 2(b): In what circumstances will the Hycraft Employees or any of them become entitled to the benefits of the Hycraft Redundancy
Answer: In the circumstances in which those employees identified in (a) were terminated on the ground of redundancy in 1993.
Question 2(c): In circumstances (if any) where the Hycraft employees become entitled to the benefits of the Hycraft Redundancy Agreement,
are those benefits "retrenchment payments" within the meaning of sn556(1)(h) of the Corporations Law.
Answer: Yes.
Question 2(d): Whether in circumstances where Hycraft Employees are entitled to the benefits of any State or Federal Industrial Award
in respect of:
(i) notice of termination of employment or payment in lieu thereof; and/or
(ii) severance of employment, such employees shall have their benefits under the Hycraft Redundancy Agreements (if any) reduced by
the amount of their Award entitlements.
Answer: Yes, award payments are to be brought into account and the difference is payable.
Question 3: Whether the following documents are binding on the Receiver and Manager of Homfray or Homfray:
(a) the document entitled "Homfray Carpets Australia Pty Ltd Cheltenham/Benalla Redundancy Agreement", which is expressed to be "signed
for and on behalf of Homfray Carpets Australia Pty Ltd" by "H Kindler (Personnel Manager)" on 12 November 1991, and "signed for and
on behalf of the Federated Engine Drivers andFiremen's Association Victoria Branch" by "M McDonald (State Secretary)" on 13 November
1991 (the "Homfray FEDFA Redundancy Agreement");
(b) the document entitled "Homfray Carpets Australia Pty Ltd Cheltenham/Benalla Redundancy Agreement", which is expressed to be "signed
for and on behalf of Homfray Carpets Australia Pty Ltd" by "H Kindler (Personnel Manager)" on 12 November 1991, and "signed for and
on behalf of the Electrical Trades Union" by "G Main (Secretary)" on 13 December 1991 (the "Homfray ETU Redundancy Agreement");
(c) the document entitled "Homfray Carpets Australia Pty Ltd Cheltenham/Benalla Redundancy Agreement", which is expressed to be "signed
for and on behalf of Homfray Carpets Australia Pty Ltd" by "H Kindler (Personnel Manager)" on 23 September 1991, and "signed for
and on behalf of the Amalgamated Footwear and Textile Union of Australia" by "S Baxter (Acting Secretary)" on 9 October 1991 (the
"Homfray AFTUA Redundancy Agreement"); and
(d) the document entitled "Homfray Carpets Australia Pty Ltd Cheltenham/Benalla Redundancy Agreement", which is expressed to be "signed
for and on behalf of Homfray Carpets Australia Pty Ltd" by "H Kindler (Personnel Manager)" on 12 November 1991, and "signed for and
on behalf of the Amalgamated Metal Workers Union" by "F Cherry (Secretary)" on 13 November 1991 (the "Homfray AMWU Redundancy Agreement"),
collectively the "Homfray Redundancy Agreements".
Answer: Yes.
Question 4: If any or all of the Homfray Redundancy Agreements is or are binding on the Receiver and Manager of Homfray or Homfray:
(a) Which current or former employees of Homfray (other than the former employees of Homfray previously employed by Homfray at its
premises at 72-82 Samaria Road and 60 and 62 Coster Street, Benalla, Victoria) ("Homfray Employees") are entitled to the benefits
of one or more of the Homfray Redundancy Agreements and, if so, to which particular Homfray Redundancy Agreement or Agreements.
Answer: All weekly paid employees whose contracts of employment were terminated on 12 March or 10 June 1993 and at the date of such
dismissal were members of relevant unions.
Question 4(b): In what circumstances will the Homfray Employees or any of them become entitled to the benefits of the relevant Homfray
Redundancy Agreement or Agreements.
Answer: In the circumstances in which those employees identified in (a) were terminated on the ground of redundancy in 1993.
Question 4(c): In circumstances (if any) where the Homfray employees become entitled to the benefits of the Homfray Redundancy Agreement
or Agreements, are those benefits "retrenchment payments" within the meaning of s556(1)(h) of the Corporations Law.
Answer: Yes.
Question 4(d): Whether in the circumstances where Homfray Employees are entitled to the benefits of any State or Federal Industrial
Award in respect of:
(i) notice of termination of employment, or payment in lieu thereof; and/or
(ii) severance of employment, such employees shall have their benefits under the relevant Homfray Redundancy Agreement or agreements
(if any) reduced by the amount of their Award entitlements.
Answer: Yes, award payments are to be brought into account and the difference is payable.
Question 5: The priority to be accorded (if any) in the receiverships of Homfray and Hycraft, to entitlements of Homfray Employees
or Hycraft Employees under:
(a) the Hycraft Redundancy Agreement;
(b) the Homfray Redundancy Agreements.
Answer: The priority accorded by S446(1)(h) of the Corporations Law of redundancy payments.
(The authenticated order in this matter records the answers that were given but does not set out the questions. It is very inconvenient
if the order does not set out the questions as well as the answers that are given to them and it is to be hoped that in future orders
will take that form, rather than the form adopted here.)
The receiver and manager now appeals contending that no priority should be accorded to any of the claims for the amounts which the
respondents allege are payable under the agreements. On 12 September 1994 the Full Court held that the appeal was competent.
S433(4) of the Corporations Law (as in force at the relevant time) obliged a receiver taking possession or assuming control of property
of a company to pay out of the property of the company coming into the receiver's hands certain "debts or amounts in priority to
any claim for principal or interest in respect of the debentures" namely:
(a) first, any amount that in a winding up is payable in priority to unsecured debts pursuant to s562;
(b) next, any debt or amount that in a winding up is payable in priority to other unsecured debts pursuant to para556(1)(e), para556(1)((g)
or para556(1)((h) or s560.
S556 (again as then in force) provided that:
(1) Subject to the following provisions of this Division, in the winding up of a company the following debts shall be paid in priority
to all other unsecured debts: ...
(h) next, retrenchment payments payable to employees of the company (other than excluded employees of the company) ...
(2) In this section: ... "retrenchment payment", in relation to an employee of a company, means an amount payable by the company to
the employee, by virtue of an industrial instrument, in respect to the termination of the employee's employment by the company, whether
the amount becomes payable before, on or after the relevant date.
("The relevant date" in a winding-up by the court is the date of the winding-up order or in any other winding-up, the date of its
commencement.)
"Industrial instrument" was defined as:
(a) a contract of employment; or
(b) a law, award, determination or agreement relating to terms and conditions of employment.
On 29 March 1988 John Worth, Operations Manager of Hycraft and Ron Jennings, an assistant secretary of the Textile Union, signed
a document on the letterhead of Hycraft which read: HYCRAFT CARPETS - FIVE DOCK REDUNDANCY PROPOSAL SAMPLE ASSEMBLY SECTION
1. Award notice.
2. Severance pay. a/ 2 weeks up front payment. b/ 2 weeks pay per year of service. c/ Payment for all untaken sick leave, including
1988 entitlement. d/ Pro Rata Long Service after 3 years.
e/ 17% loading in Pro Rata Annual Leave. f/ Superannuation payment in accordance with the various trust deeds ie Hycraft and Australian
Retirement Fund. g/ An additional allowance of 25% of item a/ and b/ above for employees over 45 years of age.
Definition of Weeks Pay The ordinary rate of pay received by the employee for all purposes of the award.
On 23 September 1991 (more than three years later) Howard Kindler, then personnel manager of Homfray, signed a document entitled
"Homfray Carpets Australia Pty Ltd, Cheltenham/Benalla, Redundancy Agreement". The acting secretary of the Textile Union signed that
document on behalf of his union on 9 October 1991. In November and December three other documents in like form were prepared and
signed by Kindler on behalf of the company and by an official of the Amalgamated Metal Workers' Union, an official of the Federated
Engine Drivers and Firemen's Association, Victorian Branch, and an official of the Electrical Trades' Union, each official being
expressed to sign on behalf of his union. Each of those letters was in the following form: HOMFRAY CARPETS AUSTRALIA PTY LTD CHELTENHAM/BENALLA
REDUNDANCY AGREEMENT
1. Award Notice
2. Severance Pay
(a) 2 Weeks up front payment
(b) 2 Weeks per year of Service
(c) Pro-rata Long Service after 3 years
(d) 17.5% loading on Pro-rata Annual Leave
(e) Superannuation Payment in accordance with the various trust deeds: ie, Homfray Hycraft Superannuation Fund Australian Retirement
(f) An additional allowance of 25% of items (a) and (b) above for employees over 45 years of age.
Definition of Weeks Pay The ordinary rate of pay received by the employee for all purposes of the Award. Agreement Agreement has
been reached on the following matters in conjunction (sic) with the redundancy agreement: -
1. Electronic Funds Transfer
(a) From the date of this agreement, all employees agree the company will pay wages directly into Bank accounts nominated by individual
(b) It is agreed that Electronic Funds Transfer will be a condition of employment for all new employees.
2. Selective Redundancies It is agreed that if further redundancies are required Homfray Carpets Australia Pty Ltd has the right
to be able to select employees after volunteers have been considered. Selection will be after due consultation with the union and
after identifying individuals:
(b) Work performance
(c) Attitude
(d) Attendance
(e) Warnings
3. Shift Flexibility (Tufting Department) It is agreed that the shift structure in the Tufting Department will change to the following:
Finish Time
Afternoon Shift
12.00 midnight
Night Shift
12.00 midnight
All three Shifts will receive a paid 20 minute break. These breaks will be staggered to meet production demands. The change-over
to this new shift structure must be completed no later than November 1 1991.
This agreement shall operate as from the 16th Day of September in the year One Thousand Nine Hundred and Ninety One.
The central question at issue both below and on appeal was whether the document dated 29 March 1988 relating to Hycraft or any of
the four 1991 documents relating to Homfray were industrial instruments by virtue of which retrenchment payments were payable by
Hycraft or Homfray to employees.
At no time before the trial of the proceeding commenced were the parties required to state their contentions in writing. There were
no pleadings and no direction was given for the delivery of points of claim and points of defence. Thus when the matter came on for
trial it was by no means clear whether the respondents contended that the documents I have mentioned were in each case the sole repository
of a wholly written agreement alleged to be binding at law or whether the respondents contended that there was an agreement binding
at law which was partly in writing but also partly to be implied or, indeed, whether the respondents contended that it was not necessary
that there be an agreement that was binding at law. Further, the respondents were not required to state who were alleged to be the
parties to the agreement upon which they sought to rely and were not required to state what was the consideration for any agreement
alleged to be a binding contract. As a result, the argument at trial ranged far and wide; both sides put many alternative arguments
to the learned trial judge. The questions asked in the originating motion might be thought to proceed on the basis that the supposed
agreements were to be regarded as constituted by the documents mentioned in the questions.
Far from there being some narrowing of the issues on appeal, it appeared, in the course of argument, that the respondents sought
to broaden their case, seeking to raise for the first time on appeal still further alternative cases, such, for example, as a case
that the employer companies (and presumably their receivers and managers) were estopped from denying the existence of a contract
of one or other of the kinds alleged. I mention these matters because the lack of precise definition of the issues between the parties
appears to have led both below and on appeal to some elision of aspects of the arguments with consequential loss of precision. Many
of the arguments that have been canvassed by the parties require precise identification of matters such as who are the parties to
the alleged agreement and what is the consideration for the agreement alleged.
Perhaps it is for the same reasons that some of the answers given to the questions asked in the originating motion appear not to
reflect the reasoning in the learned trial judge's reasons for judgment. Thus, Q4(a) was answered in terms of "all weekly paid employees
whose contracts of employment were terminated on the ground of redundancy in 1993 and were members of relevant unions". Leaving aside
the fact that the relevant award appears to have required payment of textile workers fortnightly rather than weekly, the answer to
the question appears to identify a class of employees by reference to their
membership of relevant unions at the time of termination of their employment. It is not immediately apparent how that answer stands
with the conclusion expressed by the learned trial judge in his reasons for judgment that each union officer who signed a document
in relation to Homfray "did so as agent for the union employees who represented who had approved the agreement at the meeting". At
least at first sight, this might suggest that the relevant class of employees was to be defined as those who had been employed at
the time of the meetings concerned and who had voted in favour of the adoption of the proposals. However, these are matters to which
it will be necessary to return in due course.
For the moment, I mention the breadth of the arguments for the purposes I have already mentioned and for the further purpose of saying
that I do not consider it necessary or desirable to canvass every one of the very many alternatives put forward for consideration
by the parties. To do so would extend these reasons for judgment very considerably and do so for no useful purpose.
I turn first to some aspects of the Corporations Law.
"INDUSTRIAL INSTRUMENT"
It was submitted on behalf of the respondents that the word "agreement" was used in the definition of "industrial instrument" to
include a wider range of arrangements than contracts enforceable at law. At first sight, some support for this argument is to be
found in the earlier reference to a "contract of employment" in the definition. Why should the legislature speak in one part of the
definition of a "contract" but in another use the word "agreement"? For a number of reasons, I do not accept that "agreement" is
intended to embrace arrangements of a kind that are not enforceable.
Several aspects of s556 make that plain. First, the section provides for the payment of certain "debts" in priority to "all other
unsecured debts". Arrangements which are not enforceable are not ordinarily described as giving rise to "debts". Next, the amounts
are described as retrenchment payments "payable" to employees; retrenchment payments are defined as amounts "payable" by the company
and amounts which are payable "by virtue of" an industrial instrument. The words "payable" and payable "by virtue of" connote obligation,
not voluntary arrangement. These textual matters are clear indications that "agreement" is used in the definition of "industrial
instrument" in the sense of an agreement giving rise to binding obligations.
Further, if "agreement" were to be given a more general meaning encompassing all arrangements, whether enforceable or not, as suggested
by the respondents, it would lead to the absurd result that an employee retrenched by a employer not in such financial difficulties
as to lead to the appointment of a receiver and manager or to lead to its being wound up would have no enforceable claim to redundancy
payments but as soon as the employer fell on financial hard times, the receiver or liquidator would be bound to pay that employee
the benefits concerned and to do so in priority to persons who had legally enforceable claims against the employer. That result is
an absurd result which is to be countenanced only if the words of the statute dictate such a result and they do not. As I have said,
the words used in the definition point clearly away from such a result.
It is to be noted that I have spoken in terms of an "agreement giving rise to binding obligations" rather than in terms of a "contract".
I do so because I am of the view that an industrial agreement reached between (say) a union and an employer and then registered pursuant
to the relevant industrial legislation
making such agreements enforceable is properly described as an industrial instrument even though (for a number of reasons) it may
not amount to a contract. No doubt the legislature intended to include arrangements such as these in the definition of industrial
instrument and it is this kind of arrangement which explains the use of the word "agreement" in preference to "contract" in the second
limb of the definition of industrial instruments. If the definition of industrial instrument did not include reference to "agreement"
such an arrangement would not be caught. Thus it is not necessary (as counsel for the respondents submitted) to construe the word
"agreement" as extending to any consensual arrangement, whether enforceable or not, to give the word useful work to perform in the
definition. In my view it is not to be construed in that way; "agreement" refers to arrangements giving rise to binding obligations.
THE HYCRAFT AGREEMENT
In 1982 Hycraft closed the Axminster Weaving section at its Five Dock plant. Some employees became redundant. The company negotiated
with the New South Wales Labour Council (representing all unions with members at the plant) about the terms governing which employees
were to be made redundant and what benefits were to be given to them. The personnel manager of Hycraft at the time gave evidence
that this agreement "was extended to cover all employees (award and non-award related) to be retrenched due to the effects of this
In 1986 the plant at Northmead, New South Wales operated by a related company of Hycraft (Hycraft Spinners) was flooded and ultimately
it was closed. In December 1986 in response to a log of claims from the Textile Union, Metal Union and Society of Engineers the company
made an offer to pay those who had been made redundant following the closure of the plant at Northmead the following benefits:
* 4 weeks' payment in lieu of notice
* 2 weeks "up-front pay"
* 2 weeks pay per year of service 50% of untaken sick leave
* pro rata long service leave after three years
* 17.5% loading on pro rata annual leave
* an additional 25% of the "up front pay" and pay per years of service for those over 45 years of age.
The Textile Union (and presumably the other unions) accepted these terms in January 1987 and the redundant employees from Northmead
were paid benefits accordingly.
In March 1988 the company closed the sample assembly section at its plant at Five Dock and again employees were made redundant. On
29 March 1988 John Worth, Operations Manager of Hycraft and Ron Jennings, Assistant Secretary of the Textile Union, signed the document
the text of which I have set out earlier. The document was signed only after Jennings had conducted a general meeting of Textile
Union members employed at Hycraft to discuss the redundancy agreement which had been negotiated. In a letter to the company Jennings
referred to the agreement as having been negotiated "on their (scil the members') behalf" and he told the company that "the members
voted unanimously to accept" the proposal.
In April 1988 three employees in the sample assembly section were retrenched and they were paid the benefits that had been agreed.
The document signed by the parties in March 1988 was described as a "Redundancy Proposal, Sample Assembly Section". In its terms
it was directed only to defining the benefits to be paid to employees in the sample assembly section of Hycraft's factory at Five
Dock who were to be made redundant and there is nothing in the text of the document that suggests that it was intended to be given
any wider effect. Moreover, the negotiations between Hycraft and the union related only to the redundancy of workers in that section
of Hycraft's factory and in my view the agreement that was reached related only to those workers.
It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that because the union consulted all its members about whether to accept the terms proposed
by the employer, the agreement that was reached was to be understood as relating to all employees of Hycraft. I do not consider that
the internal procedures adopted by the union to authorise it to make the agreement can alter its terms. It is by no means unusual
for a union negotiating with an employer to consult its members and that is all that the union was doing in calling a meeting of
members employed at the Five Dock factory.
It was submitted next that subsequent events, ie subsequent to the signing of the document of 29 March 1988, dictated a different
Between July and December 1988, 40 to 45 employees, of whom some were "staff" employees and not members of the Textile Union or any
other union, were made redundant. All were paid benefits calculated in the same way as the benefits paid to the sample assembly section
employees under the arrangements recorded in the letter of 29 March 1988. In March 1989 another staff employee was made redundant
and she too was paid redundancy payments calculated in the same way.
In March 1990 the union wrote to the personnel manager of Hycraft asking him to review what was described as "the current redundancy
agreement, negotiated 19 December 1986". (This was presumably a reference to arrangements made between the company and the union
in relation to redundancies following the closure of the plant at Northmead.) The group personnel manager of Homfray replied saying
that he saw "no reason to review the current redundancy agreement, as we have no plans at the present to make any employee redundant".
He went on to say that: If at a future time the need arises, prior to any redundancies, we would sit down with you to re-negotiate
a new agreement.
In August 1991 Hycraft made a textile worker and a metal worker redundant. Neither was paid redundancy benefits calculated in the
way described in the letter of 29 March 1988 and the representative of the Textile Union on the Hycraft Consultative Committee (a
committee established to enable union and employer representatives to meet and discuss industrial problems) asked why this was so.
Hycraft maintained that the agreement reached in 1988 was an agreement relating only to the sample assembly section at Five Dock
but agreed to reinstate the textile worker pending further negotiations about an "enterprise proposal". The metal worker was then
paid redundancy benefits calculated in accordance with the letter of 29 March 1988. In October 1991 another employee was retrenched
but that employee was not paid redundancy benefits calculated according to the March 1988 letter.
Counsel for the respondents submitted that this course of events revealed that the agreement reached in March 1988 had been "extended
to" all employees of
Hycraft. While there was debate in the course of the hearing about the legal analysis of the means by which it was said that this
"extension" had occurred, it is not necessary to deal with those matters. Thus it is not necessary to examine whether a contract
was made in March 1988 which was varied or some new contract was made at some later time. Nor is it necessary to consider whether
some new term was introduced in the contract of employment of individual employees. All of these different analyses proceeded from
the premise that Hycraft and the union (or Hycraft and its employees) reached a consensus that the terms described in the letter
of March 1988 should apply not just to these from the sample assembly section who had been retrenched earlier, but to all other employees
of Hycraft. In my view the evidence does not show that the parties reached any such consensus. It was not contended that any express
agreement was reached; the respondents submitted that the agreement was to be implied from the conduct of the parties.
On any view, the conduct now relied on by the respondents was equivocal. First, there was conduct which was inconsistent with the
parties having made an agreement of the kind now alleged - such as the employer's refusal (at first) to pay benefits to those who
were made redundant in August 1991 and the union's stated reliance in March 1990 not upon the 1988 arrangements but upon some earlier
arrangement. Secondly, as counsel for the receiver and manager submitted, the conduct relied on by the respondents was as consistent
with an employer providing benefits to particular redundant employees because the employer considered it expedient to do so as it
was with the employer and the union or the employer and its employees having struck some agreement. It was not a case in which there
were repeated acts of conduct consistent with the making of some new or varied agreement as eg by increasing wages or providing other
benefits regularly during the continuance of the relationship between the employer and employees. Redundancies were unusual events
and, so far as the evidence reveals, each round of redundancies was treated separately. Although on a number of occasions the employer
did pay redundancy benefits calculated in accordance with the letter of March 1988, that "is equally consistent with the view that
it did so, not because it was bound contractually to apply it to [them], but because as a matter of policy it deemed it expedient
to apply it to [them]": Young v Canadian Northern Railway Co
[1931] AC 83
Nor do I consider that this is a case in which it could be said that after March 1988 there was some established usage or custom
incorporated into the contract of employment of the individual employees. Apart altogether from the fact that the conduct relied
on as evidencing what was said to be a usage or custom was, as I have said, equivocal, because redundancies were exceptional and
infrequent, it is not possible to say that there was some custom and usage "so well known and acquiesced in that persons making a
contract in that situation reasonably can be presumed to have imported it into their contract": Byrne v Australian Airlines Ltd
[1995] HCA 24
(1995) 69 ALJR 797
at 812 per McHugh and Gummow JJ; Con-Stan Industries of Australia Pty Ltd v Norwich Winterthur Insurance (Australia) Ltd
[1986] HCA 14
(1986) 160 CLR 226
at 236-8; Liverpool City Council v Irwin
[1976] UKHL 1
[1977] AC 239
at 253. It is not necessary then to consider the further difficulties presented by the fact that it seems likely that some of the
employees now claiming to be entitled to these benefits made their contract of employment long before the conduct now relied on as
establishing some custom or usage.
Finally, counsel for the respondents submitted that if the subsequent conduct of the parties did not evidence the making of some
new agreement, it could be taken into account in construing the agreement that was recorded in the letter of 29 March 1988.
This limb of the respondents' argument proceeded from the premise that the letter of 29 March 1988 evidenced or constituted a contract.
For present purposes it is convenient to proceed without testing the validity of this premise.
It was submitted that the proper law of the agreement reached was that of New South Wales and that the law of that State admits consideration
of subsequent conduct of the parties in construing an agreement. (It was accepted that in this State it has been held in FAI Traders
Insurance Co Ltd v Savoy Plaza Pty Ltd [1993] 2 VR 343 that the subsequent conduct of parties is not relevant to the interpretation
of the contract that they have made.)
In Spunwill Pty Ltd v BAB Pty Ltd
(1994) 36 NSWLR 290
Santow J held that evidence of the conduct of parties to a contract subsequent to the time the contract was made may be used as an
aid to construction of the contract where it is probative of a clear and mutual subjective intention as to what the contract meant
at the time it was made. His Honour declined to follow the decision in FAI Traders Insurance Co Ltd v Savoy Plaza Pty Ltd [1993]
2 VR 343 FAI Traders Insurance Co being of the view that that decision was inconsistent with Hart v MacDonald
[1910] HCA 13
(1910) 10 CLR 417
; Farmer v Honan
[1919] HCA 13
(1919) 26 CLR 183
; Thornley v Tilley
[1925] HCA 13
(1925) 36 CLR 1
; Sinclair, Scott and Co Ltd v Naughton
[1929] HCA 34
(1929) 43 CLR 310
and, in particular, White v Australian and New Zealand Theatres Ltd
[1943] HCA 6
(1943) 67 CLR 266.
His Honour was of the view that these decisions had not been overruled by the later decisions of the High Court in Administration
of the Territory of Papua New Guinea v Daera Guba (1973) 130 CLR 353 or Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority of New
South Wales
[1982] HCA 24
(1982) 149 CLR 337
(as to which see also Hide and Skin Trading Pty Ltd v Oceanic Meat Traders Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 310).
In my view there are considerable difficulties in reconciling the use of post contractual conduct of parties as an aid to construction
of the agreement and the fact that the "intention of the parties" that is to be ascertained by the process of construction is an
objective rather than subjective intention. Indeed, as Gleeson CJ said in Australian Broadcasting Corporation v XIVth Commonwealth
(1988) 18 NSWLR 540
at 549 (a decision to which Santow J does not refer in the Spunwill Spunwill Pty Ltd v BAB Pty Ltd
(1994) 36 NSWLR 290
case) "[a]lthough there are qualifications to it, this general test of objectivity is of pervasive influence in the law of contract".
As Gleeson CJ went on to say: Two passages from speeches of Lord Diplock illustrate the point. In Gissing v Gissing
[1970] UKHL 3
[1971] AC 886
at 906, his Lordship said:
"As in so many branches of English law in which legal rights and obligations depend upon the intentions of the parties to a transaction,
the relevant intention of each party is the intention which was reasonably understood by the other party to be manifested by that
party's words or conduct notwithstanding that he did not consciously formulate that intention in his own mind or even acted with
some different intention which he did not communicate to the other party."
In Ashington Piggeries Ltd v Christopher Hill Ltd
[1972] AC 441
at 502, his Lordship said:
"In each of the instant appeals the dispute is as to what the seller promised to the buyer by the words which he used in the contract
itself and by his conduct in the course of the negotiations which led up to the contract. What he promised is determined by ascertaining
what his words and conduct would have led the buyer reasonably to believe that he was promising. That is what is meant in the English
Law of contract by the
common intention of the parties. The test is impersonal. It does not depend upon what the seller himself thought he was promising,
if the words and conduct by which he communicated his intention to the seller would have led a reasonable man in the position of
the buyer to a different belief as to the promise; nor does it depend upon the actual belief of the buyer himself as to what the
seller's promise was, unless that belief would have been shared by a reasonable man in the position of the buyer. The result of the
application of this test to the words themselves used in the contract is still `the construction of the contract'."
In my view the subsequent conduct of the parties may reveal their subjective intentions, but it is not those intentions which reveal
the nature and extent of the rights and obligations of the parties, it is "the intention which was reasonably understood by the other
parties to be manifested by that party's words or conduct".
The subsequent conduct of the employer being equivocal, it is conduct of the kind which falls short of the description of conduct
which Santow J considered admissible as an aid to construing the agreement. In those circumstances, I need express no concluded view
(1994) 36 NSWLR 290
Spunwill as accurately reflecting the law of New South Wales. Even if Spunwill does reflect the law in New South Wales, the conduct
now relied on does not lead to the conclusion for which the respondents contended.
Thus, I am of the opinion that the agreement of 29 March 1988 (whatever its legal enforceability and whoever may have been parties
to it) was an agreement which dealt only with those employees in the sample assembly section of Hycraft's factory at Five Dock who
were made redundant upon the closure of that section. In my view none of the events occurring after the signing of the agreement
leads to any different conclusion.
THE HOMFRAY AGREEMENT
In August 1991 the management of Homfray decided to retrench eight employees. Homfray's personnel manager told the Textile Union
what was proposed and told the union that redundancy payments would be made in accordance with the relevant award. The employees
were then dismissed and paid their award entitlements.
The union then asked Homfray to make an agreement governing redundancies that would provide for benefits calculated in the same way
as the redundancy benefits which had been paid at Hycraft. During August and September 1991, the management of Homfray, representatives
of the Chamber of Manufacturers on behalf of Homfray and officials of the Textile Union met to discuss the arrangements that could
be made. In addition, there were meetings of the Homfray "Consultative Committee" a body drawn from management and employees which
was established to discuss and, where possible, resolve industrial matters concerning Homfray's operations. In the course of these
various meetings, the management of Homfray said that it would require various "off sets" if it were to provide redundancy benefits
of the kind that were sought. Among the matters mentioned were the introduction of payment of wages by electronic funds transfer
and changes to the shifts then worked at Homfray's plants.
On 15 August 1991 the management of Homfray offered severance pay of between one and eight weeks for employees who had completed
up to four years' service and one week's pay per year of service over four years (up to a maximum of 26 weeks' pay) plus 17 1/2%
leave loading on holiday pay plus long service
leave after five years. A meeting of employees held on 17 August rejected this proposal. On 2 September the company made a new proposal
(two weeks' "up front" pay, 2 weeks' pay per year of service, pro rata long service leave after three years, leave loading, and an
additional 25% of the first two items for employees over 45 years of age). This proposal was said to be subject to employees agreeing
to four conditions:
* introduction of payment by electronic funds transfer
* the company having the right to select who would be made redundant "after due processes such as identifying" certain matters
* working of 38 paid ordinary hours before payment of overtime penalty rates
* changes in shift arrangements which would allow management to require employees to work 12 hour shifts.
Another meeting of employees was held on 5 September but again the meeting rejected the proposal. On 16 September the company put
a still further proposal.
This proposal repeated the offer about redundancy benefits but in return sought three, not four, matters:
* payment by electronic funds transfer;
* the right to select who would be made redundant;
* and the changes in shift arrangements that had been mentioned earlier.
The proposal was put to employees at a stop work meeting held on 16 September 1991 and was approved "overwhelmingly". Company records
reveal that 18 union members were absent from work on that day. Further, there was evidence below that suggested that of two boiler
attendants at the factory (the two being the only members of one union at Homfray), only one would attend meetings (the other tending
the boilers during meetings). The meeting on 16 September was held (as were other meetings) to coincide with the change of shifts
at the factory and there was evidence that about 150 or 160 employees (out of about 190 employed at Homfray) attended the meeting.
After the meeting approved the proposal, the letters I have mentioned earlier were prepared and signed on behalf of Homfray and on
behalf of each of the four unions involved.
The respondents put their case about the Homfray agreement in many different ways. The two principal themes of their submissions,
on each of which there were variations, were, first, to seek to support the finding of the learned trial judge that "[e]ach union
officer who signed a document did so as agent for the union employees he represented who had approved the agreement at a meeting
and did not do so as principal on behalf of the union", and, secondly, to submit that if that were not so, there were binding agreements
between the employer and each of the four unions concerned.
Each of these principal submissions was directed to demonstrating that the parties (the employer of the one part and either the individual
employees by their agents the union, or the unions themselves of the other part) had made a contract. Thus it is necessary to consider
on each branch of the respondents' submissions whether the parties intended to enter legal relations or rather, as the appellant
submitted, intended to make an agreement binding only in honour.
It is clear that each of the unions and the employer is to be taken as believing that an agreement had been reached. Why otherwise
did representatives of the unions and the employer sign the documents? Before those documents were signed, the employer had made
two offers setting out the terms upon which it
would be willing to pay redundancy benefits but those offers had been rejected. The third offer made by Homfray had been considered
by a meeting of employees which had resolved to accept the offer. Only then were the documents recording the arrangement prepared
and in each case signed by a representative of the relevant union and a representative of the employer. In those circumstances it
is clear that the unions concerned and the employer intended to make an arrangement that would be binding. But binding in what sense
and upon whom? Although it is clear that the parties intended by their signature to the documents to record something that was serious
and significant, as opposed to something trifling, are they to be taken in the circumstances of this case as intending to reach an
agreement enforceable at law or intending to reach an agreement that would or might have significance in the future industrial relations
between the parties but not be enforceable by resort to the courts?
We were referred to no reported decision which provides any direct or immediate guidance in resolving this question. We were told
that at first instance extensive reference was made to, and reliance placed by the receiver and manager upon, the decision of Geoffrey
Lane J in Ford Motor Co Ltd v Amalgamated Union of Engineering and Foundry Workers [1969] 2 QB 303. The plaintiff, Ford, had made
collective agreements which regulated procedures governing the relationship between the company and unions representing employees
and regulated conditions of employment for employees. It was held that the plaintiff had not made out a sufficient prima facie case
that the agreements were contracts intended to be enforceable at law to warrant the grant of interlocutory injunctions restraining
alleged breaches of the agreements. It was held that having regard to all of the surrounding circumstances the parties to the agreements
did not intend that the arrangements should be binding at law but intended only that the arrangements should be binding in honour.
Extensive reference was made in the reasons for judgment of Lane J to the published reports of various inquiries, and in particular
the Report of the Royal Commission on Trade Unions and Employers' Associations (the Donovan Report, Cmnd 3623, 1968), which, so Lane
J held, revealed an almost unanimous climate of opinion on both sides of industry in Great Britain, since at least 1954, that no
legally enforceable contract resulted from collective agreements of the kind then in issue.
Little reference was made to the Ford Motor Co case in the course of the argument of the present appeal and in my view that is understandable
when it is recognised that it is a decision that proceeded from considerations that were unique to Great Britain. In particular,
it is a decision that depended upon a finding about the views of those who participated in industrial negotiations in that country
after 1954. The systems of industrial regulation, wage fixing and regulation of matters between employer and employee in that country
then were (and now are) very different from those that applied then or now apply in this country. The differences are too numerous
to mention but one example will serve to identify the general nature and extent of those differences. Registered organisations of
employees have had a place in the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes in this country which finds no analogy in Britain.
As late as 1971, after the decision in the Ford Motor Co Ltd v Amalgamated Union of Engineering and Foundry Workers [1969] 2 QB 303
Ford Motor Co case Lord Wedderburn (in the second edition of his text The Worker and the Law ) could still express doubt about whether
a registered union in Great Britain had legal personality that would enable it to make a contract: see at 178. Doubts about the Commonwealth's
power to provide for the incorporation of organisations when registered under the
Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904 were settled in 1908 in Jumbunna Coal Mine NL v Victorian Coal Miners' Association
(1908) 6 CLR 309
and since then there has been no doubt about the capacity of a registered organisation such as the Textile Workers' Union or other
unions concerned in this matter to make a legally binding contract. Whether the parties are to be taken to intend to make such a
contract in any particular case is a separate question but there is no doubt about the capacity of registered unions to do so: cf
Australian Agricultural Co v Federated Engine-Drivers' and Firemen's Association of Australasia
[1913] HCA 41
(1913) 17 CLR 261.
The respondents sought to rely upon evidence given by the union officials who had been concerned in this matter to the effect that
those union officials had made other agreements of the same general kind as those now in issue and that those officials intended
those other agreements, and the agreements which they had made with Homfray, to be legally binding. Objection was taken at trial
to this evidence and although it appears that the learned trial judge did not rely upon it in reaching his conclusions, he made no
formal ruling on its admissibility. The evidence was given by a number of witnesses and, as might be expected, was put in different
terms by the various witnesses. However, the nature of the evidence can be illustrated by an extract from the affidavit of Neville
Thomas Brent, an organiser employed by the AMEU who deposed that: I have negotiated a large number of agreements for redundancy or
retrenchment pay during my period of employment as a union organiser. I have always considered these agreements to be legally binding.
They have always considered these agreements to be legally binding. They have always been honoured by employers except where employers
have not had capacity to pay through insolvency.
In my view that evidence was inadmissible. It did no more than describe the deponent's view of the effect of the arrangements that
had been made. That is, it was evidence of the apparently uncommunicated subjective belief or opinion of the witness about the legal
consequences to be attached to the transactions. Such subjective beliefs (uncommunicated to the opposite party to the transaction)
do not assist in determining whether the parties are to be taken as intending legal consequences to attach to that conduct. That
enquiry is principally, if not entirely, an enquiry about the objective effect of the words and conduct of the parties; it is not
an enquiry about the beliefs each may have secretly harboured about what was the effect of those words or that conduct. Whether communications
between the parties may be examined in considering whether they are to be taken as having intended to enter legal relations is a
question I need not consider in this case. Those issues were examined in Air Great Lakes Pty Ltd v KS Easter (Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1985) 2 NSWLR 309
and Australian Broadcasting Corporation v XIVth Commonwealth Games Ltd
(1988) 18 NSWLR 540.
The evidence which it was sought to adduce here was not of that kind. It was evidence only of the views of particular union officials
or employer representatives about the effect of arrangements they had made and on one view may not have amounted even to evidence
of the actual intention of the deponents at the time of making the agreements (as opposed to their subsequent construction or characterisation
of events). However even if it is to be understood as evidence of the deponents' actual intention, it is not evidence of any mutual
actual intention, there being no evidence of communication of the views to the opposite party. Further, unlike the material in the
Ford Motor Co Ltd v Amalgamated Union of Engineering and Foundry Workers [1969] 2 QB 303 Ford Motor Co case, the evidence sought
to be adduced in this matter did not seek to establish some general opinion or practice prevailing in industry. The question whether
these parties intended to be
legally bound must, in the end, fall to be judged according to what they said or did and what the reasonable hearer or observer would
take the words or action concerned to convey.
Further, that question (whether the parties intended to be legally bound by the arrangement that they made) cannot be answered in
isolation. In particular it cannot be answered without identifying the parties to the arrangement and cannot be answered without
identifying what the arrangement was. As I have said earlier, there is no doubt that those who participated in the process leading
up to the signing of the documents said to operate from 16 September 1991 believed (and are to be taken by their words and deeds
as believing) that they had reached consensus upon an important matter. Nothing in the various subjects under discussion (redundancy
payments, payment of wages, redundancy procedures or shift arrangements) and nothing in the way in which the parties acted or spoke
suggests that they did not intend a result that would inure to the benefit of at least some (if not all) employees of Homfray. But
in deciding whether parties were to be bound in a way that would permit the opposite party to enforce rights at law, and not be confined
to securing performance of the opposite party's promises only by industrial means, much may turn upon who are the parties and what
it was that was agreed.
It is convenient then to consider the question of parties. The learned trial judge found that "each union officer who signed the
document did so as agent for the union employees he represented who had approved the agreement at a meeting and did not do so as
principal on behalf of the union". I do not agree.
Any conclusion that the union (or its officers) was acting as agent rather than as principal confronts a number of difficulties which
I consider are insuperable obstacles in the way of accepting the proposition. The arrangement was one that would operate in the future;
it was not an arrangement dealing with an existing problem. Although there had been some redundancies which had provoked the negotiations,
the arrangement that was reached was one that would govern redundancies in the future and the parties negotiated the arrangement
without confining their attention to any identified employees or classes of employee who were about to be made redundant. Further,
it is clear that one of the so-called "offsets" which Homfray wanted (about payment of wages by electronic funds transfer) extended
not only to present employees but to future employees. Subpara(b) of that part of the agreement dealing with electronic funds transfer
said that it was agreed that "Electronic funds transfer will be a condition of the employment for all new employees". These matters
suggest that it was intended that the redundancy arrangements agreed in by the parties would be applied not only to present employees
of Homfray but any future employees. Nor can the significance of that fact be diminished by saying, as was submitted on behalf of
the respondents, that there was a stable workforce at Homfray. However stable the workforce may have been it must be accepted that
the parties contemplated some changes in personnel brought about by retirement in the ordinary course or death or illness.
If the union was acting as agent, for which employees at Homfray did it act as agent? The learned trial judge concluded that the
union was acting on behalf of those members who voted in favour of the proposal put to the general meeting of union members on 16
September 1991. That is, he concluded that the union acted on behalf of some but not all persons who were employed at Homfray at
the time of the making of the arrangement.
On no view of the evidence did all employees of Homfray vote in favour of the proposal that was put to the meeting. Some employees
were absent from the meeting. It may be that some who were present at the meeting did not vote in favour of it. (The evidence about
this was not entirely clear but I need not stay to examine it further for it is clear that there were some employees of Homfray who
did not vote in favour of the proposal.)
A conclusion that the union was acting only for those employees who voted in favour of the proposal leads to strange and difficult
results. The agreements which the unions and the employer executed were cast in general terms. There was nothing in them to suggest
that only some employees were to benefit. No record was made at the meeting of who voted in favour of the proposal and thus there
was no record of who, on this analysis of the matter, was to benefit from the arrangement. (Indeed, no record was made at the meeting
of who attended it. All that the evidence shows is that some employees were absent from work on the day the meeting was held and
it was suggested in argument that even that may not represent a sufficient basis for concluding that they did not attend the meeting,
it being submitted that they might have come to the meeting but not attended work that day.)
Of course the fact that there may be difficulties in proving who did or did not vote in favour, and thus, on this analysis, difficulties
in proving who is or who is not a party to the agreement, is not determinative of the legal issue which is raised but I mention these
difficulties to demonstrate the improbability that when they signed an agreement cast in terms apparently applicable to all employees
at Homfray, the union and the employer are to be taken to have made an arrangement benefiting some but by no means all of the then
employees of Homfray. The very nature of the difficulties I have mentioned, coupled with the general terms in which the agreement
is recorded suggest, and to my mind suggest strongly, that it was not intended to oblige the company to some only of its workforce.
That conclusion is reinforced by the fact that if the company had made an agreement with only some of its employees, there would
inevitably be increasing difficulties in the future. Was the company to be regarded as being at large on this issue of redundancy
when it came to set the terms and conditions of employment of newly engaged employees? Are the parties to be taken as intending that
only a particular group of employees (the number of which would inevitably reduce as time passed) should have these terms? For these
reasons I reject the submission that the union acted as agent for those who voted in favour of the resolution put to the meeting.
If the union were to be treated as acting as agent not only for those who voted in favour of the proposal but for some wider class
of employees of Homfray, such as all union members or all present and future union members employed at Homfray, other difficulties
arise. Leaving to one side whatever problems there might be about contracting on behalf of unascertained future employees, and dealing
only with present employees, by what right does the union act for absent or dissenting employees? By hypothesis, the agreement that
is struck is reached between individual employees and the employer. If that agreement is enforceable as a contract, those individual
employees have provided consideration for the promise of the employer. By what right does the union agree on behalf of dissenting
or absent employees to provide consideration to the company in return for its promise to provide specified redundancy benefits? Nor
should the question of providing consideration be dismissed as some legal technicality. Thus if the union had purported to offer
a promise of no further industrial action for a time,
would persons who were later employed at the factory be bound at law not to take industrial action and thus be liable to an action
for damages if they did? Or if the union had agreed that there would be no further claims for changes in the terms and conditions
of employment for a period of (say) two years, could the employer seek an injunction restraining employees who had voted against
the proposal, or who first came into its employment after the agreement was made, from prosecuting such a claim? By what right does
the union offer such promises on behalf of persons who have not assented to their being proffered?
It was not suggested in the course of argument that these questions could be answered by reference to union rules. Thus it was not
suggested in the course of argument that members of the union who were employed at Homfray at the time of the agreement assented
in some way, whether by their membership of the union or otherwise, to the union reaching an agreement and proffering consideration
on their behalf if the union was authorised to do so by a bare majority of those present and voting at a meeting of members. Nor
was any argument advanced suggesting that persons who later became members of the union or who later were employed at Homfray might
be taken to have assented to the agreement reached.
Similarly, no argument was addressed to any of the problems that can be seen as emerging from the fact that in this case there was
a single meeting of members of four different unions. How does such a meeting confer authority on officials of a union which had
one or two of three eligible members attend it? (Again the evidence does not reveal clearly whether there were two or three boiler
attendants who were members of the FEDFA or whether one or two of the eligible members of that union attended the meeting.) If only
one member attended, is the vote of that one member of the union to confer authority on the union to negotiate for the other one
or two members?
Even if such problems could be overcome, what of the problem presented by persons later employed by Homfray?
Counsel for the respondents submitted (as one of the several alternative submissions made on this aspect of the case) that each of
the agreements made by the unions could be seen as an agreement reached by the union as agent for the then employees of Homfray who
were members of that union and thus could be seen as working a variation of the contracts of employment of those employees. If all
that the unions and employer did was reach an agreement varying the terms and conditions of employment of present employees and they
made no agreement about future employees, why was it thought necessary or appropriate to record in the documents that it was agreed
that payment of wages by electronic funds transfer would be a condition for all new employees? Was this simply a bare statement of
intention having no legal significance or effect? Are the parties to be taken as having addressed that question of payment by electronic
funds transfer in relation to the terms and conditions of employment of new employees but as not having addressed (whether expressly
or implicitly) any question about what redundancy benefits were to be offered to new employees as part of their terms and conditions
of employment? Are the unions to be taken as acting as agents for the present employees but as principals in relation to matters
touching future employees?
No doubt, as counsel for the respondents pointed out, it was the employees at Homfray who first raised the question of redundancy
payments with their unions. Equally clearly, the unions did nothing to signify assent to any proposal until a meeting of employees
had been held. But these considerations, important as they
no doubt are, do not lead me to the conclusion that the unions were acting as agent in the negotiations. They are considerations
that do no more than show that the unions responded to the expressed wishes of their members.
The several difficulties I have mentioned lead me to reject the proposition that the unions were acting in these negotiations as
agent for some or other of their members. They were not. If the unions made any agreement that was enforceable at law, they were
agreements that the unions made as principals, not as agents.
I turn then to the respondents' alternative argument that each of the four unions, as principal, made an agreement with the employer.
If that is the proper analysis of what was said and done, no difficulty arises about identifying the parties to the arrangement.
But what consideration can be identified for the employer's promise to pay redundancy benefits? What was the right, interest, profit
or benefit accruing to the employer or forbearance, detriment, loss or responsibility given, suffered or undertaken by the union?:
Currie v Misa (1875) LR 10 Ex 153 at 162.
In no case did the union give any express promise to the employer and in my view it is not possible to imply in any of the four agreements
that were reached any promise by the union concerned. I say that the union gave no express promise to the employer notwithstanding
what is said in the second part of the agreement. Two aspects of the matter lead me to that conclusion. First, if consideration is
to be found in some promise by the union, it must be a promise sufficiently certain to admit of enforcement before a contract can
be found to exist and, secondly, if the consideration is to be found in a promise, it must be a promise by the union, not by some
third party.
The second part of each of the documents executed in late 1988 dealt with three different subjects - payment of wages by electronic
funds transfer, selection of persons to be made redundant if there were to be future redundancies, and reorganisation of shifts.
Each of those matters was a matter immediately affecting employees of Homfray rather than the unions. In my view it is not possible
to distil from the words used in the agreements or from any of the surrounding circumstances any promise by the unions. They did
not promise to do anything themselves whether for example by procuring employees (or perhaps by procuring those employees who were
members of the union concerned) to do or refrain from doing anything or otherwise.
It is as well to consider separately each of the three subjects of electronic funds transfer, selection for redundancy and shift
flexibility.
What is it that the union was promising to do, or not to do? In my view it is not possible to spell out from the words used some
promise by the unions to procure present employees to agree to payment by electronic funds transfer or to procure future employees
to do so. That is not what the words say and, in my view, no process of construction can mould them to such a meaning. Thus it is
said that "from the date of this agreement, all employees agree ...". To construe that as a promise by the union to procure an agreement
in the future would fly in the face of the words that have been used. As for the future, what is it said that the union will do?
The words are that "it is agreed that Electronic Funds Transfer will be a condition of employment for all employees". That speaks
of an agreement (now) between union and employer and not about what the union will do but what the employer will require of its new
Again, so far as selection of redundancies and shift flexibility are concerned, what is the union to do?
In the end the argument for the respondents was that each union promised that it would not "raise a grievance" if the steps set out
in the document were taken. But what is the content of such a promise? What kinds of steps has the union promised to forgo? For how
long does the union agree not to "raise a grievance"?
In my view it is simply not possible to distil from the words used in the documents any agreement on the unions' part to do or refrain
from doing anything.
Not only is there no express promise by the union to do or refrain from doing something, no such promise can be implied. Apart from
any other reason that might stand in the way of implying a term, what is the content of the promise by the union which was so obvious
that it went without saying?: BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd v Hastings Shire Council (1977) 180 CLR 266 at 283; Codelfa Construction
Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority of NSW
[1982] HCA 24
(1982) 149 CLR 337
at 347. Because the content of that promise cannot be identified, no such term can be implied.
Thus, I do not consider that it is possible to identify any executory consideration moving from the unions for the promise of the
Nor do I consider that it is possible to identify any executed consideration. That is, I do not think it possible to identify any
act done or forbearance suffered by the union as the price for the employer's promise to pay redundancy benefits.
It was suggested in the course of argument that executed consideration could be identified in the unions' treating the particular
dispute with the employer (about redundancy benefits) as at an end. Or, putting it another way, it was suggested that the unions
forbore from prosecuting the particular claims that they had made, in return for the employer (about redundancy benefits) as at an
end. That is, it was suggested that the unions forbore from prosecuting the particular claims that they had made, in return for the
employer's promise to pay benefits to present and future employees who included or would include members of the unions.
Put in this last way, the submission seeks to evoke analogies with forbearance from prosecuting a disputed claim (say) for a debt
which, of course, can be good consideration for a promise to pay a sum. But several points must be noticed. First, this is not a
case in which the parties were bargaining about disputed rights and duties; they were not seeking to settle a dispute in which one
side alleged an existing right and the other disputed either its existence or its content. Here the parties were seeking to create
a new right. Secondly, the expression "forbear from prosecuting the particular claims" may obscure more than it illuminates. It may
be possible to spell out from the dealings of the parties, or from the nature of industrial negotiations in this country, some implicit
understanding of the parties that if agreement is not reached, one or other side may resort either to compulsory processes in the
industrial tribunals or to industrial action. Thus to say that parties have reached an agreement and that the particular dispute
is at an end might be said, at first sight, to lead to the conclusion that one side or the other, in this case the unions, have given
up the possibility of (or forborne to prosecute their claims by resorting to) industrial action or the processes of conciliation
and arbitration by industrial tribunal. But to say that that "forbearance" is good consideration for a contract would, in my view,
extend the notions of consideration beyond what now is recognised in authority. That is not because forbearance is not good consideration;
it can be. It is because, on analysis, the "forbearance" in this kind of case is devoid of content.
The hypothesis from which this argument proceeds is that the union has made no promise to the employer. (If it has made a promise
then it is to that promise that attention should be directed in the search for consideration). If it has made no promise eg about
future claims, what then is the content of the "forbearance"? There is in this case no element of compromising a dispute about an
existing right such as whether A owes B $100. Thus, it is not possible to say that new rights have been created in substitution for
other, disputed, rights. All there is in this case, is a demand for the creation of a new right with no promise that a new demand
on precisely the same subject will not be made as soon as the first demand is conceded, or, if the first demand is not wholly conceded
that it will not be renewed the moment that the parties have said that they agree to compromise it. What then has the union forborne
from doing?
In fact it did not procure its members to take industrial action against the employer and in fact it did not apply to any industrial
tribunal for any conciliated or arbitrated resolution of its claim for redundancy benefits. But it made no promise that it would
not do so and, just as importantly, the employer cannot be taken as having impliedly asked it to do so. Thus the case is very different
from cases such as Fullerton v Provincial Bank of Ireland
[1903] AC 309
where Lord Macnaghten said at 313: In such a case as this it is not necessary that there should be an arrangement for forbearance
for any definite or particular time. It is quite enough if you can infer from the surrounding circumstances that there was an implied
request for forbearance for a time, and that forbearance for a reasonable time was in fact extended to the person who asked for it.
See also Alliance Bank Ltd v Broom (1864) 2 Dr and Sm 289;
; Oldershaw v King (1857) 2 H and N 517;
[1857] EngR 695
; Miles v New Zealand Alford Estate Co (1886) 32 Ch D 289.
The employer is not in the position of a debtor asking for time to pay what is, or arguably is, owing to a creditor. The parties
negotiated with a view to creating new rights, not compromising a dispute about existing rights. No request for forbearance (scil,
from enforcing the other party's claim) can then be implied. Nor, in the absence of some promise about future conduct in pursuit
of this or other claims, can any implication be made that the union forgoes the right to make a fresh demand. All there is, at most,
is the union's statement (in effect) that it accepts the employer's offer. In my view that is not good consideration. The union has
thereby suffered or undertaken no forbearance detriment loss or responsibility.
The conclusion that there is no consideration for the employer's promise might, at first sight, seem to suggest that the employer's
promise is to be characterised as no more than some unsolicited act of generosity on its part and might lead to the further suggestion
that such a characterisation of what happened in this matter flies in the face of the fact that there was a real and lively industrial
dispute about redundancy benefits that was settled when the union accepted something less than it had originally sought. (The unions
had sought what were said to be the "Hycraft" terms but in the end they accepted benefits which were less.) Further, can it be said
that the conclusion appears to fly in the face of Homfray's insistence upon the provision of "offsets" as the price for agreeing
to provide a reward redundancy benefit?
The facts that a dispute was settled and that "offsets" were sought and given, do not (alone or together) mean that the arrangement
that was struck was a
contract enforceable at law. The settlement of the dispute and the provision of the offsets is as consistent with the making of an
arrangement that was to have industrial as opposed to legal consequences as they are with the parties having reached an agreement
intended to be binding at law. If, as I consider to be the case, no good consideration was provided by the union for the employer's
promise, then no legally binding contract was made. But that is not to say that the arrangement struck was of no significance at
all. There is no doubt that the parties could properly regard the arrangement as constituting the employer's undertaking that it
would in future provide redundancy benefits at the level agreed and that its employees would permit payment of wages by electronic
funds transfer, permit selection of redundancies according to the criteria and procedures laid down (whatever they might mean) and
allow for the introduction of more flexible shift arrangements. But the fact that that may have been the legitimate expectation of
the parties does not mean that the parties are to be taken as contemplating that those expectations were to be capable of enforcement
by resort to the courts.
Implicit in many of the submissions made on behalf of the respondents was that any conclusion that did not require the payment in
priority to other claims of the redundancy benefits set out in the agreements signed in late 1988 was a conclusion that would defeat
the legitimate expectations of the parties to those arrangements. The parties clearly intended to strike a bargain on a matter of
significance, why is it not enforceable?
Considerations of the kind I have just described, in the end, amount to no more than bare assertion: the agreement is enforceable
because the parties want it so. They are considerations that are to be judged in light of the important fact that if the parties
had wished to ensure that the agreements were enforceable at law, they could have registered them under the appropriate industrial
legislation.
Indeed PtIV of the then
Industrial Relations Act 1979
(Vic) and, in particular s50 of that Act dealt with many, if not all, of the problems that I have referred to earlier as standing
in the way of holding that the agreements are binding contracts. (The Act is no longer in force, the relevant provisions being repealed
with effect from 1 March 1993.) Thus an "industrial agreement", if registered, was binding, whether or not there was consideration
for it, and was binding not only on the parties who executed the agreement or concurred in it (s50(1)(a)) but also upon every employee
who was, at any time whilst the agreement was in force, "employed at a work site to which the agreement applies by an employer on
whom the agreement is binding": s50(1)(c). Such an agreement, if registered, was "enforceable in all respects as if it were an award":
s50(2). (Broadly similar provisions governing "certified agreements" were to be found in the relevant Commonwealth legislation: see
Industrial Relations Act 1988
In my view the argument asserting apparent disappointment of legitimate expectations is much weakened (if not wholly answered) when
it is recalled that the agreements could have been rendered enforceable by resort to these provisions. The fact that the parties
did not register the agreements may owe much to judgments which they then made about what was or was not to their advantage and may
very well not have taken to account the possibility that the employer may fall upon such hard times that an external administrator
(a receiver or a liquidator) may be appointed. But that does not mean that the expectations of enforceability which the parties (be
they the unions and the employer or the employees and the employer) may have had are to be understood as expectations of enforceability
in the courts. Nor does it mean that the expectations (however large they may have been) are properly classed as legitimate expectations
of enforceability
otherwise than by industrial means of persuasion when there was available to the parties a readily accessible means of ensuring enforceability
which they did not adopt.
It is desirable to draw together the three questions of intention to create legal relations, parties and consideration for, as I
have said, I do not think that they can be considered as three separate and isolated questions. In my opinion the true analysis of
what was said and done in relation to Homfray is that the arrangement that was struck was struck between union and employer and,
the union having provided no consideration for the employer's promise no contract was made. Because the union gave no consideration
for the promise of the employer, the parties did not make a bargain of the kind that could be enforced in a court and in my view
their conduct is to be taken as demonstrating that they did not intend to do so.
For these reasons I would allow the appeal and set aside the order below answering the questions in the originating motion. Framing
fresh answers to those questions is not easy, if only because the questions are put in terms of whether the receiver is "bound by"
the document or documents referred to in the question. Perhaps the dispute between the parties can be described in those terms but
in truth it centres not upon whether the receiver is bound by a document but upon whether the documents are or evidence agreements
giving rise to a debt or amount that in a winding up is payable pursuant to s556(1)(h) in priority to unsecured debts. For the reasons
I have given, I consider that the documents are not and do not evidence such agreements. In the case of the Hycraft agreement, any
agreement which the company is there recorded as having made about redundancy benefits was an agreement limited to the sample assembly
section of the factory and has been performed. In the case of the Homfray agreements, none is an industrial instrument within the
or s556 of the Corporations Law. I would therefore propose that the questions in the originating motion be answered as follows:
2. It is unnecessary to answer this question.
3. None of the documents is an industrial instrument by virtue of which retrenchment payments are payable by the company to employees.
4. It is unnecessary to answer this question.
Appeal allowed; questions answered accordingly.
Solicitors for the appellant: Clayton Utz.Solicitors for the respondents: Maurice Blackburn and Co.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter