URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VRAT/2009/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Douglas (HAR) - App 06 2009 [2009] VRAT 6 (18 May 2009)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
APPEAL NO. 6 OF 2009
In the matter of an Appeal
MR DARYL DOUGLAS
AGAINST THE CONVICTION AND
PENALTY OF FOUR WEEKS
SUSPENSON IMPOSED BY THE
HARNESS RACING VICTORIA
INDEPENDENT APPEALS PANEL FOR
BREACHING AUSTRALIAN HARNESS
RACING RULE 149(1)
JUDGE WILLIAMS
, His Honour
Mr P. Beaumont,
Mr B. Pearce, Adviser
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT MELBOURNE ON 18 MAY
2009 AT 10.21 A.M.
MR C. WINNEKE appeared on behalf of Mr Douglas.
MR T. FORREST QC appeared on behalf of Harness Racing Victoria.
(Judge Williams)
D E C I S I O N
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal by Mr Daryl Douglas against the conviction
and penalty imposed at first instance by the stewards at
Shepparton on 2 April
2009, that was the day of the race in question, and subsequently by the Harness
Racing Victoria Appeals Tribunal
on 16 April 09 at which hearing the appellant
Mr Douglas was convicted of a breach of Rule 149 and the penalty which had
been imposed by the stewards of 6 weeks' suspension was (at the
Appeal Tribunal) reduced to 4 weeks' suspension.
Rule 149(1) reads as follows. "The driver shall take all reasonable
and permissible measures during the course of a race to ensure
that the horse
driven by that driver is given full opportunity to win or obtain the best
possible placing in the field." This hearing
before the Racing Appeals Tribunal
is of course a hearing de novo. Further any conviction must be such that
the Tribunal is satisfied
to a degree of satisfaction that is consistent with
the well-known authority of
Now the evidence presented to this Tribunal, and which is of course
under consideration, includes the transcripts and exhibits that
were tendered
today relating to the previous hearings that I've referred to. Secondly, the
video of the race in question, which
was a three year old pace event at
Shepparton Harness Meeting on Thursday, 2 April 2009. Thirdly, the viva voce
evidence from stipendiary
steward, Mr Anthony Pearce; fourthly, the evidence
from the appellant, Mr Douglas himself, and finally the evidence of a
called on Mr Douglas's behalf in the nature of an expert witness,
Mr Graham Lang.
In essence what relevantly occurred in this race, the race in question,
is as follows. From the start of the race up until the
appearance on the video
of a yellow sign on the perimeter fence, at a point about 300 metres from the
start, Mr Douglas quite aggressively
urged his horse, Wizard of Speed, to the
front on the pegs with Mr Jack's horse, Prince Zet on his outside. The
stewards make no
criticism of this challenge at all. The driving by Mr Douglas
over this early part of the race was considered perfectly justifiable
race, and no doubt in other races where attempt is made to gain a favourable
position from the outset.
I repeat, the stewards have not levelled any criticism against Mr
Douglas in relation to that initial segment of the race. From
that point, which
was roughly at the start of the back straight and throughout almost the whole of
the back straight, a distance
of approximately 400 to 500 metres, the two horses
that I have mentioned, viz. Mr Douglas's horse, Wizard of Speed and Mr Jack's
horse, Prince Zet, continued to challenge each other for the lead with Mr Jack
on the outside, and I quote from the transcript of
words of Mr Douglas himself,
Mr Jack, "driving like a lunatic", trying to get across Mr Douglas's horse and
take the lead, and Mr
Douglas's horse matching pace with the other horse and
maintaining its position in front and on the pegs. It is perhaps convenient
this point to quote two passages, one from p.4 of the transcript before the
original stewards' hearing. Question, "Did you still
want the lead?" Mr
Douglas, "I was quite happy to hold the lead, yeah". Question, "So you weren't
relinquishing the lead?" Mr
Douglas, "No."
Also, a quote from the evidence today from the evidence of Mr Douglas,
my note of what he said, and this is not verbatim, but my
note reads, "Mr Jack
was trying to get to the front. I wasn't happy to let it go", "it" meaning "the
leading position". "If he
doesn't have the speed to cross, what do you do?"
Those remarks relate to the actions of the two horses I have referred to as they
went down the back straight. Finally at around a point about 800 metres from
the start of the race, which is near the end of the
back straight, Mr Jack's
horse did get across in front of Mr Douglas's horse.
Again I interpose a quote from p.4 of the original stewards'
transcript. Part of this is what I referred to before, "So you weren't
relinquishing the lead?---No. At any stage?---Oh well, I had to in the end
because he just kept going too far." So I repeat, at
that point Mr Douglas
finally allowed Mr Jack's horse to cross in front of him. Now I already
mentioned that this was a 3 year old
pace race. The lead time was
39.3 seconds, and it has to be noted that in 80-odd races since September
08, when the track was redeveloped,
this is the fastest lead time recorded by in
excess of 2 seconds.
The mile rate recorded for the race was 1 minute, 58.2 seconds,
which compares with the 3 year old age record of 1.58.4, and the
all age track
record of 1.57.6. Further, video seen in evidence by the Tribunal shows that
save for a third horse driven by Mr McCallum,
the two horses under discussion
achieved a lead over the field of horses of in excess of 30 metres, the field of
horses containing
those horses which ultimately filled all places and which of
course ran such a creditable time, as already indicated.
In short, Wizard of Speed and Prince Zet raced to a point some 30 or so
metres in front of the bulk of horses which contained the
winner and the place
getters which ran a fast time. Mr Douglas's horse started the race at $4.00 a
win, second favourite. It finished
43 metres last, last of the horses which
finished, i.e. 43 metres behind the winner. Mr Jack's horse was pulled up
and didn't finish.
The above represents an outline of the relevant
At this juncture let me relay my thanks to my two advisers and
colleagues whose input in an appeal of this nature has been invaluable.
However, the decisions hence forth of the Tribunal are the decisions that I have
The Tribunal finds on a combination of a number of unarguable facts
that Mr Douglas's horse was allowed to run over a distance of
first 800 metres of the race at too fast a pace. I of course acknowledge that
the first 300 metres of that distance should
be excused for the reasons I've
mentioned. The unarguable facts which have led to my finding of excessive pace
include the following.
First, the lead time that I've mentioned in this case
for three year olds.
Secondly, the mile rate that I've mentioned. Thirdly, the fact that on
Mr Douglas's own description, the horse on his outside was
being driven like a
lunatic and he kept up with it. Next, those two horses were 30 metres or
thereabouts in front of the field,
and finally the ultimate collapse of his
horse (a well fancied one) to run last, 43 metres behind the winner. In summary
those factors,
amongst others, have led to the conclusion that over the distance
in question from about the 300 metre mark - 300 metres from the
start until
allowed to run along at too fast a pace.
Next the Tribunal finds that Mr Douglas was complicit in this excessive
pace over what is considered an excessive distance, that
500-odd metres that
I've just described. Now by way of introduction to this particular part of the
judgment, the Tribunal recognises
that in the circumstances in which Mr Douglas
found himself, which were not of his doing but foisted upon him by the driving
Jack, he was placed in a awkward and invidious position.
He'd been instructed to get to the front, and he had done so very ably,
only to be taken on by a driver of a horse with little chance
in the race,
intent on challenging him for a protracted period of time. As I say, this is
seen by the Tribunal to have placed him
in a difficult and invidious situation.
However Mr Douglas's expertise and experience becomes relevant here. He of
course must
remember his responsibility to give his horse the full opportunity
to win or gain the best possible place in the race. He is not
exempted from
this obligation merely because he's been placed in awkward position.
What then did he do over this 400 to 500 metre distance? Tackling this
question, the Tribunal accepts in essence the evidence of
Mr Pearce, the
steward, that Mr Douglas allowed his horse to run along at its best to keep Mr
Jack's horse out. True, Mr Douglas
may not have positively hard driven the
horse, if I can put it that way. He may not have whipped it, he may not have
taken other
measures to sool it along. But nor was there any restraint. The
Tribunal does not accept that Mr Douglas had his horse under a
tight hold prior
to the time when ultimately he allowed Mr Jack's to actually cross to the
Again I quote from Mr Douglas's own evidence today before the Tribunal,
my notes, not verbatim, but this is what I recorded. "Mr
Jack was going harder.
I felt enough is enough. What do you do? We couldn't keep going like we were
for the whole race." The Tribunal
interprets from this evidence and the whole
of the evidence that Mr Douglas was steadfastly intent on preventing this
"interloper"
from taking his prize position on the pegs, and he was so intent
for too long a time. Until ultimately he realised, ultimately it
dawned on him
that it was suicide and that he couldn't go on like this for the whole
And finally he took a positive step, this is somewhere around the 800
metres from the start point, he took a positive step then
to slow and settle his
horse and allow the other horse to go in front. The Tribunal accepts Mr
Douglas's evidence that slowing his
horse may involve certain other
vicissitudes. For example, the horse's reaction to being slowed; and for
example, the possible advancement
of other horses in the race, but the Tribunal
is not impressed that these possibilities provide adequate excuse for his
on this occasion, especially bearing in mind Mr Douglas's expertise and
experience, which goes hand in hand with the capacity to
deal with those sort of
vicissitudes, and also bearing in mind the distance behind that the other horses
were and to which I've already
referred. In other words, it is clear from the
video that had Mr Douglas taken the option of restraining his horse at an
time and pulling in behind Mr Jack's, he would have had plenty of leeway
before the other horses caught him, and he would have been
giving his horse an
opportunity to again retake the lead when Jack's horse inevitably ran out of
Nobody, or course, can guarantee that such a course was going to lead
to a win, but it is the Tribunal's view that it was an option
which more closely
complied with the requirements of the Rule in question. Now Mr Douglas admitted
in his evidence that he was aware
of the fast rate that the two horses, his and
Mr Jack's horse, were running over the first at least 600 metres, certainly
if not 800 metres. He was aware of the fast rate, and indeed the
Tribunal would expect such an experienced driver to be so aware.
Mr Douglas also admitted in his evidence that with the benefit of
hindsight he did make an error of judgment in allowing his horse
to run at such
a fast pace over such a lengthy distance. In the Tribunal's view
Mr Douglas can't be excused for his inaction on
the basis that the horse
was simply running along under it's own steam. Even if that was the case, the
Tribunal is of the view that
if restraint is called upon for a properly rated
run, to give the horse its best reasonable opportunity, then that restraint must
be exercised.
Now Mr Douglas, the appellant, cannot be surprised at the Tribunal
concluding in all the circumstances here, but particularly bearing
in mind the
fast times that were recorded early in the race, and the fast mile rate, and
particularly also bearing in mind where
the two horses in question ultimately
finished, Mr Douglas can't be surprised at the conclusion by the Tribunal that
the collapse
into last place of his horse, Wizard of Speed, a well fancied
horse, was the direct result of the permitted excessive speed during
of the race under consideration.
Now of course there is still one remaining question. Was this error of
judgment culpable against Rule 149 or was it a mere error
of judgment which
should be attributed to the awkward position Mr Douglas found himself in? One
which should not be unduly criticised
as Mr Lang testified, and one which should
not be the subject of sanctioning for breach of the rules as Mr Winneke
submitted. In
answering these questions, the Tribunal should record that it is
of course aware of the principles set out in the hallowed case of
a decision of Judge Goran and the New South Wales Harness Racing Appeals
Tribunal on 26 October 1983; a decision which, without
quoting verbatim,
indicates that there is a significant difference between a mere error of
judgment, which is not a breach of the
rule, because a mere error or judgement
may be reasonable in the circumstances, as opposed to an error of judgment which
explained as such, one which is completely unreasonable and one which
is caught by the rule equivalent to Rule 149. In short, to
use the vernacular
adopted by Judge Goran, there are errors of judgment which are culpable or
blameworthy and there are errors of
judgment which might be described as mere
errors of judgment and not blameworthy in all the circumstances.
The Tribunal is also aware of the decision of Judge McNab in the
, which was heard on 23 October 2003. Clearly the
facts in Mifsud's case bear significant similarity to the facts in the present
case, but by no means would that lead this Tribunal to automatically follow the
outcome in Mifsud as it is recognised that no two
cases ever possess all the
same facts and circumstances and this Tribunal certainly recognises that fact
and will decide this case
on the facts that have been already outlined and not
on the outcome in Mifsud.
Having said that there has no doubt been some value to the Tribunal in
reading Mifsud and see the sort of considerations that were
In answer to the final question - bearing in mind the pace of the race
as described, the duration over which that occurred as described,
the mind set
of the appellant, Mr Douglas, as the Tribunal has already described, and the
significant collapse of the horse into
a last position, 43 metres behind the
winner, the Tribunal considers that Mr Douglas's error of judgment on the
occasion in question
was in the culpable category.
In the Tribunal's view he endeavoured to maintain his position
vis-a-vis Mr Jack's horse "at all costs" for too long a period.
ultimately restrain his horse, but bearing in mind his admitted realisation of
the excessive pace at which the horses were
travelling, he should have
restrained his horse much sooner. His failure to do so was a failure to
exercise the reasonable judgment
expected of him, an experienced and expert
In the words of
case, which is referred to in Mifsud,
"There comes a point at which it is unreasonable to continue to contend for the
has not been surrendered." In the Tribunal's view this point was
reached well before the time when, at about the 800 metre from
the start point,
Mr Douglas finally allowed Mr Jack to cross and take the lead. Accordingly the
Tribunal's conclusion is that Rule
149 has been breached by this driving and the
appeal against conviction is dismissed.
(Judge Williams)
D E C I S I O N
HIS HONOUR: On the question of penalty the Tribunal has in mind a number
of relevant considerations, amongst which are the following.
Mr Douglas is
obviously a very successful and experienced harness racing driver, who we've
heard puts a lot into the industry and
we've no reason to disbelieve that, and
who, although he certainly does have a record of the sort of traffic offences
you'd expect,
overall over the number of drives that he's had, the Tribunal is
prepared to conclude that his is generally a good driving record,
although it
must be noted that he has transgressed against Rule 149 on two previous
But I repeat, bearing in mind the number of drives he's had which is
said to be over 20,000, his record can't be regarded as all
that bad. Secondly
it is conceded in this case fairly by Mr Forrest on behalf of the stewards that
the level of culpability that
constitutes the breach of Rule 139 in this case is
at the lower end of the spectrum. No doubt this concession is forthcoming
of the circumstances that arose in the case and which I've already
outlined at some length in dealing with the conviction appeal.
In short Mr Douglas was by no means the author of his undoing in this
case. The last thing he would have wanted was this nuisance-value
challenging him over this lengthy and protracted distance down the back straight
of the first lap of the race. It was foisted
on him, and I've already found
that he settled on the wrong course of action by attempting to keep the other
horse out for too long,
but it was firstly not something that in any way he
brought upon himself, and secondly it was not done - it was action that was not
perpetrated by him with any degree of vigour, which might have occurred had he
used the whip or had he sooled his horse on in a more
Had he taken those sort of actions he wouldn't be getting the
concession that Mr Forrest and the Tribunal will allow him, namely
culpability is at the lower end of the spectrum for this offence. Next,
however, the Tribunal must at the same time acknowledge
the seriousness of the
offence. It is not merely a careless driving offence. It is a higher category
of seriousness and warrants
appropriate action by the Tribunal, and appropriate
deterrence by reason of the level of penalties imposed.
And finally there is the penalty that was ultimately imposed on the
other driver, Mr Jack, who everyone in this case acknowledges
substantial degree more culpable than Mr Douglas. He ultimately ended up with a
suspension of five weeks. So the Tribunal
has a number of matters to take into
account, which it does, and it is considered that a period of suspension of
three weeks meets
the balance that arises from all those
considerations.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (46.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter