URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/vic/VicSAC/2022/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:23:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in Victoria: Consultation Paper [2022] VicSAC 6; (16 August 2022)
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in Victoria: Consultation Paper
Sentencing Advisory Council
August 2022
Contributors
Paul McGorrery, Paul Schollum, Felicity Stewart, Anna Chalton
Sentencing Advisory Council
Arie Freiberg AM
Deputy-Chair:
Council Directors:
Carmel Arthur OAM, Hugh de Kretser, Fiona Dowsley,
Helen Fatouros, David Grace AM QC, Brendan Kissane QC, Dan Nicholson, Susanna
Quinn, Wendy Steendam
Chief Executive Officer:
Cynthia Marwood
Acknowledgments
The Council would like to thank the many people who
took the time to share their experiences with us in preparing this consultation
paper, including those who participated in our survey. Our thanks are also
extended to Court Services Victoria for providing us with
the data in this
paper, especially the Magistrates’ Court for going above and beyond in
providing the data on conditions attached
to adjourned undertakings.
Chair’s foreword
Much of the
Council’s work since it was established in 2004 has focused on the upper
end of Victoria’s sentencing hierarchy:
imprisonment, suspended sentences,
community correction orders, even fines. Until now we have not directly turned
our attention to
what are sometimes described as ‘low-end orders’:
adjourned undertakings (known in other jurisdictions as conditional
orders or good behaviour bonds) and dismissals with or without conviction.
Low-end orders are, however, a critical feature of the sentencing hierarchy.
Among other things, they are designed to respond to low-level
first-time offenders and vulnerable offenders; to reduce the resources required
in responding to certain offending; to
acknowledge circumstances where a
monetary penalty (a fine) would not be appropriate; to prioritise the
supervisory and rehabilitative
purposes of sentencing over its punitive aims;
and to encourage as little interaction with the justice system as possible in
appropriate
cases. Contact with the justice system is a significant risk factor
appropriate means of facilitating offenders’ rehabilitation, deterring
them from further offending, and thus protecting the community from further
offending behaviour.
With that in mind, in 2021 the Council committed to reviewing adjourned
undertakings in Victoria, to see whether there was scope to
improve their use,
through legislative reform, changes to how they are operationalised in court, or
changes to the programs and services
that support those orders.
We started this project by meeting with representatives from 14 key
organisations to ascertain their views about how adjourned undertakings
deferrals were working, and what the key issues might be. Their observations
have been fundamental in guiding the Council’s
work on this project, and
we’re grateful to them for taking the time to speak with us. While there
were a variety of views
thing they all shared: an appetite for more focus on, and investment into,
orders. Prosecutors, defence lawyers and courts alike were all united in
their view that encouraging increased use of adjourned undertakings,
appropriate cases, should be a priority for government. It is a fiscally sound
focus, because money spent diverting people from
increased justice system
engagement is invariably returned many times over. And it will improve community
safety by reducing reoffending.
But it can only do that if the government
commits the financial resources necessary to ensure that any reforms are given
the opportunity
We acknowledge that Victoria is in the midst of recovery from the COVID-19
pandemic, and its justice system is no exception. The courts
are still grappling
with a backlog of cases, and many organisations in this space told us they are
still treading water. The reforms
raised in this paper must be viewed in that
context. We are dealing with the aspirational while most organisations are still
with business as usual. To their credit, the situation many
organisations find themselves in did not seem to deter their fervour
reforming low-end orders, particularly if doing so meant implementing
evidence-based, non-populist policies.
We welcome any and all submissions, both from key stakeholders in the justice
system and from the general community, about the potential
reforms raised in
this consultation paper. This is an opportunity for a fairer and more effective
justice system.
Emeritus Professor Arie Freiberg AM, Chair, Sentencing Advisory Council
Call for submissions
The Sentencing Advisory
Council is seeking submissions on the questions posed in this consultation
The deadline for submissions is
Friday 27 September 2022
The Council intends to use submissions, and the results of consultations, to
make recommendations about the use of adjourned undertakings
in Victoria. The
Council welcomes submissions from stakeholders in the legal profession as well
as the broader community. We are
especially interested to hear from those who
are members of, or representatives of, marginalised groups that are too often
disproportionately
in contact with, and affected by, the criminal justice
When making a submission, please identify how you would like your submission
to be treated, based on the following three categories:
Public submission:
the Council may publish, refer to, and/or quote
directly from the submission and name the source of the submission in relevant
publications.
Anonymous submission:
the Council may publish, refer to, and/or quote
directly from the submission but will not identify the source of the submission
relevant publications.
Confidential submission:
the Council will not refer to or quote from
the submission. The submission will not be published or provided to any third
Confidential submissions will only be used to inform the Council
generally in its deliberations.
The Council reserves the right not to use or publish any submission that it
considers may be defamatory or offensive.
To make a submission, please email contact@sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au.
Consultation questions
The primary aim of this
paper is to explore whether there might be opportunities to improve and increase
the use of adjourned undertakings
in Victoria. To that end, there are 23
questions raised throughout this paper that we would be interested in hearing
your views on.
Chapter 2: Eligibility and purposes
Question 1: Supplementary purposes
Are the current supplementary
purposes for imposing adjourned undertakings in
(Vic) adequate and sufficient? If not, should they be amended and,
if so, how?
Question 2: The term ‘adjourned undertakings’
Should these orders continue to be described as
‘adjourned undertakings’? If not, what would be a more appropriate
description?
Chapter 3: Use of adjourned undertakings
Question 3: A new combined order
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be amended to specifically empower sentencing courts to impose a
combined order of imprisonment and an adjourned undertaking?
If so, how and why?
If not, why not?
Question 4: Rural and regional Victoria
Are there any issues with access to adjourned
undertakings in regional Victoria? You may wish to consider whether there are
resources that could be made available that would increase or improve
the use of adjourned undertakings in specific regions.
Chapter 4: Who receives adjourned undertakings
Question 5: Marginalised groups
Are there reforms that could
be made to adjourned undertakings that could reduce the disproportionate effect
of the criminal justice
system on marginalised groups? If so, what reforms would
you propose and why?
Chapter 5: Lengths of adjourned undertakings
Question 6: Maximum length
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be amended to restrict the maximum length of adjourned
undertakings in the Magistrates’ Court? If so, why? If not, why
Chapter 6: Mandatory conditions
Question 7: Judicial supervision
Is there scope to increase
the use of judicial supervision as a condition of adjourned undertakings? In
answering this question, you
may wish to consider:
criteria for
assessing offender suitability;
the resource
implications for courts;
the need to
balance the potential value of judicial supervision against the principles of
proportionality and parsimony;
the potential
inconsistency between adjourned undertakings being primarily unsupervised orders
but involving some supervision;
the evidence
base that would need to be developed to establish best practice processes;
the training
that judicial officers would require.
Question 8: Good behaviour
Is there a need to clarify the definition of
‘good behaviour’ in
sections 72
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic)? If so, why and how? If not, why not?
Chapter 7: Optional conditions
Question 9: Guidance about optional conditions
Is there a need for
legislative or other guidance about the optional conditions that can be attached
to adjourned undertakings? If
so, why and what type of guidance? If not, why
Question 10: Payment conditions
Should Victorian courts continue to be able to
require an offender to make a payment to an organisation that provides a
or community service, or to the court for payment to such an
organisation, as a condition of an adjourned undertaking? If so, why?
Question 11: Charitable donations
Should courts continue to be able to order donations
to specific charities? If so, is there a need for guidance or limitations about
which charities?
Question 12: Court Fund
Should there be more transparency in how the Court
Fund operates, including how much money it receives and distributes, who
the funds and how decisions about distribution are made?
Question 13: Justice plans
Are there any issues with the availability and
operation of justice plans as conditions of adjourned undertakings? What changes
you propose and why?
Question 14: Optional conditions
Are there any other issues with the optional
conditions that currently can be, and are, attached to adjourned undertakings in
Question 15: Funding for programs
Should offenders sentenced to participate in programs
as a condition of an adjourned undertaking be required to pay for those programs
themselves, or should they be paid for by the state?
Question 16: The adjourned undertaking form
Should the Magistrates’ Court review the
current adjourned undertaking form (CP230-9)? If so, what revisions would you
Chapter 8: The sentencing hierarchy
Question 17: The sentencing hierarchy
Should the placement of
adjourned undertakings in Victoria’s sentencing hierarchy be amended? If
not, why not? If so, how, why
and what consequential reforms would be needed
section 70)?
Question 18: Merging
sections 72
sections 72
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be merged to create a single sentencing order of an
‘adjourned undertaking’ regardless of whether a conviction is
imposed? If so, why? If not, why not?
Question 19: Merging
sections 73
sections 73
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be merged to create a single sentencing order of dismissal or
discharge (or some other term) regardless of whether a conviction
imposed? If so, why? If not, why not?
Question 20: Repealing
sections 74
sections 74
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be retained or repealed? In either case, why?
Question 21: Spent convictions
Spent Convictions Act 2021
be amended so that findings of guilt become spent at the date of
for people receiving adjourned undertakings without
conviction, rather than at the end of their adjourned undertaking?
Chapter 9: Breaches of adjourned undertakings
Question 22: Decriminalising breaches
Should breaching an
adjourned undertaking be decriminalised? If so, why? If not, why not?
Question 23: Successful completion
What should happen at the end of an adjourned
undertaking that has been successfully completed? You may wish to consider:
whether courts
should send a communication to offenders who successfully complete their
adjourned undertaking; and
whether there
needs to be a court hearing at the end of the undertaking, and if so, who should
be required to attend.
Introduction
Sentencing Advisory Council (‘the Council’) was established in 2004
as an independent statutory
The functions of the
Council are set out in legislation. They include providing statistical
information on sentencing, conducting
research on sentencing and, most
relevantly for this project, consulting with key stakeholders and the general
community on sentencing
matters, and advising the Attorney-General on sentencing
1.2 The aim of
this project is to examine and review the use of adjourned undertakings in
Victoria, to identify potential opportunities
for reform and to make
recommendations to the Attorney-General. The process of review involves
consultation with key stakeholders
and the general community about their views
on these orders.
Victorian courts have had the
power to impose a sentence known as an ‘adjourned
undertaking’.
These orders
are the functional equivalent of what are often referred to as good behaviour
bonds. Once a court finds a person guilty
of one or more offences, the court may
release the offender for a period of time if they give an undertaking to comply
with certain
conditions, especially to be of good behaviour. Adjourned
undertakings are predominantly issued in the Magistrates’ Court and
the second most common sentencing outcome in Victoria, with only fines being
more common.
1.4 Freiberg has
argued that adjourned undertakings have a number of advantages as a sentencing
disposition. They:
can provide for
the rehabilitation of an offender through conditions;
cost-effective than community correction orders (CCOs) as they do not require
supervision and the offender pays for their
own treatment (if necessary);
‘less likely to be criminogenic if they keep first-time, or less serious,
offenders away from more serious or recidivist
offenders, or minimise the
stigmatic effects of
conviction’.
adjourned undertakings having been in operation for almost 40 years, there has
not yet been a dedicated review of how they
function in Victoria. As Bradfield
observed in 2015, this is not unique to Victoria: ‘[s]anctions at the
lower end of the sentencing
scale tend to be overlooked in commentary on the
criminal justice system’.
current research by the Council aims to fill that gap and identify whether there
are any opportunities to reform adjourned undertakings
to increase and improve
Scope of this project
consultation paper is concerned with adjourned undertakings pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1991
1.7 The Council
is also concurrently investigating potential reforms to the use of sentence
deferrals; however, the unique issues
associated with sentence deferrals will be
discussed in a separate consultation paper released shortly after this
Human rights considerations
a public statutory authority, the Council is required, ‘in making a
decision ... to give proper consideration to a relevant
human right’. In
developing its recommendations, the Council will have regard to the various
rights enunciated in the
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act
(Vic), including but not limited to the rights to:
particularly given the disproportionate effect that the criminal justice system
frequently has on a number of groups, such
as young offenders, individuals
experiencing mental illness and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
(section 8)
not be punished
in a cruel, inhuman or degrading way
(section 10)
humane treatment
when deprived of liberty, particularly people who have not yet been convicted of
any offending
(section 22)
legal assistance
(section 25).
Five phases of the project
are five phases to this project:
preliminary
consultation:
meet with stakeholders to identify the key issues relating to
adjourned undertakings (December 2021 – February 2022);
survey judicial officers and criminal law practitioners about their
perceptions of adjourned undertakings (February – March
on options for reform:
publish this consultation paper and invite written
submissions on the questions raised herein (August – September 2022);
draft recommendations:
meet with stakeholders and the general community to
seek their views on draft recommendations (December 2022); and
deliver a final report with recommendations to the Attorney-General,
and then publish the report on the Council’s website (early
Method and data
consultation paper includes an analysis of court data on the use of adjourned
undertakings in Victoria between 2011 and
2020 (the reference period) and the
reoffending patterns of people who received adjourned undertakings, as well as
an analysis of
the survey responses from legal practitioners and judicial
officers. The methodology and counting rules used for those analyses are
outlined in Appendix 2.
undertakings: eligibility and purposes
2.1 This chapter
discusses who is eligible for an adjourned undertaking in Victoria and the
purposes for which they may be imposed.
It includes questions about the purposes
for which adjourned undertakings can be imposed, and whether the term
‘adjourned undertakings’
should continue to be used to describe
these orders.
Eligibility for adjourned undertakings
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) empower adult courts to impose
an adjourned undertaking for up to five years, either with
(section 72)
(section 75)
a conviction. These orders have been used in a wide variety
of circumstances, ranging from using public transport without a valid
and workplace health and
safety offences
manslaughter,
infanticide
are no specific eligibility criteria for adjourned undertakings, though they
cannot be imposed for a Category 1 offence under
circumstances,
or for a Category
2 offence unless there are ‘substantial and compelling circumstances that
are exceptional and rare’.
As the Council recently observed in the context of sex offences, adjourned
undertakings were already rarely imposed for Category
1 and 2 offences prior to
the introduction of those classifications in
Therefore, adjourned
undertakings are still available for the vast majority of offences in Victoria.
the 10 years from 2011 to 2020, adjourned undertakings made up 13.6% of
sentencing outcomes in the Magistrates’ Court and
1.3% in the higher
That makes them the
second most common sentence in the Magistrates’ Court, fines being the
most common (54.6%), and it means
that they are more prevalent than both
community correction orders (CCOs) and imprisonment. Adjourned undertakings are,
though, rare
in the higher courts, where imprisonment is imposed in
three-quarters of
Case law about the use of adjourned undertakings
is very little case law in Victoria about the appropriate use of adjourned
undertakings. This is to be expected. Given the costs
involved in an appeal and
the potential to receive a more severe sentence, rarely would an offender appeal
a low-end order such as
an adjourned undertaking to the Court of
Further, while the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) displaced the notion that Crown appeals
‘should only be rare and
exceptional’,
nevertheless remain fairly
exception is
, in which the prosecution appealed an adjourned
undertaking with conviction as manifestly inadequate for a man found guilty of
penetration of a child aged under
In that case, a security
guard working at a court formed a sexual relationship with a 14-year-old who he
believed was 17, but after
police told him that she was 14, he had intercourse
with her on one more occasion. The Court of Appeal held that the adjourned
undertaking
was manifestly inadequate because it did not ‘sufficiently
reflect’ the maximum penalty of the offence, the objective
gravity of the
offending, nor ‘the express need for denunciation and general
deterrence’.
given that the only effect of changing the sentence to a CCO would be to require
unpaid community work, the court exercised
its residual discretion not to
interfere with the sentence because ‘the respondent has incurred a
conviction, lost his employment
and is subject to registration as a serious sex
offender for 15 years’.
effect, this decision reaffirms that while an adjourned undertaking viewed in
isolation might appear to be an insufficient response
to objectively serious
offending, ancillary orders such as a conviction and sex offender registration,
along with extra-curial consequences
such as lost employment, can reflect a far
more serious constellation of punishment.
Purposes of adjourned undertakings
purposes that courts must bear in mind when sentencing in Victoria are specified
section 5(1)
Sentencing Act
The only purposes for which sentences may be imposed are—
punish the offender to an extent and in a manner which is just in all of the
circumstances; or
deter the offender or other persons from committing offences of the same or a
similar character; or
establish conditions within which it is considered by the court that the
rehabilitation of the offender may be facilitated; or
manifest the denunciation by the court of the type of conduct in which the
offender engaged; or
protect the community from the offender[.]
purposes are then supplemented by
section 70(1)
Sentencing Act
which outlines the purposes for which a court can impose an adjourned
undertaking, discharge or dismissal:
An order may be made under this Division—
provide for the rehabilitation of an offender by allowing the sentence to be
served in the community unsupervised;
take account of the trivial, technical or minor nature of the offence
allow for the offender to demonstrate his or her remorse in a manner agreed to
by the court;
allow for circumstances in which it is inappropriate to record a conviction;
allow for circumstances in which it is inappropriate to inflict any punishment
other than a nominal punishment;
allow for the existence of other extenuating or exceptional circumstances that
justify the court showing mercy to an offender.
every Australian jurisdiction has legislation specifying the general purposes of
sentencing.
The same is true in
many common law countries.
However, only three Australian jurisdictions supplement those with additional
purposes for issuing an adjourned undertaking (or a
Those supplementary
purposes are almost identical across Victoria, the Northern Territory and
with the exception of
Victoria uniquely specifying that adjourned undertakings can be imposed to allow
offenders to demonstrate their
remorse (a provision expressly inserted to allow
courts to attach payment conditions to adjourned
undertakings).
Australia, a court can impose a good behaviour bond ‘if it thinks that
good reason exists for doing
And in New South
Wales, courts deciding whether to make a conditional release order are required
to take into account ‘whether
the offence is of a trivial nature’
and any ‘extenuating circumstances in which the offence was
committed’.
2.10 There is
limited literature and case law about how these various supplementary purposes
should be interpreted.
case law that is available, however, suggests that they are alternative
criteria, not cumulative, so only one purpose needs to
be achieved to justify a
low-end order.
also suggests that if a low-end order is not directed towards any of the
purposes in
section 70(1)
, then it is not permissible to impose that sentence,
even if doing so would otherwise achieve one or more of the general purposes
sentencing in
For instance, in
DPP v Bills
, the County Court
held that an adjourned undertaking was not available because the offending was
not ‘trivial, technical or
of a minor nature’, because there were no
‘extenuating or exceptional circumstances that justify the court showing
and because the offending required more than nominal
punishment.
in 2013 the Supreme Court held that a charitable donation did not achieve any of
the (at the time) specified purposes in
; therefore, it could not be
imposed as a condition of an adjourned
undertaking.
In response to that
Supreme Court decision, the legislature amended the definition of
(section 3)
, amended the permissible conditions of adjourned undertakings
(sections 72
), and added to
that a low-end order can be
imposed for the purpose of allowing an offender to demonstrate their remorse in
an agreed-upon manner.
supplementary purpose that has received the most judicial consideration is
section 70(1)
©, whether it would be ‘inappropriate to record a
conviction’. Most cases were Tasmanian decisions interpreting a
to the meaning of ‘trivial, technical or minor’ in
section 70(1)(b)
Freiberg writes that this is to be ‘ascertained by reference both to the
gravity of the offence in the abstract and the particular
conduct that
constituted the offence for which the sentence is being
considered’.
He also noted
that an offence will generally not be trivial if it is a ‘typical offence
of the class prescribed’ or was
deliberately’.
, the Tasmanian Court of Criminal Appeal held that an undertaking
without conviction was manifestly inadequate in circumstances where
a woman had
drunkenly hit her neighbour on the head with a beer bottle because ‘[i]t
was not a “trivial, technical or
minor” crime and required much more
than a nominal
punishment’.
allows courts to show ‘mercy to an offender’ based on
extenuating or exceptional circumstances. For instance, in
, the Northern Territory Supreme Court overturned a conviction due to
‘extenuating circumstances’. The defendant in that
case had been
prosecuted for low-level firearm possession offences after trying to take his
own life with a gun.
High Court and the Victorian Court of Appeal have described the power to show
mercy as critical to an effective criminal
justice system (‘the very
Question 1: Supplementary purposes
Are the current supplementary purposes for imposing
adjourned undertakings in
Sentencing Act 1991
adequate and sufficient? If not, should they be amended and, if so, how?
The term ‘adjourned undertaking’
the term ‘adjourned undertaking’ is probably well understood by
experienced criminal law practitioners, it is also
probably less well understood
by the general public. There is inconsistent terminology to describe these and
similar orders across
the country. While Tasmania also describes them as
adjourned undertakings, they are otherwise known as good behaviour orders
(Australian
Capital Territory), good behaviour bonds (South Australia),
recognisance orders (Queensland), bonds (Northern Territory and Commonwealth)
and conditional release orders (New South Wales and Western Australia). The
Council is interested in hearing views as to whether
this order should be
renamed in Victoria to make its nature clearer to the public. The media
frequently describes them as good behaviour
orders or good behaviour bonds,
which may suggest that these are the most accessible terms. There are, though,
already good behaviour
bonds that can be imposed on children in
therefore, to avoid
confusion good behaviour orders may be the most appropriate term.
Question 2: The term ‘adjourned
undertaking’
Should these orders continue to be described as
‘adjourned undertakings’? If not, what would be a more appropriate
description?
of adjourned undertakings
3.1 This chapter
outlines data on the number of adjourned undertakings imposed in the
Magistrates’ Court and higher courts (County
and Supreme Courts) between
2011 and 2020, including which region of Victoria they were imposed in. It also
includes stakeholder
views on the use of adjourned undertakings, arising from
preliminary consultation and survey responses.
Adjourned undertakings in the Magistrates’ Court
The number of adjourned undertakings is
undertakings were imposed in over 126,000 cases in the Magistrates’ Court
in the 10 years from 2011 to 2020 (Figure
1). Over that period, they were
increasingly used, with a 63% increase between
followed by a significant
decline in 2020 due to COVID-19 restricting the ability of courts to operate at
full capacity.
Figure 1: Yearly number of adjourned undertakings
imposed in the Magistrates’ Court, 2011 to 2020 (126,675 adjourned
undertakings)
Adjourned undertaking and other low-end order
Adjourned undertaking only
Community-based order/community correction order + ADU
Fine + adjourned undertaking
Imprisonment + adjourned undertaking
Other + adjourned undertaking
The proportion of adjourned undertakings is
2 shows the proportion of all sentenced cases in the Magistrates’ Court
each year that either involved an adjourned undertaking
at all or involved an
adjourned undertaking as the principal (most severe) sentence in the case. The
trend for both was very similar.
Most notably, since 2015 there has been a
significant increase in the
of cases in the Magistrates’
Court in which an adjourned undertaking was
2: Yearly proportion of cases with adjourned undertakings in the
Magistrates’ Court, 2011 to 2020 (868,654 total cases,
126,675 total cases
with an adjourned undertaking, 118,056 cases with an adjourned undertaking as
the principal sentence)
Cases with an adjourned undertaking
Cases with an adjourned undertaking as the principal sentence
Cases with an adjourned undertaking
Cases with an adjourned undertaking as the principal sentence
Cases where an adjourned undertaking was not the principal
the vast majority of adjourned undertakings were the principal sentence in the
case (93%),
the other 7% were
imposed alongside more severe sentencing outcomes such as fines, drug treatment
orders and imprisonment (Figure
3). While the most common principal sentence in
those cases was a fine, there has been a growing number of adjourned
undertakings
imposed alongside imprisonment since 2011 (from 43 to
Yearly number of adjourned undertakings that were not the principal sentence in
a case, by principal sentence type, 2011
Adjourned undertakings as a subordinate sentence
Imprisonment
Community order
increase in combined sentences of imprisonment and adjourned undertakings
appears to be due to the increasing rate of time served
prison sentences in
Between 2017 and
there were 860 cases in
which an offender received both imprisonment and an adjourned undertaking. Of
those, more than two-thirds
were time served prison
sentences. That is more than triple the rate of time served prison sentences in
Victoria generally (20%).
circumstances in which courts might impose this combination of sentences –
imprisonment and an adjourned undertaking –
are most likely those where
(a) an offender has spent some time on remand, which the court recognises the
punitive effect of by imposing
a time served prison sentence (or something very
close to it)
but (b) the court
also considers it necessary to ensure there is either some ongoing form of
accountability that is not as onerous
as a community correction order (CCO) or
some form of transition assistance available. For instance, some of the
conditions attached
to adjourned undertakings in those 860 cases included:
with VACRO’s Second Chance Jobs program, which is aimed at linking people
with ‘a job at the prison gate’,
immediately upon
with VACRO’s ReConnect program, specifically designed to assist
participants transition from prison back into the
complying with
the conditions of a justice plan upon release from custody;
attending the
Victorian Aboriginal Health Service as soon as possible after release and
complying with any treatment plans; and
engaging with
the NorthWestern Mental Health service and complying with any treatment
how frequently courts impose combined orders of imprisonment and a
– 9,137 in the six
years to 30 June 2018 and increasing year on
– there is perhaps
scope for courts to more frequently impose combined sentences of imprisonment
and an adjourned undertaking
instead. This would reduce the severity of the
community-based component of the sentence imposed, decrease offenders’
with the criminal justice system, free up correctional resources and, if
the above conditions are indicative, improve the transition
assistance provided
to people released from a time served prison sentence.
that end, consideration might be given to specifically legislating the
courts’ ability to impose those two sentence types
together (either on a
single charge or on multiple charges). This would most likely replicate what
currently does for combined orders of imprisonment and
and be similar to the
combined order specified in federal
legislation.
While there are
already cases where imprisonment and adjourned undertakings are being imposed
together without a specific provision
in place, a new provision might draw
courts’ attention to the value that the legislature places on this
particular combination
and encourage its increased use in appropriate cases.
Question 3: A new combined order
Sentencing Act 1991
amended to specifically empower sentencing courts to impose a combined order of
imprisonment and an adjourned undertaking?
If so, how and why? If not, why
Adjourned undertakings in the Magistrates’ Court
across Victoria
majority of adjourned undertakings in the Magistrates’ Court were imposed
in the Greater Melbourne area (70.9%). This is
slightly lower than the adult
population rate in that area (75.8% of Victorian adults reside in Greater
Melbourne), which is consistent
with other findings that a disproportionate
number of criminal cases are dealt with in rural and regional
One possible
explanation for this might be the limited availability of services in regional
Victoria leading courts to impose adjourned
undertakings in cases where they
might otherwise have imposed a CCO.
3.9 There was
also variation in the proportion of sentences that were adjourned undertakings
across rural and regional Victoria (Figure
4). They made up between 10.1% of
sentences (in Barwon South West) and 19.8% (in Hume). This variation should not,
however, necessarily
be construed as inconsistency in court practices. It may
simply be attributable to the different types of offences dealt with in
Question 4: Rural and regional Victoria
Are there any issues with access to adjourned
undertakings in regional Victoria? You may wish to consider whether there are
resources that could be made available that would increase or improve
the use of adjourned undertakings in specific regions.
Figure 4: Number and proportion of adjourned undertakings in the
Magistrates’ Court, by justice region, 2011 to 2020
Justice region
Adjourned undertakings as principal sentence
% of all adjourned undertakings
Total sentences
Adjourned undertakings as a % of total sentences
Barwon South West
Greater Melbourne
Loddon Mallee
Adjourned undertakings in the higher courts
2011 to 2020, there were 287 cases in which an offender received an adjourned
undertaking in the higher courts, 276 in the County
Court and 11 in the Supreme
The yearly number
remained relatively low and stable (Figure 5). An adjourned undertaking was the
principal sentence in 236 of those
cases and was combined with a more severe
sentence in the remaining 51 cases, which involved 31 prison sentences,
suspended sentences
or youth justice centre orders, 13 CCOs and 7
Figure 5: Yearly number of adjourned undertakings imposed
in the higher courts, 2011 to 2020 (287 adjourned undertakings)
Stakeholder views on the use of adjourned undertakings
late 2021 and early 2022, the Council conducted preliminary consultation with,
and received survey responses from, legal and
judicial stakeholders about their
views of adjourned undertakings. The response was overwhelmingly positive, with
most stakeholders
saying that these orders ‘should be utilised more
widely’ and that they ‘would encourage greater use of adjourned
undertakings’.
3.12 Some of the
common positive themes about adjourned undertakings were that they prioritise
rehabilitation and allow offenders
to get on with their lives by reducing their
who receive them. By far, though, the most commonly observed advantage of
adjourned undertakings was the flexibility built into the
order, allowing the
conditions to be tailored to each person. Some of the survey responses included:
‘Very useful sentencing option – provides the opportunity to
rehabilitate and extremely flexible sentencing options to
address other
sentencing purposes.’
‘There is a lot of room to be creative in the imposition of the conditions
and the framework of the undertaking.’
‘Short adjourned undertakings with not too many conditions and conditions
that are achievable work well and provide a meaningful
rehabilitation
opportunity for a wide range of defendants and offence types.’
3.13 However, a
number of areas of improvement were also identified. Stakeholders identified a
need for better access to support services,
especially those that the offender
does not have to pay for themselves, a need for broader and speedier access to
justice plans for
people with intellectual disabilities, and the need for
criminal justice system actors to change their approach from expecting perfect
compliance with conditions of the order to expecting
positive engagement
3.14 There was
also considerable divergence on the appropriateness of monetary penalties as a
condition of adjourned undertakings.
Some believed they were inappropriate,
because they disproportionately affect people of lower socioeconomic means,
function like
a more serious sentencing order (fines) yet are better enforced,
and can lead to breach proceedings if people don’t pay. In
others said payment conditions could constitute the punitive condition of an
adjourned undertaking and allow people to
potentially avoid a more severe
sentence and/or having a conviction recorded.
3.15 Each of
these issues is discussed in detail throughout this
receives adjourned undertakings?
4.1 This chapter
outlines data on who received adjourned undertakings in Victoria between 2011
and 2020, including the offender’s
age, gender and offence profile, and
whether the case involved family violence.
Age and gender of people receiving adjourned
undertakings
Magistrates’ Court
on age was available and reliable for
of people who received
adjourned undertakings in the Magistrates’ Court between 2011 and 2020
(Figure 6). The largest number
of adjourned undertakings was imposed on
offenders aged 19 (5,683), and this number then declined steadily with age.
There were 378
offenders aged 80 and over who received an adjourned undertaking,
20 of whom were aged 90 and
Age of people receiving adjourned undertakings in the Magistrates’ Court,
2011 to 2020 (122,696 people)
on gender was available and reliable for
of people who received
adjourned undertakings in the Magistrates’ Court: 72% were male and 28%
were female. Given that women
make up just 22% of
cases in the
Magistrates’ Court,
means women were more likely than men to receive an adjourned
undertaking.
In the Magistrates’ Court:
18% of women received adjourned undertakings
13% of men received adjourned undertakings
Higher courts
the 283 adjourned undertaking cases for which data on age was available, there
was a significant cluster of offenders aged 19 to
29 years (Figure 7). The
oldest people receiving an adjourned undertaking in the higher courts were aged
Figure 7: Age
of people receiving adjourned undertakings in the higher courts, 2011 to 2020
(283 people)
the 283 cases for which data on gender was available, 74% of offenders receiving
adjourned undertakings in the higher courts were
male, and 26% were female.
Similar to in the Magistrates’ Court, given that just 10% of offenders in
the higher courts are
female, this means females were more than twice as likely
as males to receive adjourned undertakings. This is consistent with female
offenders often receiving less serious sentencing
offending is typically less serious and less violent than men’s, their
offending is frequently a product of trauma,
which has a powerful mitigating
effect on their sentence, and their criminal history is often much sparser,
reducing the need for
courts to prioritise specific deterrence and protection of
the community when sentencing.
In the higher courts:
3% of women received adjourned
undertakings
1% of men received adjourned undertakings
Offence types in adjourned undertaking cases
Magistrates’ Court
8 presents the most serious offence
in cases where an adjourned
undertaking was the principal sentence in the Magistrates’ Court (117,389
adjourned undertakings).
Figure 8: Most serious offence type in cases in the
Magistrates’ Court resulting in adjourned undertakings as the principal
sentence (117,389 cases)
Offence type
Traffic / vehicle offences (ANZSOC 14)
Assault /injury offences (ANZSOC 2)
Justice procedure offences (ANZSOC 15)
Theft offences (ANZSOC 8)
Endangerment offences (ANZSOC 4)
Drug offences (ANZSOC 10)
Property damage offences (ANZSOC 12)
Miscellaneous offences (ANZSOC 16)
Weapons offences (ANZSOC 11)
Fraud offences (ANZSOC 9)
Public order offences (ANZSOC 13)
Harassment and threat offences (ANZSOC 5)
Burglary offences (ANZSOC 7)
Sex offences (ANZSOC 3)
Robber offences (ANZSOC 6)
Homicide offences (ANZSOC 1)
shows that almost one-quarter of adjourned undertakings were for traffic and
vehicle offences (23.6% of adjourned undertakings),
the most common of which
were driving while disqualified or
(6.4% together),
(4.7%), failing a
breath test (1.4%), entering an intersection despite a red traffic arrow or
light (1.9%) and using an unregistered
motor vehicle on a highway or toll road
(1.2%). This is consistent with findings from 2011 by the NSW Sentencing Council
behaviour bonds were most commonly imposed for driving offences such
as driving an unregistered vehicle, negligent driving, drink
driving and driving
while suspended or
disqualified.
next most prevalent offence types were assault and injury offences (19.9% of
adjourned undertakings), the most common of which
were unlawful
(12.0%), recklessly
causing injury (3.4%), assault with a weapon (0.8%) and stalking (0.5%).
4.9 As to some
of the remaining offence types:
a family violence safety notice or intervention
was the most common
justice procedure offence (8,492 or 7.2% of adjourned undertakings);
from a shop was the most common theft-related
(6,606 or 5.6% of
adjourned undertakings);
driving of a motor vehicle
the most common endangerment offence (5,047 or 4.3% of adjourned
undertakings);
of cannabis
was the most common
drug-related offence (1,756 or 1.5% of adjourned
undertakings);
property by deception was the most common fraud-related offence (1,888 or 1.6%
of adjourned undertakings); and
two homicide-related offences were both inciting
4.10 In effect,
the specific offences of unlawful assault, driving while disqualified or
suspended, speeding, careless driving, breaching
a family violence safety notice
or intervention order and theft from a shop together represent 40.2% of all
adjourned undertakings.
Figure 9: Most common principal proven
offence types in cases in the Magistrates’ Court resulting in adjourned
undertakings,
2011 to 2020
Unlawful assault
Breach family violence order
Drive while suspended or disqualified
Theft (shopsteal)
Careless driving
Higher courts
the 236 cases in the higher courts where an adjourned undertaking was the
principal sentence, the most common principal proven
offence types were:
assault offences (28% or 65 cases), the most common of which was sexual
penetration of a child aged under 16 (i.e. aged 12
procedure offences (18% or 42 cases), the most common of which were failing to
comply with a sex offender supervision order
(12 cases) and attempting to
pervert the course of justice (11 cases); and
assault and
injury offences (15% or 36 cases), the most common of which were common law
assault (14 cases) and recklessly causing
injury (14 cases).
Adjourned undertakings in family violence cases in the
Magistrates’ Court (2016–)
18,106 cases since 2016,
offender received an adjourned undertaking in a case with a family violence
flag. A family violence flag is typically transferred
from Victoria
Police’s LEAP database to the Magistrates’ Court system and
indicates that at least one of the offences
in the case occurred in a family
violence context.
that just over one-quarter of adjourned undertakings (26.2%) during that
five-year period were imposed in a case involving
family violence. Previous
research by the Council has suggested that about 11% of all cases sentenced in
the Magistrates’ Court
have a family violence
Together, these statistics
suggest that adjourned undertakings are more than twice as common in family
violence cases as they are
in other cases. This may be because, as the Council
has previously observed, fines are often inappropriate in a family violence
In comparison, a
sentencing order requiring an offender to be of good behaviour, to comply with
the conditions of an intervention
order and/or to participate in a behaviour
change program
achieve the purposes of sentencing than a fine would.
adjourned undertakings were imposed in family violence cases
4.13 Figure 10
illustrates that the principal proven offence types in the 18,106 family
violence cases were significantly different
from those in non-family violence
cases. Assault and injury offences, as well as justice procedure offences (most
of which were breaches
of intervention orders), were the principal offence in
80% of family violence cases (compared to 17% in non-family violence cases).
Property damage offences were also three times more likely in family violence
cases. In comparison, non-family violence cases were
much more likely to involve
endangerment offences, theft offences, and traffic and vehicle offences.
Figure 10: Comparison of most serious offence types in family
violence and non-family violence cases resulting in adjourned undertakings
the Magistrates’ Court, 2016 to 2020
Offence type
Family violence cases
Non-family violence cases
Assault and injury offences
Justice procedure offences
Property damage offences
Endangerment offences
Theft offences
Traffic and vehicle offences
Recent criminal history of people receiving adjourned
undertakings
4.14 Looking
at the recent criminal history of people receiving adjourned undertakings is
useful because it provides some insight
into the extent and severity of the
recent contact that these people have had with the criminal justice system. It
was expected that
there would be a relatively low rate of prior offending for
people receiving adjourned undertakings.
4.15 In 2019 and
2020, 21,962 people received an adjourned undertaking. Just over one-third of
those people (36%) had been sentenced
on another occasion in the previous four
years (Figure 11). That rate was slightly higher for males than for females, but
not significantly
Figure 11: Prior offending rates of people
receiving adjourned undertakings in 2019 and 2020
Total (number =21,962)
Male (number = 15,868)
Female (number = 6,094)
Within 4 years
Within 3 years
Within 2 years
Within 1 year
4.16 There were
also relatively few people who had received a prison sentence at any stage in
the four years prior to receiving an
adjourned undertaking (4.9%). The prior
imprisonment rate was notably higher for males than for females.
Figure 12: Prior imprisonment rates of people receiving
adjourned undertakings in 2019 and 2020
Total (number = 21,962)
Male (number = 15,868)
Female (number = 6,094)
Within 4 years
Within 3 years
Within 2 years
Within 1 year
findings support the notion that adjourned undertakings are largely utilised in
cases involving first-time and less serious
offenders, given that, in the most
recent four years, 64% of offenders had not been sentenced for any other
offending, and 95% had
not received a recent prison sentence.
Adjourned undertakings and marginalised groups
evidence is overwhelming that the criminal justice system has a disproportionate
effect on a number of marginalised groups.
The Council is interested in
stakeholder views on whether there are reforms that could be made to adjourned
undertakings –
whether related to legislation, practice or resourcing
– that could improve criminal justice system responses for those groups.
This could include, for example:
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples;
people with a
history of trauma;
people with
substance abuse issues;
people with
mental health issues;
people with an
intellectual disability or a cognitive impairment;
experiencing homelessness;
people from
culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds; and
living in rural and regional
instance, during preliminary consultation, the Council heard that:
the availability
of justice plans is limited by both the resourcing and the current definition of
intellectual disability
the payment
conditions attached to adjourned undertakings disproportionately affect
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples;
the wait lists
to participate in many drug and alcohol treatment programs are inordinately
for many people,
their criminogenic risk factors stem from the limited availability of
appropriate public housing.
4.20 As is often
the case, the best way to reduce the disproportionate effect of the criminal
justice system on marginalised groups
is not to improve the criminal justice
system itself, but instead to front end the resourcing of social goods such as
housing, welfare and medical care. These issues are, however, beyond
the scope of the Council’s remit.
4.21 Nevertheless,
the criminal justice system can and should have some role to play in reducing
the disproportionate effect it too
often has on particular groups. If, for
example, justice plans attached to adjourned undertakings are known to be
effective in giving
people access to programs and services that reduce their
risk of reoffending but they are not widely used because of inadequate
resourcing,
then now may be an opportune time to increase those resources. This
would not only reduce the overrepresentation of people with impaired
functioning cycling through the criminal justice system but also make the
community safer in the long term and, as a result,
be an economically sound
investment.
4.22 Similarly,
the Council is interested in hearing whether there is a way to reduce the
disproportionate effect of payment conditions
of adjourned undertakings on
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples (payment conditions are discussed
in more detail at [7.11]–[7.27])
and/or whether offenders required to
participate in drug and alcohol treatment programs should have those services
paid for by the
state rather than having to self-fund them (this is discussed in
more detail at [7.37]).
Question 5: Marginalised groups
Are there reforms that could be made to adjourned
undertakings that could reduce the disproportionate effect of the criminal
system on marginalised groups? If so, what reforms would you propose and
of adjourned undertakings
5.1 This chapter
discusses the length of adjourned undertakings. This includes a comparison of
the maximum permissible lengths of
adjourned undertakings in Victoria with the
maximum lengths of similar orders in other jurisdictions, and an analysis of
their actual
lengths over the last 10 years based on court data.
Maximum length
maximum possible length of an adjourned undertaking in Victoria is five years,
regardless of whether a conviction is
The maximum length of
comparable orders varies across Australia and in some jurisdictions depends on
whether the court imposes a
conviction or not (Figure
Victoria has the longest
specified maximum, on par with Tasmania and the Northern Territory (with or
without conviction), as well
as federal legislation (but only with conviction).
There are, however, a number of jurisdictions where legislation is silent about
the maximum length, especially when a conviction is
Figure 13: Maximum lengths of adjourned undertakings (or
similar orders) across Australia, by whether the order is imposed with or
without conviction
Maximum length
NSW (with, without), WA (with, without)
QLD (without), ACT (without), CTH (without)
VIC (with, without), TAS (with, without), NT (with, without), CTH
QLD (with), ACT (with), SA (with, without)
Unspecified
Lengths in the Magistrates’ Court
an adjourned undertaking in Victoria can be imposed for a period of up to five
years, 99.7% of adjourned undertakings in the
Magistrates’ Court are two
years or less in length.
length was available for almost all adjourned undertakings
and is shown in Figure
14. Most undertakings were clustered at precisely six months (17.4%), 12 months
(62.6%), 18 months (1.8%)
or 24 months (4.2%). Together these four six-month
increments accounted for 86% of all adjourned undertakings, which is consistent
with similar findings in New South
This is most likely due
to what Marder and Pina-Sánchez describe as ‘sentence
clustering’, ‘whereby [sentences]
are clustered around a small
number of specific
[quantums]’.
Figure 14: Lengths of adjourned undertakings imposed in the
Magistrates’ Court, 2011 to 2020 (126,545 adjourned undertakings)
Less than 6 months
6 to less than 12 months
12 to less than 18 months
80,456 (79,294 were precisely 12 months)
18 to less than 24 months
24 months or longer
might have been expected that the different maximum lengths of adjourned
undertakings and equivalent orders across Australia would
correlate with similar
particular, jurisdictions with longer
maximum lengths would also have longer
actual lengths. This does not, however, appear to be the case. For instance, in
Wales, when the maximum length was five years with conviction and
three years without, 25% of good behaviour bonds were ordered to
last for longer
than two years.
In contrast,
just 0.3% of adjourned undertakings in Victoria were ordered to last for longer
than two years, despite Victoria having
a slightly longer maximum than the
similar order in New South Wales when the undertaking is without
conviction.
Lengths in the higher courts
the higher courts, data on length was available in 233 cases when the adjourned
undertaking was the principal sentence. As
in the Magistrates’ Court, in
the higher courts many adjourned undertakings clustered around the specific
lengths of 6 months
(9%), 12 months (38%), 18 months (9%) and 24 months (31%),
with a median of 18 months (Figure 15).
Figure 15: Lengths of
adjourned undertakings imposed in the higher courts, 2011 to 2020 (233 adjourned
undertakings)
Less than 1 year
1 to less than 2 years
109 (88 were precisely 12 months)
2 to less than 3 years
undertakings longer than two years were, however, more common in the higher
courts (12% or 28). Three offenders received
the maximum five years’
length: one in the Supreme Court for
manslaughter,
one in the County
Court for attempted armed robbery and another in the County Court for three
charges of the historical sex offence
of indecent assault on a male
Another seven offenders
received adjourned undertakings of four years’ length, with their
offending involving dangerous driving
recklessly causing
injury, sexual penetration of a child aged under 16 (three cases), attempted
armed robbery and incest with a sibling.
A jurisdictional limit on the length of some adjourned
undertakings?
is currently a significant gap between the available maximum length (five years)
and the actual lengths of most adjourned
undertakings, with (in the
Magistrates’ Court) 99.7% being two years or less and 92.5% being one year
or less. In contrast,
a larger proportion of adjourned undertakings in the
higher courts were longer than two years.
the one hand, this could suggest that there is a need for the Magistrates’
Court to consider longer adjourned undertakings
in some cases and better utilise
the full permissible duration of adjourned undertakings. There is some research
from New South Wales
suggesting that longer good behaviour bonds can be more
effective than shorter ones in reducing
reoffending;
however, the
findings of this paper suggest the opposite (see [9.16]).
5.9 Alternatively,
it may suggest that it could be appropriate to reduce the maximum permissible
length of adjourned undertakings
in the Magistrates’ Court. This would
constitute a restriction on judicial discretion, a step not to be taken lightly.
are, however, a number of arguments in support of this option.
this is already the case with community correction orders (CCOs), for which the
maximum duration is two years (for one offence),
four years (for two offences)
or five years (for three or more
It seems somewhat
unusual that a less serious sentencing order (an adjourned undertaking) can last
much longer than a CCO.
the principles of
proportionality
and parsimony
(see [8.2]) require courts to impose a sentence commensurate with the
seriousness of the offending and to impose the
least severe sentence capable of
achieving the purposes of sentencing. If an adjourned undertaking is the most
appropriate sentence
in any given case, it is difficult to conceive of many
cases in the summary jurisdiction where a period longer than two years would
proportional and parsimonious.
overly long adjourned undertakings can be found to be manifestly excessive. That
was the case for a five-year good behaviour
bond in New South Wales, with the
Court of Criminal Appeal finding that imposing the maximum duration was
‘unnecessarily burdensome,
and inappropriate to all the circumstances of
[the] case’.
5.13 Fourth, the
new spent convictions scheme means that a finding of guilt for someone receiving
an adjourned undertaking without
conviction remains a disclosable event so long
as the person is subject to conditions, and it is a mandatory condition of all
undertakings that the person be of good behaviour for the period of
the order. Therefore, longer adjourned undertakings significantly
period during which those people must disclose their finding of guilt (see
the current provisions of the
Bail Act 1977
(Vic) mean that since 2018,
if a person is serving an adjourned undertaking for an indictable offence and
they are alleged to have
committed another indictable offence during the period
of the undertaking, the latter is considered a Schedule 2 offence, such that
person would need to establish compelling reasons why they should be released
rather than remanded.
compelling reason is one that is ‘difficult to
and it can be
based on a combination of factors. If that person is released but is then
alleged to have committed another offence
while on summons or bail, they would
then be in an even more difficult position and need to establish exceptional
circumstances why
they should be granted
While exceptional
circumstances are not an
‘impossible’
hurdle and can be based on a combination of
the hurdle is
nonetheless ‘a high
the complex lives of many people who come into contact with the criminal justice
system, and given that desistance from offending
is much more a journey than it
is a moment in time,
bail provisions place people who receive adjourned undertakings –
low-level sentencing orders primarily designed to facilitate
rehabilitation and
precarious position. If it is alleged that they have engaged in certain
offending during the period of their undertaking, they would need to establish
either compelling reasons or exceptional circumstances
as to why they should be
granted bail. Therefore, longer adjourned undertakings may unintentionally
increase the severity of a person’s
system, and what may have seemed like an opportunity for longer-term support
could instead further
entrench them in the system.
Question 6: Maximum length
Sentencing Act 1991
amended to restrict the maximum length of adjourned undertakings in the
Magistrates’ Court? If so, why? If not, why
conditions of adjourned undertakings
chapter discusses the two mandatory conditions that must be attached to all
adjourned undertakings in Victoria. The first is
that the offender must attend
court if required, and the second is that the offender be of good behaviour
during the period of the
adjournment.
Mandatory condition 1: the requirement to attend court
first mandatory condition attached to all adjourned undertakings is that the
person must agree to attend court if required. Notice
must be served on the
offender at least four days before the required date of
attendance.
preliminary consultation, many stakeholders advised the Council that offenders
on adjourned undertakings are rarely brought
back before the court during the
relevant period (unless they reoffend). They also advised that offenders are not
brought back at
the end of their adjourned undertaking either; instead, if there
has not been any reoffending, the matter is typically finalised
papers’ by a magistrate in open court.
broad condition, that a person must agree to attend court if required, may
provide a possible vehicle for courts, in appropriate
cases and without any
legislative intervention, to undertake judicial monitoring of offenders serving
adjourned undertakings. There
is currently no formal judicial monitoring process
for offenders on adjourned undertakings as there is for offenders on community
correction orders (CCOs).
This is unsurprising given that one of the aims of low-end orders is to allow
sentences to be served in the community
‘unsupervised’.
It would, however, be possible in appropriate cases for courts to ask offenders
to attend court for review of their compliance, as
part of a ‘web of
accountability’.
could do this either via the general condition requiring an offender to attend
court if called on to do so
or as an optional
Judicial monitoring as a form of therapeutic
jurisprudence
recent years, there has been a surge of interest in therapeutic jurisprudence.
At its core, therapeutic jurisprudence recognises
that the law is capable of
affecting people in a positive, negative or neutral way, and tries to ensure
that as much as possible
of that engagement is
For instance, the
increasing utilisation of restorative justice processes is designed to improve
the criminal justice experience
for victims of
One of the most common
contexts for therapeutic jurisprudence has been in trying to transform how
sentencing courts engage with offenders
during the process: before sentencing,
at sentencing, even after sentencing. It has, for example, been advocated in the
sentencing environmental
offenders with
substance abuse issues,
and offenders in
mainstream courts
of the ‘key
element[s]’
therapeutic jurisprudence for sentencing courts is the use of judicial
supervision, which ‘involves a judicial officer monitoring
offender’s ... treatment or compliance via specially listed
instance, Victorian sentencing courts are specifically empowered to attach a
judicial monitoring condition to a CCO, which involves
the offender attending
court on one or more occasions during their CCO to ‘answer questions or
produce information (including
reports or the results of medical examinations or
medical tests)’.
Judicial monitoring is also a central feature of cases dealt with in the
specialist Drug Court,
‘a large majority’ of participants describing that aspect as either
useful or very useful.
can also undertake judicial monitoring with offenders whose sentence has been
These review
hearings are not, however, just about monitoring compliance with the sentencing
order. They are also an opportunity
for courts to engage in ‘motivational
interviewing’, which Walters et al. describe as follows:
Motivational interviewing (MI) is conversational style for strengthening a
person’s motivation and commitment to change ...
There are two basic
components of an MI interaction: relational and technical. Relational components
involve the overall listening
tone and spirit of the interaction. This is shown
through open-ended questions, affirmations, reflections and summaries (referred
to as OARS) as well as through an MI spirit that demonstrates evocation,
collaboration and autonomy
6.6 In order to
understand how judicial monitoring and motivational interviewing might operate
in practice, the Magistrates’
Court in February allowed the Council to
observe a half-day of part-heard hearings. The hearings were conducted virtually
due to the ongoing restrictions arising from the COVID-19 pandemic.
The matters heard that day included judicial monitoring hearings
serving CCOs and people whose sentence had been deferred. What we observed,
above all else, was the intentional implementation
of motivational interviewing
strategies. Some examples of what the magistrate said to a number of different
people during judicial
monitoring hearings that day included:
‘I’ve got your judicial monitoring report here from Corrections. How
are you going?’
‘And what are you thinking in terms of assessment for treatment? What are
you hoping to get out of that?’
‘What do you want to get out of the counselling? What sorts of things
might you like to focus on?’
‘Okay, so you’ve tried counselling in the past but you felt like it
hasn’t helped. But you’re willing to
give it another go?’
‘What I’m hearing from you is to stop the circle going round and
round, you might need some structure and discipline
to focus on your goal,
‘Alright, well look it sounds like you’re open to things,
you’re trying very hard. I want to say to you that I
think you can have a
little confidence in yourself to turn a corner.’
‘I’ve got your Corrections report here. You’ve been seeing
Corrections regularly? Double thumbs up, that’s
really good work. And you
haven’t had any police contact, which is excellent.’
‘You’re laying low, staying at home, well that’s good. And
you’re struggling with the drug use but talking
to your corrections
officer about that, so that’s good.’
‘Given that you’re going well on CISP, I’m willing to defer
sentence more, and keep you on bail. So I’m not
sentencing you finally
today ... But I’m happy to keep you on bail to get on to the NDIS because
you’ve been going so
6.7 The value of
these brief exchanges at judicial monitoring hearings should not be
underestimated. Research (primarily in the context
of drug courts) has gone as
far as describing the judge–offender relationship at these hearings as
key component’ of achieving behavioural change through a
sentencing order:
After reviewing the mounting literature on the success of [drug treatment
courts], researchers have confidently concluded that the
power of the
judge-participant relationship is so immense that it may have ‘effectively
suppressed all other theoretical mechanisms’
that could potentially lead
to desired outcomes ... The evidence is
overwhelming.
Judicial monitoring as a condition of adjourned
undertakings?
Council is interested in stakeholder views on the appropriateness of judicial
supervision as a condition of adjourned undertakings.
On the one hand, judicial
supervision can be highly effective in reducing reoffending, is already
available as either a mandatory
or an optional condition, and is already
occasionally used by courts as a condition of adjourned undertakings (see
[6.10]). On the
other hand, this raises important fundamental questions about
the nature of adjourned undertakings; even if judicial monitoring is
the order is intended to be an unsupervised one (though it is arguable whether
the term ‘unsupervised’ is
intended to refer to all forms of
supervision, including judicial monitoring, or whether it primarily refers to
supervision by correctional
staff). Encouraging more engagement with the
criminal justice system for offenders receiving adjourned undertakings may be
antithetical to the very purpose of such orders.
is little information available about the current use of judicial monitoring in
Victoria generally. The Council has, however,
previously found that judicial
monitoring was attached to between 10% of all CCOs imposed in the
Magistrates’ Court (from 2012
and 20% of CCOs imposed
on people found guilty of breaching a personal safety intervention order (from
2012 to 2020).
6.10 It is not
possible to discern how many courts achieve judicial monitoring as a condition
of adjourned undertakings simply by
using the general condition requiring people
to attend court as directed. It was, however, imposed as a specific, optional
of 20 adjourned undertakings in 2019 and 2020, such that at least 0.1%
of adjourned undertakings had a judicial monitoring condition
(see Figure
Motivational
interviewing and judicial supervision have traditionally been reserved for
specialist courts such as drug courts, which
often have more resources than
mainstream courts do to undertake this sort of work. However, as Trood et al.
recently observed after
surveying Victorian magistrates about their use of
judicial supervision, there are many offenders in mainstream courts who would
most likely benefit from this sort of intervention, such as offenders with
substance abuse issues and/or mental health issues. It
is, though, difficult to
implement with current ‘resource and listing constraints ... relative to
problem-solving
context, Trood et al. recommend further research to identify which people would
most benefit from judicial supervision in
mainstream courts, to ensure the
resourcing implications would be concentrated.
judicial supervision is to become part of mainstream courts’ business as
usual, this would most likely require training for
judicial officers. During
preliminary consultation, the Judicial College of Victoria advised that judicial
supervision of sentenced
offenders (how it works, when to use it and how to use
it effectively) is not currently part of training routinely delivered to
officers by the Judicial
The Judicial College
was, however, keen to explore adding it to their curriculum, particularly for
new judicial officers, and suggested
that it could be done with fairly minimal
resource implications.
6.13 Any attempt
to increase the use of judicial supervision in the context of adjourned
undertakings has the potential to significantly
affect court resources and
workloads. To overcome this issue, there would need to be criteria to help
courts decide when judicial
supervision is appropriate and thereby limit the use
of this condition (presumably, it would only be a small number of cases), and
there would need to be specifically allocated resources for the
Magistrates’ Court to manage the extra work.
Question 7: Judicial supervision
Is there scope to increase the use of judicial
supervision as a condition of adjourned undertakings? In answering this
question, you
may wish to consider:
criteria for
assessing offender suitability;
the resource
implications for courts;
the need to
balance the potential value of judicial supervision against the principles of
proportionality and parsimony;
the potential
inconsistency between adjourned undertakings being primarily unsupervised orders
but involving some supervision;
the evidence
base that would need to be developed to establish best practice processes;
the training
that judicial officers would require.
Mandatory condition 2: good behaviour
adjourned undertaking must include as a condition ‘that the offender is of
good behaviour during the period of the
adjournment’.
imposition of a ‘good behaviour’ requirement as punishment for
criminal offending has a long history in Australia.
There are a number of
publicly available judgments from the late eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries in which an offender was
sentenced to a condition to be of good
behaviour for a certain period, often alongside other people agreeing to act as
monetary sureties
is, however, no definition of ‘good behaviour’ in the legislation,
and the Council could find no definition in case
Stakeholders
suggested that the term is typically interpreted as meaning that the offender
should not commit further offences during
the period of their adjourned
undertaking. This is consistent with the requirement in other jurisdictions that
people on similar
orders not reoffend. Even this interpretation, however, might
benefit from some clarification. Is a parking infringement a breach
requirement not to reoffend? Is it only when the law broken is punishable by a
term of imprisonment, excluding more regulatory
offences where the maximum
penalty is a fine? Must there be some form of ‘physical assault or public
conversely, might good behaviour require something
abstaining from criminal
Question 8: Good behaviour
Is there a need to clarify the definition of
‘good behaviour’ in
sections 72
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic)? If so, why and how? If not, why not?
conditions of adjourned undertakings
addition to attaching the two mandatory conditions (described in the previous
chapter) to all adjourned undertakings, Victorian
courts have significant
flexibility in attaching other optional conditions, including ‘any
conditions’ they deem
appropriate.
The same is true
for similar orders across
This chapter
includes an overview of some of the optional conditions that are often attached
to adjourned undertakings.
date, there does not appear to have been any research in Australia on the
conditions attached to adjourned undertakings or their
counterpart orders. In
its 2011 report on the use of good behaviour bonds, the NSW Sentencing Council
wrote that it ‘was unable
to obtain statistics in relation to the specific
conditions imposed on
context, the below analysis of conditions attached to adjourned undertakings
appears to be the first of its kind in Australia.
most common optional conditions imposed on adjourned undertakings between 1
January 2019 and 31 December 2020 (two
are shown in Figure
16. About half of all adjourned undertakings (47.3%) had
condition attached beyond the requirements to attend court when necessary and be
of good behaviour. The most common optional
condition, in one-quarter of
adjourned undertakings (24.2%), was a donation to the Court Fund (discussed
below at [7.25]–[7.30]).
And the second most common optional condition
involved seeking, or more frequently
with, mental health or
some other form of medical treatment. This was often described as, for example,
‘continue to see Dr Smith’
or ‘continue to take medication as
prescribed’.
common optional conditions included donating to specific charities (6.7% of
adjourned undertakings), participating in a behaviour
change program (6.3%),
either a family violence specific men’s behaviour change program or a more
general anger management
course, participating in a driver education course
(4.6%) such as Amber Community’s Road Trauma Awareness
continuing with a drug and alcohol treatment program (3.6%) and paying the
prosecuting agency’s costs
Less common
conditions were apologising to the victim or someone else such as the police
informant (0.4%), participating in a justice
plan (0.4%) and engaging in
judicial monitoring (0.1%).
Figure 16: Optional conditions
attached to adjourned undertakings in the Magistrates’ Court, 1 January
2019 to 31 December 2020
(24,787 adjourned
undertakings)
Mental health (or other medical) treatment
Charitable donation
Behaviour change program
Driver education course
Drug and alcohol treatment
Compensation
Justice plan
Judicial monitoring
Guidance about optional conditions
is little guidance in the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) about what optional
conditions might be attached to adjourned undertakings, except that they can
include charitable donations,
either directly or via the
and/or justice plans
for people with an intellectual
disability.
7.6 There is
some common law guidance about how to decide which conditions to impose, but it
is abstract guidance rather than specific.
, the New South
Wales Court of Criminal Appeal outlined three principles that have since been
cited with approval in a number of other
discretion as to conditions that may be attached to a bond is broad but not
unlimited. The conditions must reasonably relate
to the purpose of imposing a
bond, that is, the punishment of a particular crime. They must therefore relate
either to the character
of that crime or the purposes of punishment for that
crime, including deterrence and rehabilitation.
Secondly, the
conditions must each be certain, defining with reasonable precision conduct
which is proscribed.
the conditions should not in their operation be unduly harsh or unreasonable or
similar lines, the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) in 2006 proposed the
following restrictive principles:
Conditions should be attached to conditional release orders only if they are
capable of being complied with. Accordingly, the court
should not order a
federal offender to participate in a rehabilitation program unless it is
satisfied that the offender is a suitable
person to participate in the program,
is eligible to participate, and the program is accessible to the offender.
Similarly, the court
should not order a federal offender to undergo medical or
psychiatric treatment unless the treatment has been recommended by a qualified
medical practitioner and is available to the
7.8 A question
arises as to whether the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) would benefit from the
inclusion of optional conditions.
2006, the ALRC recommended that federal sentencing legislation include examples
of the types of conditions that might be imposed,
without mandating
In particular,
‘[u]seful examples of conditions are that offenders undertake a
rehabilitation program, undergo specified medical
or psychiatric treatment, or
be subject to the supervision of a probation
these examples would be to guide judicial officers about the types of conditions
they might want to consider.
NSW Sentencing Council recommended the opposite in 2011, ‘that there is
[no] need to specify any additional conditions that
noting that
they were ‘not satisfied from the statistics, the submissions received, or
from [their] review of the case law’
that such guidance would be useful.
One possible reason for not legislating optional conditions, suggested during
the Council’s
preliminary consultations, could be that doing so might
unintentionally result in judicial officers ‘overloading’ some
orders with too many conditions ‘because they’re
Question 9: Guidance about optional conditions
Is there a need for legislative or other guidance
so, why and what type of guidance? If not, why not?
Optional condition 1: donations
are two avenues by which the offender can be ordered to make a donation as a
condition of an adjourned undertaking: directly
to a charity or to the court for
distribution to organisations providing a charitable or community service
(usually via the Court
There are a number of issues that arise in this context: whether monetary
penalties are appropriate conditions of adjourned undertakings,
donations to specific charities are appropriate conditions of adjourned
undertakings and the limited publicly available information
The appropriateness of monetary penalties in
courts ordering an adjourned undertaking are specifically empowered to impose a
monetary penalty requiring the offender
to pay an amount of money to an
organisation that provides a charitable or community service, either directly or
via the Court Fund.
Victoria is the only jurisdiction in the country to
specifically empower courts to impose this sort of condition on an undertaking
or similar order. While similar orders across Australia usually permit courts to
impose ‘any condition’ they see
none of them
specifically mention charitable or other donations.
donation conditions of adjourned undertakings have been available in Victoria
for decades, an issue arose in 2013 when
the Supreme Court held that they were
no longer permissible. In particular, the court held that conditions requiring
an offender
to pay a sum of money to a charitable organisation were effectively
fines and therefore not an appropriate condition of an undertaking.
[o]n 30 August 2011 at the plea hearing, the magistrate ordered ... [the
offender] to make a donation to St Vincent de Paul for their
Van’ service to the Needy/Homeless in an amount of $2,500 – payment
to be made by 28 October 2011.
The statutory definition of a fine is not avoided because an obligation to make
a payment is agreed to by the offender ... A payment
required by a special
condition is a payment made ‘under an order of a court’ that is made
on the offender being found
guilty of an offence ... The fact that the offender
has submitted to the obligation does not alter that characterisation.
I am satisfied that the magistrate erred when he required [the offender] to make
a payment to St Vincent de Paul as a condition of
the undertaking because such a
condition was ... not a sentence passed in accordance with ... the
legislature shortly thereafter amended the
Sentencing Act
to expressly
specify that a donation condition is
permissible
and ‘should
not be treated as a substitute or replacement for a
Therefore, the
current position in Victoria is that donation conditions, either to specific
charities or to the Court Fund, are not
7.15 As a point
of contrast, the ALRC has specifically recommended against courts being able to
attach conditions to conditional release
orders that are effectively the
equivalent of imposing a more severe penalty. In particular, the ALRC
recommended against community
service or monetary penalties (fines) as
conditions of good behaviour bonds:
There is no practical difference between a monetary penalty and a fine. It is
undesirable to enable a court to impose a monetary
penalty as a condition of a
conditional release order when the offence in question is punishable by a
preliminary consultation, stakeholders were divided about whether financial
penalties, even in the form of charitable donations,
should remain a permissible
condition of an adjourned undertaking. On the one hand, a financial penalty can
represent a punitive
aspect of the sentence and arguably facilitates
rehabilitation by encouraging the offender to better understand the consequences
of their behaviour, thereby allowing the sentencing court to not record a
conviction, or to impose a less severe penalty than, for
example, a fine or a
community correction order (CCO). On the other hand, while these donation
conditions may not technically be
fines, since parliament amended the
Sentencing Act
in 2013, it is hard not to characterise them as fines in
appearance and function, such that they constitute informal slippage up the
sentencing hierarchy. Moreover, financial penalties in any form
disproportionately affect people experiencing socioeconomic
disadvantage,
and Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander peoples are often overrepresented as fine
recipients.
the Council was advised during preliminary consultation that at the end of the
period of the undertaking when the case is
again heard in open court, registry
staff will have flagged for the magistrate whether the offender has sent all
relevant evidence
of compliance with the various conditions. A lack of evidence
of payment will be flagged as non-compliance and therefore lead to
consequences,
such as prosecution for a breach offence and/or resentencing for the original
offending. In comparison, ‘just
over half’ of all court fines are
fully paid.
It is possible
that the fact of a subsequent court hearing for people receiving adjourned
undertakings significantly increases the
risk – compared to people
receiving fines – of their non-payment being discovered and leading to
consequences.
Question 10: Payment conditions
Should Victorian courts continue to be able to
require an offender to make a payment to an organisation that provides a
or community service, or to the court for payment to such an
organisation, as a condition of an adjourned undertaking? If so, why?
The appropriateness of charitable donations
section considers the appropriateness of charitable donation conditions
specifically, separate from Court Fund donation conditions.
This involves
offenders themselves paying money directly to a charity. These conditions
arguably achieve some purposes of sentencing
by encouraging an offender to
engage with the consequences of their offending, particularly if the services
provided by the charitable
organisation somehow relate to the offending in
question (e.g. a donation to a domestic violence shelter in a case involving
violence offending). In the past, these donations have ‘supported
the work of the Salvation Army, the St Vincent de Paul Society
and the Melbourne
Citymission, among many
donation conditions attached to adjourned undertakings also create the risk, at
least in perception, that magistrates will
order donations to their preferred
charities, regardless of whether the charity in question is somehow related to
the offending.
For instance, the charity receiving the largest number of
charitable donations was the Country Fire Authority (CFA) – specifically,
dozens of individual CFAs across Victoria. Very few of those cases involved
fire-related offending such as arson or lighting a fire
during a prohibited
period. So too was there a large number of donations to the Victorian Bushfire
Appeal, all of them in 2020 following
the 2019–20 Eastern Victorian
bushfires. In that sense, these donation conditions seem to have been driven not
by the offending
before the court but rather by the perceived needs of the
Victorian community at the time. Similarly, 55 of the 56 donations to the
Bob Maguire Foundation – which seems to operate primarily in Albert Park
and St Kilda – were imposed about 30
kilometres away in the Ringwood
Magistrates’ Court, suggesting that the preferences of judicial officers
are sometimes guiding
the choice of charity. There were also region-specific
charities that received charitable donations, such as Banksia Gardens (operating
in the Hume region), Edgars Mission Farm Sanctuary (in
Lancefield),
the Mittagundi
Outdoor Education Centre (in
and the Finian
Foundation, which currently ‘exclusively’ assists ‘students of
St Bede’s College,
2019 and 2020, there was a total of $1,281,810 ordered to be paid to charities
and community organisations as conditions of adjourned
undertakings. The figure
was much higher in 2019 ($795,572) and is most likely more indicative of common
practice than the figure
in 2020 ($486,238) given the effect of COVID-19 on
court operations in the latter year. Those donations arose from 1,691 unique
conditions in 1,660 cases (there were 23 cases with two donation
conditions and four cases with three donation conditions). The largest
required in any case were $150,000 (made up of three separate $50,000
donations),
$75,000, $50,000
and two $10,000 donations. The 20 charities receiving the largest number of
donations and the total amounts ordered
are shown in Table 1.
$1,281,810 charitable donation conditions in 2019 and
Table 1: Charities ordered to receive the largest number of donations as
conditions of adjourned undertakings in the Magistrates’
Court, 2019 and
2020 (1,691 donations in 1,660 cases)
Number of donations
Total value of donations
Country Fire Authority (various)
Salvation Army
Royal Melbourne Hospital
Victoria Police Blue Ribbon Foundation
Banksia Gardens
White Ribbon Australia
Royal Children’s Hospital
Victorian Bushfire Appeal
Father Bob Maguire Foundation
Finian Foundation
Road Trauma Support Services Victoria (now Amber Community)
Austin Hospital
Alfred Hospital
Pip.ilepsy Foundation
McGrath Foundation
Sacred Heart Mission
Beyond Blue
MS Australia
Other (172 organisations)
potential problem with donation conditions is that they can disproportionately
affect people with lower incomes. Whereas a
contribution to the Court Fund is
not tax deductible (it is not a registered
there is nothing
stopping an offender from claiming their charitable donation as a tax deduction;
they can submit the receipt to
the court as proof of compliance, but the
donation would remain a deductible expense. Offenders in higher income brackets
would therefore
be able to receive a far more significant tax deduction (e.g. a
$500 donation for someone earning over $180,000 would receive an
additional $225
in savings) than would offenders in lower income brackets (e.g. that same $500
donation for someone earning between
$18,200 and $45,000 would only receive $95
in savings). There is, perhaps, also a question about the appropriateness of
these donations
being subsidised.
Question 11: Charitable donations
Should courts continue to be able to order
donations to specific charities? If so, is there a need for guidance or
limitations about
which charities?
The appropriateness of donations to the Court
other form of charitable donation that a court can order is for the offender to
make a payment into the Court Fund for distribution
by the court to charitable
and community organisations.
The Court Fund, previously referred to as ‘the poor
‘is used to
provide direct financial assistance to needy persons who present at the court,
or to make payments to welfare bodies
who then distribute the funds to
individuals’.
Magistrates’ Court has described the Court Fund as being of ‘great
value to the
community’.
in the past supported the work of organisations such as Whitelion, Berry Street,
Kids Under Cover, 20th Man Fund, Hand
Brake Turn, lifesaving clubs, rescue
squads, road safety initiatives, hospitals, and community health and family
support centres.
2020–21, the Heidelberg Magistrates’ Court contributed more than
$270,000 to the Court Fund, with the funds going
towards ‘food, crisis
accommodation, Myki passes, petrol vouchers, clothing, school fees and Christmas
is a significant amount of money received and distributed by the Court Fund each
year. It has, for instance, received $121,000
(1973), $542,000 (1979), $827,000
(1982), $2,047,000 (1987),
and $1.3 million
however, no recent publicly available information about the Court Fund,
including how much money it receives, how much
is distributed, who it is
distributed to, and how those decisions about distribution are made. There was
once a practice direction
distributed,
recommendations made by the
Auditor-General,
practice direction may no longer be in effect as it is not available on the
Magistrates’ Court’s
Magistrates’ Court advised that there are internal guidelines for the
distribution of Court Fund proceeds, whereby:
court region has a Court Fund Committee that meets quarterly to consider
requests for funding;
organisations
must be not-for-profit or charitable organisations, and preference is given to
local organisations supporting the community;
the funds should
be used as emergency relief or to address disadvantage and cannot be used for
administrative purposes; and
organisation receiving funds is required to submit quarterly reports about how
the money has been spent and any unspent funds
Council’s analysis of conditions attached to adjourned undertakings in
2019 and 2020 reveals that there was $3,205,138
ordered to be paid to the Court
Fund as a condition of an adjourned undertaking. The figure in 2019 was much
higher ($2,176,079)
than in 2020 ($1,029,059) and is most likely more
representative of standard practice given the effect of COVID-19 on court
in 2020. The largest donations ordered to the Court Fund were $40,000
(one case), $25,000 (two cases), $12,500 (one case) and $12,000
$3,205,138 Court Fund donation conditions in 2019 and
would possibly be of some utility for information about the Court Fund such as
this to be made more regularly and publicly available.
Above and beyond
transparency in public budgeting being a recognised principle of sound
governance,
it may also
assist in achieving the purposes of sentencing when ordering a person to make a
donation to the Court Fund. In Victoria,
a sentence (or condition) cannot be
imposed unless it facilitates one of the specified purposes of sentencing:
deterrence (general
and specific), rehabilitation, community protection,
denunciation, just
punishment.
It has previously
been argued that a payment into the Court Fund does not easily achieve any of
these purposes, except insofar as
it may have ‘a minor punitive
component’.
Stakeholders did, however, tell the Council during preliminary consultation that
some offenders will argue that a more severe sentence
(or the recording of a
conviction) is unnecessary if the offender is required to make a charitable
donation or a contribution to
the Court Fund because of its punitive effect.
There is also, perhaps, potential for these contributions to have some form of
function if the offender is made aware of how the funds are
distributed and can better engage with the consequences of their
Question 12: Court Fund
Should there be more transparency in how the Court
Fund operates, including how much money it receives and distributes, who
the funds and how decisions about distribution are made?
Optional condition 2: justice plans
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) allows adjourned undertakings to include a
condition that the offender participate in services specified in a justice plan
up to two years (that is the maximum length of a justice plan, even if the
adjourned undertaking is
Justice plans can
also be attached as conditions to
They are currently only
available to offenders with an intellectual disability.
plans must be reviewed yearly, or at briefer intervals if ordered by the
An offender can ask
the Department of Families, Fairness and Housing (DFFH) to review a justice
The offender or the
Department can ask the court to review the justice plan, so long as notice has
been given to the offender and
either to the Director of Public Prosecutions or
to Victoria Police.
review the court believes that the offender is no longer willing to comply, the
justice plan no longer meets the offender’s
needs or is otherwise no
longer appropriate, or the offender has without reasonable excuse failed to
comply with a condition, the
court can confirm, vary or cancel the
If the court cancels
the justice plan condition, it may cancel the entire sentence and resentence the
offender, but in doing so it
must take into account the extent to which the
offender had complied with the sentence prior to
cancellation.
Council’s analysis reveals that there were 92 adjourned undertakings with
justice plan conditions attached to them
in 2019 and 2020 (59 in 2019 and 33 in
2020). That amounts to 0.4% of all adjourned undertakings in those two years.
current issues with justice plans are not new, nor are they specific to
adjourned undertakings (they also apply to offenders sentenced
to CCOs with a
justice plan condition).
Those issues primarily relate to limited resourcing and restrictive eligibility
initial assessment of whether a person meets the diagnostic criteria (a Target
Group Assessment) tends to take about six
and the preparation of
available services tends to take about six
altogether meaning
that many people who are considered potential candidates for a justice plan will
often have to wait up to three
months (or more) until it can potentially
eligibility
for justice plans is currently restricted to people with an ‘intellectual
disability’ within the meaning of
Disability Act 2006
which is an overly
narrow definition. The expansion of this definition was recommended by the
Victorian Law Reform Commission in
Victoria Legal Aid in
and a parliamentary law
reform committee in 2013;
was supported in principle by the government in
and recommended by a
parliamentary committee reviewing Victoria’s criminal justice system in
and it is also under
consideration as part of the current review of the
Disability Act 2006
The Council notes
that since many of these recommendations were made, a definition of
‘impaired mental functioning’ has
been introduced into
section 10A
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) in 1 July
which could potentially
serve as an alternative eligibility criterion.
preliminary consultation, stakeholders also advised the Council that there are
issues with the availability of programs and
services for people on justice
plans, largely due to an awkward overlap between Commonwealth-funded services
delivered by the National
Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) and state-funded
Question 13: Justice plans
Are there any issues with the availability and
operation of justice plans as conditions of adjourned undertakings? What changes
you propose, and why?
Other optional conditions
courts can also attach ‘any’ condition to an adjourned undertaking
that they believe would be appropriate. In
practice, the conditions tend to be
focused on rehabilitation and are not particularly onerous. Case law examples of
optional conditions
imposed in the higher courts have included a firearm
prohibition, a non-contact condition, participating in an approved drug
program, completing an accredited driver education program, and being
under the care and direction of psychiatric
clinicians.
most common optional conditions attached to adjourned undertakings are shown in
Figure 16. They tended to be very rehabilitative
in focus – whether
through treatment for mental health or substance abuse, or through driver
education or anger management.
There were also a number of payment conditions
attached to adjourned undertakings, above and beyond charitable donations, such
paying compensation or restitution to someone harmed by the
and paying costs
associated with the proceedings, such as to the Department of Justice and
Community Safety, RSPCA, CityLink and
there were also some anomalous conditions that would have been specific to the
circumstances of each case, such as removing
rubbish from an address, not
attending gambling venues such as Crown Casino, making an apology in person
(rather than in writing),
disclosing cannabis and amphetamine use to a GP,
completing a firearms safety course, not consuming alcohol, abstaining from
drug use, complying with another court order that was already in place
(such as bail, probation, a CCO or an intervention order),
not attending a local
community football oval, seeking help in improving English language skills,
limiting the number of pets the
offender can care
not driving a motor
vehicle without a licence, participating in financial counselling, participating
in family counselling, not incurring
any further traffic infringements or
accruing further demerit points, sitting a learner’s permit test,
attempting to obtain
a driver licence,
obtaining a driver
licence, seeking the assistance of the Australian Vietnamese Women’s
Association, ‘read[ing] up on
the cost to the community of
graffiti’, not entering a Target or Cotton On store, maintaining a
property in accordance with
local council laws, considering volunteering with a
Men’s Shed, volunteering with a food delivery service, accepting temporary
accommodation arranged by the court, staying in regular contact with a
Centrelink case worker and participating in specific First
are perhaps some questions to be asked about the appropriateness of some of
these conditions, and whether they should be imposed.
As Freiberg has observed,
conditions of sentencing orders are often found invalid when they are uncertain,
unnecessary or impossible.
For instance:
undesirable for courts to impose conditions such as unpaid community work,
abstinence from drugs and alcohol, and area exclusions,
if they functionally
make the undertaking more akin to a CCO;
it may be unfair
for a condition to require an offender to successfully obtain their driver
licence (as opposed to attempting to get
their driver licence) when they may,
despite their best efforts, not succeed;
unnecessary to include a condition requiring an offender to comply with another
court order (such as a bail order or family
violence intervention order), given
that person is already obligated to comply with that other order; and
while courts
more often than not specify a particular medical practitioner’s name when
the condition requires the offender to
seek or continue medical treatment, it
may be more appropriate for the condition to also expressly allow for ‘a
alternative’, both to ensure that the offender accesses the
services that best suits their needs during the undertaking and
potential impossibility of compliance if the practitioner becomes unavailable.
Question 14: Optional conditions
Are there any other issues with the optional
conditions that currently can be, and are, attached to adjourned undertakings in
Funding for programs
is currently no funding or support for people to comply with conditions attached
to an adjourned undertaking (such as participation
in a drug rehabilitation
program or road trauma awareness seminar). In contrast, support is available for
similar orders in South
for people on
for people on a
and for people on
undertakings seem to uniquely leave the financial cost of compliance with
offenders. Given the cost of many programs attached
as conditions to adjourned
undertakings – for instance, one drink-driving education program is $384
for two 3.5-hour sessions
– this discrepancy seems to unfairly punish offenders financially when
that is not the intent of these orders.
Question 15: Funding for programs
Should offenders sentenced to participate in
programs as a condition of an adjourned undertaking be required to pay for those
themselves, or should they be paid for by the state?
The adjourned undertaking form: CP230-9
of the possible ways to improve a person’s criminal justice experience is
through what is called ‘form reform’,
the redesign of forms to be
more user-friendly.
Magistrates’ Court has a template adjourned undertaking form that is
signed and printed by both the magistrate and
the offender. They each then
retain a copy. The current version of the template form is CP230-9. An
anonymised example form was provided
to the Council by the Magistrates’
Court and is extracted in Figure 17. It is a 12-month adjourned undertaking
imposed with
conviction in February 2022 for drink driving, with a requirement
to participate in a drink-driving education program.
7.40 In the
context of that example form, some possible amendments might include:
changing the
language of conditions:
an adjourned undertaking can only be imposed with
the offender’s consent. Given that the form is designed to represent an
between the offender and the court about what behaviours are expected
of the offender, the language around conditions might more
appropriately be
written as commitments by the offender, rather than implying that they are
requirements unilaterally imposed by
the court. For instance, instead of
‘You must complete a first stage behaviour change program’, it could
instead read
‘I will complete a first stage behaviour change
unnecessary conditions:
there are a number of conditions in the example form
that are part of the template form but appear to have been irrelevant to the
offender in that case, including attending court on the date that the
undertaking expires, the ‘optional condition’ box,
the FOCiS (First
Offender’s Court Intervention Service) drug education program, and the
various payment conditions (costs,
payment to the Court Fund and compensation).
To ensure the offender has an easily understandable document specifying the
that they have agreed to, there would most likely be considerable
benefit in only listing those conditions that apply to them; and
the breach warning:
the form currently states that failing to comply with an
adjourned undertaking could be punished by up to $1,408. The current maximum
penalty for breaching an adjourned undertaking is a level 10 fine, which equates
to 10 penalty units,
turn equates to $1,849 in the 2022–23 financial year. There may also be
some added value in warning offenders that
breaching their adjourned undertaking
may result in the order being cancelled and them being resentenced for the
original offending.
a matter as simple as increasing the font size can make a considerable
difference in terms of accessibility. The font size of
the current form is quite
small. Given the high rates of impaired mental functioning and learning
disabilities experienced by people
appearing before courts for criminal
reasonable to assume that improving accessibility of this form would also
improve compliance.
Question 16: The adjourned undertaking form
Should the Magistrates’ Court review the
current adjourned undertaking form (CP230-9)? If so, what revisions would you
Figure 17: Example adjourned undertaking form: CP230-9
UNDERTAKING WITH CONDITIONS
The Magistrates' Court at MELBOURNE on 01/02/2022 found ...
guilty of ...
Case Number:
Date of Birth:
Licence No.:
CHARGE 2 - FAIL ORAL FLUID TEST W/IN 3HR OF DRIVING
and released you ... on an undertaking with the conditions written below. The
court with conviction ... adjourned the further hearing
of your case to
MELBOURNE MAGISTRATES' COURT ON 01/02/2023 at 9:30 am
The undertaking starts on 01/02/2022 and goes to 01/02/2023
You must be of good behaviour during the time the undertaking is in
[ ] You musl appear at Court on the date that this case has been adjourned
[x] You must appear at Court before the date that this case has been
adjourned to only if you get a notice from the Court telling
you to appear.
[ ] The other conditions that apply to you are:
[x] You must complete a first stage behaviour change program.
[ ] You must complete "FOCIS" the approved drug education and information
[ ] To pay $... costs, $... to the Court Fund, $... compensation.
agree to comply by the conditions of this undertaking
This undertaking was acknowledged
WARNING - If you break the conditions of this undertaking:
-You may be punished for any offence that has been adjourned on you agreeing
to this under1aking.
-You may also be punished for failing to comply with the conditions of the
undertaking by a fine of up to $1,408.
undertakings in the sentencing hierarchy
8.1 This chapter
discusses the positioning of adjourned undertakings in Victoria’s
sentencing hierarchy and whether there may
be some possibilities for reforming
the relevant provisions of the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic). It also
examines the rate at which courts record convictions alongside adjourned
undertakings.
Revising the sentencing hierarchy?
principle of parsimony requires courts to impose a sentence (in its type,
length/amount and conditions) that is no more severe
than necessary to achieve
the purposes of sentencing, taking into account the circumstances of each case.
Parsimony is originally
a common law rule, aimed primarily at ensuring that
imprisonment is a sentence of last
but it is also
enshrined in legislation, with
sections 5(4)
–(7) of the
Sentencing Act
specifying that certain orders (imprisonment or youth detention orders, drug
and alcohol treatment orders, community correction orders
(CCOs) and fines)
cannot be imposed if a less severe sentencing order would suffice. As the Court
of Appeal wrote in 2016, these
provisions ‘create a loose hierarchy of
sentencing options’.
The legislation does not otherwise rank adjourned undertakings, dismissals and
discharges in terms of severity (though it seems uncontroversial
to assert that
a dismissal without conviction is the least severe of the three). Some have
interpreted the order of dispositions
section 7(1)
as a form of hierarchy,
with adjourned undertakings treated as more serious than dismissals and
discharges.
However, it is
not immediately apparent that
is intended to supplement the hierarchy
Victoria’s current sentencing
Imprisonment or youth detention order
Drug and alcohol treatment order
Community correction order
Adjourned undertaking, discharge or dismissal
Sentencing Act 1991
8.3 There are
two particular issues related to the placement of adjourned undertakings in
Victoria’s sentencing hierarchy and
the relevant legislative provisions.
The first is whether fines should be above adjourned undertakings in the
hierarchy. The second
is whether there is scope to revise Division 1 of
Sentencing Act
to improve its coherence and
accessibility.
Fines and adjourned undertakings
currently prohibits a court from imposing a fine (or a more serious
sentence) if an adjourned undertaking would
However, the Council
heard during preliminary consultation that the appropriateness of a fine or an
adjourned undertaking will often
be far more context dependent than this
hierarchy suggests. In particular, an adjourned undertaking can sometimes be
more severe
than a fine, particularly if the court records a conviction, or if
it includes a payment condition and/or a condition requiring participation
program of some sort (especially if the offender has to pay for the program
themselves). For example, someone receiving an adjourned
undertaking for a
drink-driving offence may be ordered to participate in a seven-hour behaviour
change program, with registration
costing the offender over $400 of their own
This would make an
adjourned undertaking substantively more onerous than a fine, particularly if
the fine would have been in the
region of $400 or less. In that context, and
noting the onerous nature of some conditions attached to adjourned undertakings
Chapter 7),
question as to whether the
Sentencing Act
should continue to so firmly
place fines above adjourned undertakings in the sentencing hierarchy, or whether
the Act should be amended
to allow a more flexible approach to sentence
selection, with no overt hierarchy between the two.
8.5 If adjourned
undertakings and fines were to be co-located in the hierarchy, there would also
be some collateral issues for consideration.
For example,
Sentencing Act
currently specifies the supplementary purposes for which
adjourned undertakings, dismissals and discharges can be imposed (discussed
[2.8]–[2.15]), such as allowing for circumstances where only a nominal
punishment is appropriate or to acknowledge the trivial
nature of the offending.
There is a question as to whether fines would be subject to the same
supplementary sentencing purposes if
the hierarchy were amended.
8.6 There are a
number of options. The supplementary purposes could be left as they are in
, though that may continue to give the impression that adjourned
undertakings are more akin to dismissals and discharges than to fines.
could be imported into
so that they are read alongside the primary
purposes of sentencing when deciding whether to impose certain sentencing
orders. This
would have the advantage of co-locating the objectives of
sentencing into a single provision. Or they could become independent provisions
relating to each of the orders themselves (e.g. specific sections titled
‘Purposes of adjourned undertakings’ and ‘Purposes
discharges and dismissals’). This would have the advantage of specifically
drawing courts’ attention to the supplementary
objectives of each specific
sentencing order. For instance, it is doubtful that dismissals and discharges
are capable of ‘allow[ing]
for the offender to demonstrate his or her
remorse in a manner agreed to by the court’.
Question 17: The sentencing hierarchy
Should the placement of adjourned undertakings in
Victoria’s sentencing hierarchy be amended? If not, why not? If so, how,
and what consequential reforms would be needed (e.g. to
section 70)?
sections 72
Sentencing Act
possible reform could be to merge
sections 72
(adjourned undertakings with
conviction) and 75 (adjourned undertakings without conviction) of the
Sentencing Act
. The power to impose most other sentence types, such as
fines and CCOs, exist in individual provisions
(sections 49
), regardless
of whether a conviction is also imposed. There is no apparent reason to
distinguish between the two provisions relating
to adjourned undertakings. The
provisions are practically identical, and the decision to impose a conviction
(for other orders) appears
to be adequately addressed by
Sentencing Act
. Arguably the
Sentencing Act
would be simplified,
and therefore more coherent and accessible, if
sections 72
were merged so
that a single provision empowered courts to impose an adjourned undertaking,
with or without conviction. The decision
whether to record a conviction would
then simply be governed by the criteria in
section 8(1)
8.8 One caveat
with this reform would be ensuring that the punitive effect of sentencing
continues to be viewed as a whole, such that
the consequences of imposing a
conviction inform whether the sentence type imposed would achieve the purposes
of sentencing. In effect,
the decision to impose a conviction and the decision
to impose an adjourned undertaking should occur concurrently to acknowledge,
the Court of Appeal did in
(see above at [2.8]) that
sentencing often involves a constellation of punishment.
Question 18: Merging
sections 72
sections 72
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be merged to create a single sentencing order of an
‘adjourned undertaking’ regardless of whether a conviction is
imposed? If so, why? If not, why not?
sections 73
Sentencing Act
8.9 Relatedly,
Sentencing Act
currently distinguishes between whether a court
discharges a person (with conviction) or dismisses their charges (without
conviction).
There are no other conditions associated with those two
dispositions. As mentioned at [8.6], the discretionary nature of imposing
conviction is addressed by
for other dispositions, such as fines and
CCOs. It may be worth considering the possibility of also merging these two
to create a single sentencing order (whether it be called discharge,
dismissal or some other term) that also leaves the decision
to record a
conviction or not to be dealt with via
. While these orders are
slightly outside the scope of this consultation paper, they are nevertheless
related and covered in the same
division of the
Sentencing Act
Question 19: Merging
sections 73
sections 73
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be merged to create a single sentencing order of dismissal or
discharge (or some other term) regardless of whether a conviction
imposed? If so, why? If not, why not?
sections 74
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act
currently specify that a court ‘may
make an order for compensation or restitution in addition to’ an adjourned
undertaking,
dismissal or discharge. There is a question as to whether these
provisions add anything of substance to the legislation.
Sections 84
empower courts to impose a restitution or compensation order if they find
‘a person guilty of an offence ... or [convict]
a person of an
offence’. In that context,
sections 74
do not appear to add any
judicial power to impose a restitution or compensation order, and instead simply
clarify that courts can
impose such orders
pursuant to
sections 84
8.11 There are
at least two possible justifications for the continued existence of
sections 74
. Those sections might allow for the courts to issue own-motion
compensation orders, because section 84B only allows a compensation
order to be
made ‘on the application of a person who has suffered any injury’.
However, it seems doubtful that this would
be an issue in many cases,
particularly given that the court can invite an application if truly necessary.
The other possibility
is that a court ‘being satisfied that a person is
guilty of an offence’
(section 76)
is not synonymous with ‘find[ing]
a person guilty of an offence’, such that a compensation order can only be
in cases involving
dismissals if
specifically
empowers courts to do so. This also, though, seems unlikely, and does not
explain the need for
section 74.
Question 20: Repealing
sections 74
sections 74
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be retained or repealed? In either case, why?
Adjourned undertakings with or without conviction
adjourned undertaking can be imposed with
(section 72)
(section 75)
conviction. Recording a conviction can have significant consequences for
offenders. Among other things, it can affect their visa
status, employment
prospects, housing opportunities, ability to travel internationally, access to
firearms, access to adoption and
admission into certain professions. It can also
‘rule [Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples] out of being kinship
carers ... That can mean that Aboriginal children are placed in non-Indigenous
Because of these
consequences, there are some cases where having a conviction recorded would most
likely be more onerous than receiving
other sentencing orders – adjourned
undertakings, fines even CCOs (e.g. a young offender’s career might be
a conviction).
1989, Fox and Freiberg argued that where sentencers are given a discretion
whether to record a conviction (as they currently are
in Victoria when imposing
CCOs, fines, adjourned undertakings, discharges and
dismissals),
they should also
be given criteria to guide them in exercising that
discretion.
Along those
section 8(1)
Sentencing Act
requires courts, when deciding
whether to record a conviction, to have regard to ‘all the circumstances
of the case’,
including the nature of the offence, the character and past
history of the offender, and the impact of recording a conviction on
offender’s economic or social wellbeing or on their employment prospects.
Conviction rates in the Magistrates’ Court
Convictions
were not commonly attached to adjourned undertakings during the reference
period. Of the 118,056 adjourned undertakings
that were the principal sentence
in a case, just 16.9% were imposed
conviction. The vast majority
(83.1%) were imposed
conviction. This stands in stark contrast to
the much higher rate of convictions attached to fines (63.6%) and
community-based orders
There has, however,
been a trend since 2015 of an increasing rate of adjourned undertakings imposed
with conviction, steadily increasing
from 13.3% in 2015 to 22.2% in 2020 (Figure
18). Rather than indicating a greater inclination for courts to impose adjourned
undertakings
with conviction, it is possible that this is due to the growing
rate of adjourned undertakings in the Magistrates’ Court (see
particular, given that the rate of adjourned undertakings in the
Magistrates’ Court has recently increased from
13% of all sentencing
outcomes to 18% at the same time that the rate of fines and CCOs have declined,
it may be that offenders who
were previously receiving more serious sentencing
outcomes are now receiving adjourned undertakings instead, and that they are
more likely to have a conviction recorded.
adjourned undertakings were imposed with conviction
Figure 18: Proportion of Magistrates’ Court adjourned undertakings
imposed with conviction, 2011 to 2020 (118,056 adjourned
undertakings)
With conviction
Without conviction
With conviction (%)
Conviction rates by offence type
conviction rate for most offences ranged from around 10% to 20% (e.g. careless
driving: 11.3%; unlawful assault: 15.6%; driving
while disqualified or
suspended: 18.2%; breaching a family violence safety notice or intervention
order: 18.3%). However, there were
some offences that were much
likely to have a conviction recorded (e.g. theft from a shop: 32.4%) and
other offence types that were much
likely to have a conviction
recorded (e.g. speeding: 2.9%). The high rate of convictions for theft from a
shop seems unusual. It may
be that the prior criminal history of those offenders
was more likely to already include convictions, which would reduce the effect
a further conviction and also influence the court’s assessment of their
prospects of rehabilitation.
Conviction rates in the higher courts
the 236 cases in the higher courts where an adjourned undertaking was the
principal sentence, the slight majority were imposed
without conviction (53% or
126 cases) and the remainder were imposed with conviction (47% or 110 cases).
This is a higher rate of
convictions than the rate in the Magistrates’
Court, but that is to be expected given the nature of the higher courts
typically attracting more serious cases.
adjourned undertakings in the higher courts were imposed with conviction
Spent Convictions Act 2021
December 2021, the
Spent Convictions Act 2021
(Vic) came into effect,
providing new rules about when a person’s criminal history is disclosable.
During preliminary consultation,
some stakeholders raised an issue with the
effect of that recent legislation on people receiving adjourned undertakings
without conviction.
particular, stakeholders advised that despite adjourned undertakings currently
being less severe than a fine in the sentencing
hierarchy, the finding of guilt
for people receiving an adjourned undertaking without conviction is not
‘spent’ until
the end of the period of the undertaking (because they
have ‘conditions’ such as good behaviour, and findings of guilt
cannot become spent ‘until the person completes all conditions attached to
the penalty’).
contrast, the finding of guilt for people receiving a fine without conviction is
spent immediately at the date of the sentencing
hearing. There appears to be a
perverse incentive to argue for a more serious sentencing outcome in order to
ensure the conviction
is spent earlier. This issue does not apply to fines and
adjourned undertakings imposed
conviction, as the ‘conviction
period’ for both those orders is 10 years from the date of
sentencing.
however, affect thousands of people each year; in 2019 alone, almost 14,000
people received an adjourned undertaking without
conviction and would have been
subjected to a waiting period before their finding of guilt would cease to be a
disclosable event.
Question 21: Spent convictions
Spent Convictions Act 2021
be amended so that findings of guilt become spent at the date of
for people receiving adjourned undertakings without
conviction, rather than at the end of their adjourned undertaking?
of adjourned undertakings
9.1 This chapter
examines data on the rates of breaches of adjourned undertakings recorded by
police and sentenced by courts, and
reoffending rates within four years of
receiving an adjourned undertaking. That examination suggests an increasing
number of breach
offences recorded by police and a relatively low reoffending
rate, especially for serious reoffending. This suggests that adjourned
undertakings are often successfully completed and effective in reducing and
preventing recidivism.
Breaching an adjourned undertaking
are two ways to breach an adjourned undertaking; the first is by reoffending,
and the second is through what is often called
a ‘technical
behaviour that
is not criminal in its own right but represents non-compliance with the order.
Victoria, it is an offence to breach an adjourned undertaking without a
reasonable excuse, punishable by a fine of up to 10 penalty
(which in 2022–23
would have equated to $1,849.20). Because the provision does not specify that a
term of imprisonment can
be imposed, it is impermissible for a breach offence to
receive one.
However, if the
fine goes unpaid, it can be converted into a term of imprisonment of up to 10
prosecution for that breach offence must commence in the Magistrates’
However, if the
original adjourned undertaking was imposed in the County Court or the Supreme
Court, the Magistrates’ Court
must transfer the proceedings to that
There is a statute of
limitations requiring a prosecution to be brought within either 6 months of the
offender being found guilty
of another offence or 12 months of the end of the
undertaking.
a court then finds the person guilty of breaching the undertaking, the court
must do one of the following: confirm the original
order, vary the original
order, cancel the order and resentence the offender for the original offending,
or make no further order.
doing so the court must take into account the extent to which the offender has
complied with the order.
These powers to confirm, vary or cancel the order exist separately from the need
to also sentence the breach offence itself. If the
breach was a result of
reoffending, this can lead to what has been described as a ‘triple
jeopardy situation’, because
the person can be (a) resentenced for the
original offending, (b) sentenced for the breach offence and (c) sentenced for
The number of breaches recorded by police is
19 shows how many breaches of adjourned undertakings were recorded by police in
the 10 years to 2021, using publicly available
data published by the Crime
Statistics Agency.
exception of a very slight decline in 2021, which would have been due to
COVID-19, the yearly number of recorded breaches
increased significantly to
almost 1,300 in 2019. While there has been an increase in the number of
adjourned undertakings imposed
in the Magistrates’ Court in the same
period, it was nowhere near this magnitude. The Council has recently found
significant
increases in how many breaches of court orders (sometimes called
justice procedure offences) are recorded and prosecuted by police
including breaches of bail
and breaches of intervention
The increase in
breaches of adjourned undertakings is therefore likely to be another example of
the cultural shift in enhanced responsiveness
by police to breaches of court
Figure 19: Breaches of adjourned undertakings recorded by
police, 2011 to 2020
Number of recorded offences
The number of breaches sentenced by courts is
number of breaches of adjourned undertakings sentenced by courts each year
follows a similar trend but is less pronounced
(Figure 20). In particular, there
was a significant increase in the number of breaches sentenced between 2013 and
2019, more than
doubling (a 133% increase) and very much outpacing the 52%
increase in the number of adjourned undertakings imposed each year. Again,
most likely reflects a change in police, prosecutor and perhaps even court
responses to breaches rather than a change in compliance
rates by people serving
adjourned undertakings.
Figure 20: Breaches of adjourned
undertakings sentenced by courts, 2011 to 2020
to the consequences of these breach offences, the Council has previously
analysed sentencing outcomes for breaches of adjourned
undertakings. By far the
most common sentence was to find the charge proven and dismiss it, either with
or without conviction (84%),
followed by fines (14%) and other orders
9.9 However, as
the Council also observed, the data:
illustrate(s) the importance of considering the entire outcome ... If only the
specific penalty for the breach offence is considered,
it might wrongly be
concluded that a large number of offenders had received a very minor (or even
no) recorded penalty for their
that context, it is important to note that half of all people found guilty of
breaching an adjourned undertaking were resentenced
for their original offending
And another 11% had
the order varied, which may have resulted in more stringent conditions, but it
may also have been the result
of the court changing the conditions so the
offender would be better able to comply with them.
Reoffending after receiving an adjourned undertaking
section discusses the reoffending rates of people after they received an
adjourned undertaking. As the Productivity Commission
recently observed, there
are a number of ways of measuring
reoffending.
consultation paper, reoffending is only counted if the offence was eventually
sentenced, but it is measured by the date of
the offence. If, for example, an
offence was
10 months after an adjourned undertaking was
imposed but
14 months after the undertaking was imposed, this
would be classified as reoffending occurring within one year.
9.12 The below
analysis relates to the 23,482 people who received an adjourned undertaking in
2015 and 2016. This allows for an identical
four-year follow-up period for each
of them. If a person received multiple adjourned undertakings, they were only
counted once at
the date of their first adjourned undertaking in those two
People who reoffended within four years
those 23,482 people, two-thirds did not reoffend at all in the four years after
receiving an adjourned undertaking (65.8%),
while 34.2% did (Figure 21). The
reoffending rate was higher for males than for females.
21: Cumulative reoffending rates by people who received an adjourned
undertaking
Total (number = 23,482)
Male (number = 16,611)
Female (number = 6,871)
Within 1 year
Within 2 years
Within 3 years
Within 4 years
the context of the Council’s previous reoffending analyses, this is a
comparatively low rate of recidivism. The Council has
previously found four-year
reoffending rates of 58% (threat offenders), 57% (people who breach personal
safety intervention orders),
56% (stalkers), 54% (children and young people) and
48% (people who breach family violence safety notices or intervention
The only comparable
rates in the Council’s previous work have been 32% (animal cruelty
offenders) and 34% (all offenders sentenced
relatively low rate at which people receiving adjourned undertakings reoffended
was expected given that the order is typically
imposed for less serious
offending. However, it may also indicate that adjourned undertakings are an
effective tool in reducing recidivism.
reoffending rate varied slightly by the original length of the adjourned
undertaking, but not significantly (Figure 22).
The group of people least likely
to reoffend were those receiving adjourned undertakings of less than one year
(30.9%). That group
of people tended to reoffend
the period of the
undertaking, whereas those receiving longer undertakings were more likely to
the undertaking.
Figure 22: Timing of
reoffending, by duration of adjourned undertaking
Didn't reoffend
Reoffended during adjourned undertaking
Reoffended after adjourned undertaking
1 year or less
(number = 6,588)
More than 1 year
to 2 years (number = 15,783)
More than 2
years (number = 1,111)
group of people most likely to reoffend were those receiving adjourned
undertakings of more than two years (38.3%). This is inconsistent
with previous
findings in New South Wales that recidivism rates are lower for people receiving
longer good behaviour bonds.
It does, however, accord with the principle of parsimony, meaning that people
receiving longer adjourned undertakings are also more
likely to have committed
more serious offences and are therefore more likely to reoffend.
People sentenced to prison within four years
few people (6.1%) receiving an adjourned undertaking received a prison sentence
in the following four years (Figure 23),
and it was twice as common for men than
for women. As a point of comparison, 43.6% of people released from prison in
Victoria in
2018–19 returned to prison within two
compared to 3.9% of
people receiving adjourned undertakings. While these two groups would be very
different in nature, this nevertheless
suggests that, within two years, prison
leavers are about 11 times more likely to receive a prison sentence than people
an adjourned undertaking.
Figure 23: Proportion of
people receiving an adjourned undertaking who went on to receive a prison
sentence within four years
Total (number = 23,482)
Male (number = 16,611)
Female (number = 6,871)
Within 1 year
Within 2 years
Within 3 years
Within 4 years
Subsequent sentence types imposed
9.18 Figure
24 shows the sentence types that those 23,482 people received at their next
sentencing event after receiving an adjourned
undertaking. Two-thirds of people
were not sentenced again at all. The most common sentence types on those
subsequent occasions were
fines (16.9%) and another adjourned undertaking
(6.6%); few people received imprisonment (2.7%). This suggests that those people
receiving an adjourned undertaking do not tend to reoffend with serious
Figure 24: Sentence types that people received after
receiving an adjourned undertaking
Imprisonment
Community correction order
Adjourned undertaking
Not sentenced again
Reoffending by people receiving adjourned undertakings for
traffic and vehicle offences
the prevalence of traffic and vehicle offences, the Council separately analysed
the reoffending patterns for the 5,412
people who received an adjourned
undertaking in 2015 and 2016 in a case where the principal offence was a traffic
and vehicle offence
(Figure 25). They had an even lower reoffending rate than
the rate for all people receiving adjourned undertakings (23.8% compared
34.2%). And when they did reoffend, it was most commonly with another traffic
and vehicle offence (13.4%). Just 10.4% of those
5,412 people reoffended with
another type of offending, the most common of which were endangerment offences
(2.0%), assault and injury
offences (2.0%) and justice procedure offences
Figure 25: Types of reoffending by people receiving an
adjourned undertaking in 2015 and 2016 for traffic and vehicle offences (5,412
Didn't reoffend
Another traffic/vehicle offence
Other offences
Reoffending by family violence offenders
the prevalence of family violence offending in cases receiving adjourned
undertakings, the Council also separately analysed
the reoffending patterns for
the 4,908 people who received an adjourned undertaking in 2015 and 2016 in a
case involving family violence
(Figure 26). Those offenders had a higher rate of
reoffending than all people receiving an adjourned undertaking (38.3% compared
to 34.2%). It is, however, much lower than the reoffending rate of people found
guilty of breaching a family violence safety notice
or intervention order
One of the reasons
that the latter group had higher reoffending rates is because they may have
committed more serious offending,
particularly if they received imprisonment or
a community correction order (CCO). However, it may also evidence the
effectiveness
of adjourned undertakings as a sentencing order in family violence
cases to reduce reoffending (in comparison, for example, to fines).
38.3% of family violence offenders who did reoffend, the most common offence
justice procedure offences (9.5%)
and traffic and vehicle offences (6.6%). These are also the most common
reoffending behaviours
of all people who breach family violence safety notices
and intervention orders, but at much lower
26: Types of reoffending by people receiving an adjourned undertaking in 2015
and 2016 for a case with a family violence flag
(4,908 people)
Didn't reoffend
Assault and injury offences
Justice offences
Traffic offences
Do we need a distinct breach offence?
Council has on multiple occasions raised concerns about the separate and
distinct criminalisation of breaches of court orders.
In 2002, the
report recommended, among other things, ‘[t]hat a breach of
a conditional order no longer be a criminal
In its 2008
report on suspended sentences, the Council recommended that ‘[b]reach of a
sentencing order ... should no longer
constitute a separate offence’, and
that the benefit of criminalising breaches (improving future
decision-makers’ knowledge
achieved through other
mechanisms.
And in its 2017
report on breaches of court orders, the Council again suggested that rather than
continuing to criminalise breaches
of sentencing orders, ‘it might be more
appropriate to capture [compliance/breach] information in some other fashion
resorting to the criminal
Tasmanian Law Reform Institute made the same recommendation in 2008. In response
to their consultation paper asking, among other
things, whether breaching an
adjourned undertaking should become a criminal offence, ‘[b]oth the Chief
Justice and Tasmania
Police submitted that breach of this order should not be an
The Tasmanian
Law Reform Institute agreed, recommending that ‘breach of a conditional
release order should not constitute an
recommendation seems to have been accepted; it is still not an offence to breach
an adjourned undertaking in Tasmania.
is one of only two jurisdictions in the country that criminalises breaches of
adjourned undertakings (or equivalent orders).
It is not an offence to breach an
equivalent order in New South Wales, Tasmania, the Northern Territory,
Queensland, the Australian
Capital Territory or South
The only responses
to breaches in those jurisdictions are to vary the order or revoke it and
resentence the offender. Western Australia
is the only other jurisdiction that
makes it an offence to breach a conditional release
There, the person can
be resentenced and fined up to
In Victoria, the
person can also be resentenced but fined over $1,800.
9.24 There are a
number of arguments in support of decriminalising breaches of adjourned
undertakings.
as the Council observed in 2017, the increasing number of breach offences being
prosecuted each year are creating a significant
amount of additional work for
courts, accounting for 10% of criminal charges sentenced in Victoria each
In the context of the
ongoing backlog of criminal cases as a result of COVID-19, decriminalising
unnecessary offences may improve
court efficiencies.
9.26 Second, the
primary response by courts to proven breaches seems to be either resentencing
the original offending or varying the
order, both of which are possible
regardless of whether there is a distinct breach offence. Resentencing someone
for the original
offending and/or sentencing them for the new offending may be
considered sufficient without the need to separately punish them for
9.27 Third,
there appears to be a significant and arguably inappropriate inconsistency in
whether someone is prosecuted for a breach
offence (Figure 27). There were
15,254 people who received a 12-month adjourned undertaking in 2015 and 2016. Of
those people, 2,982
were known to have reoffended within 12 months. Given that
reoffending automatically constitutes a breach of the adjourned undertaking,
those people were all theoretically liable to be prosecuted and sentenced for
breaching their adjourned undertaking as a result.
However, this was not the
case. Just 10.5% of those people (312) were found guilty of a section 83AC
breach offence. The other 89.5%
were not, despite being found guilty of
offending that occurred during the period of their adjourned undertaking. This
nine in 10 people who breach their adjourned undertaking by
reoffending are
, for whatever reason, found guilty of breaching an
adjourned undertaking.
9 in 10 people who reoffend during their
adjourned undertaking are not found guilty of a breach offence
Figure 27: Overlap of people receiving a 12-month adjourned undertaking in
2015 or 2016 who reoffended during their undertaking and
were prosecuted for a
breach offence (15,254 people)
Breach/reoffending
No breach recorded against index case within four years and no reoffending
within one year
Breached index case within four years and no reoffending within one
Breached index case within four years and reoffended within one year
No breach recorded against index case and reoffended within one year
Total (all index cases from 2015 and 2016 with a 12 month adjourned
undertaking)
9.28 Conversely,
there are some advantages to retaining a distinct breach offence. In particular,
people making decisions in the criminal
justice system – such as whether
to bail a person, impose a certain sentencing order, release them on parole,
may find information on compliance with court orders useful.
Consistent non-compliance may, for example, militate against bailing
and that information is perhaps most easily ascertained by scrutinising their
criminal history.
Question 22: Decriminalising breaches
Should breaching an adjourned undertaking be
decriminalised? If so, why? If not, why not?
Successful completion of adjourned undertakings
the end of the adjournment period, if the court is satisfied that the offender
has complied with the conditions of the undertaking,
the court must either
discharge the offender (with conviction) or dismiss the charges (without
conviction).
Council heard from stakeholders that the vast majority of adjourned undertakings
are finalised ‘on the papers’ by
a magistrate at an administrative
court hearing. The people subject to the undertakings do not appear, but
Victoria Police advised
that they are typically asked to be present. During
consultation, they suggested that there was not much value in having a police
prosecutor present at that hearing, as they are rarely asked to comment and have
no previous exposure to the
9.31 One of the
stakeholders responding to the Council’s survey also suggested that it may
be useful to send people who successfully
complete adjourned undertakings a
letter (or some form of communication) advising them that they have successfully
completed their
adjourned undertaking, giving them a sense of validation,
encouragement and closure.
Question 23: Successful completion
What should happen at the end of an adjourned
undertaking that has been successfully completed? You may wish to consider:
whether courts
should send a communication to offenders who successfully complete their
adjourned undertaking; and
whether there
needs to be a court hearing at the end of the undertaking, and if so, who should
be required to attend.
Appendix 1: Preliminary consultation
3 December 2021
Meeting with County Court
9 December 2021
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
10 December 2021
Meeting with Law Institute of Victoria
14 December 2021
Meeting with County Court
15 December 2021
Meeting with Law Institute of Victoria
16 December 2021
Meeting with Victoria Police
21 December 2021
Meeting with Federation of Community Legal Centres
22 December 2021
Meeting with Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service
17 January 2022
Meeting with Department of Justice and Community Safety
17 January 2022
Meeting with Department of Families, Fairness and Housing
18 January 2022
Meeting with County Court
19 January 2022
Meeting with Victoria Police
19 January 2022
Meeting with Victoria Legal Aid
21 January 2022
Meeting with Office of Public Prosecutions
21 January 2022
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
25 January 2022
Meeting with Criminal Bar Association
15 February 2022
Meeting with Centre for Forensic Behavioural Science
30 March 2022
Meeting with Judicial College of Victoria
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
Appendix 2: Method and data
This paper analyses
adjourned undertakings imposed in the 10 years from 2011 to 2020 (the reference
period). Unless otherwise specified,
the data on adjourned undertakings in this
paper is derived from CourtLink data that is regularly provided to the Council
Services Victoria and cleaned by the Council’s data analysts.
Surveying practitioners and judicial officers
In order to supplement available court data on the
use of adjourned undertakings in Victoria, the Council developed a survey to
to prosecutors, defence lawyers, magistrates and judges to seek their
Because the survey was
considered incapable of causing anything more than discomfort to the intended
participants, the Council determined
that there was no need to seek ethics
approval for the survey.
views of groups such as victims and the general community about the options for
reform will be sought upon publication of this
consultation paper.
Survey development
The survey was developed iteratively based on
internal feedback from the project team and other Council staff, as well as
initial questions in the survey were based on the identified gaps
in court data,
issues identified during preliminary consultations, and early research into
sentence deferrals and adjourned undertakings.
That first draft was
intentionally overlong to ensure that as many key issues as possible were
addressed. From there, the project
team met to discuss whether each question was
essential, optional or unnecessary, and significantly reduced the length of the
From there, the survey was shared internally to seek feedback. Once that
judicial officer, a
police prosecutor and a defence lawyer for feedback. Once that was implemented,
the survey was finalised (see
Appendix 3). Wherever possible, the questions were
multiple choice in order to reduce the workload required by participants and
the prospects of them filling in more of the survey. There were,
though, also a number of qualitative questions seeking free-text
Participant recruitment
To recruit participants from the criminal justice
system, the Council used a targeted, non-probability, respondent-driven snowball
sampling (or chain-referral)
This involves making
participants) and asking those
initial contacts to recruit other participants
into the research. This recruitment methodology is particularly useful in
hard-to-reach populations, such as legal practitioners and judicial
officers for whom the Council does not have contact details.
It also increases
the buy-in of the intended study participants if their participation is
encouraged by someone within their own
organisation or immediate
Further, while
snowball sampling has sometimes been criticised for causing respondents to have
similar characteristics to the initial
people contacted by the
researchers,
the Council was
only interested in accessing a finite and identifiable sample of the Victorian
population (criminal law practitioners
and judicial officers), and only a
handful of peak bodies needed to be contacted to (in theory) access the vast
majority of that
population.
The Council therefore met and spoke with senior representatives from nine
target cohorts of criminal law practitioners and judicial
officers in
each of whom was
likely to have access to a means of sending a bulk email to a subset of the
intended study participants. Eight of
the organisations agreed to email a
hyperlink to the survey to the relevant people in their networks, along with a
blurb explaining
the survey, and they agreed to encourage participation by those
receiving the email. The one exception was the Office of Public Prosecutions,
which indicated that it did not have capacity to distribute the survey to their
The Council sent the link to the survey to all nine initial contacts on
Monday 21 February 2022, and almost all of the eight participating
organisations
advised that the link had been distributed to their networks within a week. The
survey then remained open until 11:59
p.m. on Friday 11 March 2022 to allow most
respondents a minimum of two weeks to participate.
Analysis of results
There were just 25 unique respondents to the
survey: seven judges or magistrates, 16 criminal law practitioners who mainly
one criminal law practitioner who prosecutes and defends about equally,
one criminal law practitioner who mainly prosecutes and no
police prosecutors.
The Council had originally planned to analyse the results of the survey using a
combination of multivariate analysis
(for responses that could be quantitatively
measured) and reflexive thematic analysis (for responses that were more
qualitative in
nature). However, the low response rate meant that any results of
such an analysis would not have been reliable. As such, the survey
discussed throughout this paper are designed to be illustrative, not
representative.
Confidentiality
In addition to participation in the survey being
voluntary, the survey was conducted on a confidential and anonymised basis. The
question in the survey did ask participants for their email address as a
mandatory field; however, they were advised that the primary
aim of this was to
ensure that the Council could exclude any duplicate entries (e.g. if someone
left the survey but started again).
Participants were also advised that a
secondary purpose was to allow them to opt in (at the end of the survey) to
either being contacted
consultation paper once it was published. If they did not voluntarily opt in,
email address was exclusively used to avoid duplicate entries.
Optional conditions of adjourned undertakings
The optional conditions attached to adjourned
undertakings can be recorded in CourtLink using structured data fields (such as
Fund Amount’ and ‘Justice Plan Indicator’) or a
free-text field named ‘Further Order Conditions’.
Because the conditions are recorded in both structured and unstructured data,
a variety of methods were used to derive the statistics
for conditions of
adjourned undertakings in this paper. Table A1 summarises these methods.
As Table A1 shows, it was possible to use the structured data to determine
the prevalence of some conditions of adjourned undertakings.
However, most of
the analysis relied on the unstructured text data because information on a
number of common additional conditions
(such as mental/medical health treatment,
behaviour change or charitable donation) was only contained in the free-text
field. Further,
even when a structured data field did exist, the free-text field
was often used to record this data. For example, some cases had
‘N’ in the Justice Plan Indicator field but the free-text field
included comments such as ‘to comply
with the justice plan imposed this
Table A1: Methods for deriving data on conditions of adjourned
undertakings
No conditions
Text field had a value of ‘NULL’, or had
‘other’ condition, that is, the condition did not fall within
below categories
Text string search for ‘court fund’ and/or a non-zero value in
the ‘Court Fund Amount’ variable
Mental/medical health treatment
Machine learning model
Charitable donation
Machine learning model
Behaviour change
Machine learning model
Driving course
Machine learning model and/or ‘Road Trauma Awareness Seminar
Indicator’, variable = ‘Y’
Drug/alcohol treatment
Machine learning model
Text string search for ‘costs’ and related terms, and/or a
non-zero value in the ‘Costs Amount’ variable
Compensation
Text string search for ‘compensation’ and related terms, and/or
a non-zero value in the ‘Compensation Amount’
Text string search for ‘apology’ and related terms
Justice plan
Text string search for ‘justice plan’ and related terms and/or
‘Justice Plan Indicator’, variable = ‘Y’
Judicial monitoring
Text string search for ‘judicial monitoring’ and related
While the text field could be used to identify the conditions imposed, it was
not feasible to manually code the thousands of adjourned
undertakings imposed
during the reference period. The Council therefore utilised a number of
automated methods to identify the most
common conditions.
For some conditions, a relatively simple search for a term (or very slight
variations of that term) was sufficient to determine the
number of occurrences.
For example, when an offender was required to apologise to someone as part of
their undertaking, the term
‘apology’ or ‘apologise’
almost always appeared in the free-text.
For other conditions, there was far more variation in the terms used, so
text-mining techniques were used. For example, consider the
following three
cases where the additional conditions were classified in the mental/medical
health treatment category:
to undertake a
mental health assessment with a GP;
to continue
treatment for depression and anxiety;
to continue with
psychologist as required.
Text-mining techniques are used to
systematically extract quantitative information from unstructured text
A recent application of
this methodology in a criminological context is found in the Australian
Institute of Criminology’s
examination of mentions of mental disorders in
police narratives at domestic and family violence
The key steps taken for the adjourned undertakings free-text data
processing and
filtering text, including:
punctuation;
words (i.e., eliminating variations among larger words –
‘psychologist’ and ‘psychological’
would both become
‘psycholog’); and
stop words (i.e., small words such as ‘of’, ‘the’ and
‘a’, which are not useful for categorising
transforming the
text data into structured data using a ‘document-term matrix’
– a large table created using statistical
software that shows the
frequency of terms occurring in the collection of adjourned undertakings
free-text fields. Rows in the matrix
represented individual cases, and the
columns represented terms; and
machine learning models for selected conditions based on a sample of 500 cases
in the document-term matrix. After the sample
was manually coded for various
conditions, 350 cases were used to ‘train’ the models, and then 150
cases were used to
evaluate them. A model was developed for each of the
following condition categories: medical/mental health treatment, charitable
donation, behaviour change, driving course and drug/alcohol treatment. The
performance of the models in classifying the evaluation
set suggested that they
provided reliable
models were then applied to the full dataset to determine whether the text in
each case could be classified under the model’s
condition of the adjourned
undertaking.
Reoffending
The Council’s reoffending database links
different sentencing events using unique person identifiers. This allowed the
of individuals’ prior and subsequent offences. This database was
used to identify each offender who received an adjourned undertaking
in 2019 and
2020 to analyse their prior offending, as well as each offender who received an
adjourned undertaking in 2015 and 2016
to analyse their reoffending. Each
offender was counted once, at the earliest sentencing event at which they
received an adjourned
undertaking in those two periods (the index sentence).
That allowed for an identical follow-up period for each person.
Appendix 3: Survey
The survey of legal
practitioners and the judiciary was conducted via Survey Monkey. The text below
is not a precise reflection of
the survey’s appearance, but it is a
precise reflection of the survey’s content. Other points to note include:
participants who
selected the last option for questions 2 and 3 were directed to a termination
page because this indicated that they
were not part of the target cohort;
participants
were only asked to respond to question 4 if they indicated that they usually
worked in a mix of the Magistrates’
Court and higher courts;
participants
were only asked to respond to question 6 if they indicated that they usually
worked in regional or rural Victoria; and
participants
were only asked to respond to question 24 if they indicated that there was
usually some non-compliance with undertakings.
Introduction
Thank you for participating. We would like to hear
from you about your experiences with deferrals and adjourned undertakings in
courts in Victoria. We’re seeking your views in relation to your
role as a legal practitioner, police prosecutor or judicial
There are more questions about sentence deferrals than about adjourned
undertakings because court data about adjourned undertakings
comprehensive.
The primary aim of this survey is to enhance our understanding of court data
on deferrals and adjourned undertakings, especially on
deferrals. This survey
does not replace stakeholder consultation. We will be publishing consultation
papers in the middle of the
year, and we will welcome your submissions. You will
also have the opportunity at the end of the survey to provide additional
information
and context to your responses.
This survey should take you about 15 minutes to complete.
Demographic questions
1. What is your email address?
We ask for your email to avoid duplicate responses. We will not use your
email to contact you unless you give us permission at the
end of this survey.
All information you provide is confidential and is anonymised for the
purposes of analysis.
2. Please identify your role in relation to sentencing
I am a judge or
I am a police
I am a legal
practitioner who mainly prosecutes
I am a legal
practitioner who mainly defends
I am a legal
practitioner who prosecutes and defends about equally
In which adult jurisdiction do you usually work?
The County Court
or Supreme Court
Magistrates’ Court
A mix of the
Magistrates’ Court and higher courts
work in the adult jurisdiction
4. Because you work in multiple
answering questions about
sentence deferrals and adjourned undertakings.
Magistrates’
5. In which part of Victoria do you usually work?
Melbourne area
regional Victoria
6. In which justice region do you most often
work? We ask that you please keep this region in mind when answering questions
sentence deferrals and adjourned undertakings.
Barwon South
West (including Geelong and Warrnambool)
(including Morwell and Bairnsdale)
(including Ballarat and Horsham)
Hume (including
Wangaratta and Shepparton)
Loddon Mallee
(including Bendigo and Mildura)
Sentence deferrals under s 83A
*Questions 7–22 are excluded here because
they related exclusively to sentence deferrals.
Adjourned undertakings
Sections 72
Sentencing Act
(Vic) permit courts to sentence someone to an adjourned undertaking for
a period of up to five years. Adjourned undertakings include
conditions of good behaviour and attending court if required, as well as
optional conditions. This section asks about your
experience with adjourned
undertakings.
23. In your experience, how do offenders who receive an adjourned
undertaking usually engage with that sentence?
The offender
complies with all the conditions
The offender
engages positively with the conditions, but there are minor breaches along the
The offender
tries to engage with the requirements, but there are significant breaches
The offender
does not try to engage with the conditions of the adjourned undertaking
Cannot answer
(e.g. because you do not typically see them again)
24. Does that
non-compliance typically involve further offending?
25. In your experience, what works well with adjourned
undertakings as they currently operate?
You can interpret this question as broadly as you like. You may wish to
consider the legislation, court practices, and available support
26. Based on your experience, how would you change the way adjourned
undertakings currently operate? Please explain why you would
make those changes.
You can interpret this question as broadly as you like. You may wish to
consider the legislation, court practices, and available support
Concluding questions
27. Some of the questions in this survey have
asked you to comment on what is common or typical. However, people who belong to
groups might have different experiences with the process of having a
sentence deferred, or be affected differently by the requirements
of deferrals
or adjourned undertakings.
Such groups might include, for example, young adults, women, Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples, people with substance
abuse or mental health
issues, people experiencing homelessness, culturally and linguistically diverse
people, and people in rural
and regional Victoria.
Is there anything else you would like us to know about the different
experiences certain groups might have with sentence deferrals
or adjourned
undertakings?
*Question 28 is excluded here because it related exclusively to sentence
29. Do you have any further comments about deferrals or adjourned
undertakings?
Bibliography
Armita, George Karystianis and Tony Butler,
Text Mining Police Narratives for
Mentions of Mental Disorders in Family and Domestic Violence Events
& Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice no. 629 (Australian Institute of
Criminology, 2021).
Amber Community, ‘Road Trauma Awareness Seminar Calendar’
(rtssv.org.au, 2022)
<https://rtssv.org.au/road-trauma-awareness-seminar-calendar/>.
Auditor General Victoria,
Results of Special Reviews and Other
Investigations
(Victorian Government Printer, 2005).
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Australian and New Zealand Standard
Offence Classification (ANZSOC)
, cat. no. 1234.0 (abs.gov.au, 2011)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/1234.0Contents2011>.
Australian Charities and Not-for-Profits Commission, ‘Search for a
Program’ (acnc.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.acnc.gov.au/charity/programs/map>.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of
Federal Offenders
, Report 103
(Australian Law Reform Commission,
Australian Productivity Commission, Steering Committee for the Review of
Government Service Provision,
Report on Government Services 2022
Table CA.4 (Australian Productivity Commission, 2022).
Australian Productivity Commission,
Australia’s Prison Dilemma:
Research Paper
(Australian Productivity Commission, 2021).
Bell, Charlotte and Dominiek Coates,
The Effectiveness of Interventions
for Perpetrators of Domestic and Family Violence: An Overview of Findings from
(ANROWS, 2022).
Benchimol, Jonathan, Sophia Kazinnik and Yossi Saadon, ‘Text Mining
Methodologies with R: An Application to Central Bank Texts’
Machine Learning with Applications
Berger, Raoul,
Impeachment: The Constitutional Problems
University Press, 1973).
Boyd, Carrie C., ‘Expanding the Arsenal for Sentencing Environmental
Crimes: Would Therapeutic Jurisprudence and Restorative
Justice Work?’
(2008) 32(2)
William and Mary Environmental Law and Policy Review
Bradfield, Rebecca, ‘Sentences Without Conviction: Protecting an
Offender from Unwarranted Discrimination in Employment’
[2015] MonashULawRw 3
(2015) 41(1)
Monash University Law Review
Braithwaite, John, ‘Restorative Justice and Therapeutic
Jurisprudence’
(2002) 38(2)
Criminal Law Bulletin
Clarke, Sophie, Suzie Forell and Emily McCarron,
Fine But Not Fair: Fines
and Disadvantage
, Justice Issues Paper no. 3
(Law and Justice
Foundation of NSW, 2008).
Corrections Victoria,
Corrections Alcohol and Drug Strategy 2015: Overview
(Corrections Victoria, 2015).
Crime Statistics Agency, ‘Year ending 31 December 2020’
(crimestatistics.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.crimestatistics.vic.gov.au/crime-statistics/download-crime-data/year-ending-31-december-2020>.
De Renzio, Paolo and Harika Masud, ‘Measuring and Promoting Budget
Transparency: The Open Budget Index as a Research and Advocacy
(2011) 24(3)
Department of Families, Fairness and Housing,
Disability Services:
Additional Service Delivery Data 2020–21
(Department of Families,
Fairness and Housing, 2021).
Department of Families, Fairness and Housing,
Review of the
Disability Act
: Consultation Paper
(Department of Families, Fairness and Housing,
Department of Justice and Community Safety, ‘Justice Human Research
Ethics Committee’ (justice.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.justice.vic.gov.au/data-and-research/justice-human-research-ethics-committee>.
Department of Justice and Community Safety,
Spent Convictions Act 2021
Factsheet – December 2021
(Department of Justice and Community Safety,
Department of Justice (NI),
Sentencing Review Northern Ireland: A Public
Consultation
(Department of Justice of Northern Ireland, 2019).
Department of Social Services,
Principles to Determine the
Responsibilities of the NDIS and Other Service Systems
(Department of Social
Services, 2015).
Department of the Attorney General (WA),
Statutory Review of the
Sentencing Act 1995
(Department of the Attorney General, 2013).
Donnelly, Neil and Lily Trimboli,
The Nature of Bail Breaches in NSW
Crime and Justice Statistics Issue Brief no. 133 (NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics
and Research, 2018).
Edwards, William and Christopher Hensley, ‘Restructuring Sex Offender
Sentencing: A Therapeutic Jurisprudence Approach to the
Criminal Justice
Process’ (2001) 45(6)
International Journal of Offender Therapy and
Comparative Criminology
Erickson, Bonnie H., ‘Some Problems of Inference from Chain Data’
(1979) 10(1)
Sociological Methodology
Fairfax Media Australia, ‘Court Poor Box Gives Rich Solace to
(8 July 2002),
<https://www.theage.com.au/national/court-poor-box-gives-rich-solace-to-needy-20020708-gduded.html>.
Fox, Richard and Arie Freiberg, ‘Sentences Without Conviction: From
Status to Contract in Sentencing’
(1989) 13(5)
Criminal Law Journal
Freiberg, Arie, ‘Drug Courts: Sentencing Responses to Drug Use and
Drug-Related Crime’
[2002] AltLawJl 99
(2002) 27(6)
Alternative Law Journal
Freiberg, Arie,
Fox and Freiberg’s Sentencing: State and Federal Law
in Victoria
(3rd ed., Thomson Reuters, 2014).
Freiberg, Arie,
Pathways to Justice: Sentencing Review 2002
(Department of Justice, 2002).
Freiberg, Arie and Monica Pfeffer, ‘The Poor Box: A Charitable
Disposition?’
(1989) 14(5)
Legal Service Bulletin
Gelb, Karen,
Understanding Family Violence Court Proceedings: The Impact
of Family Violence on the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
Commission into Family Violence, 2016).
Gile, Krista J., Isabelle S. Beaudry, Mark S. Handcock and Miles Q. Ott,
‘Methods for Inference from Respondent-Driven Sampling
Data’ (2018)
Annual Review of Statistics and its Application
Heckathorn, D. Douglas, ‘Respondent-Driven Sampling: A New Approach to
the Study of Hidden Populations’
(1997) 44(2)
Social Problems
Hueston, Jamey and Kevin Burke, ‘Exporting Drug-Court Concepts to
Traditional Courts: A Roadmap to an Effective Therapeutic
Court’ (2016)
Court Review
Jones, Glyn and Jenny Talbot, ‘No One Knows: The Bewildering Passage of
Offenders with Learning Disability and Learning Difficulty
Through the Criminal
Justice System’ (2010) 20(1)
Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health
Jones, Michael D., ‘Mainstreaming Therapeutic Jurisprudence into the
Traditional Courts: Suggestions for Judges and Practitioners’
(2012) 5(4)
Phoenix Law Review
Judicial College of Victoria, ‘Motivational Interviewing’
(judicialcollege.vic.edu.au, 2020)
<https://www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/programs-and-events/motivational-interviewing>.
King, Michael, ‘New Directions in the Courts’ Response to Drug
and Alcohol Related Legal Problems: Interdisciplinary Collaboration
Collaboration with Defendants’ (2012) 6
Phoenix Law Review
King, Michael, ‘What Can Mainstream Courts Learn from Problem-Solving
[2007] AltLawJl 17
(2007) 32(2)
Alternative Law Journal
Evaluation of the Drug Court of Victoria: Final Report
Laub, John H. and Robert J. Sampson, ‘Understanding Desistance from
Crime’ (2001) 28
Crime and Justice
MacKenzie, Brian, ‘The Judge is the Key Component: The Importance of
Procedural Fairness in Drug-Treatment Courts’ (2016)
Court Review
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Annual Report 2011–2012
(Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, 2012).
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Annual Report 2014–2015
(Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, 2015).
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Annual Report 2020–2021
(Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, 2021).
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, ‘Bail Support (CISP)’
(mcv.vic.gov.au, 2019)
<https://www.mcv.vic.gov.au/find-support/bail-support-cisp>.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, ‘Practice Directions’
(mcv.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.mcv.vic.gov.au/practice-directions>.
Marder, Ian and Jose Pina-Sánchez, ‘Nudge the Judge? Theorising
the Interaction Between Heuristics, Sentencing Guidelines
and Sentence
Clustering’ (2020) 20(4)
Criminology & Criminal Justice
Ministry of Justice (NZ),
Good Behaviour Bonds: Evidence Brief
Zealand Ministry of Justice, 2016).
National Disability Insurance Agency, ‘Justice System’, NDIS
(ndis.gov.au, 2021)
<https://ourguidelines.ndis.gov.au/how-ndis-supports-work-menu/justice-system>.
NSW Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing – Patterns and Statistics:
Companion Report 139-A
(NSW Law Reform Commission, 2013).
NSW Sentencing Council,
Good Behaviour Bonds and Non-Conviction Orders
(NSW Sentencing Council, 2011).
O’Byrne, Paula, ‘Therapeutic Jurisprudence and the Sentencing of
Family Violence Offenders: Does the Sentencing “Bottle”
in Victoria
Need to Change?’ (2016) 1(1)
International Journal of Therapeutic
Jurisprudence
Ogloff, James R. P., Michael Davis, George Rivers and Stuart Ross,
Identification of Mental Disorders in the Criminal Justice System
& Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice no. 334 (Australian Institute of
Criminology, 2007).
Old Collegians Association, ‘The Finian Foundation’
(stbedes.catholic.edu.au, 2022)
<https://www.stbedes.catholic.edu.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Finian-Foundation.pdf>.
Parliament of Australia, ‘Records of the Parliamentary Commission of
Inquiry’ (aph.gov.au, 2016)
<https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Chamber_documents/Tabled_Papers/Parliamentary_Commission>.
Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Inquiry into Access to and
Interaction with the Justice System by People with an Intellectual Disability
and Their Families and Carers
(Parliament of Victoria, 2013).
Parliament of Victoria, Legal and Social Issues Committee,
Inquiry into
Victoria’s Criminal Justice System
(Parliament of Victoria, 2022).
Pearce, Dennis and Robert Geddes,
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
(8th ed., LexisNexis Butterworths, 2014).
Perlin, Michael L. and Alison J. Lynch, ‘“Some Mother’s
Child Has Gone Astray”: Neuroscientific Approaches
to a Therapeutic
Jurisprudence Model of Juvenile Sentencing’ (2021) 59(3)
Family Court
Poynton, Suzanne, Don Weatherburn and Lorana Bartels, ‘Good Behaviour
Bonds and Re-offending: The Effect of Bond Length’
(2014) 47(1)
Australian & New Zealand Journal of Criminology
Prakash, Saikrishna and Steven D. Smith, ‘Reply: (Mis)understanding
Good-Behavior Tenure’
[2006] YaleLawJl 70
(2006) 116(1)
Yale Law Journal
Queensland Law Reform Commission,
A Review of the
Peace and Good Behaviour
: Discussion Paper
(Queensland Law Reform Commission, 2005).
Scottish Sentencing Council,
Principles and Purposes of Sentencing:
Sentencing Guideline
(Scottish Sentencing Council, 2018).
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the Higher
Courts’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/sentencing-outcomes-higher-courts>.
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the
Magistrates’ Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/sentencing-outcomes-magistrates-court>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Animal Cruelty Offences in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2019).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Third Monitoring
Report (Post-Guideline Judgment)
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2016).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Contravention of Family Violence Intervention
Orders and Safety Notices: Prior Offences and Reoffending
(Sentencing
Advisory Council, 2016).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Gender Differences in Sentencing Outcomes
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2010).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
The Imposition and Enforcement of Court Fines
and Infringement Penalties in Victoria: Report
(Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reoffending by Children and Young People in
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2016).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reoffending Following Sentence in Victoria: A
Statistical Overview
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2015).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Restitution and Compensation Orders: Issues
and Options Paper
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2018).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Restitution and Compensation Orders: Report
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2018).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Secondary Offences in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2017).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentence Appeals in Victoria: Second
Statistical Research Report
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2018)
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Family Violence
Intervention Orders and Safety Notices: Third Monitoring Report
(Sentencing
Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Personal Safety
Intervention Orders in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Sex Offences in Victoria: An
Analysis of Three Sentencing Reforms
(Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Stalking in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Suspended Sentences and Intermediate
Sentencing Orders: Suspended Sentences Final Report –
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2008).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Swift, Certain and Fair Approaches to
Sentencing Family Violence Offenders: Discussion Paper
(Sentencing Advisory
Council, 2017).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Swift, Certain and Fair Approaches to
Sentencing Family Violence Offenders: Report
(Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Time Served Prison Sentences in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2020).
Spencer, Pauline, ‘From Alternative to the New Normal: Therapeutic
Jurisprudence in the Mainstream’
(2014) 39(4)
Alternative Law Journal
Spencer, Pauline, ‘Strengthening the Web of Accountability: Criminal
Courts and Family Violence Offenders’ (2016) 41(4)
Alternative Law
State of Victoria,
Victorian Budget 2020/21: Putting People First
Budget Paper no. 3: Service Delivery (Department of Treasury and Finance,
State of Victoria,
Whole of Victorian Government Response to the Law
Reform Committee Inquiry into Access to and Interaction with the Justice System
by People with an Intellectual Disability and Their Families and Carers
(Victorian Government, 2013).
Stinson, Jill D., ‘Motivational Interviewing with Court-Ordered
Populations’, in Elizabeth L. Jeglic and Cynthia Calkins
Frontiers in Offender Treatment
(Springer, 2018).
TaskForce, ‘Behaviour Change Program’ (taskforce.org.au, 2022)
<https://taskforce.org.au/education/driver-behaviour-change-program/>.
Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
, Final Report no. 11
(Tasmania Law Reform Institute, 2008).
Treloar, Alexandra, ‘Olam Orchards Australia, Complete Commodity
Management Plead Guilty Over Carwarp Workplace Death’,
December 2020
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-12-18/almond-producer-and-contractor-face-court-on-safety-charges/12995598>.
Trood, Michael D., ‘Judicial Supervision of People Who Have
The ISTJ Blog
(Blog Post, 12 December 2021)
<https://mainstreamtj.com/2021/12/12/judicial-supervision-of-people-who-have-offended/>.
Trood, Michael D., Benjamin L. Spivak, Diane Sivasubramaniam and Stephane
Shepherd, ‘Magistrates’ Experiences of Judicial
Supervision in
Mainstream Courts’ (2022) 31(3)
Journal of Judicial Administration
VACRO, ‘ReConnect’ (vacro.org.au, 2022)
<https://www.vacro.org.au/reconnect>.
VACRO, ‘Second Chance Jobs’ (vacro.org.au, 2022)
<https://www.vacro.org.au/second-chance-jobs>.
Victoria Legal Aid,
Submission to the Parliament of Victoria Law Reform
Committee: Inquiry into Access to and Interaction with the Justice System by
with an Intellectual Disability and Their Families and Carers
(Victoria Legal Aid, 2011).
Victorian Auditor-General,
Administration of Non-Judicial Functions of the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
(Victorian Government Printer, 2007).
Victorian Auditor-General,
Administration of Parole
Government Printer, 2016).
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Defences to Homicide: Final Report
(Victorian Law Reform Commission, 2004).
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Improving the Justice System Response to
Sexual Offences
(Victorian Law Reform Commission, 2021).
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
People with Intellectual Disabilities at
Risk: A Legal Framework for Compulsory Care: Report
(Victorian Law Reform
Commission, 2003).
Victorian Ombudsman,
Investigation into Public Transport Fare Evasion
Enforcement
(Victorian Government Printer, 2016).
Walters, Scott T., Elizabeth Ressler, Latonya Douglas and Faye S. Taxman,
‘Motivational Interviewing in Criminal Justice: A
New Approach to
Addressing Treatment Motivation and Related Behaviours’ (October 2013)
Counselor Magazine-The Magazine for Addiction & Behavioural Health
Professionals
Wei, Zhigang, Hugh M. McDonald and Christine Coumarelos,
Disadvantaged People at a Disadvantage?
Justice Issues Paper no. 27
(Law & Justice Foundation of NSW, 2018).
Wexler, David B., ‘Therapeutic Jurisprudence: An Overview’ (2000)
Cooley Law Review
Wexler, David B., ‘Therapeutic Jurisprudence, Legal Landscapes, and
Form Reform: The Case of Diversion’
(2009) 22(1)
Federal Sentencing
Williams, Mary S. and Robyn Gilbert,
Reducing the Unintended Impacts of
, Current Initiatives Paper no. 2 (Indigenous Justice Clearinghouse,
WorkSafe Victoria,
Work Safe Annual Report 2020–2021
Victoria, 2021).
Bell v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 203
Brittain v Mansour
[2013] VSC 50
[2016] VSCA 279
DPP v Bills
[2019] VCC 98
DPP v Bowen
[2021] VSCA 355
DPP v Ellett
[2016] VCC 1841
DPP v Godfrey
[2020] VSC 197
[2022] VSC 170
DPP v O’Neill
[2015] VSCA 325
DPP v Ortell
[2016] VCC 1459
DPP v Ramirez
[2017] VCC 1898
DPP v Schulz
[2018] VCC 615
DPP v Smith
[2012] VSC 314
DPP v Snow (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VSCA 67
DPP v Sugar
[2020] VSC 338
Markovic & Anor v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 105
[2013] VSC 123
R v Gazdovic
[2002] VSC 588
[2014] VSC 67
R v O’Connor
[1987] VicRp 45
[1987] VR 496
[2015] VSC 188
R v Whincup
[2001] VSC 408
[2018] VSC 361
Re Chatters
[2017] VSC 2
[2018] VSC 559
Re Gloury-Hyde
[2018] VSC 393
[2019] VSC 134
Re Whiteside
[1999] VSC 413
Interstate and overseas
Attorney-General v Smith
[2002] TASSC 10
Badcock v White
[2004] TASSC 59
Blake v Adams
[2013] TASSC 44
Bonde v Ellery
[2016] TASSC 43
Byrne v Mingay
[2014] ACTSC 126
Cannell v Probert
[2017] TASSC 69
Cobiac v Liddy
[1969] HCA 26
Collins v Caccavo
[2015] TASSC 53
Commissioner of Taxation v Doudle
[2005] SASC 442
Curnow v Pryce
[1999] NTSC 116
Davis v Hayward
[1997] NTSC 8
DPP v Cooper
[2017] TASCCA 8
Garling v Firth
[2016] NTSC 41
Hamilton v Hampton
[2007] TASSC 27
[1989] HCA 33
MacPherson v Beath
(1975) 12 SASR 174
Maynard v Lane
[2011] TASSC 33
Moore v Rittman
[2018] TASSC 5
Munro v Hatch
[2011] NFSC 1
Parker v Hall
[2015] TASSC 60
Perkins v Heath
[2017] NTSC 74
[1788] NSWSupC1
[1818] NSWSupC 5
[1800] NSWSupC4
[2004] NSWCCA 258
R v Davoren
[1813] NSWSupC14
[2005] NSWCCA 225
[1794] NSWSupC1
The State (Stanbridge) v Mahon
[1979] IR 214
Legislation and regulations
Bail Act 1977
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes Amendment (Gross Violence Offences) Act 2013
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Disability Act 2006
Drugs, Poisons and Controlled Substances Act 1981
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Justice Legislation Amendment Act 2013
Penalties and Sentences Act 1985
Road Safety Act 1986
Road Safety Rules 2009
Road Safety Rules 2017
Sentencing (Amendment) Act 2003
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing Regulations 2011
Spent Convictions Act 2021
Summary Offences Act 1966
Interstate and overseas
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Amendment (Sentencing Options) Act 2017
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Code,
Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry (Repeal) Act 1986
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Sentencing Act 1995
Sentencing Act 1995
Sentencing Act 1997
Sentencing Act 2002
Sentencing Act 2007
Sentencing Act 2017
Sentencing Act 2020
Quasi-legislative materials
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Direction 25/2006: Guidelines for the Distribution of Court Funds
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 17 April 2013
(Robert Clark, Attorney-General)
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 28 October
2020 (Jill Hennessy, Attorney-General)
Published by the Sentencing Advisory Council
Melbourne, Victoria,
© Copyright State of Victoria, Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022
This publication is protected by the laws of copyright. No part may
reproduced by any process except in accordance with the provisions
ISBN 978-1-925071-69-6 (Online)
Authorised by the Sentencing Advisory Council,
Level 3, 333 Queen Street,
Melbourne VIC 3000
Copyedited and typeset by Catherine Jeffreys AE
, as inserted by
Sentencing (Amendment) Act 2003
and Sentences Act 1985
(Vic) ss 83–89 (repealed).
(with conviction), 75 (without conviction).
Advisory Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the Magistrates’
Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2022).
Fox and Freiberg’s Sentencing: State and Federal Law in
(3rd ed., 2014) 668. See also NSW Sentencing Council,
Behaviour Bonds and Non-Conviction Orders
(2011) 24–25. The New
Zealand Ministry of Justice, however, considers the evidence about the
effectiveness of good behaviour
bonds as a means of reducing crime to be
‘inconclusive’: Ministry of Justice (NZ),
Good Behaviour Bonds:
Evidence Brief
Bradfield, ‘Sentences Without Conviction: Protecting an Offender from
Unwarranted Discrimination in Employment’
[2015] MonashULawRw 3
(2015) 41(1)
University Law Review
, 40. Contra
NSW Sentencing Council (2011),
Investigation into Public Transport Fare Evasion Enforcement
Annual Report 2020–2021
63–64, 135.
Law Reform Commission,
Defences to Homicide: Final Report
(2004) 278;
R v Gazdovic
[2002] VSC 588
DPP v Smith
[2012] VSC 314
[2022] VSC 170.
Advisory Council,
Sentencing Sex Offences in Victoria: An Analysis of Three
Sentencing Reforms
(2021) 36. Adjourned undertakings have also been imposed
for possession of child pornography in unusual circumstances:
[2016] VCC 1459
DPP v Schulz
[2018] VCC 615.
As the Court of Appeal recently observed,
‘[t]hat requirement is – no doubt quite deliberately – almost
to satisfy’:
DPP v Bowen
[2021] VSCA 355
Advisory Council (2021), above n 12, 80–81.
represents cases where the adjourned undertaking was the
in the case. There would also have been some cases where an
adjourned undertaking was imposed alongside a more serious disposition,
imprisonment or a fine (see [3.4]).
Advisory Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the Higher Courts’
(sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2022).
from the Magistrates’ Court to the County Court, which are
appeals, are rarely published.
[2015] VSCA 325
Advisory Council,
Sentence Appeals in Victoria: Second Statistical Research
(2018) 13 (finding that of 230 appeals of criminal decisions in the
higher courts in 2013–14, just 10% (23) were prosecution
[2016] VSCA 279.
[2016] VSCA 279
, [36], [85].
[2016] VSCA 279
, [40], [85]–[88].
(Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
Sentencing Act 1995
Penalties and
Sentences Act 1992
Sentencing Act 2017
Sentencing Act 1991
To a lesser extent, see
Sentencing Act 1997
(which includes some purposes of
sentencing as purposes of the Act). Sentencing legislation in Western Australia
does not include
a purposes section, and a 2013 review recommended against
introducing one: Department of the Attorney General (WA),
Statutory Review of
Sentencing Act 1995
(2013) 10–12.
(NZ) s 7(1);
Sentencing Act 2020
(E&W) s 57(2);
Criminal Code,
1985, c C-46, s 718; Scottish Sentencing
Principles and Purposes of Sentencing: Sentencing Guideline
(2018) 4. There is ‘no comprehensive statement of the principles and
purposes of sentencing’ in Northern Ireland, but
some have been proposed:
Department of Justice (NI),
Sentencing Review Northern Ireland: A Public
Consultation
(2019) 1, 4–5. And in Ireland, the purposes of sentencing
are specified in common law, not legislation:
The State (Stanbridge) v Mahon
[1979] IR 214.
Sentencing Act 1991
is also the case in Norfolk Island:
Sentencing Act 2007
was a specific amendment in response to a Supreme Court decision: see
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(2014), above n 6, 674, citing
Commissioner of Taxation v Doudle
[2019] VCC 98
, [40]. See also
Munro v Hatch
[2011] NFSC 1
[106]–[108].
[2013] VSC 50
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 17 April 2013, 1264 (Robert
Clark, Attorney-General).
[2013] TASSC 44
Collins v Caccavo
[2015] TASSC 53
[2015] TASSC 60
Bonde v Ellery
[2016] TASSC 43
[2017] TASSC 69
Moore v Rittman
[2018] TASSC 5
[2007] TASSC 27
Badcock v White
[2004] TASSC 59
Attorney-General v Smith
[2002] TASSC 10.
(2014), above n 6, 675.
675–676 (citations omitted). Contra
Curnow v Pryce
[1999] NTSC 116
[17] (finding that although the offence was typical, it was nevertheless
[2017] TASCCA 8
[1997] NTSC 8
[1969] HCA 26
Markovic & Anor v The Queen
[2010] VSCA
DPP v Snow (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VSCA 67
; Freiberg (2014), above n 6,
Youth and Families Act 2005
2011, 9,534 were imposed as the principal sentence, and 905 were imposed
alongside a more severe sentence.
2019, 15,970 were imposed as the principal sentence, and 1,081 were imposed
alongside a more severe sentence.
the same period that adjourned undertakings increased in prevalence (2015 to
2019), imprisonment also increased, from 6.3% to 10.5%,
whereas fines decreased
from 57.1% to 50.5%, and community orders decreased from 10.5% to 9.1%.
represents 118,056 of 126,675 adjourned undertakings.
sentence types include drug treatment orders and suspended sentences. The
abolition of suspended sentences in 2013 and 2014 explains
their decline since
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Time Served Prison Sentences in Victoria
(2020) 7, 9.
is when courts most reliably started recording pre-sentence detention in cases
receiving imprisonment.
Sentencing Act 1991
stipulates that where an offender receives a sentence of imprisonment,
‘any period during which he or she was held in
custody’ in relation
to the offending must be ‘reckoned as a period of imprisonment ... already
the remaining 32% of cases in which an offender received imprisonment and an
adjourned undertaking (271 cases), 6% of offenders
had not spent any time on
remand before receiving imprisonment and an adjourned undertaking (53 cases), 6%
received total effective
than the amount of time served
(51 cases), and 19% received a prison sentence longer than the amount of time
they had spent on remand
(167 cases).
Advisory Council (2020), above n 47, 17 (finding that in 2017–18, 20% of
prison sentences in Victoria were time served
prison sentences).
account for some discrepancies in data recording, the Council considers a prison
sentence to be a time served prison sentence if
the amount of pre-sentence
detention recorded by the court is three days more or less than the total
effective sentence.
‘Second Chance Jobs’ (vacro.org.au, 2022).
‘ReConnect’ (vacro.org.au, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council (2020), above n 47, 8.
a point of comparison, sentencing legislation in New Zealand goes one step
further and specifically lists the types of sentences
that can be combined:
Sentencing Act 2002
s 20(1)(b).
for example, the Council’s three recent reports on stalking and breaches
of intervention orders: Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of
Personal Safety Intervention Orders in Victoria
(2022) 21, 31, 71;
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Stalking in Victoria
45–46; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Family
Violence Intervention Orders and Safety Notices: Third Monitoring Report
(2022) 22–23, 30–31.
of the Supreme Court cases have publicly available sentencing remarks:
[2012] VSC 314
(negligent manslaughter);
(incitement to cause serious injury);
[2014] VSC 67
(possession of an unregistered firearm);
[2015] VSC 188
(assisting offender);
DPP v Godfrey
[2020] VSC 197
(reckless conduct
endangering serious injury);
DPP v Sugar
[2020] VSC 338
on age was available for 122,696 of 126,675 adjourned undertakings.
of those aged 90 and over received adjourned undertakings for driving offences;
however, four were sentenced for unlawful assault
and two were sentenced for
indecent assault.
on gender was available for 125,994 of 126,675 adjourned undertakings.
2011 and 2020, 190,785 of the 853,360 offenders sentenced in the
Magistrates’ Court were female.
[2020] VSC 338
(attempted murder).
[2016] VCC 1841
(dangerous driving causing death).
Advisory Council,
Gender Differences in Sentencing Outcomes
offence types are based on the Australian Bureau of Statistics’ offence
classification system: Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Australian and New
Zealand Standard Offence Classification System (ANZSOC),
cat no. 1234.0
(abs.gov.au, 2011). Some of the category descriptions have been simplified.
on offence type was not available or reliable for 667 of 118,056 adjourned
undertakings that were principal sentences. Adjourned
undertakings imposed with
more serious sentence types are not included.
Safety Act 1986
Safety Rules 2009
(Vic) r 20 (repealed), as replaced by
Road Safety Rules
(Vic) r 20.
Sentencing Council (2011), above n 6, 29–30. Note, however, that in 2012,
assault and injury offences were the most serious
offences in cases receiving
section 9 good behaviour bonds in New South Wales (33% of cases), and traffic
related offences were the
second most common (18%): NSW Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing – Patterns and Statistics: Companion Report 139-A
Offences Act 1966
Violence Protection Act 2008
This does not include other forms of theft under
, such as theft of or from a motor vehicle.
Safety Act 1986
Poisons and Controlled Substances Act 1981
This does not include
other drug possession offences under
, such as possession of
amphetamine or cocaine.
of these may have been adjourned bonds pursuant to
Poisons and Controlled Substances Act 1981
(Vic), which allows or encourages
a court to impose an adjourned undertaking without conviction pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) for possession of small
quantities of cannabis.
is most likely in the context of less predatory offending involving offenders
aged 17 to 21 and victims in the upper end of the
age range: see Sentencing
Advisory Council (2021), above n 12, 50.
is the first full calendar year for which family violence flags were
Karen Gelb,
Understanding Family Violence Court Proceedings: The Impact of
Family Violence on the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
(2016) 1 fn
Advisory Council,
Swift, Certain and Fair Approaches to Sentencing Family
Violence Offenders: Discussion Paper
for example, Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Family
Violence Intervention Orders and Safety Notices: Third Monitoring Report
(2022) 59–60.
Charlotte Bell and Dominiek Coates,
The Effectiveness of
Interventions for Perpetrators of Domestic and Family Violence: An Overview of
Findings from Reviews
(2022) 2 (‘Of 29 reviews that assessed the
effectiveness of behaviour change interventions for a reduction in DFV/IPV, only
one concluded that the intervention works’).
the exception of gender, discussed above at [4.3] and [4.5], data on the
prevalence of these other groups among those who receive
adjourned undertakings
is either unavailable or unreliable and cannot be reported here.
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(the maximum length
was previously five years with conviction, but that was reduced to two years by
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Amendment (Sentencing Options) Act 2017
(NSW) ss 9, 31;
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Sentencing Act 2017
(the maximum length was previously
three years until the enactment of the new 2017 sentencing legislation);
Sentencing Act 1995
Sentencing Act 1997
Sentencing Act 1995
ss 11(1)(a)
(Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes Act 1914
19B(1)(d)(i)
393 of 126,545 adjourned undertakings were longer than 24 months.
on length was available for 126,545 of 126,675 adjourned undertakings.
Poynton et al., ‘Good Behaviour Bonds and Re-offending: The Effect of Bond
(2014) 47(1)
Australian & New Zealand Journal of
Criminology
, 29 (‘The length of bonds ... tends to be grouped into
discrete categories ... i.e. 6, 9, 12, 18, 24, 36 months’).
Marder and Jose Pina-Sánchez, ‘Nudge the Judge? Theorising the
Interaction Between Heuristics, Sentencing Guidelines
and Sentence
Clustering’ (2020) 20(4)
Criminology & Criminal Justice
While they focused their discussion on the clustering of
lengths, the same logic applies to any sentence that is to last for a specified
et al. (2014), above n 91, 29.
[2012] VSC 314.
remarks are not publicly available for the two cases in the County Court.
[2017] VCC 1898.
et al. (2014), above n 91, 36–37.
[1989] HCA 33
[2005] NSWCCA 225
, sch 2 cl 1(d). During the period of an adjourned
undertaking, a person is ‘serving a sentence’.
[2018] VSC 361
s 4AA(2)(c)
, sch 2 cl 1.
[2018] VSC 559
Gloury-Hyde
[2018] VSC 393
, [30]–[36];
[2018] VSC 559
[2019] VSC 134
[2018] VSC 559
, [64], quoting
Re Whiteside
[1999] VSC 413
for example, John H. Laub and Robert J. Sampson, ‘Understanding Desistance
from Crime’ (2001) 28
Crime and Justice
ss 72(2)(a)
(2)(a)–(b).
s 70(1)(a).
Spencer, ‘Strengthening the Web of Accountability: Criminal Courts and
Family Violence Offenders’ (2016) 41(4)
Alternative Law Journal
225. See also Sentencing Advisory Council,
Swift, Certain and Fair
Approaches to Sentencing Family Violence Offenders: Report
44–62 (on increasing the use of judicial monitoring of family violence
offenders on CCOs).
ss 72(2)(a)
ss 72(2)(c)
B. Wexler, ‘Therapeutic Jurisprudence: An Overview’ (2000) 17(1)
Cooley Law Review
for example, John Braithwaite, ‘Restorative Justice and Therapeutic
Jurisprudence’
(2002) 38(2)
Criminal Law Bulletin
Indeed, one
of the specific legislated purposes of a sentence deferral in Victoria is to
allow a restorative justice process to occur:
Sentencing Act 1991
83A(1A)(d).
C. Boyd, ‘Expanding the Arsenal for Sentencing Environmental Crimes: Would
Therapeutic Jurisprudence and Restorative
Justice Work?’ (2008) 32(2)
William and Mary Environmental Law and Policy Review
King, ‘New Directions in the Courts’ Response to Drug and Alcohol
Related Legal Problems: Interdisciplinary Collaboration
and Collaboration with
Defendants’ (2012) 6
Phoenix Law Review
917; Jamey Hueston and
Kevin Burke, ‘Exporting Drug-Court Concepts to Traditional Courts: A
Roadmap to an Effective Therapeutic
Court’ (2016) 52(1)
Court Review
Edwards and Christopher Hensley, ‘Restructuring Sex Offender Sentencing: A
Therapeutic Jurisprudence Approach to the
Criminal Justice Process’ (2001)
International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology
646; Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Improving the Justice System
Response to Sexual Offences
(2021) 184–212.
L. Perlin and Alison J. Lynch, ‘“Some Mother’s Child Has Gone
Astray”: Neuroscientific Approaches
to a Therapeutic Jurisprudence Model
of Juvenile Sentencing’ (2021) 59(3)
Family Court Review
Spencer, ‘From Alternative to the New Normal: Therapeutic Jurisprudence in
the Mainstream’
(2014) 39(4)
Alternative Law Journal
King, ‘What Can Mainstream Courts Learn from Problem-Solving
[2007] AltLawJl 17
(2007) 32(2)
Alternative Law Journal
; Michael D. Jones,
‘Mainstreaming Therapeutic Jurisprudence into the Traditional Courts:
Suggestions for Judges and Practitioners’
(2012) 5(4)
Phoenix Law
D. Trood, ‘Judicial Supervision of People Who Have Offended’,
(12 December 2021).
D. Trood et al., ‘Magistrates’ Experiences of Judicial Supervision
in Mainstream Courts’ (2022) 31(3)
Journal of Judicial
Administration
s 18ZF(1)(b).
Attending Drug Court as required has been a
core condition for more than 20 years: see, for example, Arie Freiberg,
‘Drug Courts:
Sentencing Responses to Drug Use and Drug-Related
[2002] AltLawJl 99
(2002) 27(6)
Alternative Law Journal
Evaluation of the Drug Court of Victoria: Final Report
(2014) 18, 19
(noting that ‘Court Review Hearings’ were weekly, fortnightly or
(2014), above n 125, 67.
T. Walters et al., ‘Motivational Interviewing in Criminal Justice: A New
Approach to Addressing Treatment Motivation and
Related Behaviours’
Counselor Magazine: The Magazine for Addiction & Behavioural Health
Professionals
(October 2013) 49. See also Jill D. Stinson,
‘Motivational Interviewing with Court-Ordered Populations’, in
L. Jeglic and Cynthia Calkins (eds),
New Frontiers in Offender
(2018). The Council also heard during consultation from a number
of stakeholders that judicial supervision hearings can be a useful
holding correctional staff and service providers accountable if a person has not
been placed on a particular program yet.
Magistrates’
Court Observation (February 2022).
MacKenzie, ‘The Judge Is the Key Component: The Importance of Procedural
Fairness in Drug-Treatment Courts’ (2016)
Court Review
(citations omitted).
Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Third Monitoring Report
(Post-Guideline Judgment)
Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Personal Safety Intervention Orders
in Victoria
(2022) 58. See also Sentencing Advisory Council,
Stalking in Victoria
(2022) 50 (18% of CCOs); Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Family Violence Intervention Orders and Safety
Notices: Third Monitoring Report
(2022) 70 (16% of CCOs); Sentencing
Advisory Council,
Animal Cruelty Offences in Victoria
(2019) 37 (10% of
et al. (2022), above n 123, 136. Trood et al. recommend further research into
the optimal scheduling of review hearings.
Judicial College of Victoria did, though, host a two-day workshop on
motivational interviewing for judicial officers in late 2020:
Judicial College
of Victoria, ‘Motivational Interviewing’
(judicialcollege.vic.edu.au, 2020).
with Judicial College of Victoria (30 March 2022).
ss 72(2)(b)
[1788] NSWSupC1;
[1794] NSWSupC1;
[1800] NSWSupC4;
R v Davoren
[1813] NSWSupC14;
[1818] NSWSupC 5.
(2014), above n 6, 686 (‘This concept is poorly defined’); NSW
Sentencing Council
(2011), above n 6, 56 (‘the concept of
“good behaviour” is ill defined’).
Law Reform Commission,
A Review of the
Peace and Good Behaviour Act 1982
Discussion Paper
not comparable, there have been arguments that the constitutional requirement
for judicial officers to be of good behaviour
in both the United States and
Australia means more than simply not committing an offence: Raoul Berger,
Impeachment: The Constitutional Problems
(1973); Saikrishna Prakash and
Steven D. Smith, ‘Reply: (Mis)understanding Good-Behavior Tenure’
[2006] YaleLawJl 70
(2006) 116(1)
Yale Law Journal
; see the ‘Class B
documents’ of the federal parliamentary inquiry into Justice Murphy of the
Higher Court, as defined
section 6(6)
Parliamentary Commission of
Inquiry (Repeal) Act 1986
(Cth): Parliament of Australia, ‘Records of
the Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry’ (aph.gov.au, 2016).
ss 72(2)(c)
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Sentencing Act 2017
Penalties and Sentences
Sentencing Act 1995
Crimes Act 1914
ss 19B(1)(d)(iii)
(1)(a)(iv);
Sentencing Act
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(albeit there are some restrictions in New South Wales, such as prohibiting a
work condition and an
electronic monitoring condition).
Sentencing Council (2011), above n 6, 42.
is the period for which the Magistrates’ Court was able to provide the
Council with an exhaustive account of conditions
attached to all adjourned
undertakings.
Community, ‘Road Trauma Awareness Seminar Calendar’ (rtssv.org.au,
appropriate cases, courts usually award costs pursuant to
section 401
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic). However, as the example adjourned
undertaking form in Figure 17 seems to suggest, the award of costs can be a
condition of
an adjourned undertaking.
that many undertakings included two or more optional conditions, such as a
donation to the Court Fund as well as participating
in a behaviour change
program, which is why the percentages add up to more than 100%.
ss 72(2)(c)
[2004] NSWCCA 258
, [61], cited with approval in the Northern
Territory, the Australian Capital Territory and Tasmania:
Perkins v Heath
[2017] NTSC 74
Garling v Firth
[2016] NTSC 41
, [33]–[36];
Byrne v Mingay
[2014] ACTSC 126
, [109]–[110]; to a lesser extent
(only the second principle),
Maynard v Lane
[2011] TASSC 33
Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal
, Report 103
(2006) 245.
Sentencing Council (2011), above n 6, 56.
ss 72(2)(c)
(2)(c). There were some cases where the court
imposed a condition that was earmarked for a particular charity (like a
charitable donation)
but the money was ordered to be paid to the court (like the
Court Fund). This option, while not particularly common, could be one
avoiding the disproportionate tax deduction for wealthier offenders when they
themselves make the payment to the charity,
while also ensuring the offender has
a clear understanding about the final destination of the funds.
Sentencing Act 2017
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Sentencing Act 1995
s 11(1)(c).
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Sentencing Act 1995
Penalties and Sentences
[2013] VSC 50
, [6], [41], [44], [57].
Legislation Amendment Act 2013
–(3), amending
Sentencing Act 1991
ss 72(2)(c)
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 17 April 2013, 1264 (Robert
Clark, Attorney-General). The
Justice Legislation Amendment Act 2013
(Vic) also amended the definition of
Sentencing Act
(Vic) to make it clear that court-ordered donations are not to be
characterised as a monetary penalty.
Law Reform Commission (2006), above n 151, 245–247.
Wei et al.,
Fines: Are Disadvantaged People at a Disadvantage?
Issues Paper no. 27
(2018); Sophie Clarke et al.,
Fine but Not Fair:
Fines and Disadvantage
, Justice Issues Paper no. 3
S. Williams and Robyn Gilbert,
Reducing the Unintended Impacts of Fines
Current Initiatives Paper no. 2 (2011); Meeting with Victorian Aboriginal Legal
Service (22 December 2021).
Advisory Council,
The Imposition and Enforcement of Court Fines and
Infringement Penalties in Victoria: Report
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 17 April 2013, 1264 (Robert
Clark, Attorney-General).
not shown in Table 1, there were 18 cases with conditions requiring a donation
to Edgars Mission Farm Sanctuary, totalling $7,560.
not shown in Table 1, there were 10 cases with conditions requiring a donation
to the Mittagundi Outdoor Education Centre, totalling
Collegians Association, ‘The Finian Foundation’
(stbedes.catholic.edu.au, 2022). Unusually, despite the locations
Bede’s’ campuses (Mentone, Bentleigh East and Phillip Island), many
of these donations were imposed in northern
regional courts such as Shepparton,
Cobram and Wodonga.
Alexandra Treloar, ‘Olam Orchards Australia, Complete Commodity Management
Plead Guilty over Carwarp Workplace Death’,
(18 December
Charities and Not-for-Profits Commission, ‘Search for a Program’
(acnc.gov.au, 2022).
addition to the two standard donation conditions – donating directly to a
particular charity or to the Court Fund –
there were also a handful of
cases where offenders were ordered to pay money to the court registrar for
distribution to a specific
charitable organisation.
Freiberg and Monica Pfeffer, ‘The Poor Box: A Charitable
Disposition?’
(1989) 14(5)
Legal Service Bulletin
General Victoria,
Results of Special Reviews and Other Investigations
(2005) 109.
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria,
Annual Report 2014–2015
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria,
Annual Report 2011–2012
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria,
Annual Report 2020–2021
and Pfeffer (1989), above n 171, 219.
Media Australia, ‘Court Poor Box Gives Rich Solace to Needy’,
(8 July 2002).
Auditor-General,
Administration of Non-Judicial Functions of the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
47 fn 2, citing Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Practice Direction
25/2006: Guidelines for the Distribution of Court Funds
Auditor-General
Administration of Non-Judicial Functions of the Magistrates’
Court of Victoria
(2007) 47. The Auditor-General found that there was
‘a lack of formal policy on how the Court fund should be administered, and
a lack of reporting and accountability for funds provided to charities’,
that ‘junior court administrative staff effectively
had discretion over
who received assistance and how much’, and that there was
‘inadequate documentary evidence for many
Court fund payments’. The
Auditor-General recommended that the Magistrates’ Court and Department of
Justice ‘consider
alternative methods to administer the Court fund’,
such as ‘the outsourcing of the function’: ibid, 3, 50.
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria, ‘Practice Directions’ (mcv.vic.gov.au,
is a specific ‘Court Fund Application’ form, a copy of which the
Court sent to the Council, but that form does not
seem to be publicly available,
so it is not clear how organisations would become aware of this funding
from Magistrates’ Court of Victoria (18 May 2022).
de Renzio and Harika Masud, ‘Measuring and Promoting Budget Transparency:
The Open Budget Index as a Research and Advocacy
Tool’ (2011) 24(3)
607, 608–609.
Another possibly appropriate purpose of sentencing that
could be achieved by the imposition of a donation condition exists in
other than Victoria, in particular, ‘to recognise the harm
done to the victim of the crime and the community’: see, for
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(Sentencing) Act 2005
and Pfeffer (1989), above n 171, 220.
course, as was observed in 1989 (and which seems to remain apt today):
‘one wonders how many offenders are actually aware
of the destination of
the funds’: ibid.
(definition of
justice plan condition
80(1)(a). See also
section 44A(1)(b)(ii)
requiring mandatory treatment and
monitoring orders to include either a treatment and rehabilitation condition or
a justice plan
s 81(2)(a).
ss 82(2)(a)
, (d), (3). The
Sentencing Regulations 2011
(Vic) sch 1 specifies the prescribed form (Form 2) of an application for
review of a justice plan condition.
(definition of
justice plan condition
of Victoria,
Victorian Budget 2020/21: Putting People First
, Budget Paper
no. 3: Service Delivery (2021) 227; Department of Families, Fairness and
Disability Services: Additional Service Delivery Data 2020–21
with Department of Families, Fairness and Housing (17 January 2022). The DFFH
further advised that this is largely because
they only have one forensic
psychologist on staff to conduct these assessments and prepare these service
advised that sometimes these processes will take less than three months, and
sometimes they will take longer.
Section 80(3)
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) states that courts considering a justice plan condition may request a
pre-sentence report (which is prepared by Corrections
Victoria pursuant to
sections 8A
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic)), a statement of
intellectual disability and a program of available services. The period can be
reduced to six weeks if the
person has been assessed on a previous occasion as
having an intellectual disability. In 2011, Victoria Legal Aid highlighted a
in which the assessment took so long while the offender was on remand that
the magistrate imposed a time served prison sentence,
resulting in the offender
being ‘released without a justice plan, any accommodation or services in
place to support him in
the community’: Victoria Legal Aid,
to the Parliament of Victoria Law Reform Committee: Inquiry into Access to and
Interaction with the Justice System by People
with an Intellectual Disability
and Their Families and Carers
(2011) 10. In 2013, a parliamentary committee
recommended improving times for these assessments and the proper resourcing of
and DJCS to that end: Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Inquiry into Access to and Interaction with the Justice System by People with
an Intellectual Disability and Their Families and Carers
309–312 (Recommendation 42). Therefore, while there are some cases where
the delay is due to the person being assessed
– see, for example,
[2017] VSC 2
, [16] – it appears to more often be a question
of available resources.
s 80(3)(b).
This includes ‘in relation to a person over
the age of 5 years ... the concurrent existence of—(a) significant
sub-average
general intellectual functioning; and (b) significant deficits in
adaptive behaviour—each of which became manifest before the
Disability Act 2006
(definition of
intellectual disability
Law Reform Commission,
People with Intellectual Disabilities at Risk: A Legal
Framework for Compulsory Care: Report
(2003) 126–127 (‘There is
no logical reason for limiting the availability of justice plans to people with
an intellectual
disability’).
Legal Aid (2011), above n 198, 19. Victoria Legal Aid also included a case study
of an offender for whom engagement with
Disability Services had successfully
interrupted his cycle of offending: ibid 7.
of Victoria, Law Reform Committee (2013), above n 198, 309–312
(Recommendation 42).
of Victoria,
Whole of Victorian Government Response to the Law Reform
Committee Inquiry into Access to and Interaction with the Justice System
People with an Intellectual Disability and Their Families and Carers
of Victoria, Legal and Social Issues Committee,
Inquiry into Victoria’s
Criminal Justice System
(2022) 559–560
of Families, Fairness and Housing,
Review of the
Disability Act 2006
Consultation Paper
(2021) 36–37, 62.
inserted by
Crimes Amendment (Gross Violence Offences) Act 2013
NDIS provides support to people serving a community order: National Disability
Insurance Agency, ‘Justice System’,
NDIS (ndis.gov.au, 2021). See
also Department of Social Services,
Principles to Determine the
Responsibilities of the NDIS and Other Service Systems
[2001] VSC 408
[2013] VSC 123
DPP v Smith
[2012] VSC 314
2019 and 2020, a total of $1,436,811 in compensation was ordered in cases
involving adjourned undertakings, with $1,205,852 of
that amount being via
ancillary compensation orders pursuant to section 85AB of the
Sentencing Act
(Vic), and the remaining $230,959 being ordered as optional conditions
of the adjourned undertaking itself. On compensation orders
generally, see
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Restitution and Compensation Orders: Issues and
Options Paper
(2018); Sentencing Advisory Council,
Restitution and
Compensation Orders: Report
2019 and 2020, a total of $201,386 in costs was ordered: $120,934 in 2019 and
$80,452 in 2020.
is often a condition of an ancillary ‘control order’ in animal
cruelty cases: see Sentencing Advisory Council (2019),
above n 132,
example, Rumblara provides support for First Nations peoples and communities
affected by gambling, the Victorian Aboriginal Health
Service addresses the
specific medical needs of Victorian Indigenous communities, the Kurnai Youth
young people who are homeless or at risk
of homelessness, Stronger Families is an integrated placement, prevention and
family reunification
service run by Mallee District Aboriginal Services,
Ramahyuck is a leading provider of primary health care and related social and
family support services to Aboriginal people in the Gippsland region, and Winda
Marra is a community-controlled organisation in South
West Victoria with a key
focus on providing Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples with access to
culturally appropriate services
and community activities. Each of these services
was specified in one or more conditions of adjourned undertakings over the
(2014), above n 6, 689. For instance, in
MacPherson v Beath
, a court held that a condition requiring an offender to be
‘courteous’ was ‘bad for several reasons’, including
that it was ‘uncertain’ and ‘oppressive’: at 180.
ss 29(1)(b)
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria, ‘Bail Support (CISP)’ (mcv.vic.gov.au,
for example, Corrections Victoria,
Corrections Alcohol and Drug Strategy
2015: Overview
(2015) 12 (on funding for alcohol or drug treatment
for example, Victorian Auditor-General,
Administration of Parole
‘Behaviour Change Program’ (taskforce.org.au, 2022).
for example, David B. Wexler, ‘Therapeutic Jurisprudence, Legal
Landscapes, and Form Reform: The Case of Diversion’
(2009) 22(1)
Federal Sentencing Reporter
for example, James R. P. Ogloff et al.,
The Identification of Mental
Disorders in the Criminal Justice System
, Trends & Issues in Crime and
Criminal Justice no. 334 (2007); Glyn Jones and Jenny Talbot, ‘No One
Knows: The Bewildering
Passage of Offenders with Learning Disability and
Learning Difficulty Through the Criminal Justice System’ (2010) 20(1)
Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health
for example,
R v O’Connor
[1987] VicRp 45
[1987] VR 496
v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 203
for example, Paula O’Byrne, ‘Therapeutic Jurisprudence and the
Sentencing of Family Violence Offenders: Does the
“Bottle” in Victoria Need to Change?’ (2016) 1(1)
International Journal of Therapeutic Jurisprudence
court must not impose a fine unless it considers that the purpose or purposes
for which the sentence is imposed cannot be
achieved by a dismissal, discharge
or adjournment’:
Sentencing Act 1991
for example, TaskForce (2022), above n 218.
undertakings might be conceptualised as falling into two categories, one with
more onerous conditions and one with less
onerous conditions. In that sense,
there may be some utility in considering the introduction of a mid-tier
community order between
community correction orders and adjourned undertakings;
however, preliminary consultation did not reveal much appetite for this
would likely require a consequential amendment of merging
sections 7(1)(g)
(1)(i) of the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) so that the former would read
‘with or without recording a conviction, order the release of the offender
on the adjournment
of the hearing on conditions’, which would be
consistent with other dispositions in
with Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service (22 December 2021). The recent
parliamentary inquiry into Victoria’s justice
system recommended that the
government ‘evaluate its response to the overrepresentation and serious
consequences experienced
by Aboriginal children and young people in out of home
care’: Parliament of Victoria, Legal and Social Issues Committee (2022),
above n 204, 123.
Fox and Arie Freiberg, ‘Sentences Without Conviction: From Status to
Contract in Sentencing’
(1989) 13(5)
Criminal Law Journal
Advisory Council (2014), above n 163, 32.
Convictions Act 2021
, (2). The definition of
‘conviction’ in section 5 of the Act
could be interpreted as
suggesting that section 7(1)(a) only applies to cases where a court does not
record a finding of guilt (e.g.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
However, that interpretation would be inconsistent with what the Department
of Justice and Community Safety and the Attorney-General
appear to have
intended: Department of Justice and Community Safety,
Spent Convictions Act
: Factsheet – December 2021
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 28 October
2020, 2981 (Jill Hennessy, Attorney-General). It would also render
redundant because a person receiving a diversion program does not have a
finding of guilt recorded. Further, even if a term is otherwise
defined in an
Act, it can take an alternative interpretation if ‘the contrary intention
appears’, as seems to be the
case here: Dennis Pearce and Robert Geddes,
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
(8th ed., 2014) 316–319.
Finally, the inclusion of the term ‘recorded’ in section 7(1)(a)
suggests that it specifically
relates to sentencing courts’ discretion
whether or not to record a conviction pursuant to
(Vic). On balance, it seems very likely that the term
‘conviction’ in
section 7(1)(a)
Spent Convictions Act 2021
(Vic) is intended to relate to the narrower definition of courts actively
recording a conviction, and not the broader
definition of any finding
Convictions Act 2021
for example, Neil Donnelly and Lily Trimboli,
The Nature of Bail Breaches in
, Crime and Justice Statistics Issue Brief no. 133 (2018).
Prior to 16 January 2012, the breach offence was in
section 79.
The prosecution for the breach must, though,
nevertheless ‘not be commenced more than two years after the order ceases
Pathways to Justice: Sentencing Review 2002
Statistics Agency, ‘Year Ending 31 December 2020’
(crimestatistics.vic.gov.au, 2022).
Advisory Council,
Secondary Offences in Victoria
(2017) 3, 14.
Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Personal Safety Intervention Orders
in Victoria
(2022) 33, 45; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Breaches of Family Violence Intervention Orders and Safety Notices: Third
Monitoring Report
(2022) 35, 42.
Advisory Council (2017), above n 247, 30.
Productivity Commission,
Australia’s Prison Dilemma: Research Paper
Advisory Council,
Contravention of Family Violence Intervention Orders and
Safety Notices: Prior Offences and Reoffending
(2016) 26, 33; Sentencing
Advisory Council,
Reoffending by Children and Young People in Victoria
(2016) 20; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Stalking in Victoria
(2022) 63; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Personal
Safety Intervention Orders in Victoria
(2022) 65. Many of these were based
on a ‘sentence date’ counting rule to measure recidivism, whereas an
date’ counting rule was used here.
Advisory Council (2019), above n 132, 58; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reoffending Following Sentence in Victoria: A Statistical Overview
et al. (2014), above n 91, 25. This could be because of the distinctiveness of
good behaviour bonds, as they then were (sentencing provisions in New
South Wales have since been amended by the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
Amendment (Sentencing Options) Act 2017
Productivity Commission, Steering Committee for the Review of Government Service
Report on Government Services 2022
, Table CA.4
Advisory Council,
Contravention of Family Violence Intervention Orders and
Safety Notices: Prior Offences and Reoffending
(2002), above n 245, 9, 116–119.
Advisory Council,
Suspended Sentences and Intermediate Sentencing Orders:
Suspended Sentences Final Report –
Advisory Council (2017), above n 247, xi, 25–26.
Law Reform Institute,
, Final Report no. 11 (2008) 153.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Sentencing Act 2017
Sentencing Act 1995
Crimes (Sentence
Administration) Act 2005
Advisory Council (2017), above n 247, ix.
with Victoria Police (19 January 2022).
same survey sought participants’ views on
section 83A
sentence deferrals
as well, but the results relating to deferrals will be discussed in a separate
consultation paper (forthcoming).
Department of Justice and Community Safety, ‘Justice Human Research Ethics
Committee’ (justice.vic.gov.au, 2022).
a useful introduction to respondent-driven sampling, see Douglas D. Heckathorn,
‘Respondent-Driven Sampling: A New Approach
to the Study of Hidden
Populations’
(1997) 44(2)
Social Problems
for example, Krista J. Gile et al., ‘Methods for Inference from
Respondent-Driven Sampling Data’ (2018) 5(1)
Annual Review of
Statistics and Its Application
for example, Bonnie H. Erickson, ‘Some Problems of Inference from Chain
Data’ (1979) 10(1)
Sociological Methodology
included the Chief Judge of the County Court, the Chief Magistrate, the
president of the Law Institute of Victoria (LIV), the
co-chair of the Criminal
Law Section of the LIV, senior representatives of Victoria Legal Aid, the CEO of
the Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service, the CEO of the Federation of Community
Legal Centres, senior representatives from Victoria Police’s legal
department, senior representatives of the Criminal Bar Association, and
senior representatives from the Office of Public Prosecutions.
Benchimol et al., ‘Text Mining Methodologies with R: An Application to
Central Bank Texts’ (2022) 8
Machine Learning with Applications
Adily et al.,
Text Mining Police Narratives for Mentions of Mental Disorders
in Family and Domestic Violence Events
, Trends & Issues in Crime and
Criminal Justice no. 629 (2021).
(a standard evaluation measure for machine learning models) ranged from 0.83 for
the drug/alcohol treatment model to 0.94
for the charitable donation model. An
F1-score of 0.8 or above is generally considered reliable.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.52 MB)
PDF format (2.83 MB)
Plain text (ASCII) (240 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter