URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2008/168.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:32:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Save Albert Park Inc v Australian Grand Prix Corporation (General) [2008] VCAT 168 (6 February 2008)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
GENERAL LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO.
Freedom of Information Act
S.34(4)(a)(ii)
affairs exemption –
– public interest override – Grand
Prix ticket sales information sought – application refused.
Save Albert Park Inc.
RESPONDENT:
Australian Grand Prix Corporation – Freedom
of Information Officer
WHERE HELD:
Her Honour Judge Harbison
HEARING TYPE:
DATE OF HEARING:
20 & 21 December 2007
DATE OF REASONS:
6 February 2008
Save Albert Park Inc v Australian Grand Prix Corporation (General)
the Respondent’s decision to refuse access to 29 documents identified in
the Applicant’s request, made 16 February
2007, is affirmed.
Her Honour Judge Harbison
Vice President
APPEARANCES:
For Applicant:
Mr KeithWiltshire, spokesman for the Applicant
For Respondent:
Mr Jason Pizer of Counsel,
instructed by Allens Arthur Robinson
REASONS FOR DECISION
Australian Grand Prix has been held at Albert Park in Melbourne every year since
1996. It is located at Albert Park on a stretch
of road which was originally
designed as a racetrack, but used for many years before 1996 as a local road.
It runs through parkland
and encircles the Albert Park Lake. The Government of
the day formed the Respondent as a statutory corporation under the
Grand Prix Act
, giving it power to conduct the race, together with a
Motorcycle Grand Prix at Philip Island, and providing a mechanism for the annual
grant of a substantial amount of public money to underwrite each event.
decision to reuse the Albert Park road as a raceway attracted a great deal of
controversy at the time. Many residents of Albert
Park and neighbouring suburbs
were concerned about the presence of the race. Complaints included traffic
congestion caused by the
transporting of 40,000 tons of equipment into the park,
the barricading of the park for the period of the event and during preparation
for and dismantling of the race venue, and loss of amenity to the surrounding
neighbourhood caused by the ear-splitting noise of
the Formula One cars. It was
out of that concern that the Applicant, Save Albert Park Incorporated, was
formed. Its role was initially,
and continues to be, as a lobby group to argue
against the continuing presence of the race in Albert Park.
THIS APPLICATION
the Respondent is a statutory corporation, it is subject to the
Information Act
1982, (save for an exception under section 49 of the
Australian Grand Prix Act
which is not relevant to this decision).
16 February 2007, the Applicant made a request to the Respondent under that Act
for all documents relating to the holding of the
2005 Grand Prix which contained
the following information:-
- total ticket sales for the event
categorised as General Admission, Grandstand and Corporate;
- the number of tickets sold to (a) overseas visitors and (b) interstate
visitors; and
- the total number of free tickets issued.
Applicant directed its attention to ticket sales and the breakdown of tickets
sold, so as to explore the accuracy of public statements
by the Respondent about
the popularity of the Grand Prix and its economic benefit to the people of
Victoria. Several of these statements
appear in the evidence. For instance, in
the 2002 Chairman’s Report the following passage
“The event attracts one of the largest Australian
sporting or cultural event crowds in any one year with a high percentage of
patrons attending from either interstate or overseas.”
the 2005 Report, an estimate appears that there were 77,000 persons who attended
the event on “People’s Day”
– a day of free attendance
– and the following statement appears:-
enticed 56,109 interstate and international visitors to Victoria.”
have also been made by the Respondent in various media estimating the economic
value of the Grand Prix to the economy of
Victoria. In its first Annual Report
in 1996, the Chairman commented that:-
“No single sporting
event since the 1956 Olympic Games has had such an effect on its host city or on
Australia as a whole.”
estimated the economic benefit to Victoria at $95.6 million, with an additional
State tax benefit of $6.9 million, and the creation
of the equivalent of 2,270
full-time employment positions.
its 2006 Report, the Respondent suggested that the event had produced a gross
economic benefit to the State of $174.8 million,
and that since 1996 the event
had generated over $1.3 billion in economic benefit for the State. The
Respondent asserted:-
“The Grand Prix has put Melbourne on
the map globally and year after year it provides unquestionable tourism and
promotional
benefits for the State.”
Applicant wishes to question the above conclusions. It has conducted its own
count of persons attending the Grand Prix every
year. It suspects that actual
patronage of the event is substantially less than the Respondent has publicly
has formed the view that continued Government underwriting of the event is a
waste of public money, and that far fewer people attend
the event than is
generally thought. It wishes to be able to demonstrate, by analysing the ticket
sales figures, that the event
is much less popular than the Respondent has
asserted. It wishes to show that its advertised attendance figures are
artificially
inflated, in particular by the issue of inordinate numbers of free
tickets, and by the issue of 4-day corporate passes which it claims
are not used
on each day for which they have been issued.
further wishes to demonstrate that the event attracts minimal interstate and
overseas patronage. It believes local traders are
being given inflated figures,
leading them to plan for increased custom, particularly from interstate and
overseas, and adversely
impacting on the commercial viability of local business
during the event as a result of lower than expected attendances.
Applicant believes these inflated figures are used to overstate the positive
effects of the event on the local economy and the
economy of Victoria, thus
inappropriately justifying repeated recurrent funding of the event.
relies on a recent report of the Victorian Auditor-General, which it says shows
that the Respondent’s claims of economic
benefit to Victoria have been
overstated, and that in fact costs exceeded benefits by $6.7 million in the 2005
the words of local Councillor, Peter Logan:-
residents and traders have relied upon information supplied by the Australian
Grand Prix Corporation to justify their
loss of recreational amenity or make
business decisions related to the Grand Prix period, but that information has
now been proved
to be incorrect by the Auditor-General. Along with the
Auditor-General, they have not been able to see data on ticket sales, free
tickets issued or numbers of interstate or overseas patrons that may have been
in their interest in assessing the claims of economic
benefit by the Australian
Grand Prix Corporation. Indeed, business has only been given misleading
inflated crowd attendance figures
that has proved to be a poor basis for making
investment decisions in relation to the Grand Prix period.”
Applicant has focussed on the 2005 Grand Prix as the Respondent takes this year
as its benchmark. The Respondent has publicly
argued that attendances were less
than could be expected in 2006 because of the holding of the Commonwealth Games
in Melbourne, and
the 2007 figures were similarly affected by the absence of the
V8 Super Cars at the event. Thus, it is the 2005 figures that the
wishes to analyse.
THE DOCUMENTS IN DISPUTE
Respondent’s Freedom of Information Officer has identified a total of 29
documents to which this request relates. Many
of the documents provide
ticketing information about the 2005 Grand Prix, interspersed with identical
information from other years.
The documents can be broadly described as sales
graphs, tables and reports for the 2005 Grand Prix, customer lists, attendance
and reports which reveal the patron attendance count methodology and
formulas for the 2005 event, and registers which record the
recipients of free
or no-charge tickets, whether to charities, or sponsors, or contra tickets.
It is to be noted that the documents in dispute are not just raw ticket sales
figures. For reasons which I will expand on below,
the Respondent says that raw
ticket sales information, categorised in the manner that the Applicant requests,
does not exist. The
documents are documents which the Respondent uses to
calculate and record various categories of ticket sales and attendances.
Respondent claims that each of these documents is exempt under
Freedom of Information Act
(the business affairs exemption). The
Applicant challenges the application of this section, and says further that even
that it does apply, the documents should be released pursuant to
section 50(4) of the Act, as the public interest requires their
THE BURDEN AND STANDARD OF PROOF
Applicant points out that the burden of proving the exemption sought, and the
inapplicability of the public interest override,
lies with the Respondent. This
is because the object of the Act is to:-
“extend as far as
possible the right of the community to access information in the possession of
the Government of Victoria
and certain other bodies constituted under the law of
Victoria for certain public purposes.”
(Section 3(10)).
and section 13 gives ever
“legally enforceable
right to obtain access in accordance with this Act”,
other than to an
exempt document.
in dealing with this application I must decide whether or not the Respondent has
proved that each of the documents identified
are covered by section 34. If they
are, I must go on to consider whether or not the public interest requires their
release, notwithstanding
their status as exempt documents.
THE BUSINESS AFFAIRS EXEMPTION
Respondent claims that each document identified is exempt from disclosure under
Freedom of Information Act
part of that section relied on is as follows:-
“34(4)(a) A
document is an exempt document if its disclosure under this Act would disclose
information acquired by an agency
or a Minister from a business, commercial or
financial undertaking and the information relates to –
(ii) ... other matters of a business, commercial or financial nature and
the disclosure of the information would be likely to expose
the undertaking
unreasonably to disadvantage.”
section therefore requires me to be satisfied that the Respondent is engaged in
trade or commerce, that the documents contain
information of a business,
commercial or financial nature, and that the release of the documents would
unreasonably disadvantage
the Respondent.
1. Is the Respondent Engaged in Trade or Commerce?
was some uncertainty as to whether or not the Applicant conceded that the
Respondent was an agency engaged in trade or commerce.
This appeared to have
been conceded in the Applicant’s Statement of Legal Contentions, but was
not conceded in final written
submissions. The Applicant suggested that the
Respondent’s character, as a “public enterprise operating under a
signed and paid for by Government, and not required to maximise its
profits at the expense of other events”, and operating
in a limited motor
sport market, put the Respondent’s activities outside of trade and
commerce in the way that term is used
in the section.
Respondent is a public corporation established by an Act of Parliament. The
Applicant submitted that its sole purpose was to
stage the Grand Prix each year.
It is the only body established for that purpose, and so by definition it has no
competitors and
is not operating in a competitive commercial environment. The
Applicant suggested that a Government-funded body should not be treated
section 34 in the same way as an ordinary commercial entity. There is only one
Grand Prix in Melbourne. If it has competitors,
then the market in which it
operates is very limited, and it has competition only in a “trivial”
sense. Its competitors
are other car race events. The Applicant referred to
and relied upon observations in the National Competition Policy Review of the
South Australian Motor Sport Act
to the Department of Premier and
Cabinet of South Australia as follows:-
“The APPA argue
that the market is wider than motor sport events and includes major sporting
events of any type (including horse
racing, cycling and other sports) and all
major entertainment events. However, all other organisations that made
submissions to
the review agreed with the conclusion put forward in the draft
report. Namely, that motor sport events involve specific activities
and require
facilities that are generally not suitable for other major sporting events. In
addition, motor sport events attract
spectators for different reasons.
Therefore, while the parklands may be a potential venue for other activities,
spectators do not
regard other sporting or entertainment events as adequate
substitutes or attractive alternatives to the thrill provided by the extreme
speed, noise and risk of accident provided by motor sport events. It is
concluded therefore, that for the purpose of this review,
the market is confined
to motor sport events as this includes activities of direct substitution for the
motor car events that have
been staged pursuant to the Act.”
contrast, the evidence of the Deputy Chief Executive Officer of the Respondent,
Mark Maskiell, was that the Grand Prix competed
in the marketplace with several
other large entertainment events. He named the Australian Open, AFL, Soccer and
Rugby codes, Spring
Racing Cup Carnival, Bathurst 1000, and other motor sports
events such as the V8 Super Cars. He said that the Respondent competes
these events because it regards itself as trying to attract household
discretionary spending and corporate promotional budgets.
It does not regard
itself as competing only with events held close in time, but with events held
throughout the year which are attractive
to households or corporate marketing
departments. He also said the event competed with interstate events such as the
Indy 500 held
in Queensland.
Applicant tendered an extract from a 2003 article in “The Age”
newspaper, in which the then Chief Executive of the
Melbourne Grand Prix, Steve
Wright, was quoted as observing:-
“I think there is quite a
distinction between the Spring Racing Carnival, for instance, and the Grand
Prix. The Spring Racing
Carnival is just that – a carnival. The Grand
Prix, I believe, is a lot more about business.”
Applicant suggested this comment revealed that the Respondent did not believe
itself to be competing in the same marketplace as
events such as the Spring
Racing Carnival.
my view, it is beyond doubt that the Respondent is engaged in trade or commerce
within the meaning of the Act, and it is most likely
that its competitors
include a wide variety of public entertainment events, not just a limited range
of motor sports.
Australian Grand Prix Act
requires the Respondent to
“undertake and facilitate the organisation, conduct, management and
” of the Grand Prix. It also gives to the Respondent power
do all other things necessary for or in connection with the conduct
and financial and commercial management of each F1 event promoted
Corporation.”
my view it is apparent from the powers given to the Respondent, and from all of
the documents in evidence, that the role of the
Respondent is not simply to
stage the Grand Prix – it is responsible also to try to achieve its
financial and commercial success,
through its efforts in promoting the event,
and through the overall financial and commercial management of the event. In
it must compete with alternative entertainment. This activity is
properly to be characterised as being engaged in trade or commerce.
need to be positively satisfied that the Respondent competes with interstate
events, or even with all other types of available
entertainment. There is in my
view ample evidence in the material to show that the Respondent is engaged in
trade and commerce.
2. Do the Documents Contain Information of a Business, Commercial or Financial
it appeared to be conceded in the Applicant’s Statement of Legal
Contentions that the documents in question contained
information of a
“business, commercial, or financial nature”
, once again this
was challenged in final oral submissions. I have had an opportunity to view the
documents in dispute. It is clear
in my view, from perusing the documents, and
indeed is apparent from their description, that they are documents of a
business, commercial
or financial nature within the meaning of the section.
3. Would Release of the Documents Disadvantage the Respondent?
of the evidence of the Respondent was directed to this issue.
analysing the Respondent’s evidence, it is necessary to summarise the
results of two separate reports into the 2005 Grand
Prix. The first was a
report commissioned by the Respondent, called the NIEIR Report, and the second a
report undertaken by the
State Auditor-General.
there is some discussion in the witness statements of the parties as to the
utility or accuracy of the competing methodology
of NIEIR and the
Auditor-General, it is not my role to investigate whether or not the NIEIR
methodology, or whether the content of
or the methodology of the Victorian
Auditor-General’s Report, is flawed. Both Reports are only of importance
to me in analysing
whether release of the information sought by the Applicant is
1. The NIEIR Report
2005, a body called the National Institute of Economic and Industry Research
(NIEIR) was commissioned by the Respondent to make
an analysis of the economic
effects of the 2005 Grand Prix. That Report was published for general
circulation in August of 2005.
order to make a calculation of economic effects, it used an economic model. One
of the inputs into that model was what was called
“unique visitor
. This figure represents an estimate of the number of
separately identifiable persons who attended the Grand Prix during the four
days, regardless of how many occasions they attended the event. The reason this
figure was used, rather than the estimate of tickets
sold, was because the
calculation was to be applied to calculate the proportions of interstate and
overseas visitors to the event.
If daily attendance was used as the input, the
relative proportions of Victorian, interstate and overseas visitors would have
unique visitor figure was calculated using detailed ticket sales information
provided by the Respondent and applying the following
assumptions to that
25% of Victorian 4-day General Admission and Grandstand tickets were used by
more than one person.
4-day Corporate tickets are used by two persons.
the unique visitor figure, NIEIR calculated the proportion of visitors from
Melbourne, interstate and overseas. It used this
calculation in conjunction
with surveys of patrons attending the event.
have said that the unique visitor figure was calculated by NIEIR using detailed
ticket sales information provided by the Respondent.
It is important to note
the Respondent’s evidence that the ticket sales information provided did
not include an actual record
of the number of persons attending the event on any
given day. The Respondent’s evidence is that no such record is available.
There are no turnstiles at the Grand Prix to keep a physical record of attendees
– in contrast to events such as the Australian
Open and the AFL Grand
Final, where permanent turnstiles are installed. The Respondent says that to
install turnstiles or other
electronic recording devices in a park for a
four-day event would be financially prohibitive.
the Respondent says that it makes a calculation based on gross ticket sales,
informed by a visual estimate and other confidential
assumptions – and
that it was this calculation which was provided to NIEIR for use in its economic
is important to note that NIEIR did not make its own enquiry as to the accuracy
of the ticket sales calculation provided to it
by the Respondent. It was not
engaged to do so. Its task was to calculate the economic effects of the event,
using the data with
which it was provided. It did so using a particular
economic model, and making particular assumptions which are fully set out in
2. The Auditor-General’s Report
second Report was that of the Auditor-General of Victoria, who published a
Report in May 2007 entitled “State Investment
in Major Events”.
purpose of this Report was to critically evaluate proposed models for
determining the economic benefit of major events funded
by the Victorian
Government, and to suggest more accurate models to assess the real economic
effect of major events to Victoria.
Grand Prix was used as a case study in the Report, and the methodology and
conclusions of the NIEIR Report was examined in detail.
major focus of the case study was into assessing the appropriateness of various
inputs made by NIEIR into its modelling process,
and to suggest alternative or
supplementary inputs to establish the overall impact of the event on the State
of Victoria. For example,
the Auditor-General took issue with NIEIR’s
assumption in calculating the event’s effect on enhanced resident
expenditure
that Victorian residents would pay for their tickets from their
savings (thus increasing overall spending on entertainment), and
reducing their entertainment expenditure on other sources of entertainment (thus
having no impact on the overall expenditure
of Victorians on entertainment). As
another example, the Auditor-General suggested inputs such as the loss of
amenity to residents
through noise or traffic congestion should be factored into
the models.
Auditor-General acknowledged that the analysis on which he had embarked was not
an economic analysis in the narrow sense defined
by NIEIR, but a cost benefit
analysis – that is, an attempt to draw together all of the assessable
welfare effects of the event
on the community, rather than merely those inputs
taken into account in standard economic modelling. He noted that economic
would always result in higher estimates of benefit than a cost-benefit
analysis, for this reason.
Auditor-General’s Report was therefore not specifically a report on the
level of attendances at the Grand Prix, or an analysis
of actual ticket sales.
Indeed, the Auditor-General used the data provided to NIEIR as to attendances
and ticket sales as inputs
into his own modelling. His only comments on the
accuracy of that data was as follows:-
“The detailed
workings behind the models used are proprietary and commercial in confidence.
It is therefore difficult to evaluate
them without complete and current
documentation.”
And again at page139:-
“The robustness of the (visitor) expenditure estimates turns on the
accuracy of the attendance figures. However it is not possible
to independently
confirm their accuracy as attendance figures are based on non-verifiable
the NIEIR Report used as an input into its models the confidential calculation
as to ticket sales provided to it by the Respondent,
in conjunction with a
survey of attendees, and the Auditor-General used as an input into his model the
information provided in the
NIEIR Report. It is important to note that neither
the Auditor-General or the NIEIR Report relied directly on actual ticket sales
information in their conclusions, although they relied on attendance estimates
which had been generated in part from the Respondent’s
confidential ticket
sales calculations.
I note that the Auditor-General has not commented on the appropriateness of
release of gross ticket sales figures, and the inputs
into his models are not
ticket sales figures. The Auditor-General did not, as was suggested by Logan in
the passage I previously
quoted, “prove” that the information
supplied by the Respondent to the public about attendance figures at the 2005
Prix was incorrect. He suggested a different and (in his view) more
accurate way of calculating the public benefit of the event,
making use of
different indices and inputs, leading unsurprisingly to different outcomes.
THE RESPONDENT’S EVIDENCE AS TO DISADVANTAGE
Respondent’s evidence as to the disadvantage to the Respondent of release
of the documents was led through Mark Maskiell,
Deputy Chief Executive Officer
of the Respondent, who prepared two witness statements and was cross-examined
said that the Respondent was very concerned to protect all information which
could be used to make calculation of attendances and
ticket sales at the Grand
said that ticketing information is treated as highly confidential information
for all large public entertainment events. This
includes gross ticket sales,
and the information as to how many tickets are purchased in various categories,
and the particular events
for which various proportions of tickets are
is because it is this information which provides the clue as to how successful
or unsuccessful the event’s marketing and
sales strategy has been. Any
given event will seek to attract custom by marketing in what it believes to be
the most effective way.
It may advertise to a particular demographic group
– for instance, to young men who love race cars or, alternatively, to
with young children. It is not until the ticket sales are analysed
after the event that the success or failure in marketing to various
be evaluated, and patterns of success or failure of marketing strategies
established.
well as this information being vital for advertising and marketing of ticket
purchases, it was said it is also vital information
to use in attracting
sponsors to place advertising at the event. Sponsors need to know how many
individuals will see their sponsorship
banners and advertising material. A
sponsor will be less likely to be attracted if the numbers of people attending
the event (and
therefore seeing and being influenced by their signs or displays)
are small. In negotiating with sponsors, the Respondent says that
sponsor and the Respondent make offers and counter-offers reflecting what they
perceive to be the popularity and prestige
of the event.
companies considering buying Corporate tickets need to be able to see how sought
after these tickets are. Is a gift to a
valued client of a ticket in a
corporate box to the Grand Prix attractive? There is no point in a business
buying tickets for corporate
entertainment at the Grand Prix if attendance at
the Grand Prix is not valued by the clients those businesses are trying to
is thus not just actual tickets sold which is essential marketing information.
In the case of tickets sold over four days, it
is necessary to estimate how many
persons will use the ticket, and over how many days.
actual attendances at an event such as the Grand Prix is more difficult than one
might at first think. Far different results
may be obtained in various
scenarios. For instance, a person may buy a 4-day ticket but only use it to
attend once. Alternatively
a person may buy a 4-day ticket and share it with
three friends, so each of four friends attends on one day. Or a person may buy
a 4-day ticket and that same person attends for all four days.
in the absence of actual figures of attendance and categories of attendance,
assumptions need to be made about the likelihood
of use of tickets purchased.
Calculations may vary widely depending on exactly what those assumptions are.
the Respondent says that it will be greatly disadvantaged if the Applicant, or
any competitor, is given access to documents
which will enable the Applicant to
attempt its own estimates of actual ticket sales, or to analyse the way in which
ticket sales
information is treated by the Respondent in its various financial
statements and projections. The release of this information may
harm actual
ticket sales. It will also place the Respondent at a disadvantage in trying to
extract the most favourable terms from
potential sponsors.
Respondent’s final submissions set out three categories of the exempt
information:-
ticket sales information broken down into Grandstand, Corporate and General
Admission ticket sales.
of tickets sold to interstate and overseas visitors.
3. The number of free tickets issued for the event.
1. Ticket Sales
Respondent says that disclosure of ticket sales information would be likely to
unreasonably expose the Respondent to disadvantage.
Ticket sales information is
a particular type of intellectual information capable of being used to assess
the success of marketing
strategies. It is not generally released into the
marketplace. The only examples of release have been in relation to the Adelaide
Grand Prix – shortly before the event was lost to Melbourne. It is highly
sought after information because of its ability
to signal trends and to confirm
commercial success.
2. Interstate and Overseas Patrons
Respondent says that disclosure of the number of tickets sold interstate and
overseas would be likely to unreasonably expose the
Respondent to disadvantage.
Attraction of sponsors between high profile events depends upon establishing the
profile. Part of a
profile is overseas recognition of the event. The evidence
of the Respondent is that there is no reliable way of estimating the
of overseas and interstate visitors to the event, as those statistics cannot
reliably be captured. Release of incomplete
figures, providing a low impression
of interstate or overseas interest, would be damaging to the Respondent in the
marketplace.
3. Free Tickets
Respondent says that the release of the number of free tickets would be likely
to unreasonably expose the Respondent to disadvantage.
An event which relied on
a large number of give-away tickets to give an impression of popularity would be
seen within the marketplace
to be unsuccessful. The Respondent gave evidence
that there is no breakdown in the documents in dispute of different categories
of free tickets. Tickets counted as free include tickets given in exchange for
services, such as to contractors, sponsors, tickets
giving admission to
tradesmen working at the event, and various other categories of non-paying
ticket, as well as free tickets in
the usual sense of tickets given without
obligation, such as tickets to charities. Therefore the Respondent argued that
if the gross
number of free tickets was to be released this would give the
impression that the event was being artificially enhanced by giveaway
and so reduce the value of tickets sold and the likelihood of sponsorship.
Applicant was sceptical of the Respondent’s claims of disadvantage. It
suggested that many comparable events release information
of the kind requested.
The Applicant provided, by way of example, figures released from the 2002
Australian Open. These figures
were prepared for Tourism Victoria by the
National Institute of Economic and Industry Research (NIEIR) in March 2002 and
in June 2002. The figures showed a total attendance figure for the
event, broken down into origin of visitors – from Melbourne,
interstate and overseas – and estimates of average duration of stay and
economic impact estimate. The AFL also releases
information as to the break-up
of tickets to the Grand Final.
Respondent suggested that the total attendance figure provided for the
Australian Open was not in fact the total ticket sales
for the event. The
Respondent suggested that the Australian Open’s attendance figures were
calculated by NIEIR, using the
same formula as the Respondent had used to
calculate attendances at the 2005 Grand Prix. The actual ticket sales for
events such
as the Australian Open and the AFL Grand Final would remain
confidential information, for the same reasons the Respondent has advanced
its own ticket sales information.
Applicant also produced a Price Waterhouse economic evaluation of the Adelaide
Grand Prix for the year 1992. This provided exact
numbers of ticket sales to
the event, and also a breakdown of visitors from interstate and overseas, and a
breakdown of General Admittance
and Corporate sales. This is thus exactly the
sort of information sought by the Applicant from the Respondent. The Applicant
that if this information had been released in relation to the Grand
Prix when it was held in Adelaide, there should be no impediment
figures being released in relation to the Melbourne Grand Prix.
Respondent’s answer was that it believed the release of this information
would have harmed the Adelaide Grand Prix. It
is notorious that Melbourne
successfully outbid Adelaide for the rights to hold the Grand Prix. Maskiell
said it might well have
been a factor in Melbourne being able to secure the
event from Adelaide. The release of this information would have enabled rivals
to the Adelaide Grand Prix to tender competitively for the event.
Maskiell’s words, he would “love” to know the ticket sales for
rival events, as this would assist him to make
his own assessment of the
strengths and weaknesses of rival advertising, and adjust his own advertising
and marketing program accordingly.
Applicant argued that the passage of time had rendered these figures out of
date, and thus there would be little, if any, commercial
harm in releasing them.
However, Maskiell gave evidence that the Respondent uses 2005 as its
“benchmark”. It uses the
information from each year going back to
1996 to confirm trends, to analyse the success of past marketing campaigns, and
its approach into the future.
the Applicant argued that there was no evidence that competitors would in fact
use this information in the way suggested
by the Applicant. In my view no
direct evidence would be available or is necessary to prove the likelihood of
behaviour of this
need not be certain that the release would in fact disadvantage the Respondent.
It is enough if it is “likely” that
it will do so. (See
Department of Innovation, Industry and Regional Development
(2005) VCAT
my view it is clear from the above evidence of the Respondent, which I accept,
that the release of the documents sought would be
likely to disadvantage the
Respondent in the ways advanced by the Respondent’s witness..
UNREASONABLE DISADVANTAGE?
there be unreasonable disadvantage to the Respondent if the documents in dispute
were released? I accept that the onus of proving
unreasonable disadvantage lies
on the Respondent. However, Mr Maskiell has provided clear and logical reasons
for the claimed disadvantage.
He presented as an honest witness. He gave
persuasive evidence that this information was part of the Respondent’s
intellectual
property – its “know-how”, and that this
intellectual property was a very valuable commodity.
Applicant suggested that any attempt to use the information by a competitor to
attract sponsors or corporate clients away from
the Grand Prix could easily be
countered by advertising.
my view the Applicant failed to come to grips with the issues of competition
raised in the Respondent’s witness statements.
If, as I accept, this
information is valuable intellectual property, then its release into the public
domain deprives the Respondent
of a valuable asset. It allows all of the
entities with which the Respondent must deal – sponsors, competitors,
customers – access to data from which they can strengthen their
bargaining position at the expense of the Respondent. This
disadvantage cannot
be countered by advertising or public relations.
my view the Respondent has established that it will be unreasonably
disadvantaged in the marketplace should the documents in dispute
be released.
might say, that although the matter was not argued in this case, it is clear to
me that release of this information to the Applicant
will mean its release into
the public domain. The Applicant wishes to have the information so that it can
be disseminated throughout
the community – to the traders of Albert Park,
and to the public whose funds underwrite the event.
OTHER GROUNDS OF EXEMPTION
its Statement of Legal Contentions, the Respondent asserted that some parts of
the documents were covered by section 30 of the
Act, which protects internal
working documents, and some parts protected by section 33 – personal
also asserted that some parts of the documents sought
were irrelevant and should be excised pursuant to section 25 if this application
was successful. The section 30 and 33 exemptions were not argued before me at
the hearing, and I propose to disregard them. Given
that I have found the
documents exempt under section 34, I do not need to consider further the issues
arising under section 25.
THE PUBLIC INTEREST OVERRIDE
have found the documents to be exempt under section 34 of the Act. Section
50(4) of the Act provides that the Tribunal has power
to decide that access
should be granted to an otherwise exempt document:-
“where the Tribunal is of the opinion that the public
interest requires that access to the document should be granted under
section requires that I am satisfied that:-
Applicant’s interest in access to these documents is a public interest;
of the documents identified will promote that public interest; and
may only use the power contained in section 50(4) if the public interest
requires disclosure of the documents. I can only come
to this conclusion after
weighing up the competing public interest in non-disclosure of the documents
sought to be protected.
Applicant contends that I should use this power in this case, and filed a
statement of public interest grounds, setting out the
matters of public interest
which the Applicant says requires release of the documents. This statement was
supplemented by final
submissions.
were many broad public interest issues raised in the Applicant’s
submissions. The Applicant filed several comprehensive
witness statements.
member of the Applicant, Colin Smith, prepared a lengthy witness statement in
which he analysed the public information available
various years, the on-the-spot counting of attendance by members of the
Applicant who observed and counted
attendees at each gate, and the information
in the NIEIR Report and the Auditor-General’s Report, and his own
observations
of attendances, complete with photos taken of underused corporate
boxes. His aim was to establish that the Respondent’s published
attendance figures were very much exaggerated. His research was painstaking.
submitted that the public has a legitimate interest in ensuring that the
economic impact of the event was accurately calculated
and reported.
Goad, a retired metallurgical engineer, prepared a witness statement and gave
evidence before me. His witness statement set
out what he identified as the
major negative financial, economic and environmental effects of the Grand Prix
to the State of Victoria.
He asserted that:-
"the release of
ticket sales would assist to reveal the event’s true attendance and costs,
and the community will benefit from
being properly informed as to the events
true value.”
Wiltshire, who appeared before me on behalf of the Applicant, also filed a
witness statement and gave evidence. His witness
statement set out details of
comparable events for which attendance information had been released.
unduly truncating the Applicant’s arguments, it seems to me that the
public interest grounds relied on by the Applicant
involve the need to closely
scrutinise the economic impact on Victoria of the event, given that the event is
highly subsidised by
the State of Victoria (the Applicant’s final
submissions refer to underwriting of the 2007 event of almost $35 million) and
the need to correct false and misleading attendance estimates made by the
Respondent.
major obstacle to the Applicant’s arguments seems to me to be that release
of the documents by themselves will not prove
whether the Respondent’s
published attendance figures are right or wrong.
of the Applicant’s witnesses attempted their own estimates of actual
attendances at the Grand Prix. It is clear that if
the documents sought were
released to the Applicant, the Applicant’s witnesses would have to
interpret them using their own
methodology and assumptions as set out in their
witness statements.
Respondent argues that any information released may lead to misleading
conclusions if it is incorrectly analysed. This is because
disclosure of ticket
sales will not directly affect attendance calculations. It will only do so if
different assumptions are made
based on those ticket sales – for instance,
if a more conservative estimate is made of the instances each 4-day ticket is
used on each of the four days.
accurate information is not kept, or is not collectable, of the numbers of
interstate and overseas visitors, or the number
of free tickets issued. It is
impossible for the documents sought to throw light on these matters. Specific
counting is not made
of tickets sold interstate and overseas. In addition, many
tickets are treated as free in the company books, when they are really
tradesmen needing access to the event, sponsors, or in return for services
rendered. If raw figures were released, this would
potentially create
misinformation and damage in the marketplace to the reputation of the event.
is apparent that exactly the same calculations as the Applicant wishes to
perform, based on the documents in dispute, could be
performed by any
competitors of the Respondent who wished to use this information to improve
their competitive position vis-a-vis
the Respondent, or sponsors who wished to
negotiate more attractive terms of sponsorship.
public interest grounds relied upon by the Respondent were expressed as
“There is a clearly recognised public interest in
those government agencies which operate in trade and commerce being able to
compete effectively and efficiently with the businesses with which they are in
competition. The inability to protect a government
agency’s business
information will lead to its competitors being delivered a competitive advantage
to the detriment of the
performance of the government agency and the public
benefits which the government agency is expected to achieve.”
Respondent used a recent marketing campaign, for the Clipsal 500, as an example.
The marketing strategy for this campaign specifically
tried to draw away patrons
from the Grand Prix on the basis that the V8 Cars would not be running at the
Grand Prix in 2007.
Respondent also relied on newspaper reports of possible challenge from New South
Wales to hold the Grand Prix as part of the New
South Wales major events
blueprint, and the presence of Singaporean officials at the Grand Prix in 2007,
keen to bid for the event
when the contract expires in 2010. One major concern
of the Respondent was that ticket sales information could be used by a
to augment its strategy for the re-negotiation of the Grand Prix
contract when it expires in 2010.
the words of Maskiell:-
“If information about ticket sales
was publicly available this would be disadvantageous to any rival bid. A rival
need to make numerous economic decisions in formulating a bid and to
make these economic decisions. The more concrete data that
is available, the
easier it would be. By having access to the Melbourne events ticket sales
information, it will be easier for any
rival bidder to plan and produce economic
models with greater certainty rather than simply relying on public
information.”
conclude that there is a strong public interest in allowing the Respondent to
compete effectively in the marketplace. A great deal
of public money has been
invested in the commercial enterprise run by the Respondent. It cannot be in
the public interest for the
Respondent to be forced to compete in a market where
its competitors and likely customers have access to information which could
impede its effectiveness as a competitive business entity.
of the Applicant’s criticisms of the Respondent’s claims of economic
benefit and attendance estimates were made by
the Applicant in submissions to
the Auditor-General. The Applicant’s submissions were produced to me.
They have therefore
been assessed in an appropriate and expert manner in the
preparation of the Auditor-General’s 2007 Report. The
Auditor-General’s
Report did not suggest the Respondent had disseminated
false or misleading information about ticket sales. The Respondent asked
note the conclusion of the Auditor-General that, even on its most pessimistic
analysis, the overall benefit to the State flowing
from the Grand Prix was $56.6
million, and the most optimistic benefit using the same calculations was $69
evaluating the public interest override, I must weigh up all competing public
interest considerations; on the one hand, the public
interest which I accept as
presently underpinning the exemption, and on the other hand, the public
interest, if any, that I find
in the disclosure of information.
circumstances in which section 50(4) of the Act may apply were recently
considered in
Secretary to the Department of Justice v Osland
(2007) VSCA
at page 113:-
“The power conferred on the Tribunal by
S.50 (4) to grant access to an exempt document, is exercisable only if the
concludes that the public interest requires that access be granted.
That is a stringent test. As this court said in Hulls, “requires”
in this context is synonymous with “demands” or
“necessitates”. There is a sense of the “imperative”.
The public interest considerations said to require the granting of access must
be so strong as to override the public interest considerations
underpinning the
applicable exemptions. The case for access must, in effect, be
irresistible.”
Applicant recognised that this decision presented a high bar to success in
applying the public interest override to its case.
order to meet that standard, the Applicant submitted the word
“requires” in section 50(4) should be interpreted to
“demands as necessary or essential on legal principles” or
“calls for” and that necessitates could be
read as “to require
as a necessary condition or result”, using definitions from the Shorter
Oxford Dictionary. This
would result in a less emphatic degree of satisfaction
than the decision in
the clear authority of
binds me. I do not propose to read these
words down in the manner suggested.
considerations may have arisen if the evidence revealed the likelihood of a
fraudulent difference between the Respondent’s
published and actual
figures. However, I do not make such a finding. None of the witnesses called
by the Applicant was qualified
in the mathematical analysis which they
undertook. None had qualifications in economics. Some clearly did not
understand the Reports
of the Auditor-General and NIEIR fully. I would need
clear evidence of a significant likelihood of wrongdoing by or on behalf of
Respondent before acting on their conclusions. Each of the points made by them
was addressed in the second witness statement
of Mr Maskiell, and their
methodology rigorously challenged.
is no need for me to make a finding as to whether or not the statistical methods
of the Applicant’s witnesses or their
description of the accuracy of the
cost benefit analysis of the Auditor-General, compared to the economic model of
NIEIR, were accurate
or flawed. The Applicant submitted I should be satisfied
that the Respondent’s figures are misleading, because their information
not transparent. In truth, all I can conclude from the evidence is that the
Respondent’s figures are different to the Applicant’s.
release of the ticket sales information, and any use the Applicant may make of
them, will not directly show the profitability
of the 2005 Grand Prix, or the
profitability of any future Grand Prix. The Respondent published aggregate
sales revenue figures
in its 2005 Annual Report. This revenue figure will not
change even if the Applicant can show by the information sought that the
Respondent’s published estimates of attendance are inaccurate. The
overall economic value estimates of the 2005 Grand Prix
and other Grand Prix
events on other years will only be affected by the information sought if the
Applicant applies different assumptions
that the Respondent uses to make its
calculation of actual attendances.
Goad, one of the Applicant’s witnesses, agreed with the proposition that
the release of the ticket sales information would
not add anything to analysis
of the audited and publicly available financial statements of the Respondent.
the reasons I have already outlined, I do not take the view that the report of
the Auditor-General shows wrongdoing or falsification
of the attendance figures,
or the publication of misleading, or potentially misleading, attendance figures.
The Auditor-General made
it clear that he was undertaking a far different
analysis than that performed by NIEIR. He did not throw doubt on the attendance
figures with which he was provided. There is nothing in the
Auditor-General’s Report which demands or necessitates disclosure
documents sought.
public has a clear interest in having the funding of the event scrutinised by an
independent authority . However, that interest
is well satisfied in this case.
The Respondent is bound by the
Financial Management Act
audited annual reports. Its affairs are subject to the scrutiny of the
Auditor-General. Further, section 25 of the
Australian Grand Prix Act
, makes detailed provision for the preparation of an annual business
plan and its detailed scrutiny before approval by Government.
There was no
evidence presented to me, apart from its assertion as a fact in the
Applicant’s submission, that there is “
ample evidence in the
public domain that the Respondent has a history of not being transparent and
accountable”
this case, I am satisfied that the Applicant’s interest in disclosure of
the documents is a public interest. It is not a
document of merely personal
significance. It is not merely a document in which the public may be
interested. It is not just a matter
which has received publicity and is the
subject of prurient public interest. In my view, continued public funding of
the Grand Prix
is appropriately described as a matter of public interest to the
people of Victoria, not just a matter in which the people of Victoria
interested.
lack of access to the documents described does not appear to me to impede the
public’s ability to debate the funding
of the event.
importantly, I must be satisfied, not only that it is in the public interest
that the documents be released, but that the public
interest requires release.
, reference was made to the inappropriateness of taking into
“abstract policy considerations, such as the desirability of
greater transparency in decision-making by the executive”
have found each of the documents in contest to be exempt documents. I have
identified the strong public interest grounds for the
exemption which applies to
each such document.
my view, having applied the principles set out in
, the matters put
forward by the Applicant to establish that the public interest requires
disclosure of the documents sought, are
not sufficient to displace the clear
public interest in upholding the exemption claimed for all of the documents
under review.
Accordingly,
the application is refused in respect of all documents under review.
Her Honour Judge Harbison
Vice President
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (363 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter