URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2021/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kyabram Club Inc at Kyabram Club premises (EGM - Increase) [2021] VCGLR 26 (24 August 2021)
DECISION AND REASONS FOR DECISION
In the matter of an application under section 3.4.17(1)(b) of the
Regulation Act 2003
by Kyabram Club Inc to amend its venue operator’s
licence to vary the number of electronic gaming machines at the approved
Kyabram Club, located at 82 Allan Street, Kyabram from fifty-three
(53) to sixty-five (65).
Commission:
Ms Danielle Huntersmith,
Commissioner
Mr Des Powell, Commissioner
Appearances:
Mr Rupert Watters of Counsel
for the Applicant (instructed by Bazzani Scully Priddle Lawyers)
Ms Karpaagam Shanmugam, Counsel Assisting the Commission
Date of Hearing:
10 August 2021
Date of Decision:
24 August 2021
Date of Reasons:
24 August 2021
The Commission has determined to grant the application
subject to the conditions set out in Appendix A.
Huntersmith
Commissioner
REASONS FOR DECISION
INTRODUCTION
1. This is an application by the Kyabram Club Inc (
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation (
to amend its venue operator’s licence to vary the number of electronic
gaming machines (
) permitted in Kyabram Club, located at 82 Allan
Street, Kyabram (
), from fifty-three (53) to sixty-five (65)
Application
2. The relevant municipal authority is the Campaspe Shire Council
). By email dated 25 June 2021 to
the Commission, the Council stated that it does not oppose the Application and
will not be making
a submission in relation to the Application.
3. The Commission considered the Application at a public
with a hearing conducted by
video conferencing on 10 August 2021 (
). The Applicant was
represented by Mr Rupert Watters of Counsel instructed by Bazzani Scully Priddle
THE LEGISLATION AND THE TASK BEFORE THE COMMISSION
4. Gaming on EGMs is a legal recreational and commercial activity in Victoria
so long as it is done in accordance with the
Gambling Regulation Act 2003
). The GR Act recognises that, notwithstanding individual rights
of self-determination, gaming on EGMs causes harm to some communities
members of some communities. For this reason, the GR Act includes safeguards to
ensure an appropriate balance is struck
between a lawful and legitimate
recreational activity for some, and a potentially harmful activity for others.
5. The objectives of the GR Act are set out at section 1.1, which
(2) The main objectives of this Act are—
(a) to foster responsible gambling in order to-
(i) minimise harm caused by problem gambling; and
(ii) accommodate those who gamble without harming themselves or
(ab) to ensure that minors are neither encouraged to gamble nor allowed to
(b) to ensure that gaming on gaming machines is conducted honestly;
(c) to ensure that the management of gaming equipment and monitoring
equipment is free from criminal influence and exploitation;
(d) to ensure that other forms of gambling permitted under this or any other
Act are conducted honestly and that their management
is free from criminal
influence and exploitation;
(e) to ensure that-
(i) community and charitable gaming benefits the community or charitable
organisation concerned;
(ii) practices that could undermine public confidence in community and
charitable gaming are eliminated;
(iii) bingo centre operators do not act unfairly in providing commercial
services to community or charitable organisations;
(f) to promote tourism, employment and economic development generally in the
6. Chapter 3 of the GR Act deals with the regulation of gaming machines.
Section 3.1.1 of the GR Act sets out the purpose of Chapter
(1) The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a system for the regulation,
supervision and control of gaming equipment and monitoring
equipment with the
(a) ensuring that gaming on gaming machines is conducted honestly;
(b) ensuring that the management of gaming equipment and monitoring equipment
is free from criminal influence or exploitation; and
(c) regulating the use of gaming machines in casinos and other approved
venues where liquor is sold; and
(d) regulating the activities of persons in the gaming machine industry;
(e) promoting tourism, employment and economic development generally in the
(f) fostering responsible gambling in order to—
(i) minimise harm caused by problem gambling;
(ii) accommodate those who gamble without harming themselves or
(2) The purpose of this Chapter is also to—
(a) provide for the allocation of gaming machine entitlements in order to
maximise the financial and social benefits to the Victorian
community within the
regulatory framework applying to the allocation of entitlements;
(b) promote a competitive gaming industry with the aim of providing financial
and social benefits to the Victorian
7. The relevant provision concerning the Application is in section
3.4.17(1)(b) of the GR Act, which states that variation of the
number of EGMs
permitted in an approved venue may be amended in accordance with Division 2,
Part 4 of Chapter 3 of the GR Act.
8. Sections 3.4.18 to 3.4.19 of the GR Act provide for the manner in which
requests for amendments under section 3.4.17(1)(b) are
to be made. Relevantly
for the Application, section 3.4.18 provides, inter alia, that:
(1) A request by a venue operator for an amendment of licence
conditions—
(c) in the case of ... an amendment to increase the number of gaming machines
permitted in an approved venue, must be accompanied
submission—
(i) on the net economic and social benefit that will accrue to the community
of the municipal district in which the approved venue
is located as a result of
the proposed amendment; and
(ii) taking into
account the impact of the proposed amendment on surrounding municipal
in the form approved by the Commission and including the information
specified in the form.
9. Section 3.4.18(2) provides that if the request is for an amendment to
increase the number of gaming machines permitted in an approved
venue, the venue
operator must give the relevant municipal council a copy of the proposed request
before submitting the request to
Commission.
10. Further, section 3.4.19(1) of the GR Act provides:
(1) Subject to this section, after receiving a copy of a request for an
amendment referred to in section 3.4.18(2), a municipal council
submission to the Commission—
addressing the economic and social impact of the proposed amendment on
the well-being of the community of the municipal district in
which the approved
venue is located; and
taking into account the impact of the proposed amendment on surrounding
municipal districts.
11. Section 3.4.20 sets out matters that are
required to be considered by the Commission with respect to such a proposed
Relevantly for this Application, that section provides:
(1) Without limiting the matters which the Commission may consider in
deciding whether to make a proposed amendment the Commission
must not amend a
venue operator’s licence unless—
(a) the Commission is satisfied that the amendment of the licence does not
conflict with a direction, if any, given under section
(b) if the proposed amendment will result in an increase in the number of
gaming machines permitted in an approved venue, the Commission
is satisfied that
the regional limit or municipal limit for gaming machines for the region or
municipal district in which the approved
venue is located will not be exceeded
by the making of the amendment; and
(c) if the proposed amendment will result in an increase in the number of
gaming machines permitted in an approved venue, the Commission
is satisfied that
the net economic and social impact of the amendment will not be detrimental to
the well-being of the community
of the municipal district in which the approved
venue is located;
12. Section 3.4.20(1)(c) provides for what is now commonly described as the
no net detriment
’ test. It requires the Commission to be
satisfied that there is no net detriment arising from the approval through
and objectively establishing that the net economic and social impact
will not be detrimental to the well-being of the
13. The GR Act does not specify the matters that the Commission must consider
in deciding whether the ‘
no net detriment
’ test is satisfied.
However, the statutory signposts are provided by the test itself. The Commission
must consider:
(a) the likely economic impacts of approval;
(a) the likely social impacts of approval; and
(b) the net effect of those impacts on the well-being of the relevant
14. As such, the ‘
no net detriment
’ test is a composite
test requiring consideration of a single net impact in economic and social terms
on the well-being of
The test will be
satisfied if, following the weighing of any likely impacts, the Commission is
satisfied that the net economic and
social impacts of approval on the well-being
of the relevant community will be either neutral or positive.
15. The Commission recognises that the task of identifying likely benefits
and disbenefits will not always be straightforward given
the overlap of
socio-economic issues, and the quality and availability of relevant data and
cogent evidence. Some economic outcomes
may have social consequences, and vice
On review, decisions in the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (
) have held that for
impacts that may be both economic and social – for example the benefits of
gaming consumption – it
does not matter whether the impact is considered
on the economic side, or the social side, or both, so long as it is included and
not double-counted in the ultimate composite
The Commission has adopted
the same approach as VCAT in setting out a table of likely economic and social
benefits both to enhance
clarity of Commission decisions and facilitate greater
consistency between the Commission and
16. If the Commission is not satisfied that the ‘
’ test is met, that is clearly fatal to the application
before it, as given the opening words of section 3.4.20(1) of the GR
satisfaction of the test is a mandatory pre-condition to approval. However,
although section 3.4.20(1) sets out certain mandatory
considerations for the
Commission, the provision is not exhaustive. If the Commission is satisfied that
no net detriment
’ test is met, it still has an ultimate
discretion as to whether or not to grant the
The Commission must
decide whether to make the proposed amendment, with or without any changes from
that proposed by the applicant,
even where the applicant has satisfied the
minimum threshold of the ‘
no net detriment’
17. In considering the exercise of this discretion:
(a) it must be exercised having regard to the purposes of the GR Act and, in
particular, the specific purposes of Chapter 3 of the
GR Act dealing with the
regulation, supervision and control of gaming
(b) it may also be influenced by other factors such as broad policy
considerations drawn from the content and objectives of the GR
18. The Commission agrees with the comments of Deputy President Dwyer in
Mount Alexander Shire Council v Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation & Ors
if all of the mandatory considerations under the GR Act favour
the grant of an approval, one would expect that the ultimate discretion
commonly favour approval - other than in relatively rare or exceptional
circumstances arising in a particular case. In such
a case, any such
circumstances should be separately and transparently identified.
19. Finally, pursuant to section 9(4) of the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation Act 2011
), the Commission must have regard to Ministerial
guidelines issued under section 5 of the VCGLR Act when performing functions
gambling legislation.
MATERIAL BEFORE THE COMMISSION
20. Before the Hearing, the Applicant provided the Commission with the
following material in support of its Application:
(a) application form – amendment to venue
operator licence – vary gaming machines, received by the Commission on 18
Application Form
(b) social and economic impact statement prepared by Ratio Consultants dated
June 2021 (
Ratio Report
(c) expenditure analysis prepared by Tim Stillwell of Shine Wing Accountants
& Advisors dated 26 May 2021 (
Expenditure Report
(d) witness statement prepared by Leigh James Barrett of Leigh Barrett &
Associates dated 15 April 2021;
(e) witness statement of Terrence Leslie Nepean;
(f) witness statement of Greg Ryan;
(g) witness statement of Steven Shane Grima;
(h) witness statement of Vincent Anthony Curtis; and
(i) a copy of the public notice appearing in the Kyabram Free Press dated 30
21. The following material, prepared by Commission staff, was provided to the
Applicant and the Council and considered by the Commission:
(a) a report titled
Economic and Social Impact Report
dated May dated 22
July 2021 (
VCGLR Report
(b) a report titled
Pre-Hearing Inspection and Compliance Report
July 2021 (
Pre-Hearing Report
22. The Commission received correspondence in
opposition to the Application from a local community organisation, Campaspe
Care Partnership dated 3 August 2021. A copy of the correspondence was
provided to the Applicant on 5 August 2021.
23. On 9 August 2021, the following material was provided to the Commission
in relation to the Application:
(a) written submissions from the Applicant; and
(b) proposed conditions to attach to approval of the Application, were the
Commission to approve the Application.
24. The following witnesses gave oral evidence at the Hearing:
(a) Mr Greg Ryan, General Manager of the Applicant;
(b) Mr Terrence Nepean, Board Member of the Applicant;
(c) Mr Steven Grima, Gaming Supervisor of the Applicant;
(d) Mr Vincent Curtis, Chair of the Kyabram and District Community Bank -
Bendigo Bank;
(e) Ms Hayley Vinecombe, Associate of Ratio Consultants;
(f) Mr Tim Stillwell, Partner of ShineWing Advisors and Accountants; and
(g) Mr Leigh Barrett, Founder/Executive Director and Principal Consultant of
Leigh Barrett and Associates.
25. After the Hearing, the Applicant provided amended conditions to the
Commission, prepared by Mr Watters.
26. Commissioner Huntersmith visited the Premises on 20 August 2021.
PRELIMINARY MATTER
27. The Commission has considered this matter on all of the available
evidence before it. The Commission is aware that the COVID-19
pandemic, and
associated restrictions implemented by government, are likely to have an impact
on the social and economic conditions
of Victoria, as well as the community of
the Shire of Campaspe. The nature and extent of this impact on the municipality
28. The Commission notes that the GR Act expressly requires that “the
Commission must use its reasonable endeavours to determine
an application within
the required period” (see section 3.3.8(1A)), the Commission has
accordingly used its reasonable endeavours
to determine this matter on the basis
of the information and evidence before and available to it within the required
period, noting
that there is no information or evidence before the Commission
that could confirm or reliably predict the impact of this matter on
and economic conditions in the municipality.
DECISION AND REASONS FOR DECISION
29. The Premises is located in the Shire of
a rural LGA located
200km north of Melbourne which covers an area of 4,519 square kilometres. Major
centres in the Shire of Campaspe
include Echuca, Kyabram and Rochester.
30. The Premises is located at 82 Allan Street, Kyabram to the west of the
Kyabram town centre and is surrounded by residentially
zoned land. The majority
of the land uses in the surrounding area are residential in nature, however,
there are a few exceptions
including Kyabram Recreational Reserve to the north
east of the site and the Kyabram Hospital to the south east. The main commercial
centre of Kyabram is located along Allan Street approximately 300 metres east of
the Premises. It includes a range of both retail
and non-retail uses including
the Kyabram Plaza Theatre, several banks and the post office.
31. According to the VCGLR Report, Shire of Campaspe has an estimated adult
population of 29,724, which ranks it 6
out of the 35 rural
municipality. The annual rate of population growth of 0.1% in 2020 was projected
by the Department of Environment,
Land, Water and Planning (
lower than the Victorian average of 1.3%. The Shire of Campaspe’s
percentage of population over 50 of 43.2% in 2020
was projected by DELWP to be
higher than the Victorian average of 37.9%.
gaming in the Shire of Campaspe
32. The permissible number of gaming entitlements
made under a Ministerial Order pursuant to sections 3.2.4 and 3.4A.5(3A) of the
GR Act applies to the Shire of
The maximum
permissible number of gaming machines in the Shire of Campaspe is 293.
Currently, there are 4 gaming venues operating
within the Shire of Campaspe
with approvals to operate a total of 209 EGMs
The success of this application would increase the number of operational EGMs in
the Shire of Campaspe to 221.
33. The Shire of Campaspe has an EGM density of 7 EGMs per 1000 adults,
which is 42.4% more than the rural average (4.9) and 39.4%
more than the State
average (5). This ranks the Shire of Campaspe as the 8
of 26 rural
municipalities in terms of EGM density per 1000 adults.
34. The VCGLR Report notes that in the 2019-20 financial year, the Shire of
Campaspe had an average gaming expenditure of $227.32
per adult, which is 9.84%
less than the rural average ($252.14) and 39.79% less than the State average
($377.57). Applying the estimate
of increased gaming expenditure as received
from the Applicant in the first year of operation of the additional 12 EGMs at
the Premises,
approval of this Application would result in an increase in
average gaming expenditure per adult from $227.32 to $234.76. In the
financial year, the expenditure on gaming for the Shire of Campaspe was
$6,756,968.05. Of that amount, the Applicant’s
53 EGMs at the Premises had
generated $2,170,233.87 (i.e. Net Machine Revenue (
) of $40,947.81).
Socio-economic profile of the Shire of
35. The Shire of Campaspe is characterised by a moderate socio-economic
profile, in comparison to rural municipalities. It is ranked
35 rural LGAs and 22
of 79 LGAs in Victoria on the Socio-Economic
Indexes for Areas (
) scale of disadvantage
moderate disadvantage within the LGA (1st being the LGA with the greatest
disadvantage).
36. In relation to the immediate surrounding area of the Premises (i.e.
within 5 kilometres),
IRSD index is 1.50% higher than the SEIFA IRSD index for the Shire of Campaspe,
and 2.87% lower than the SEIFA IRSD index
for Victoria. On the SEIFA IRSD, a
lower score indicates more disadvantage, therefore the immediate surrounding
area is relatively
disadvantaged than rural LGAs. 27.3% of
in the immediate surrounding area are in the 1st
of SEIFA scores (on par
with the rural average of 26.8%). This suggests that the area immediately
surrounding the Premises experiences
approximately the same levels of
disadvantage relative to the rural average.
37. The VCGLR Report also indicates that:
(a) the unemployment rate in the Shire of Campaspe is 5.15%. This is higher than
the rural LGA average of 4.59% but lower than the
State average of 6.61%. The
unemployment rate for the immediate surrounding area is 4.9%, slightly higher
than the rural average;
(b) the equivalised household income in the Shire of Campaspe is $826.98, which
is slightly lower than the rural LGA average of $863.42
and moderately lower
than and State average of $1,028.24. The equivalised household income in the
immediate surrounding area is $803.42,
being 21.9% lower than the rural
(c) the homelessness rate in the Shire of Campaspe is 4.2%, which is higher than
the rural average (2.8%), but lower than the State
average (5.1%); and
(d) the crime rate in the Shire of Campaspe, with 12,865 reported crimes per
100,000 adults, is fourth highest of rural LGAs and
37.6% higher than the rural
Nature of the Premises
38. The Premises currently comprises a range of facilities
(a) Sports bar with big screen TVs and TAB and seating for 38 patrons;
(b) Gaming room with 53
(c) Dedicated lounge area with seating for 48 patrons;
(d) Main bar area shared between bistro, sports bar and gaming room;
(e) External smoking room;
(f) Bistro with seating for 180 patrons (including a private dining area);
(g) Outside dining terrace with seating for 120 patrons including external
(h) External children’s play area;
(i) Back of house facilities including kitchen, offices, storage etc; and
(j) On-site car parking for 44 vehicles.
Catchment area of the Premises
no net detriment
’ test refers to ‘the
community of the municipal district in which the approved venue is
located’. In determining
the impact of an application of this nature on a
municipal district, previous Commission and VCAT decisions have had particular
to the area serviced by the relevant premises, which is generally
referred to as the ‘catchment
The determination
of the likely catchment area in this instance is important in the
Commission’s consideration of the identity
of those residents which will
be most affected by the Application in terms of gambling-related benefits and
40. The VCGLR Report provides that the surrounding area is defined by a
radius of 5km around the Premises. The Commission notes that
it may from time to
time vary the size of the radius of the immediate surrounding area due to
specific circumstances. The immediate
surrounding area does not aim to define
the origin of patrons likely to visit the venue; rather, it enables a
statistical profile
of the area immediately surrounding the venue.
41. The Ratio Report contains a table summarising data in relation to patron
surveys. Table 5.1 in the Ratio Report indicates that
for March 2020, the
primary patron catchment of the venue came from the suburb of Kyabram, which
accounts for 56.9% of the patrons
in the gaming room for the relevant period in
March 2020. The secondary patron catchment comprises patrons from the townships
Merrigum and Tongala, which accounts for a further 17.3% of patrons. The
Ratio Report suggests that the concentration of patrons
from these towns are
located between 10km to 20km from the Premises.
42. The Ratio Report notes that the full two-week survey period was unable to
be completed due to restrictions on the trade of licensed
premises as a result
of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Applicant relied on the results of the suburb
survey, which the Commission considers
to be appropriate in the
circumstances.
43. At the Hearing, Ms Vinecombe gave evidence that the majority of the
patrons coming to the Premises are from Kyabram, with the
townships of Merrigum
and Tongala making up the secondary patron catchment. She also indicated that
these areas were profiled in
the social and economic assessment.
44. Similarly, the ShineWing Report contains a table summarising data in
relation to gaming patron locality survey. Appendix 5 in
the ShineWing Report
outlines that of patrons who visit the Premises, there is a combination of those
that reside within the Shire
of Campaspe, both within and outside the 10
kilometre radius, and those who reside outside the Shire of Campaspe. In
particular,
the ShineWing Report indicates the patron catchment of the venue
comprises of 57% from Kyabram, a further 17% from the townships
of Merrigum and
Tongala, and the remaining 26% from surrounding townships.
45. The ShineWing Report notes that the closest gaming venues to the Premises
are located in Tatura, Shepparton and Echuca. However,
these venues are located
at a distance of approximately 30km to 40km, by road, from the Premise.
46. In this instance, the Commission considers that the gaming room patron
surveys provides some indication of the likely gaming patrons
for the Premises,
with the greatest proportion of patrons residing in Kyabram. Having regard to
the material and evidence put forward
by the Applicant and noting the VCGLR
Report analysing the surrounding area around the Premises as a radius of 5km,
the Commission
considers that the appropriate primary catchment area of the
Premises comes from Kyabram while the secondary catchment area comprises
from the townships of Merrigum and Tongala.
Issues for determination
47. As set out in paragraph
the Commission cannot grant the Application unless it is satisfied of the four
matters set out in section 3.4.20 of the GR
Act. These matters are considered in
parts A to D below.
48. If having determined that these matters have been satisfied, the
Commission is then required to exercise its discretion under
section 3.4.20 to
determine whether or not the Application should be granted. That is, whether or
not the proposed amendment to the
venue operator’s licence should be
given under section 3.2.3
49. Pursuant to section
3.4.20(1)(a) of the GR Act, the Commission must be satisfied that the proposed
amendment does not conflict
with a Ministerial direction, if any, given under
section 3.2.3 of the GR Act. There is no relevant direction issued pursuant
section 3.2.3 of the GR Act that relates specifically to this
Application.
50. On this basis, the Commission is satisfied that granting the Application
would not conflict with a direction given under section
3.2.3 of the GR Act, and
therefore considers that the mandatory pre-condition set out in section
3.4.20(1)(a) of the GR Act is satisfied.
noted in paragraph
above, the Shire
of Campaspe is subject to a municipal limit on the number of EGMs under a
Ministerial Order under sections 3.2.4
and 3.4A.5 of the GR Act. The maximum
number of machines permitted in the Shire of Campaspe is 293.
52. Accordingly, the Commission is satisfied that granting the Application
would not cause the relevant limit for gaming machines
for the Shire of Campaspe
to be exceeded, and therefore considers that mandatory pre-condition set out in
section 3.4.20(1)(b) of
the GR Act is satisfied.
net detriment’ test
53. The Commission must be
satisfied that if this Application is granted the net economic and social impact
of approval will not be
detrimental to the well-being of the community of the
municipal district in which the Premises are located. Set out below (and
in tabular form at Appendix B) is the Commission’s assessment
of the economic and social benefits and disbenefits associated
Application, including the weighting given to each of these impacts.
Economic Impacts
54. The materials before the Commission and the evidence adduced at the
Hearing provided the evidentiary basis for a range of economic
benefits and
disbenefits associated with this Application.
Expenditure on capital works
55. A potential
economic benefit associated with this Application is that arising from the
expenditure on the proposed redevelopment
of the Premises.
56. In relation to the proposed renovations of the
Premises, the Applicant submitted that refurbishment and renovation works
) would occur at the Premises, including:
(a) to convert the external courtyard into a fully enclosed multipurpose area
including the provision of an additional 120 bistro
seats inside
(b) an all-weather indoor children’s play area;
(c) new male and female bathrooms; and
(d) new store area.
57. The Commission notes that Mr Nepean gave evidence that the conversion of
the external courtyard would allow for an extra 120 patrons
to be accommodated
inside. Mr Ryan also gave evidence that the bistro area has not been able to
operate at maximum capacity (i.e.
180 patrons) due to restrictions on social
distancing as such the external courtyard area is intended to be utilised by
patron overflow
from the bistro area.
58. The proposed Works are expected by the
Applicant to cost approximately $1.7 million. The Applicant asserted that
without approval
of the Application, it would not be in a position to implement
the proposed renovations. The Applicant indicated that the Works for
Premises would take approximately 24 months to substantially complete.
59. Mr Nepean, a board member of the Applicant,
gave evidence that the Applicant would seek to engage approximately 70% from
suppliers and 30% from non-local suppliers if for the Works if the
Application was approved. However, Mr Nepean also gave evidence
that although
the Applicant endeavours to employee local tradespeople and businesses, he noted
that sometimes local suppliers within
the Shire of Campaspe do not have the
ability or experience to undertake large scale building projects.
60. The Commission accepts that the Applicant intends to undertake the Works
if the Application is granted, and also accepts that,
given the nature of the
proposed Works, some local contractors would likely be sourced within the Shire
of Campaspe. Therefore, the
Commission considers this expenditure is an economic
benefit and, in the circumstances, gives it marginal weight.
61. Further, the Commission has been careful to
ensure that benefits associated with the renovation expenditure are not double
having regard to the social impact that may result from the improved
facilities. This aspect is considered further below at paragraphs
contracts and complementary expenditure
62. In the Ratio Report, the Applicant estimated
that the Works will result in increased patronage in the order of 315 patrons
week, and it is expected to generate approximately $530,000 in complementary
expenditure in its first year. Further, the value of
additional supply and
maintenance contracts is estimated to be $293,000.
63. The Commission
finds that there is likely to be an increase in patronage arising from the Works
and such increased patronage could
result in complementary expenditure. Based on
evidence that the patronage of the Premises, the Commission accepts that
patronage is also likely to be drawn from the catchment area. However,
there is some uncertainty as to the extent to which the new
patronage would
generate increased economic activity within the local area, as opposed to
transferred activity within the Shire of
Campaspe form other suppliers and other
complementary expenditure at the Premises.
64. For these reasons,
the Commission finds that any benefit associated with supply contracts and
complementary expenditure for the
Shire of Campaspe is an economic benefit and
gives it marginal weight.
Additional employment
65. According to the
Applicant, employment benefits associated with this Application would include
the creation of an additional 2.4
equivalent full time (
Premises (including 0.5 EFT positions in the gaming room).
66. The Applicant also anticipates that approximately 40-50 individuals will
be employed during the construction process across the
entire project.
67. In the Ratio Report, the Applicant submitted
that the majority of these positions will be taken by residents within the local
area. The Applicant also submitted that although the high unemployment within
the hospitality sector as a result of COVID-19 will
place greater value on any
68. Overall, the Commission finds that the
additional employment as a positive impact; noting that the additional
employment of 2.4
EFT is of significance to a municipality with an adult
population of 29,724 and an unemployment rate that is ranked 11
35 rural municipalities. The Commission also considers that the additional
employment of 0.5 EFT positions in the gaming room
to be a benefit, however,
recognises the possibility of employment transfer within the food and beverage
offering. The Commission
also notes the possibility of employment transfer
resulting from the impact of this Application on other venues within the Shire
of Campaspe due to the anticipated increase in gaming and other complementary
expenditure at the Premises. The Commission considers
it is an economic benefit
to the community to which it should attribute marginal weight.
Increased gaming competition in the Shire
of Campaspe
69. Increasing competition in gaming in Shire of
is a factor to be considered by the Commission in light of the
statutory purposes of the Act
and the consumer benefits that derive from competition.
70. In the ShineWing Report, Mr Stillwell
indicated that the Premises has no competitors within a 10km radius, with the
closest gaming
venues being located at a distance of approximately 30 to 40
kilometres by road.
71. Mr Stillwell used the utilisation survey
method of estimating additional gaming expenditure to be derived at the
Premises, he
considered this method was to be most appropriate for comparatively
low to mid performing venues with comparatively smaller gaming
rooms, such as
the Premises. Accordingly, Mr Stillwell considered the range of estimated
additional gaming expenditure for the Premises,
if the Application is approved,
to be between $153,534 and $245,654 per annum in the first 12 months of trade
post installation of
the additional eight EGMs. He also estimated that the
additional gross gaming expenditure derived from the increase in EGMs, 10%
be transferred expenditure.
72. Mr Ryan, a general manager of the Applicant, gave evidence that a
considerable amount of competition comes from over the border
in New South Wales
), as a number of local residents frequent the venues in NSW on
regular basis.
73. The Commission notes that in the ShineWing Report, Mr Stillwell stated
that the Premises is located within proximity to towns
in NSW where there are
venues which currently operate EGMs. Given the gaming patron locality survey, he
considered that patron catchment
can occur from these towns in NSW, however it
would not have a large overall impact on the gross gaming expenditure to be
transferred
to the Premises.
74. The Commission also notes that this Application, if approved would
increase EGM density in the municipality from 7.03 to 7.44
per 1,000 adults, as
compared with the rural average of 4.9 and the State average of 5 EGMs per 1,000
75. Considering the matters discussed above, while
competition can be a positive impact, the Commission considers that twelve
EGMs is a small increase relative to the overall market in the Shire
of Campaspe, being 209 EGMs across 4 venues. The Commission
acknowledges that
the EGM density in the municipality is 42.4% greater than the rural average and
39.4% greater than the State average,
which again lessens the impact on
competition of a small increase in EGMs. Accordingly, the Commission considers
it appropriate to
attribute nil weight.
Gaming expenditure not associated with problem gambling
76. To the extent that gaming expenditure is not
associated with problem gambling, it has been recognised that such expenditure
be treated as an economic
As Bell J notes in
Romsey No. 2
, this approach also brings to account the benefit obtained
from pure consumption by the lone gambler who does not use EGMs for social
77. In the ShineWing Report and at the Hearing, Mr Stillwell gave evidence
regarding the likely increase in gaming expenditure should
the Application be
granted. Specifically, he gave evidence of the likely increased gaming
expenditure in the first 12 months of operation
of the additional twelve EGMs at
the Premises.
78. The ShineWing Report sets out the different methodologies used to
estimate EGM expenditure and determined that the utilisation
survey method was
the most appropriate in the circumstances of the Application. On this basis and
compared with an analysis of historical
and recent trends in gaming expenditure,
Mr Stillwell estimated that (as noted in paragraphs
(a) the level of additional gross gaming expenditure generated from the
Application would be between $153,534 an $245,654 in the
first 12 months of
(b) due to the location of the Premises and the LGA being within a rural areas
of Victoria, the expenditure would most likely be
transferred expenditure from
existing venues within the Shire of Campaspe at the rate of 10%; and
(c) adopting the estimated level of 10% transferred expenditure, new gaming
expenditure is estimated to be between $138,181 and $221,089
in the first 12
months of trade.
79. The Commission notes from the VCGLR Report that the average net EGM
expenditure per adult in the Shire of Campaspe ($227.32, based
on spending in
the 2019/20 financial year), is lower than the rural average ($252.14) and the
State average ($377.57).
80. In the Ratio Report, Ms Vinecombe submitted that the Applicant's EGM
utilisation records indicate that the Premises' gaming room
did not operate at
peak utilisation (i.e. greater than 70% or 38 EGMs) at any time during the
survey period, which is indicative
of modest demand for gaming at the Premises.
Further, the highest utilisation recorded was 34 EGMs (64% utilisation) which
was recorded
at 9pm on Saturday 14 March 2020. The Applicant submitted the
modest level of utilisation combined with the modest NMR at the venue
an indication that problem gambling is not a significant issue at this venue.
81. In assessing the extent of the benefit
associated with this increased gaming expenditure, the Commission notes the
following in
respect to the Premises:
(a) there are already 209 EGMs across 4 venues (including the existing 53
accessible at the Premises), however there are no venues
located within a 10km
radius of the Premises;
(b) the median weekly household income for residents living within the primary
catchment area of the Premises sits well below both
the rural and State
(c) housing stress in the Shire of Campaspe is ranked 20
rural LGAs, and the housing stress in the immediate surrounding area of the
Premises (32.5%) is much lower than housing stress
for the Shire of Campaspe
(d) unemployment in the Shire of Campaspe is 4.9% (ranked 11
rural LGAs), compared with Victoria at 6.61%;
(e) the Shire of Campaspe has the 4
highest crime rate for rural
(f) the Shire of Campaspe is ranked 15
by rural LGAs for pensions
and allowances per 1,000 adults;
(g) in the 2019/20 financial year, the Shire of Campaspe had an average gaming
expenditure which is 9.84% less than the rural LGA
average and 39.79% more than
the State average; and
(h) approximately 40.9% of residents within a 5km radius from the Premises are
in the lowest two State SEIFA deciles.
82. Generally, the Commission considers that the
portion of new expenditure not attributable to problem gambling is an economic
Having regard to the matters discussed above regarding the Premises and
in the section below related to problem gambling, the Commission
considers that
the level of anticipated new expenditure is not particularly high, and there are
likely to be portions of new expenditure
at the Premises to be associated with a
risk of problem gambling. The Commission also considers there is some
uncertainty associated
with pre-COVID expenditure figures being replicated in
the future. Overall, the Commission attributes this benefit marginal weight.
Gambling expenditure associated with
problem gambling
83. To the extent
that a portion of the new expenditure is attributable to problem gambling, this
represents an economic
disbenefit.
In assessing this
impact (and other effects of problem gambling), the Commission recognises that
harms associated with problem gambling
may be experienced directly and
indirectly as a consequence of gambling undertaken by those who may be defined
as ‘problem
gamblers’, as well as those who may be otherwise
regarded as ‘low-risk’ or ‘moderate-risk’ gamblers.
84. In assessing the extent of this disbenefit,
the Commission has regard to the expenditure evidence set out in paragraph
above and the findings in relation to
the risk of problem gambling at the Premises discussed further below. In doing
so, the Commission
recognises that in considering this aspect of the
’ test it does not include
consideration of transferred expenditure because such expenditure cannot be said
to exacerbate proble
85. The extent to which new gaming expenditure will be associated with
problem gambling, and hence may be regarded as a disbenefit
associated with the
Application, will be influenced by the socio-economic status and vulnerability
of the community of the Shire
of Campaspe, and in particular those living in the
immediate surrounding area of the Premises. This is because communities
characterised
by relative socio-economic disadvantage are considered more
vulnerable to the harms arising from problem gambling.
86. In the Ratio Report, Ms Vinecombe noted that:
(a) The SEIFA Index for the Campaspe LGA (967) sits below the median for
Regional Victorian LGAs (977) and the median for all Victorian
LGAs (994).
(b) The suburb where the venue is located (Kyabram) and where the majority of
patrons reside sits within the 14
percentile.
(c) The suburbs that comprise the patron catchment of the venue (based on the
patron surveys), generally have SEIFA scores well below
the median SEIFA score
for Victorian suburbs.
(d) The venue is located within an SA1 that sits in the first decile with a
further five SA1 areas within a 10km radius sitting within
the first or second
deciles (bottom 20%). The remainder of the patron catchment sits in the
decile and is generally characterised by
sparsely populated areas including farmland.
(e) This indicates that the patron catchment does show significant signs of
disadvantage.
87. The Commission notes from the materials and evidence before it that other
factors suggesting the risk of increased incidence and
economic impact of
problem gambling at the Premises should this Application be granted, would be
reduced include:
(a) The Kyabram Club draws patrons from most of Kyabram, with an overall above
average socio-economic profile.
(b) It has a broad ‘full service’ venue offer, physical and
functional separation of the gaming room, minimum ten-hour
closure of the gaming
room, and other facilities also operating whenever the gaming room is open.
(c) It is a mid-sized gaming room, increasing the level of social and staff
interaction and lacking the sense of anonymity which
problem gamblers are known
to seek out.
(d) It has a venue operator with a strong commitment to responsible gambling
practices, assisted by the engagement of experts in
RSG compliance to implement
best practice initiatives.
88. While a 2019 audit by the Commission did
identify some non-compliances with various aspects of the regulatory scheme, the
submitted that:
(a) these non-compliances were towards the less significant end of the
(b) these non-compliances occurred before the Applicant engaged Mr Barrett as
its RSG supplier; and
(c) the most recent audit did not identify any non-compliances.
89. The Commission notes that the evidence provided by Mr Nepean and Mr Grima
had a particular focus on problem gamblers as a category
and whilst this is
noted, the Commission does need to consider the other categories of at risk
gamblers (as noted in paragraph
90. Overall, the Commission considers with respect
to the Application whilst acknowledging mitigating factors proposed (including,
importantly, hours of operation and the existing RSG commitment at the Premises)
there does remain the likelihood of increased expenditure
associated with
problem gambling which the Commission assesses is a marginal to low disbenefit.
Issues relating to the negative social
impacts associated with problem gambling
are considered further in paragraphs
diversion of trade from other gaming venues
91. In the Shinewing Report, Mr Stillwell
estimated that at least 10% of gaming expenditure would be transferred from
existing venues
within the Shire of Campaspe. Mr Stillwell also submitted that
due to the location of the Premises and LGA being within a regional
Victoria, the expenditure would most likely be transferred expenditure from
existing venues located both within and outside
the Shire of Campaspe.
92. The Commission accepts the Applicant’s
evidence that at least 10% of anticipated increased expenditure would be
transferred
from other venues, located both within and outside the Shire of
Campaspe. The Commission considers that a transfer rate of this size
significant, however due to the lack of competition within the market, the
Commission finds that the diversion of trade will
have a negligible detrimental
economic impact on other venue operators. Having regard to these factors, the
Commission considers
this economic disbenefit as marginal.
Conclusion on economic impacts
93. After considering the economic benefits of the Application and balanced
against the disbenefits, the Commission considers that,
on balance, the
Application is likely to have a marginal positive economic impact if
Social Impacts
94. The materials before the Commission and the evidence adduced at the
Hearing detailed a range of social benefits and disbenefits
associated with this
Application.
Increased gaming opportunities for those who enjoy gaming
95. Increased
gaming opportunities is a positive impact if the Application will better serve
the needs of gaming patrons through providing
additional opportunities and
choice for those who choose to play EGMs responsibly.
96. Mr Stillwell submitted that the Premises does not necessarily reach peak
utilisation. However, Ms Vinecombe submitted that there
is some benefit to
patrons of the Premises, given the existing ultilisation and the improved choice
as a result of the increase in
97. While the Commission considers that the
approval of the Application would have a positive effect of increasing gaming
opportunities
for those who enjoy gaming, the addition of a small number of EGMs
to an existing venue with low utilisation rates is unlikely to
significant impact. The Commission therefore attributes nil to marginal weight
to this factor.
Improved facilities at the Premises
98. Separate
from the economic benefit that may be associated with expenditure involved in
capital works at the Premises, there are
also potential social benefits to the
community that may arise having regard to the nature of the renovations that are
intended to
take place.
99. As noted at paragraph
the Works include the conversion of the existing outdoor area into a fully
enclosed multipurpose area including the provision
of an additional 120 bistro
seats inside and an all-weather indoor kids play area. The Works will also allow
for more flexible usage
of the function space. Accordingly, the Applicant
submits that the proposed renovations to the Premises are not primarily
with gaming. Rather enhancing the capacity of the club in a broader
community offering.
100. The Commission considers that the
community’s access to, and use of, the proposed improved facilities at the
Premises will
provide a social benefit to the community of the Shire of
Campaspe. The Commission recognises that the Works are not a major redevelopment
rather an enhancement that will improve existing facilities at the Premises.
Therefore, the Commission considers it is appropriate
to attribute marginal
weight to this factor.
contributions
101. In determining
the net economic and social impact of applications of this nature, both the
have regularly treated
community contributions proposed by an Applicant as a positive benefit. However,
for such contributions to
be regarded as a benefit associated with the
Application, it is necessary that they are properly regarded as community
contributions
and that they will result as a consequence of the Application
being granted.
102. The Commission has taken into account both the economic (financial
benefit enjoyed by recipients) and social (improvement to
the social fabric of
the community) benefits associated with the proposed community contributions
forming part of the Application
in this section, and given appropriate weight to
that impact in its cumulative form.
103. The Applicant’s proposed conditions, if
the Application is granted, include a condition to:
(a) continue to pay existing cash contributions to not-for-profit community and
sporting groups in the Shire of Campaspe in the sum
of $100,000 per annum
the Existing Contributions
), for as long as the any of the Additional
EGMs are in operation.
(a) make cash contributions annually (in addition to the Existing Contributions)
in the sum of $15,000 (increased each year by the
increase in CPI) (
Contributions
) for as long as any of the Additional EGMs
are in operation at the Premises.
Contributions
104. The Applicant provided that the Contributions will be allocated each
year to not-for-profit community groups and sporting organisations
services and facilities to residents in the Shire of
The Commission notes
that the Applicant in its submissions and evidence demonstrated the breadth of
their community contributions
approach to a wide section of community.
105. The Commission notes that the Applicant at the Hearing committed to the
increased contributions and subsequently submitted proposed
conditions to the
Commission mandating this increased contribution (see paragraph
above) which has been adopted by the
Commission. Accordingly, the Commission has confidence that the community
contributions will
result as a consequence of the Application being granted.
106. Overall, the Commission considers that, by way of the wording of the
proposed conditions, the Applicant is committing to community
contributions
totalling $115,000 to organisations providing services or facilities to
residents of the Shire of Campaspe. However,
the Commission finds that, the true
benefit associated with this Application is limited to the additional community
contributions
in the amount of $15,000 per annum.
107. It is anticipated that the majority of this additional spending
($15,000) would be directed to the enhancement of the Kyabram
Fauna Park, which
is a regional tourism asset. Improvements to the Fauna Park have the potential
to draw additional tourism and visitors
to Kyabram and thus to increase overall
spending in the community at least for the next three years of the agreement.
108. The Ratio Report provides that the Applicant has made cash donations of
in excess of $115,000 in calendar year 2019 to a wide
range of clubs and
organisations. Of note are the donations made to preschools, schools and
secondary colleges within 20km of the
Premises, which totalled $21,597 in 2019,
and represented a significant benefit to the community as a whole, regardless of
they have any involvement with the Applicant or with any of the other
community groups to which the Applicant donates.
109. Ms Vinecombe gave evidence that the Applicant has a history of extensive
community contributions to a broad range of local community
and sporting groups.
This included the school sponsorship donations, which provide $7 per student
every year to every preschool,
primary and secondary school within an
approximate 20-kilometre radius of the Premises, as well as a minimum donation
of $600 which
is provided to these schools. Mr Nepean also gave evidence that
they have a sponsorship program in place, and they encourage people
to apply via
their website.
110. The Applicant submitted that the cash contributions serve a much broader
catchment than the Kyabram township itself, with donations
made to organisations
in several smaller townships such as Stanhope, Rushworth, Rochester, Girgarre,
and Tongala. In addition to
the cash donations, the Applicant submitted it
provides a modest amount of ‘in kind’ donations in the form of meal
for community organisations. The total value of in-kind donations in
2019 was $1,850.
111. Mr Curtis, Chair of the Kyabram and District Community Bank - Bendigo
Bank, gave evidence that the Premises is a very important
economic contributor
to the community. He indicated that the function facilities at the Premises is
often used by the local organisation
free of charge for all sorts of different
function (i.e. board meeting and charity functions).
112. Accordingly, the Commission considers that
the Applicant’s commitment to the Contributions (particularly to
organisations
providing services and facilities to residents in the Shire of
Campaspe), as well as its strong contributions culture and connection
local community would be a positive economic and social benefit and considers it
a social benefit of marginal weight.
Possibility of increased incidence and
impact of problem gambling on the community
113. Wherever accessibility to EGMs is increased,
there is a risk of an increase in problem gambling, which leads to other costs
as adverse health outcomes, family breakdowns and other social costs.
Accordingly, the Commission accepts that there is potential
for a negative
social impact through possible increased problem gambling expenditure.
114. The Commission refers to and relies upon the
evidence set out in paragraphs
with respect to the economic impact of
problem gambling on the community, which equally applies to the social impact of
problem gambling.
As is concluded there, the Commission considers that there is
potential for increased risk in gambling related harms as a result
Application. This gives rise to a negative social impact. The Commission accepts
that harms associated with gambling are
wide-ranging and attributable to all
categories of gamblers (‘low-risk’, ‘moderate-risk’ and
gamblers’) and across the community more broadly.
115. Mr Barrett gave evidence that the Applicant's compliance with
responsible service of gaming was strong. Mr Barrett noted that
the Premises was
a small venue, that the staff of the Applicant knew its regular patrons well and
that the hours of operation were
modest in comparison with other venues. He
further noted that the size of a venue, its operating hours, its broad venue
the layout of the venue were all protective factors against problem
gambling. Overall, Mr Barret submitted that the increase in EGMs
would have a
negligible effect on problem gambling in the LGA.
116. Having regard to
all of the evidence and circumstances, for the reasons discussed in relation to
the economic impact of problem
gambling, particularly given both the location of
the Premises within the Shire of Campaspe and the socio-economic disadvantage of
residents within the catchment area of the Premises, the Commission considers it
appropriate to attribute marginal to low weight
to this negative social
Community attitude
117. As was determined in
Macedon Ranges Shire
Council v Romsey Hotel Pty Ltd and
the Commission
recognises that while community apprehension is not an over-riding factor (in
the sense that the Application is not
a referendum on gaming), it is certainly a
relevant factor in the consideration of the particular social impact within, and
no net detriment’
118. The Commission notes that Council did not oppose this Application, and
only one objection has been received from the Campaspe
Primary Care Partnership.
This opposition was directed towards the concern that this Application might
increase the risk of problem
gambling through the increased accessibility and
anonymity a larger venue provides in a relatively small town.
119. The Applicant submitted that the community opposition to the Application
will have little or no impact on the risk of problem
gambling and gambling
related harm in Kyabram and surrounds. Further, any residual risk is also
mitigated by the specific qualities
of the Premises, including its commitment to
RSG and the fact that it is not the kind of venue that would be attractive to
120. Overall, the Commission is satisfied that the
submissions referred to in paragraph
above suggest that there is some limited negative attitude within Shire of
Campaspe to this Application. The Commission notes that
is has considered the
general concerns raised by the Campaspe Primary Care Partnership regarding
problem gambling, and the non-opposition
from Council. In all of these
circumstances and evidence in relation to the Application, the Commission
considers it appropriate
to attribute nil to marginal weight to this negative
social impact.
Conclusion on social impacts
121. After considering the social benefits of the Application and balanced
against the disbenefits, the Commission considers that,
on balance, there is
likely to be a marginally negative social impact should the Application be
Net economic and social impact
no net detriment
3.4.20(c) of the GR Act requires the Commission to weigh the likely positive
social and economic impacts of an application
against the likely negative social
and economic impacts. This test will be satisfied if, following the weighing of
any likely impacts,
the Commission is satisfied that the net economic and social
impact of approval on the well-being of a relevant community will be
neutral or positive.
123. After consideration of the material before it, including the evidence
provided at the Hearing (and weighted as outlined above
and summarised in
tabular form at Appendix B of these Reasons for Decision), the Commission is
satisfied that the social and economic
impact on the well-being of the community
of the municipal district in which the Premises are located will not be
detrimental to
the well-being of the community of the LGA. Accordingly, the
pre-condition set out in section 3.4.20(1)(c) of the GR Act is
D. Independence from other gaming venues
124. Section 3.4.20(1)(d) of the GR Act requires the Commission to be
satisfied that, if the Premises are proposed to be added to
Applicant’s licence as an approved venue and the Applicant (or an
associate of the Applicant) operated an approved venue
within 100 metres of the
Premises, the management and operation of the Premises and other approved venues
are genuinely independent
of each other.
125. The Commission notes that the Application is not proposing to add the
Premises to the Applicant’s venue operator’s
licence (as it already
exists on the licence), nor does the Applicant (or an associate) operate an
approved venue within 100 metres
of the Premises.
126. On this basis, the Commission considers that the mandatory pre-condition
set out in section 3.4.20(1)(d) is not applicable to
this Application.
127. On the material that has been put before it, the Commission has
determined that the ‘
no net detriment’
test has been
and that granting the
Application to amend the venue operator’s licence will not result in
exceeding the municipal limit set
pursuant to section 3.4A.5 of the GR Act.
Pursuant to section 3.4.20(1) of the GR Act, the Commission is satisfied that it
exercise its discretion to approve the Application and make the proposed
amendment to the venue operator’s licence to vary
of EGMs permitted in the premises from 53 to 65, subject to the
conditions set out in Appendix A.
128. The Application is
therefore granted.
The preceding
paragraphs and the following
Appendix are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Ms Danielle Huntersmith
and Mr Des Powell.
(a) The Works at the Premises (as defined in clause
) must be completed to the
satisfaction of the Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation
) by the date that is 24 months after the commencement of the
operation of any of the Additional EGMs at the Premises.
(b) For the purpose of this clause, the Works must
be completed substantially in accordance with the plans attached at Appendix D
of the Social and Economic Impact Assessment prepared by Ratio Consultants dated
(c) If the Works referred to in condition
are not completed to the satisfaction
of the Commission by the date that is 24 months
after the commencement of
the operation of any of the Additional EGMs at the Premises, the operation of
the Additional EGMs must cease
immediately until the Venue Operator is provided
with written confirmation by the Commission that the Works have been completed
the satisfaction of the Commission.
(d) The Commission may, on the request of the Venue Operator agree to extend the
time for completion of the Works referred to in
. The request must be made no later
than the date that is 21 months after the commencement of the operation of any
of the Additional
EGMs. Any request for an extension of time must include an
explanation as to why the Works have not been substantially completed.
(e) If the Commission agrees to extend the time for completion of the Works in
accordance with condition 1(d), the Commission may
require that any of the
Additional EGMs cease operation during the period of any extension of time
granted by the Commission.
2. Community Contributions
(a) The Venue Operator will continue to pay existing
cash contributions to not-for-profit community and sporting groups in the Shire
of Campaspe in the sum of $100,000 per annum (
the Existing
Contributions
), for as long as the any of the Additional EGMs are in
(b) The Venue Operator will make cash contributions annually (in addition to the
Existing Contributions) in the sum of $15,000 (increased
each year by the
increase in CPI) (
the Additional
Contributions
) for as long as any
of the Additional EGMs are in operation at the Premises.
(c) The Additional Contributions will be allocated each year to not-for-profit
community groups and sporting organisations providing
services and facilities to
residents in the Shire of Campaspe.
(d) If the Existing Contributions and Additional Contributions are not allocated
in full each financial year as required in conditions
2(a) and 2(b), the
operation of the Additional EGMs must cease immediately for so long as the
Existing Contributions and Additional
Contributions (or part thereof) remain
outstanding.
Summary of economic and social impacts
The following table is a summation of the economic and social benefits and
disbenefits considered by the Commission in reaching its
decision. The table is
to be read in conjunction with the main body of the Reasons for Decision, as the
weight attributed to each
factor is determined in light of the particular
circumstances of the Application and the evidence presented.
Economic impacts
Paragraph Reference
Comments relevant to weight
Expenditure on capital works
The proposed Works are expected by the Applicant to cost approximately
$1.7million.
Regarding the construction costs, the Applicant estimates that 70% will be
spent on local suppliers and 30% will be spent on non-local
suppliers from the
Shire of Campaspe.
Marginal weight
Supply contracts and complementary expenditure
The Applicant anticipated increased patronage of 315 patrons per week,
accompanied by $530,000 increase in complementary expenditure.
Additional supply contracts totalling $293,000 per year, with approximately
70 percent being fulfilled by suppliers within the Shire
of Campaspe.
There is some uncertainty as to the extent to which the new patronage would
generate increased economic activity within the local
area, as opposed to
transferred activity within the Shire of Campaspe and other complementary
expenditure at the Premises.
Marginal weight
Additional employment
Creation of 2.4 additional EFT positions at the Premises, including an
additional 0.5 EFT position in the gaming room.
The Applicant also anticipates that approximately 40-50 individuals will be
employed during the construction process across the entire
Positive impact, noting the possibility of employment transfer resulting
from the impact of this Application on other venues within
the Shire of Campaspe
due to the anticipated increase in gaming and other complementary expenditure at
the Premises.
Marginal weight
Increased gaming competition in the Shire of Campaspe
Overall market in the Shire of Campaspe is 209
EGMs across 4 venues.
Twelve additional EGMs is a small increase relative to the current market.
EGM density in the LGA municipality is 42.4% greater than
the rural average and
39.4% greater than the State average, which again lessens the impact on
competition of a small increase in
Nil weight.
Gaming expenditure not associated with problem gambling
Additional gaming expenditure generated from the Application would be
between $153,534 and $245,654 in the first 12 months of trade.
Likely transfer rate of 10%, resulting in new gaming expenditure estimated
to be between $138,181 and $221,089 in the first 12 months
Level of anticipated new expenditure is not particularly high, and it is
likely that there would be portions of new expenditure at
the Premises
associated with a risk of problem gambling (and therefore not forming part of
this economic benefit).
Marginal weight
Disbenefits
Gambling expenditure associated with problem gambling
New gaming expenditure estimated to be between $138,181 and $221,089 in the
first 12 months of trade.
Catchment area demonstrates mixed levels of socio-economic disadvantage.
Mitigating factors include the relatively small size of the gaming room,
the relatively short hours of operation and the existing
and ongoing RSG
commitment at the Premises.
Marginal to low weight
Potential diversion of trade from other gaming venues
10% of anticipated increased expenditure would be derived from other venues
located within the Shire of Campaspe.
Transfer rate of this size is not insignificant, however due to the lack of
competition within the market, the diversion of trade
will have a negligible
detrimental economic impact on other venue operators.
Marginal weight.
Social impacts
Paragraph Reference
Comment relevant to weight
Increased gaming opportunities for those who enjoy gaming
While the Premises does not necessarily reach peak utilisation. However,
there is some benefit to patrons of the Premises, given the
ultilisation and the improved choice as a result of the increase in EGMs.
Overall, unlikely to have a significant impact.
Nil to marginal weight
Improved facilities at the Premises
The Works include the conversion of the existing outdoor area into a fully
enclosed multipurpose area including the provision of an
additional 120 bistro
seats and an all-weather indoor kids play area.
The Works predominantly only improve existing facilities at the Premises,
however the Commission notes the improved facilities at
the Premises will
provide a social benefit to the community of the Shire of Campaspe.
Marginal weight
Community contributions
The Applicant is committing to community contributions totalling $115,000
to organisations providing services or facilities to residents
of the Shire of
The true benefit associated with this Application is limited to community
contributions in the amount of $15,000 per annum.
The function facilities at the Premises will continue to be used by the
local organisation free of charge for all sorts of different
function (i.e.
board meeting and charity functions).
Marginal weight
Disbenefits
Possibility of increased incidence and impact of problem gambling on the
There is potential for an increased risk in gambling-related harms as a
result of this Application.
The Commission refers to and relies on the reasons discussed in relation to
the economic impact of problem gambling, particularly
given both the location of
the Premises within the Shire of Campaspe and the socio-economic disadvantage of
residents within the
Marginal to low weight.
Community attitude
The Council did not oppose the Application, and only one objection has been
received from the Campaspe Primary Care Partnership.
This opposition was directed towards the concern that this Application
might increase the risk of problem gambling through the increased
accessibility
and anonymity a larger venue provides in a relatively small town.
Nil to marginal weight
A public inquiry is required to
be conducted by the Commission in relation to the Application pursuant to
section 28(g)(iii) of the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation Act 2011
). As to the manner in which the
Commission is to conduct an inquiry, see generally Pt 3 Div 2 VCGLR Act
(Inquiries), see also Pt
2 Div 3 VCGLR Act (Performance and exercise of the
Commission's functions, powers and
The Applicant provided
the Commission with a letter dated 28 March 2019 from the Council acknowledging
receipt of the application,
which the Commission regarded as sufficient evidence
for the purposes of s 3.4.18(2) of the GR Act.
Mount Alexander Shire
Council v Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation & Ors
[2013] VCAT 101
, [52] per Dwyer
Macedon Ranges Shire
Council v Romsey Hotel Pty Ltd
[2008] VSCA 45
(2008) 19 VR 422
, [42]-[43] per Warren CJ,
Maxwell P and Osborn AJA (
Romsey Hotel Pty Ltd v Victorian Commission for Gambling Regulation (Romsey
[2009] VCAT 2275
, [332], [348] per Bell J (
Mount Alexander Shire Council v
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation & Ors
, [58] per Dwyer DP.
Mount Alexander Shire Council v Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation & Ors
[2013] VCAT 101
, [57] per Dwyer
Romsey No. 2
[2009] VCAT 2275
[352] per Bell J;
Mount Alexander Shire Council v
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation & Ors.
, [58] per Dwyer DP.
Mount Alexander Shire Council v Victorian Commission for Gambling
and Liquor Regulation & Ors.
[2013] VCAT 101
, [60] per Dwyer
Ocean Grove Bowling
Club v Victorian Commission for Gaming Regulation
[2006] VCAT 1921
following per Morris J;
Bakers Arms Hotel Pty Ltd v Victorian Commission for
Gambling and Liquor Regulation
[2014] VCAT 1192
, [126] per Code PM and
Nelthorpe M; see also
Mount Alexander Shire Council v Victorian Commission
for Gambling and Liquor Regulation & Ors.
[2013] VCAT 101
following per Dwyer DP (with respect to section 3.3.7 of the GR
Alexander Shire Council v Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation & Ors.
[2013] VCAT 101
, [98] per Dwyer
Ocean Grove
Bowling Club v Victorian Commission for Gaming Regulation
[2006] VCAT 1921
[32] per Morris J;
Mount Alexander Shire Council v Victorian Commission for
Gambling and Liquor Regulation & Ors
[2013] VCAT 101
, [99] per Dwyer
; Bakers Arms Hotel Pty Ltd v Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
[2014] VCAT 1192
, [126] per Code PM and Nelthorpe M. As to
policy principles identified for consideration, see the
[2008] VSCA 45
(2008) 19 VR 422
, [7] per Warren CJ, Maxwell P and Osborn
[2013] VCAT 101
Where reference is
made in these reasons to the Shire of Campaspe, this is a reference to the local
government area
Government Gazette S318, 20 September
SEIFA is a product
developed by the ABS to assist in the assessment of the welfare of Australian
communities. The SEIFA Index allows
the ranking of regions/areas, providing a
method of determining the level of social and economic well-being in each
The VCGLR Report
adopts a 2.5km radius as the immediate surrounding area for applications to
amend EGM venue operator’s licences
for venues within rural
SA1s have been
designed by the ABS as the smallest unit for the release of Census data, and
generally have a population of 200 to
800 persons, with an average of 400
SEIFA index of
relative disadvantage is divided into five quintiles each comprising 20% of
areas (Statistical Areas Level 1 (SA1s))
ranked by socioeconomic status from the
most disadvantaged (lowest / 1st quintile) to least disadvantaged (highest / 5th
High disadvantage is indicated by a low SEIFA score (and low
disadvantage by a high
The gaming room is
open daily between 10am to 11pm (Monday to Thursday), 10am to Midnight (Friday
to Saturday), and 11am to 11pm
See for example,
Romsey No. 2
[2009] VCAT 2275
Whittlesea CC v George Adams Pty
[2011] VCAT 534
(7 April 2011).
See GR Act, s 3.1.1(2).
Romsey No. 2
[2009] VCAT 2275
[351] per Bell
Ibid. Bell J further
notes at [352] that the other approach is to say (as Morris J did in
Pty Ltd v Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation
at 79) that gaming extends ‘substantial economic and social
benefits’ to gaming machine users, which treats consumption
as a benefit
without saying whether it is economic or social. While Bell J states both
approaches are correct, for the purposes of
this Application, this benefit is
treated as an economic
See VCGLR Report,
The Commission
recognises that, on review, the key likely disbenefit of ‘problem
gambling’ has, for convenience, been
treated under the heading of
‘social impacts’ in various instances: see
Mount Dandenong
Tourist Hotel Pty v Greater Shepparton CC
[2012] VCAT 1899
, [121] and
Melbourne CC v Kingfish Victoria Pty Ltd & Anor
, [47] per Martin PM and Naylor M. However, this is not an approach
that has been uniformly adopted; see, for example,
Mount Alexander Shire
[2013] VCAT 101
and following per Dwyer DP. For
completeness, the Commission considers both the economic and social impacts of
problem gambling in
assessing this
Application.
Arms Hotel Pty Ltd v Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation
[2014] VCAT 1192
per Code PM and Nelthorpe M;
Kilsyth and Mountain
District Basketball Association Inc v Victorian Commission for Gambling
[2007] VCAT 2
, [40] per Morris J.
Application by
Richmond Football Club
[2015] VCGLR (24 July 2015) (Commissioners Cohen and
Melbourne CC v Kingfish Victoria Pty Ltd & Anor
[2013] VCAT 1130
Bakers Arms Hotel Pty Ltd v Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
[2014] VCAT 1192.
Conditions.
[2008] VSCA 45
(2008) 19 VR 422
, [44] per Warren CJ, Maxwell P and Osborn AJA. See
Mount Alexander Shire Council v Victorian Commission for Gambling and
Liquor Regulation & Ors.
[2013] VCAT 101
, [73] per Dwyer
Mount Alexander Shire
Council v Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation & Ors.
[2013] VCAT 101
Refer to paragraph
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (9.12 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter