URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VDBT/1998/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Latino v HGF & anor [1998] VDBT 5 (6 April 1998)
THE DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(DOMESTIC BUILDING CONTRACTS AND TRIBUNAL ACT 1995)
- ORDERS FOR COSTS -
SERGIO LATINO & ANNA LATINO
HOUSING GUARANTEE FUND LTD.
(A.C.N. 006 258 233)
B J & P M GAMBLIN
PRESIDING MEMBER:
Mr F. Tenni
ORIGINATING DOCUMENT:
Original Application - Costs
APPEARANCES:
Mr M. Ridgeway of Counsel for the
Ms K. Pettigrew of Counsel
for the First Respondent
Mr J Bolton of
Counsel for the Second Respondent
DATE(S) OF HEARING:
23 February, 1998
DATE OF DETERMINATION:
6 April, 1998
I MAKE THE FOLLOWING ORDERS:
1. (a) That the firm of Testart Robinson, Solicitors for the Applicants, pay
the sum of $2,538 to the First Respondent, being the
cost of the first day of
this hearing on 19th January, 1998.
(b) That the firm of Testart Robinson, Solicitors for the Applicants, pay the
sum of $2,846 to the Second Respondent, being the cost
of the first day of this
hearing on 19 January, 1998.
2. (a) As between the Applicant and the First Respondent, I make no order for
costs of the hearing on 20th, 21st and 22nd January,
(b) That the Applicants pay the sum of $2,651 to the Second Respondent, being
the cost of the hearing on 20th, 21st and 22nd January,
3. That the firm of Testart Robinson, Solicitors for the Applicants, pay the
sum of $1,000 to each of the First and Second Respondents,
being the cost of the
proceedings held on 23rd February, 1998.
4. That the Applicants pay the sum of $500 to each of the First and Second
Respondents, being the cost of the Case Management Conference
held on 2nd
October, 1997.
5. That there be no order for costs under
Contracts Guarantee Act
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(G:Determ96\0023a-96)
FILE NO. A23/96
THE DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(DOMESTIC BUILDING CONTRACTS AND TRIBUNAL ACT 1995)
-REASONS FOR DECISIONS ON COSTS -
SERGIO LATINO & ANNA LATINO
HOUSING GUARANTEE FUND LTD.
(A.C.N. 006 258 233)
B J & P M GAMBLIN
PRESIDING MEMBER:
Mr F. Tenni
ORIGINATING DOCUMENT:
Original Application - Costs
APPEARANCES:
Mr M. Ridgeway of Counsel for the
Ms K. Pettigrew of Counsel
for the First Respondent
Mr J Bolton of
Counsel for the Second Respondent
DATE(S) OF HEARING:
23 February, 1998
DATE OF DETERMINATION:
6 April, 1998
REASONS FOR DECISIONS ON COSTS:
Cost of First Day of Hearing - 19/1/98
In my reasons for the determination given on 11/2/98 I rejected the notion
that the "Amended Points of Claim" filed 23 December, 1997
by the Applicants,
could be considered as a document originating proceedings against the First and
Second Respondents. In those
reasons I indicated that it was clear to me that
the proceedings before me constituted an appeal against the decision of the Fund
not to allow the owners claim that three particular items were the result of
defective work by the builder.
In fact I had already made a ruling to that effect very late on the first day
of hearing. In answer to comments made by Mr Ridgeway
to the owners I said:
"There is no claim before the Tribunal for other than the three
Day one proceeded something like this:
At the commencement Miss Pettigrew and Mr Bolton for the First and Second
Respondents objected to the filing and contents of the owners’
‘Amended Points of Claim’. The objections were to late filing, to
amending without permission of the Tribunal and to
the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal to deal with the matters raised in the Amended Points of Claim.
Legal argument followed and I adjourned around 11.20 a.m. At 12.30 p.m. I
returned with a finding that I rejected the amendments,
particularly as they
concerned the builder. At that stage Mr Ridgeway introduced the argument that
the ‘Amended Points of
Claim’ itself constituted an originating
document which formed the proper basis for a claim.
The lunch adjournment was taken at 1.00 p.m. and the hearing resumed at 2.20
p.m. Soon after, Mr Ridgeway informed me that he had
not seen the form, signed
by the owners on 10 April, 1996, which form brought the parties to the Domestic
Building Tribunal. That
form is headed
"Domestic Building Tribunal
Application form
(Where Appeal to Appeals Committee Already Lodged)"
The appeal referred to is against the Housing Guarantee Fund’s decision
not to include three particular items in a Schedule
At 2.40 p.m. I again made a ruling that I had no jurisdiction to hear other
than what relates to the appeal against the Fund’s
decision. The hearing
was then adjourned to allow the owners to consider their position with their
legal representatives; Ms Arvanitis,
Solicitor, was present, instructing Mr
Ridgeway. The hearing resumed at 3.35 p.m.
After a brief discussion as to what costs might be involved in an
adjournment, Mr Ridgeway advised he was instructed to proceed on
the points of
claim "as they stand". About 3.45 p.m. Miss Pettigrew argued that as the Fund
had made no decision on quantum there
could be no matters concerning quantum
raised in this hearing. Mr Ridgeway argued otherwise, and at about 4.30 p.m. I
made the ruling
to which I have already referred
"There is no claim before the Tribunal for other than the three
At the end of the day the result was that not a word of evidence had been
given and I had rejected all of Mr Ridgeway’s continuous
arguments that the hearing should cover a much wider ambit. I have set out the
day’s proceedings in some considerable
detail because that forms my reason
for rejecting one argument put forward by Mr Ridgeway at the Costs Hearing on 23
February, 1998.
His claim was that the owners should not be held responsible
for the loss of the day because events other than the jurisdiction
argument took
place and in fact the Respondents should be made to pay costs as they took up a
large part of the day arguing minor
amendments. It is true that the builder did
propose a form of settlement but that did not arise until after 4.30 p.m.
I am satisfied that the proceedings on 19 January, 1998 were a total loss for
the Respondents. However Mr Ridgeway has argued that
the Respondents themselves
have brought about that situation because of their comments and attitude at the
Case Management Conferences.
In support thereof he has presented the
transcripts of the proceedings at those conferences.
At the first of those conferences held on 4 September, 1997 before Davey J,
Mr Latino appeared in person, Mr Johns for the builder
and Miss Curtin for the
Fund. There, the question arose whether the Tribunal might find itself asked to
deal with some matters already
heard by the A.A.T. Ms Curtin and Mr Johns
agreed that could be an issue. Mr Johns felt
"there should be proper particulars of claim raised so that we can
identify what we are talking about" - pages 4 - 5.
At page 7 Mr Johns raised the question of quantum. Ms Curtin noted the Fund
had carried out an inspection and prepared a report which
"at this stage it is not appropriate to determine the quantum ......and
that we are not sure which issues are in dispute .......".
Mr Johns also pointed out that a lot of issues (a plethora) had been raised
at mediation. He felt Particulars of Claim should show
an exact quantum.
Davey, J ordered the Applicant to file Particulars of Claim including full
particulars and quantum claimed, by
18 September, 1997.
After that Mr Latino engaged Testart Robinson, Solicitors, to act on his
behalf. During the costs hearing I questioned Mr Latino
under oath. I asked
him what instructions he gave to his solicitors. His reply was:
"The instructions were basically to follow this case through. Me and my
wife just got to a stage where we needed a solicitor to assist
Later I asked:
"Is it basically you instructed Testart Robinson to follow the case
"Yes, we instructed them to."
"Did you tell them what action you had taken to that
"We had the files there and we gave them most of the files of
what’s been happening from the start - before they got started.
everything was on file."
Another firm of solicitors had acted for Mr & Mrs Latino at an earlier
stage. In September 1997 Ms Arvanitis of Testart Robinson
took over the case.
On 19 September, 1997 she conducted an inspection of files held at the Domestic
Tribunal and the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
The Applicants’ points of claim were not filed by 18 September, 1997.
On 2 October, 1997, a further Case Management Conference
was held before Davey
J. All parties were legally represented. The Fund’s representative has
not been identified. Ms Arvanitis
appeared for the owners and Mr Johns for the
builder. The owners sought an extension of time for filing their Points of
Mr Ridgeway has provided a transcript of those proceedings.
From page 5 of that transcript one notes that Mr Arvanitis raised the figure
of $40,000 as the amount of the claim. Mr Johns indicated
that Respondents
would raise contract and variation issues. The fact that he did not dispute the
figure of $40,000 may well have
led the Judge to confirm that quantum was an
issue proper to be included in the Points of Claim.
Principally, on the basis of the matters raised on page 5 of the Transcript,
Mr Ridgeway argues that the builder did expect the Tribunal
to embark on a
hearing of the wide ambit of claims, that the builder misled the owners and the
Tribunal per Davey J on that fact,
and as a result he is not entitled to claim
costs for the lost first day of the hearing. Mr Ridgeway implies that the Fund
misled the parties and the Tribunal and should not be entitled to costs for
that first day. The owners’ Points of Claim were
filed at the Tribunal on
20 October, 1997, and amended Points of Claim were filed on 23 December,
At the Costs Hearing on 23 February, 1998, Miss Pettigrew for the Fund,
stated that the Points of Claim necessitated an inordinate
amount of time before
she could submit there was no jurisdiction. She pointed out that at the CMC
held on 2 October, 1997, there
were no Points of Claim filed so there was little
the Fund could say on that date about the extent of the claim. She also made
point that it is not the Respondent’s job to clarify the
Applicant’s claim.
I would comment that the Fund’s representative had relatively little to
say at that CMC; however page 6 of the transcript notes
that he or she said:
"There will also be arguments in relation to - it depends what the claim,
how the claim is actually listed.
There may be some jurisdictional points
but they would only be short arguments".
Page 3 of the Transcript indicates that the Fund was aware of a report
prepared for the owner by a Mr Glynn-Lewis, which covered the
whole ambit of the
owners’ claims. The Fund acknowledged it was obtaining its own report,
"What we have been doing on a ‘without prejudice’ basis is
having our own experts look at that report
(by Glynn -Lewis)
that, I do not believe, should hold anything up. That is merely a matter -
an attempt to resolve the issue
I do not read that remark as saying, ‘we are prepared to join all
issues at a hearing’.
Mr Bolton for the builder, stated that the builder was at the hearing because
of a dispute between the other two parties. I believe
that is the correct
interpretation of
House Contracts Guarantee Act
. Mr Bolton referred to the role of Mr Johns at the CMCs. He claimed that
Mr Johns neither supported nor denied the $40,000 figure
- that the application
(appeal) was on foot - we were not to know the details - those three items could
have amounted to $40,000.
I am not much persuaded by those comments but I do
give credit to later remarks by Mr Bolton that the transcript does not indicate
that Mr Johns knew what it was all about; that when the Points of Claim arrived
he was able to argue successfully that there was
no action against the Second
Respondent. I agree with that except to confirm that the builder was a
Respondent to the claim for
the three items which were the subject of the appeal
against the Fund’s decision.
I am satisfied that the ‘lost’ first day of hearing on 19
January, 1998 was in no way the fault of either of the Respondents.
believe that the responsibility for that day having been wasted lies directly
with the owners.
On more than one occasion during the hearing I indicated to Mr Ridgeway that
I would be considering the application of Section 92(3)
Building Contracts and Tribunal Act
1995. That sub-section reads:
"If the Tribunal believes that the representative of a party, rather than the
party, is responsible for conduct described in sub-section
(1), the Tribunal may
order that the representative in his or her own right compensate the other party
for any costs incurred unnecessarily".
Section 92(1)(c) refers to the situation where one party unnecessarily
disadvantages another party by causing an adjournment.
It was for that purpose that I requested the attendance of Mr Latino and Ms
Arvanitis at the Costs Hearing on 23 February, 1998.
I have earlier referred to
Mr Latino’s evidence on that day. It is clear to me that he wanted help
and guidance from his solicitor
and he gave her what information he could. On
19 September, 1997 Ms Arvanitis inspected the case file at the Domestic
At the costs hearing I questioned Ms Arvanitis as to what she learnt from
that inspection. I attach to this finding a copy of the
transcript of my
examination of both Ms Arvanitis and Mr Latino. The examination indicated that
she proceeded on a number of assumptions
based on her observations of mediation
reports, file notes, information from her clients and Orders from the first Case
Conference. At no stage did she appreciate that the only proceedings
commenced in accordance with Section 69 of the Act, concerned
an appeal against
a decision of the Housing Guarantee Fund. Nor does it appear that she gave any
consideration to Section 60 (1)
Domestic Building Contracts and
Tribunal Act
1995 which gives the Tribunal power to review any decision of
an insurer, in this case the Housing Guarantee Fund Ltd, arising from
guarantee. On 6 November, 1996, Dr Cremean, Deputy Chairperson of this
Tribunal, handed down a decision in the matter of Roemer
v Housing Guarantee
Fund Ltd and Town & Country Dwellings (File A318/96). That decision was to
the effect that specific items
of the Applicant’s claim were not the
subject of "any decision of an insurer" and therefore outside the scope of
of this Tribunal pursuant to Section 60 (1).
In answer to my questions, Ms Arvanitis said she believed that by filing
Points and amended Points of Claim she was amending the original
disagree. The Points of Claim included matters which had not been the subject
of any decision by Housing Guarantee Fund
Ltd and were outside the jurisdiction
of this Tribunal. Mr Ridgeway advised me that he had the amended Points of
Claim typed. These
were filed on 23 December, 1997, but because of the
Christmas vacation, they did not come to the notice of the builder’s
until 12 January, 1998, a week before the hearing commenced. Through
those amended Points of Claim, Mr Ridgeway, or his instructors,
sought to make
the builder personally liable for all of the owners’ claims which went
beyond the three items originally appealed.
Until then, the builder was before the Tribunal only as a party to the appeal
by virtue of
House Contracts Guarantee Act
not proper to impose upon him an entirely new dimension of liability at such
short notice and by such procedure.
I find that the proceedings of the first day of hearing, being an attempt to
obtain a hearing of all the matters contained in the
ill-conceived forms headed
Points of Claim and Amended Points of Claim unnecessarily disadvantaged both the
Respondents by causing
an adjournment. For that I do not hold the owners
responsible. I asked Ms Arvanitis if she had any questions of Mr Latino. She
had none. I am satisfied that the incorrect manner in which she pursued the
case was due to her own failure to understand both the
Tribunal and what had occurred before she took over the running of the case.
For a time, I considered the persistent refusal of Mr Ridgeway to accept
rulings I made on the jurisdictional points might have merited
his inclusion in
an Order under Section 92(3); however I am not satisfied that he was acting
without instructions from his instructing
I order that Testart Robinson, Solicitors, pay the costs of the First and
Second Respondents, being the costs thrown away on the first
day of hearing. I
determine the amounts of such costs as follows:
On Magistrates’ Court Scale $40,000 and over -
First Respondent
Instructions to Defend
General Preparation - allow 1/2
Conference with Counsel
Counsel Fee
Witness Dobell
-----------
Second Respondent
Instructions to Defend
General Preparation - allow 1/2
Court attendance of Solicitor:
19 (a) 3 hours
19 (b) 3 hours @ $102
Conference with Counsel
Counsel Fee
Witness Gamblin
-----------
Costs of Proceedings on Days 2, 3 and 4
(1) BETWEEN APPLICANTS AND FIRST RESPONDENTS
Of the three items which formed the subject of this hearing, the Applicant
owners succeeded in relation to one and Respondent Housing
Guarantee Fund Ltd
succeeded on the other two. Counsel argued that costs should be awarded
according to the financial impact of
the decision upon each item. There was
also argument advanced concerning the relevance of the various experts called by
As this hearing did not concern itself with any question of costs of
rectification I have only the comments in some of the expert
reports as to what
such costs might be. Those comments were not tested at the hearing and I do not
propose to rely on them.
To determine the relevance of the reports and the evidence of the various
experts would require a lengthy pin-pricking exercise on
my part. I do not
propose to adopt that course. Rather, I accept that there was some useful
material to be gained from each of
the building experts and it was therefore
proper that they were called to give their evidence.
I have also been asked to consider and to take note of the time given to each
item during the hearing. I would say that much of the
hearing time probably
related to the point upon which the Applicants succeeded, i.e. roof support to
ground level; however I believe
an equal amount of time was spent in dealing
with the other two points.
Ms Pettigrew for the Fund referred to the offer made by the Second Respondent
late on day one of the hearing. In the final analysis,
the owners did not
obtain an order which equated with the builder’s offer. Her argument is
that by rejecting the builder’s
offer, the owners caused the hearing to
continue unnecessarily. Mr Ridgeway for the owners pointed out that if the
owners had accepted
the builder’s offer to rectify two of the items,
nonetheless, the case against the Fund’s decision had to proceed so
the owners could seek to benefit from the guarantee.
Ms Pettigrew continued by saying the Fund had nonetheless been prepared to
supervise the builder’s rectification work. I have
no record of such;
perhaps it was part of a discussion between the parties or their Counsel?
I do not consider the offer from the builder is relevant to the question of
costs involving the Applicants and the First Respondent.
My decision is based upon the following:
(i) Each party had to prepare a case, either to prosecute or defend;
(ii) Each party needed to call its expert witnesses;
(iii) Each party was entitled to legal representation;
(iv) Each party was partly successful.
The decision is that I make no order for costs between the Applicants and the
First Respondents for days 2, 3 and 4 of the hearing.
2. BETWEEN THE APPLICANT AND THE SECOND RESPONDENTS
What I have already stated concerning the relative merits of the
parties’ successes and failures before the Tribunal applies
this question. However the matter of the builder’s offer on day one
requires a different consideration. The builder
made an offer to rectify two of
the defects claimed. In the end I have found he needs only to rectify one item.
The owners could
have accepted his offer and would in fact have been better off
had they done so.
As Davey J pointed out in
Metricon Homes Pty Ltd v Burnell & Anor
10 October, 1997, A321/96, the nature of this offer does not bring the matter
within the ambit of Section 103(1) of the
Domestic Building Contracts and
Tribunal Act
1995. However, as Davey J went on to point out, Section 92
(2)(a) "is directed towards ensuring in the event of additional costs
incurred as a result of another party’s conduct then that party may be
ordered to pay those additional costs".
In the present case, Mr Ridgeway had no worthwhile material with which to
argue the third item which was not conceded by the builder.
The owners could
have accepted the builder’s offer and by so doing would have greatly
reduced the time of the hearing of its
claim against the builder. The
owners’ argument that they should have the benefit of the Fund’s
guarantee could have
continued as a separate matter. The owners might also have
argued a claim for costs against the builder for their costs up to the
As the owners took none of the above courses, the builder was obliged to
attend, with Counsel, for three more days of hearing. I
will allow a total of
$1,200 per day for the builder’s barrister and solicitor ($3,600) together
with $200 per day net to cover
the builder’s loss of earnings ($500).
Note: Builder did not attend on one 1/2 day.
A total of $4,100. Bearing
in mind that I am concerned here with the ‘additional costs’
occasioned by refusal of the
offer I will offset the following amounts based on
Magistrates’ Court Scale $5000 - $7,500:
Instructions to sue
General preparation
-----------
The net result is that I order the Applicants pay to the Second Respondents
the sum of $2,651 being the costs of days 2, 3 and 4 of
the hearing.
Costs of the Costs Hearing 23/2/98
The proceedings on day 4 (22 January) concluded before lunch. Ms Arvanitis
and Mr Latino were present and I proposed to question
them in regard to a
possible Order for Costs under Section 92(3). Mr Ridgeway requested an
adjournment so that he could call a number
of witnesses, specifically Judge
Davey, Mr & Mrs Latino, the instructing Solicitors for the First and Second
Respondents, his
own instructing Solicitor and the Mediator.
As it happened he called none of those witnesses on the adjourned date. Ms
Arvanitis and Mr Latino gave their evidence at my request.
The result was that
the adjournment on 22 January was not necessary.
Further time had been lost during the 2nd, 3rd and 4th days of the hearing
due to Mr Ridgeway’s refusal to accept the ruling
I made on day one as to
the breadth of the hearing. He raised the question of jurisdiction on more than
one occasion over those
days although I indicated the decision had been made,
would not be altered and that Mr Ridgeway should know of the course available
him in the light of his disagreement with my ruling.
I am satisfied that Mr Ridgeway’s handling of the case caused the
hearing to last much longer than it should have. In the time
that ought to have
been saved, all parties could have raised their preliminary points on the
question of costs. Those points could
then have been supplemented by written
submissions after the decision on the facts was given.
I am mindful of the decision of the Supreme Court (Victoria) in the matter of
Minter Ellison v Lifeline Properties Pty Ltd
No.7571/1996. This is a
decision of Winneke P, Charles and Batt JJ.A. This was a hearing of an appeal
against an order of this
Tribunal against the legal representative of one of the
parties under Section 92(3). At the conclusion of his judgement, Charles,
said that whilst an order for costs of an adjournment was appropriate, he could
not see "any basis for concluding that the conduct
which was unnecessarily
disadvantaging Lifeline was the responsibility of anyone other than HGFL". In
that case Housing Guarantee
Fund Ltd was one of the parties.
In the present case, the owners constitute one of the parties. I can
conceive of no way in which the owners could have instructed
Mr Ridgeway to act
as he did during the hearing. It is clear that Mr & Mrs Latino were out of
their depth in the legal issues
and as Mr Latino said "we got to the stage where
we needed a Solicitor to assist us in this matter".
The Applicants have not succeeded in any of their claims for costs. That,
coupled with the fact of the unnecessary adjournment of
the hearing, leads me to
make an order that costs should be awarded to both Respondents for the "Costs"
hearing on 23rd February.
I do not believe that the Applicants should pay those
costs. I suspect the responsibility ought lie with Mr Ridgeway, but I must
note that his instructing solicitor, Ms Arvanitis was present throughout the
hearing and it was within her power to instruct
him otherwise.
I order that Testart Robinson, Solicitors, pay the costs of the First and
Second Respondents for 23 February, 1998 in the sum of $1000
Costs of Case Management Conference held on 2/10/97
Davey J reserved costs on 2 October, 1997. He stated that the fact that he
had made a self executing order against the Applicants
could be evidence in
itself to justify some costs under Section 92. He did not think it was
appropriate to order costs at that time.
Nothing put to me during the hearing has indicated that the need for the
second Case Management Conference, held on 2 October, 1997
was due to the
actions of anyone but the Applicants.
I order that the Applicants pay the sums of $500 each, being the costs of the
First and Second Respondents in attending that Case
Management Conference.
Section 15 - Costs
I find no basis upon which to make an order for costs under
House Contracts Guarantee Act
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(G:Determ96\0023a-96)
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
A23 OF 1996
TUESDAY 23 FEBRUARY, 1998
BEFORE: MR F. TENNI
SERGIO LATINO & ANNA LATINO
HOUSING GUARANTEE FUND LTD
First Respondent
B.J. & P.M. GAMBLIN
Second Respondent
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
55 King Street, Melbourne
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS - A 23/96
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
TAPE NO.033
MR TENNI: You are a Solicitor of 701 Station Street, Box Hill?
MS ARVANITIS: Correct.
MR TENNI: The Firm of Solicitors was Testart Robinson - what’s your
capacity in that?
MS ARVANITIS: Solicitor.
MR TENNI: You are a Solicitor working for that firm?
MS ARVANITIS: Yes, that’s correct.
MR TENNI: Now I have read your affidavit and I’ve heard what Mr
Ridgeway has said and I’ve read the transcript, and from
the transcript
and from everything else it seems at this stage, and I haven’t heard from
the other parties as to what their
view of what meaning I should place on the
evidence of the transcript, but it seems that there was agreement between the
that a big deal was at stake and at issue - and there was a rather large
contest. However, in paragraph 7 of your affidavit you
say "on the 19th of
September, 1997 I conducted an inspection of files held at the DBT and the AAT".
MS ARVANITIS: Correct.
MR TENNI: If you had done that, did you not realise that you had no claim
before the Tribunal for the wide range of issues that you
sought to recover?
MS ARVANITIS: No. I went - is the Tribunal referring to the original
application form?
MR TENNI: I’m referring to - I’m just asking, did you realise
that you had nothing filed claiming the matters that you
MS ARVANITIS: No, well, the claims - I made inquiries with the Domestic
Tribunal Registry and they indicated to me that there is no
separate application fee needing to be paid to amend the claim existing,
inspection that I conducted was to brief myself as to the history of the file.
I did that with the DBT Registry. I sat
down with a Mr Peter Anderson, went
through the file, the history of the file and proceeded on my client’s
instructions and
on the documentation that I inspected.
MR TENNI: Do you claim that you have filed an amended claim?
MS ARVANITIS: Through the amended, sorry, through the Points of Claim as
ordered at the Case Management Conference by Judge Davey
I was advised by the
Registry informally and myself throughout the file - the conduct of the file
that that was sufficient to proceed.
There was no separate filing fee that I
needed to be pay. My clients...
MR TENNI: By filing Points of Claim you believe you put in an amended
MS ARVANITIS: I believe we were proceeding at the directions of the
MR TENNI: That’s not what I asked you.
MS ARVANITIS: Sorry.
MR TENNI: Did you believe you were putting in an amended claim?
MS ARVANITIS: Well yes, technically yes, amended to the original application
form. In that, if I might add ...
MR TENNI: Just a moment. Yes...
MS ARVANITIS: In that, the matter was not only about three issues. The
matter as it came before my office was about a whole range
of issues; hence why
we stated to the Tribunal there was a $40,000 claim, when asked.
MR TENNI: The Particulars of Claim were prepared when? Can you remind me of
that offhand?
MS ARVANITIS: They were filed on the 16th of October, which was the date we
needed to have them filed and served on the other parties.
MR TENNI: And the Case Management Conference was held on the 2nd of
MS ARVANITIS: That’s correct.
MR TENNI: So at the 2nd of October, how could you have said to the Tribunal
that there was a $40,000 claim afoot?
MS ARVANITIS: Based on Glen Clark Lewis’ report.
MR TENNI: That was the grievance.
MS ARVANITIS: That’s right.
MR TENNI: I’m talking about claim in a legal sense with a capital C or
whatever you call it - the Claim filed before the Tribunal.
How could you have
said to the Case Management Conference on the 2nd of October, that there was a
$40,000 claim - meaning the legal
document - or the legal meaning of claim,
filed at the Tribunal?
MS ARVANITIS: I inspected the files on the 19th of September. The Tribunal
documents, or the file documents, indicated to me that
there were more than
three issues in dispute.
MR TENNI: What documents?
MS ARVANITIS: The Mediation Reports, the file notes by the DBT Registry -
at the Registry and
that the matter - my instructions from my clients were that they had not
received any monies as it states in
my affidavit that all issues were in dispute
and that they wanted resolution of those issues - and there was a Case
Management Conference
MR TENNI: If your client came along and said to you "I’m suing somebody
for" - any figure of damage in a car accident, you wouldn’t
MS ARVANITIS: No, that’s correct.
MR TENNI: Why did you just come to the Tribunal here because your client said
there were issues in dispute?
MS ARVANITIS: Why did - sorry, could you repeat that?
MR TENNI: Well you, it seems to me that you have not checked the file to find
out what proceedings were ever instigated.
MS ARVANITIS: Well, yes, I have checked the file.
MR TENNI: Well you haven’t seen it then. You say that from Mediation
Report - a Mediation Report is not a sums or an originated
-------------
MS ARVANITIS: Yes. No, but as I indicated earlier, when I asked the Registry
what do we do, there was no indication to me there was
a separate form that I
needed to fill out or a filing fee that needed to be paid. That has been asked
again by myself after the
hearing recently took place, and that was also
affirmed. But there was not separate application fee that I needed to file to
anything else added to the claim. Apparently the Registry says you file
either a letter or Orders made by the Tribunal to be complied
with to bring on
matters before the Tribunal. So I did not think I was limited to three points
on the original application form
and the dispute schedule that was filed six
months later.
MR RIDGEWAY: Sir, I’m a bit concerned about the Tribunal having a clear
idea of exactly what order things happened. I should
perhaps point out Sir,
that the first complaint was made in January 1994 to the Housing Guarantee Fund.
The Builder’s appeal
was in May of 1994 - that’s when the builder
lodged his appeal. The owner’s appeal then occurred in February 1995 and
then the second complaint occurred in September 1995. The builder appealed
complete (?) in November...
MR TENNI: All this is on the file and I think I referred to it all in my
decision. I did a chronology of events.
MR RIDGEWAY: Yes, and the only point I make Sir, is that at the time this
witness comes into the scenario, there’s a builder’s
appeal which
hasn’t been withdrawn, there is an application for ...
MR TENNI: Not before the Domestic Building
Tribunal - there was not a
builder’s appeal that hadn’t been withdrawn.
MR RIDGEWAY: No, but this as I understand it ----------- was fully aware that
the builder had appealed.
MR TENNI: Yeah, but what is the relevance of that? I’m asking the
witness did she undertake to find out what action had been
taken by her clients
when she engaged their -----------?
MR RIDGEWAY: I understand that sir, but what I’m saying is that the
time she comes to the file - comes to the matter - there
is on foot an
application, an originating application form which has no particulars -
doesn’t define...
MR TENNI: Where is the original application form - for the Domestic
MR RIDGEWAY: Yes.
MR TENNI: Where?
MS ARVANITIS: The original application form does not have...
MR RIDGEWAY: The original application form dated 10th April, 1996.
That’s what’s on file ...
MR TENNI: So this is an appeal against the decision of the Housing Guarantee
MR RIDGEWAY: Well, it’s here that the application form Where appeals to
the Appeals Committee already lodged and that ticks
compensation for loss,
costs, and review of HGF decision. That’s all that’s on file in
terms of the original application.
MR TENNI: Also on the file by the time the inspection was made was a Dispute
Schedule which clearly related to the items - and the
Act itself would have
advised - I don’t know whether she’s your client or not, you seem to
be now representing her as
your client - the Act would have advised her...
MR RIDGEWAY: Sir, I’m representing what I believe to be a true account
of what happened.
MR TENNI: Alright then, but the Act would have advised Ms Arvanitis that the
proceedings were only before the Tribunal as a result
of the transferred appeal
- if she was familiar with the
Domestic Building Contracts and Tribunal Act
that was the only basis on which this matter got here.
MR RIDGEWAY: Sir, but ------ does that Application and Dispute Schedule there
was also what had already occurred was the mediation.
MR TENNI: -------------about the Mediation. I’ve been trying to tell
you that since day one. I want to know what arrangements
the witness had made
or what inspection she’s made to find out what is actually legitimately
before the Tribunal. Not what
she might have wanted or any other party might
have wanted to be before the Tribunal.
MR RIDGEWAY: But the Order for Points of Claim had already been made and Mr
Latino attended the first Case Management Conference she
was already faced with
the Order to draw Points of Claim.
MR TENNI: Points of Claim in relation to the three items...
MS ARVANITIS: No, it doesn’t say that.
MR TENNI: Doesn’t say that but it’s the only valid matter to
which it can relate. The Judge has made a wide Order which
is a standard form
of the Order and it’s based on, at the best, a misapprehension given to
-------- by all parties but it doesn’t
resolve the originator of the
whole action from responsibility for having set out, in my view, having taken
appropriate initiating
action and you’re acting on behalf of that
MS ARVANITIS: Yes, and the original - the Orders made on the 4th of September
- which I did not appear at the Case Management Conference,
also stated that
quantum was to be obtained so it was only to do with the three items on the
application form and clearly quantum
was not an issue. I had to - I could not
comply with those Orders within the time limit. That’s where I got
involved and
sought the extension of time to comply with the Orders, hence why I
appeared before Judge Davey and the Orders were varied and time
MR TENNI: And you did not tell Judge Davey that there was no action issued by
you for all these points of claim?
MS ARVANITIS: No, we were proceeding that full particulars of the claim were
not even provided by the Applicants at that stage. There
were Orders made the
first time round - they were not complied with - or we sought the extension of
time they were complied with
subsequently, but at that stage the Case Management
Conference that took place before Judge Davey was the original transcript that
we had accounts of the Applicants went through specifically stating what the
First Respondent, the Second Respondent and the Applicant
in person were
debating. It was from there that Judge Davey made those Orders and I followed
that up with, I suppose the preparation
work after that time. I did not seek to
vary the contents of the Orders ...
MR TENNI: Did you not realise that you had no action pending? There were
Orders being made in a void.
MR RIDGEWAY: Well sir, ...
MR TENNI: I asked the question Mr Ridgeway.
MR RIDGEWAY: We’ll accept sir that...
MR TENNI: Mr Ridgeway, I will not be objected to from the Bench. If I ask
you a question, I can ask you a question. Thank you.
MS ARVANITIS: Would you repeat that again for me?
MR TENNI: Did you not realise that the Orders made at the Case Management
Conference related to ------- void?
MS ARVANITIS: No, that’s not correct. I made inquiries at the time of
my inspection which stated I did not need to file a subsequent
filing fee, nor
did I need to need to fill out a -------
MR TENNI: So you acted on the advice of a clerk?
MS ARVANITIS: Well, I made inquiries...
MR TENNI: Of whom?
MS ARVANITIS: As the file of the Tribunal will shown, there’s file
MR TENNI: In the Registrar’s Office - of one of the clerks in the
MS ARVANITIS: Yes.
MR TENNI: You acted on the advice of the clerk.
MS ARVANITIS: No. I acted on the advice of what was before me in the file
and what had taken place at Case Management Conference
which I was not at -in
attendance, but I had a copy of the Orders - as to what had to be prepared for
the Tribunal proceeding in
this matter. Subsequently we have the transcript of
those proceedings and that indicates exactly what was taking place.
MR TENNI: No, it doesn’t, does it?
MS ARVANITIS: Well, it indicates that there were all issues in dispute and
MR TENNI: All issues are still in dispute.
MS ARVANITIS: Yeah, of course.
MR TENNI: Not before this Domestic Building
MS ARVANITIS: Of course.
MR RIDGEWAY: Sir, the concern I have is the question is based on the
assumption that the Order that the interpretation has given to
section 96 is
indeed - firstly that it was - sorry section 62 I think it is - Section 69 -
that the interpretation ...
MR TENNI: That’s the interpretation. I’m not going to argue with
you about that. I’ve made that interpretation
and this is my questioning
of the witness.
MR RIDGEWAY: This witness didn’t know that interpretation at the time
MR TENNI: This witness should have known.
MR RIDGEWAY: But sir, I don’t know whether there’s any other
interpretation of this Section or indeed ...
MR TENNI: Well, I’m not gong to argue with you. This witness should
have known. She’s acting as a legal representative.
MR RIDGEWAY: What you’re saying sir is that this witness should have
known that you would make a subsequent Order ...
MR TENNI: No, she should have known that there were no proceedings before the
MR RIDGEWAY: Well, that’s an interpretation sir, and ...
MR TENNI: That’s my interpretation - exactly - that’s my
interpretation. I’ve told you since day one. You have
a course of remedy
available to you.
MR RIDGEWAY: Yes sir, that’s right.
MR TENNI: Well, either do it, put up or shut up, but don’t argue with
me again about my interpretation.
MR RIDGEWAY: Well the concern I have sir, is that there’s bias in
MR TENNI: There’s no bias. How can there be bias if I have an
interpretation? I am biased if I don’t follow my own
interpretation of
coming to a decision.
MR RIDGEWAY: I’ve made my submission sir.
MR TENNI: Your submission is rejected.
Will you tell me now, what instructions you were given by Mr Latino?
MS ARVANITIS: I refer you to paragraph 4 of my affidavit - I’m sorry,
paragraph 5 of my affidavit.
MR TENNI: "I received instructions from the clients that despite findings in
their favour, they had not been paid any monies. Nor
had the defects been
rectified."
MS ARVANITIS: And the Second Respondent was seeking to set aside findings of
the First Respondent.
MR TENNI: Did you follow up those instructions and see what they ...
MS ARVANITIS: Yes I did.
MR TENNI: And what did you find?
MS ARVANITIS: As I said, the mediation reports indicated to me why mediation
was not successful and could not be successful was because
the builder and the -
or the Second Respondent and the Applicants were at issue with the First
Respondent on separate matters.
MR TENNI: Alright. Did you find then, any documentation had ever been
MS ARVANITIS: No, I did not. By the builder? No.
MR TENNI: By anybody.
MS ARVANITIS: No.
MR TENNI: By anybody, to answer the question that monies had not been paid,
nor had defects been rectified, or that the builder was
seeking to set aside
MS ARVANITIS: Well, there’s numerous - I mean there’s
correspondence on my file notes as to what took place between the
MR TENNI: I know there’s correspondence. The whole things is full of
correspondence and I know there is a dispute between the
parties. I keep
coming back to the fact did you find any documentation that said action had been
taken to remedy - perhaps I’ll
add remedy before a Tribunal - to remedy
those complaints of your client?
MS ARVANITIS: Action had been taken by whom?
MR TENNI: By your client.
MS ARVANITIS: My clients to remedy the - I’m sorry, I’m not
following...
MR TENNI: Well, you’ve taken up the case, right, you now find out
you’ve taken up the case which is nothing more than
an appeal against
three decisions of the Housing Guarantee Fund. Did you ...
MS ARVANITIS: That’s not what I proceeded on.
MR TENNI: Well then what did you proceed on?
MS ARVANITIS: There had been Case Management Conferences.
MR TENNI: It was set down for Case Management Conference and Mediation.
MS ARVANITIS: Yes, there had been - the original Application form did not
have a Dispute Schedule attached to that, so technically
six months later
there’s a form headed "Dispute Schedule". That has three items. A year
MR TENNI: Just a moment please. Did you inquire then as to how the original
Application form came before this Tribunal?
MS ARVANITIS: Yes, I undertook the file ...
MR TENNI: Did you study the Act?
MS ARVANITIS: The introduction of the legislation which meant that the
Applicants could transfer proceedings.
MR TENNI: And what proceedings did you believe had been transferred
MS ARVANITIS: The subject - or as I said the - there were two boxes ticked on
that form and they had "Review of HGF decision" and
"Compensation for loss".
That is the only thing that was on the Application form. I looked down at the
file. There was a Dispute
Schedule filed six months later - a separate
document. A year later there was a mediation where there were further issues in
A year later there was a Case Management Conference before Judge Davey
which said that full particulars of the claim and quantum
had to be provided to
proceed to a hearing.
MR TENNI: Alright, would you come back to the question ------- at the start
of proceedings? You saw the claim form and you were
aware that that had been
transferred under the provisions of Part 8, I think, of the
Building Contracts and Tribunal Act.
MS ARVANITIS: Yes.
MR TENNI: You were aware of that? Did you make inquiries to find out what
matter had been transferred? - that there was an appeal
MS ARVANITIS: Yes
MR TENNI: Against three items?
MS ARVANITIS: No, they were not my instructions. My instructions were that
they were appealing three items - there was a decision
which ruled three items
not in their favour. There were those decisions. There was an AAT decision
pending and there were a lot
of other things such as no approved defects paid to
my clients.
MR TENNI: They were your instructions. Did you then say, alright, I will
issue a summons for you so that we can sue for the cost
of the defects, the cost
of rectification?
MS ARVANITIS: No.
MR TENNI: Why?
MS ARVANITIS: Because Section 69 has the applications lodged - it
doesn’t say that it is limited to three items. In fact my
clients have
ticked two boxes saying that they are seeking review of decision and
compensation for loss. A year later there’s
a mediation - or
there’s a decision. A Dispute Schedule is filed by the Applicants - at
that stage I’m not acting -
they file a Dispute Schedule about three
points after the AAT decision comes down and is handed down. A year later
mediation. Mediation is about a whole lot of other things as
well. Shortly thereafter I think there was the first Case Management
- or a year later there’s a Case Management Conference ...
MR TENNI: I don’t think going into a year later.
MS ARVANITIS: Oh, I’m just trying to summarize the events.
MR TENNI: The important thing in my view is what started this off. And all I
can find that started this off, was a claim which -
an Application Form where
Appeal to Appeals Committee already lodged. And the only way that that can get
across to the Tribunal
is by virtue of Part 8 of the
Domestic Building
Contracts and Tribunal Act.
Alright. At the best, six months later, a
Dispute Schedule spelled out three items.
MS ARVANITIS: That’s correct.
MR TENNI: Where did you see that anybody had taken an issue to summons then
for compensation for loss, the cost of rectification ...
MS ARVANITIS: In that original application form.
MR TENNI: You saw that in the original Application form?
MS ARVANITIS: There were two boxes ticked.
MR TENNI: One box is ticked that has absolutely no particulars accompanying
MS ARVANITIS: There’s - no - and I asked about that form -
there’s no attachment to that form at the time that form ...
MR TENNI: So twenty months later you filed Points of Claim and you say that
that is a Claim.
MS ARVANITIS: Well, twenty months later is - yes, when I became involved and
I was at a Case Management Conference where ------ had
been taking place and
Orders were made to file full particulars of claim. I did make inquiries about
having to pay the filing fee.
There was no such filing fee that I was required
MR TENNI: Alright thank you. You may take a seat. I’d like to hear
from Mr Latino please.
UNKNOWN: Sir, do you require me to ask Mr Latino questions or do you ...
MR TENNI: No, he’s my witness.
Swearing in of Mr Latino
MR TENNI: Basically, Mr Latino, I don’t know what your interpretation
or what your understanding is of the instructions you
gave to your
Solicitors.
MR LATINO: The instructions were basically to follow this case through. Me
and my wife just got to a stage where we needed to get
a Solicitor to assist us
in this matter. I went to a Case Management hearing ....
MR TENNI: No, we won’t worry about when the Case Management Conference
was. When did you engage Testart Robinson?
MR LATINO: Straight after the Case Management Conference.
MR TENNI: In September? You went on your own without a Solicitor?
MR LATINO: We - me and my wife actually spoke to a solicitor stating that we
were going to a case management hearing and that we were
having a bit of a
problem, and then I actually attended on my own yes- because we weren’t
too sure where we were at.
MR TENNI: The reports from Mr Clarke Lewis, and Mr Brown and Mr Baker, when
did you obtain them?
MR LATINO: Mr Clarke Lewis - I’m sorry I can’t remember the dates
- it was a little while ago.
MR TENNI: In relation to the Case Management Conference in September. Had
you engaged your experts before that?
MR LATINO: I think Clarke Lewis was before that, but Mr Baker and - Mr Brown,
was it? - yes that was just not long ago at all.
MR TENNI: Why did you engage Mr Clarke Lewis? Did you do that off your own
bat or was it your first solicitors?
MR LATINO: No, we went to a hearing and it’s probably a bit hard for me
to recall, possibly my wife can recall it, but they
instructed us to get full
particulars - I mean we had a problem with the first claim. We got the first
claim heard, then the second
claim came along. We are ---------- Clarke-Lewis
for the second claim in for us.
MR TENNI: Why did you go to Clarke Lewis?
MR LATINO: Because the Judge at that time told us to get full particulars of
what the problems were. I kept on saying there are other
problems and he says
well O.K. put the whole matter together. We’ll get two claims happening
altogether plus it was - one
was the AAT, one was the DBT and it just sort of
plodded along and got a bit confusing and so the ------- Clark-Lewis engaged us
to his solicitor - he had a solicitor there called Broberger. We also had at
the time. But I felt he wasn’t doing his job
correctly so we got rid of
him. I’m unable to remember everything - possibly my wife could...
MR TENNI: Is it basically you instructed Testart Robinson to follow the case
MR LATINO: Yes, we instructed them to.
MR TENNI: Did you tell them what action you had taken to that stage?
MR LATINO: We had the files there and we gave them most of the files of
what’s been happening from the start - before they got
started. So
everything was on file.
MR TENNI: Alright. I should have asked Mr Latino is he had any questions -
was there anything you wanted to ask Mrs Arvanitis while
she was in here
MR LATINO: No.
MR TENNI: Ms Arvanitis?
MS ARVANITIS: No.
MR TENNI: Thank you Mr Latino.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (126 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter