URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VDBT/1997/91.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Innis Ltd and Ors v Demos and Ors [1997] VDBT 91 (3 September 1997)
FILE NO. A824/96
THE DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(DOMESTIC BUILDING CONTRACTS AND TRIBUNAL ACT 1995)
- RULING AND DIRECTIONS -
BETWEEN INNIS LIMITEDW.T. CARR & M. YOSHIDA APPLICANT
MR JOHN DEMOS FIRSTRESPONDENT
S. & E. PAPASAVAS SECONDRESPONDENT
RAIA ARCHICENTRE (AUST) PTY LTDT/A ARCHICENTRE THIRDRESPONDENT
PRESIDING MEMBER: DR DAMIEN CREMEAN
FORM OF APPLICATION: General
APPEARANCES: Mr Bolton of Counsel for the Applicant
Mr Robins of Counsel for the First Respondent
Mr Margetts of Counsel for the Second Respondent
Mr Roberts of Counsel for the Third Respondent
DATE OF HEARING: 28 AUGUST 1997
DATE OF RULING
AND DIRECTIONS: 3 SEPTEMBER 1997
I MAKE THE FOLLOWING RULING:
1. The Tribunal does have power or jurisdiction to order security for costs.
2. The Tribunal does not have power or jurisdiction to entertain claims for
damages alleging breach of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
3. The Tribunal does have power or jurisdiction to entertain claims for
damages alleging breach of the
Fair Trading Act 1985
4. More than one party, as a matter of law, may be named as an applicant and,
as a matter of law, a party may be joined as an applicant
under s56 of the Act.
I MAKE THE FOLLOWING DIRECTIONS:
1. This matter is referred to further Case Management Conference before
Dr D. Cremean on a date after 13 October 1997.
2. Costs are reserved.
DR DAMIEN CREMEAN
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
REASONS FOR RULING
A. INTRODUCTION
1. On 24 June 1997 I referred this matter to a preliminary hearing on the
following issues:
"(a) Whether the Tribunal has power or jurisdiction to order security for
(b) Whether the Tribunal has power or jurisdiction to entertain claims
alleging breach of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act
(c) whether the Second and Third Applicants have standing at all to be each a
party named as an Applicant in these proceedings and/or
whether each may or may
not be joined as a party under s56 of the Act"
2. In determining these issues at the preliminary hearing on 28 August 1997
the Tribunal was assisted by a Summary of Facts and Contentions
filed by each of
the parties together with copies of authorities. The Tribunal was also assisted
by the detailed submissions of the
various Counsel. In determining the issues
raised for consideration I have considered the detailed submissions and the
contentions
of each party. I have perused all of the authorities to which
reference has been made but I have not found it necessary to mention
all of them
in these Reasons.
B. SECURITY FOR COSTS
3. The first issue is whether the Tribunal has power or jurisdiction to order
security for costs. This arises because of the allegation
that the First
Applicant is a company incorporated in the British Virgin Islands. I am plainly
of the view that the Tribunal does
have such power or jurisdiction. Whether,
however, security will be ordered in a particular case, is a different matter.
a matter for discretion: Pearson v Naydler
[1977] 3 ALL ER 531.
is, or may be, a critical factor, in the exercise of such discretion: see
Alexiou v HGFL (DBT, 19 September 1996)
4. I consider that the Tribunal has power or jurisdiction to order security
for costs based on s77(2) of the Domestic Building Contracts
and Tribunal Act
1995 ("the 1995 Act"). That sections says: "Subject to this Part and the
regulations, the Tribunal may regulate
its own proceedings." If there were any
doubts about this, however, I would think that the Tribunal's power or
be found under s53(1) or s87(1) of the 1995 Act. By the
former, the Tribunal may make "any order it considers fair to resolve a domestic
building dispute" while, by the latter, the Tribunal "may give directions and do
whatever is necessary for the expeditious and fair
hearing and determination of
any proceeding before it".
5. There is no doubt, in my view, that the power of a court to order security
for costs is an exercise of what is said to be its inherent
power to regulate
its own procedures. There are numerous authorities to this effect. I refer, in
particular, to what was said by
Crockett, O'Bryan and Tadgell JJ in Lines v Tana
Pty Ltd [1987] VR641 at 642: "There can be no question that the power to order
for costs exists and derives from the court's inherent power to
regulate its own procedure." In Thunderdome Racetiming and Scoring
Dorian Industries Pty Ltd
[1992] FCA 291
(1992) 109 ALR 196
at 205 this authority was quoted by
Olney J who had said earlier in his judgment (at 203) this it was conventional
wisdom that "the
power of the superior courts to order security for costs is
derived from the court's inherent power to regulate its procedure". In
Billington Ltd v Billington [1907] 2KB 106 (also referred to by Olney J at 203
of his judgment) Lord Alverstone CJ (at 109) said:
"I have always understood
that the power of the superior courts of common law to order security for costs
arose from the inherent
See also Rajski v Computer Manufacture and Design Pty Ltd
[1982] 2 NSW LR 442
448 per Holland J.
6. It seems to me, however, that if the courts have power to order security
for costs, because they have power (called "inherent"
power) to regulate their
own procedures, then the power to order security for costs also reposes in the
Tribunal under s77(2) of
the 1995 Act. I am unable to read s77(2) in any way
except as giving the Tribunal power to regulate its own procedures. I cannot
that anything is to be made out of the circumstance that s77(2) refers to
"proceedings" and not "procedures". I would think a
power in a Tribunal to
regulate its own proceedings would include a power to regulate its own
procedures. Nor do I consider that
it matters at all that the power to regulate
its own proceedings has been given to the Tribunal by virtue of legislative
and is not possessed "inherently". Nothing seems to me to turn on this
point. The focus seems to be on the power itself rather than
on whether it is
inherent or not. The fact is that the Tribunal has such power too. From this, it
would seem to follow, almost automatically,
that the Tribunal, although a
creature of statute, does itself have power to order security for costs by
virtue of s77(2).
7. Independently, in any event, of the authorities on the "inherent" powers
of the courts to which I was referred, I would think that
the Tribunal would
have power to order security simply as an incident of this very power in s77(2)
itself to regulate its own proceedings.
In other words, even on its own, and
considered apart from the authorities, I would think that s77(2) could itself
sustain a security
for costs order being made. If there were doubts about this,
I would add, that I would see a power to order security deriving also
ss53(1) and 87(1) of the 1995 Act as I have mentioned. In my view, therefore, in
one way or another, the Tribunal does have
power to order security for costs be
8. It was argued on behalf of the Applicants that the Tribunal could have no
power to order security because it has no power to deal
with contempt. Without
necessarily dealing with the latter proposition, I must say that this was an
argument I did not quite follow.
Contempt and security for costs are two quite
different matters. Moreover, the Tribunal has its role in the hearing of civil
building disputes. If it is true to say that the Tribunal does not have
"inherent" power to deal with contempts (see Attorney-General
Broadcasting Corp
[1980] 3 ALL ER 161)
that, in my view, is not an end of the
matter. I would still see the Tribunal as having power to order security under
the 1995 Act,
if not under s77(2) on its own, then under ss53(1) and 87(1).
9. There was also an argument by the Applicants that the 1995 Act contains no
express provision allowing the Tribunal to order security.
Reference in this
regard was made to other provisions of the 1995 Act (including s90) in an
endeavour to show that had Parliament
intended the Tribunal to have power to
order security it would have expressly so provided. Reliance was placed on the
maxim expressio
unius est exclusio alterius. The answer to this argument, I
think, is that, by reason of s77(2), or by reason of s53(1) or s87(1),
Parliament obviously did not see the need to provide an express power to order
security. The maxim expressio unius est exclusio alterius,
it has been said, is
"a valuable servant, but a dangerous master": Houssein v Under Secretary
at 581. Parliament would be presumed to know the law and Parliament
would know that the power in the courts to regulate their own
procedures has
given rise to the power to order security. I should add that there is nothing in
s77(2) itself, in the terms in which
it is expressed (ie. "Subject to this Part
and the regulations.....), which would bring in, as it were, any other provision
1995 Act operating to the contrary of reading s77(2) as allowing for a
power to order security.
TRADE PRACTICES ACT 1974
10. The next issue concerns whether the Tribunal has power or jurisdiction to
entertain claims alleging breach of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) ("the
"). This arises because of allegations made in the Statement of Claim
11. I am of the view that, properly construed, the Tribunal does not have
power or jurisdiction to entertain a claim for damages based
on the provisions
. I refer to
which reads as
"(1) Jurisdiction is conferred on the Federal Court in any matter arising
under this Act in respect of which a civil proceeding has,
whether before or
after the commencement of this section, been instituted under this Part.
(2) The several courts of the States are invested with federal jurisdiction
within the limits of their several jurisdictions, whether
those limits are as to
locality, subject matter or otherwise, and, subject to the Constitution,
several courts of the Territories, with respect
to any matter arising under Part IVA or Division 1 or 1A of Part V in respect of
which a civil proceeding is instituted by a person other than the Minister or
the Commission.
(3) Nothing in subsection (2) shall be taken to enable an inferior court of a
State or Territory to grant a remedy other than a remedy
of a kind that the
court is able to grant under the law of that State or Territory."
In my view the Tribunal is not a court of a State within the meaning of
s86(2) or for its purposes. I say this in reliance upon
Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) which provides in part that: "Every Act shall be
read and construed subject to the Constitution, and so as not to exceed the
legislative power of the Commonwealth...". I cannot think that it was
contemplated by the Parliament, when enacting
would purport to confer jurisdiction to award damages (or give other relief) on
a Tribunal of a State whose members did
not satisfy the tenure requirements of
Chapter III of the Constitution. I refer in particular to ss71 and 72 of the
Constitution
and I refer also to the decision in Waterside Workers Federation of
Australia v J.W. Alexander Ltd
[1918] HCA 56
(1918) 25 CLR 434.
The members of the Tribunal
are appointed generally to short terms of office as set out in Schedule 1 of the
1995 Act. Based on s15A
of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901(Cth) the reference
to "courts of States" in
should, I think, be confined to
such courts of the States as would be courts upon which the Parliament (so as
not to exceed it legislative
powers) is able to confer judicial power. I note,
too, the decision in Kable v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[1996] HCA 24
so far as it holds that no Australian legislature can invest in a court
of a State functions that are incompatible with the exercise
of federal judicial
power. As a result, on this basis, compliance with
Judiciary Act
(Cth) does not even arise as an issue. In my view, the Tribunal is plainly
excluded. If this is so, then it follows that the Tribunal
has no power to award
damages (or give other relief) under the
. In consequence, it serves no
useful purpose to allege breach of the provisions of the
in proceedings issued under the 1995 Act.
FAIR TRADING ACT 1985
12. The next question is whether the Tribunal has power or jurisdiction to
entertain claim alleging breach of the
Fair Trading Act 1985
(Vic) ("the 1985
Act"). This arises because of allegations made in the Statement of Claim raising
s11 of the 1985 Act which is the
equivalent of
13. I am of the view that the Tribunal does have power or jurisdiction to
entertain claims alleging breach of s11 of the 1985 Act.
The basis for my view
lies in s37 of the 1985 Act which is as follows:
(1) A person who suffers loss or damage by conduct of another person that was
done in contravention of a provision of Part II may
recover the amount of the
loss or damage by proceeding against that other person or against the person
involved in the contravention.
(2) A proceeding under sub-section (1) may be commenced at any time within
three years after the date on which the cause of action
(3) Sub-section (1) does not apply in relation to conduct done in
contravention of section 11A.
In my view the word "proceeding" in s37(1) is capable of including a
proceeding in the Tribunal. I note that Division 3 of Part 5
of the 1995 Act is
expressed as: "How Proceedings Are To Be Started"; I note also that Division 4
of that Part is expressed as: "How
Proceedings Are to be Conducted". I see no
way of distinguishing between a "proceeding" in s37(1) of the 1985 Act (which
define the expression) and a "proceeding" under the 1995 Act (which in
s5(1) defines a "proceeding" only as including any application
for the review of
a determination). I see no warrant whatever for confining the word "proceeding"
in s37(1) (as was contended) to
the meaning given to that expression in
Supreme Court Act 1986
(Vic). The definition in
of that Act relates to
proceedings in the Supreme Court.
14. It was, however submitted that I should construe the word "proceeding" in
s37(1) as referring to a proceeding in a court (as opposed
to a Tribunal) by
reason, in particular, of the Heading to Division 3 of Part III of the 1985 Act.
That Heading is: "General Power
of Courts". The submission was that the Tribunal
is not a court and that only courts can entertain claims under s37(1) because
occurs in Division 3 of Part III of the 1985 Act. Reference in that
regard was made to
Interpretation of Legislation Act 1984
which provides that a Heading to a Division of an Act forms "part of" the Act.
15. It is, of course, true that s36(1)(a) of that Act does so provide. At the
same time, however, s7 of the same Act provides that
every section of an Act has
effect as "a substantive enactment" without introductory words. The Act does not
provide that a Heading
to a Division of an Act has effect as a substantive
enactment. It is, in my view, one thing to say that a Heading forms "part of"
Act and quite another to say that it operates definitionally to dictate the
effect of a particular provision standing as a substantive
enactment. In my
view, the Heading to Division 3 of Part III of the 1985 Act, not being expressed
in definitional terms, cannot be
given definitional status as regards s37(1). To
operate as a qualification or restriction upon the terms of s37(1), I would
it would need to have effect as a substantive enactment. But, although it
is part of the 1985 Act, no provision of the
Interpretation of Legislation Act
(Vic) gives it effect as a substantive enactment. In that regard it is
which does have effect as a substantive enactment.
16. Whatever else may be the effect of the Heading to Division 3, it does
not, in my view, qualify or restrict the operation of
Nor, upon proper
analysis, does it purport to do so. In contrast to the Heading to Division 2 of
of the 1985 Act (which is quite specific in referring to the "Powers of
County Court"), I think the Heading to Division 3 is using
the word "Courts"
quite loosely in the sense of bodies required to proceed judicially in which
case, if so, the Tribunal would be
included: compare s77(1)(b) of the 1995 Act.
A reading of the word "Courts" in this way is supported by a reading of the word
"proceeding"
in s37(1) which does not confine that word to proceedings in a
court. If, however, the position were otherwise, and if then the Heading
Division 3 did purport to qualify or restrict the operation of s37(1), then, I
think, the answer is this. The provisions of the
Interpretation of Legislation
(Vic), by reason of
of such Act, themselves apply to Acts
passed before or after that Act unless a contrary intention appears in that Act
or in the Act
"concerned". I consider that the 1995 Act, which I regard as the
Act "concerned", does demonstrate a contrary intention to what has
contended is the effect of the Heading to Division 3. The provisions of the 1995
Act are wide, broad-ranging and remedial in
nature. Considering those provisions
and the objects of the 1995 Act set out in s4 (see the
Interpretation of
Legislation Act 1984
, I cannot think that Parliament intended to
exclude jurisdiction from the Tribunal in cases (possibly many) where conduct in
contravention
of s11 of the 1985 Act is alleged. Particularly is this so if the
heading to Division 3 is not itself a substantive enactment. By
Interpretation of Legislation Act 1984
(Vic), therefore, I
regard the 1995 Act as demonstrating sufficiently a contrary intention such that
the Heading to Division 3 of
Part III of the 1985 Act, whatever else it does,
cannot be used to exclude jurisdiction from the Tribunal under s37(1) of the
Act in cases where contravention of s11 is alleged.
17. I am thus able to decide the question raised for my consideration
concerning the 1985 Act without having to determine the question
whether the
Tribunal is a "court" or not for any or for what purposes. Indicia in the 1995
Act point to a conclusion that the Tribunal
should be considered a "court" for
certain limited purposes. Such indicia include, not least, the qualifications
required of the
Chairperson who is a serving judge: see schedule 1 of the 1995
Act. The fact that the Tribunal is not called a "court" I would regard
immaterial: see Australian Pastoral Commission v Dao (No 2)
(1986) 6 NSW LR 497
at 512 per Kirby P. I note the decision of Starke J in Trevor Boiler Engineering
Co Pty Ltd v Morley
[1983] VicRp 67
[1983] 1 VR 716
AT 721 holding that the Workers Compensation
Board was a court of law within the meaning of
Administrative Law Act
(Vic). I note also the decision of Tadgell J in Deneys v Delafotis (No. 2)
[1992] VicRp 96
[1992] 2 VR 701
that an arbitrator appointed under the
Retail Tenancies Act 1986
(Vic) is not a court or a board or a body within the definition of "court" in s2
of the Appeal Costs Act 1984 (Vic). See also QH
Tours Ltd v Ship Design &
Management (Aust) Pty Ltd
[1991] FCA 637
(1991) 105 ALR 371.
I would make the observation, that
the characteristics of arbitrations are quite dissimilar to the functionings of
the Tribunal.
Nor do I think that the Tribunal can be likened to a Land
Valuation Board of Review (held not to be a court in Roads Corporation
Melbourne Estates and Finance Co Pty Ltd (No 2)
[1993] VicRp 94
[1993] 2 VR 620).
Attorney General v British Broadcasting Corp
[1980] 3A11 ER 161.
I would add I
think that it is entirely possible for a State Tribunal to be a court of a State
for one purpose but not a court of
a State for another (federal) purpose by
reason of tenure requirements in Chapter III of the Constitution.
18. The final question concerns the standing of the Second and Third
Applicants. I see no problem, in the abstract, with more than
one person being
named as an applicant. I refer to s69(1) of the 1995 Act and I note
Interpretation of Legislation Act 1984
(Vic). It may be quite proper in a
case to have several applicants. An issue was raised regarding s56 of the 1995
Act and whether
it is possible to join a person as an applicant under that
section. Again, I must say, I do not, in the abstract, see any problem
if the requirements of s56 are otherwise met: see Zettl v Jolin Holdings (DBT,
12 March 1997). The words in s56 are "joined
as a party". It is common in courts
to have persons joined as plaintiffs or as defendants. I see no reason to read
the word "party"
as restricted in meaning to a respondent.
19. The real problem, as I see it, is with the Applicant's Statement of Claim
in its pleading of a case so far as the Second and Third
Applicants are
concerned. I have heard no evidence on oath from any party. However, a mere
perusal of the Statement of Claim would
suggest that what is alleged on their
behalf is not sound in law in so far as it is sought by the pleading to attract
the principle
in Bryan v Maloney (1995) 128 ALR 163 and subsequent cases. The
oral application to join under s56 made at the preliminary hearing
think, be renewed in the proper way, if it is still to be pressed after these
Reasons are perused. Likewise, the strike
out application which was sought to be
F CONCLUSION
20. Having now, for the reasons I have given, expressed my views on the
questions raised for my consideration it is appropriate that
I should make
directions to refer this matter back to Case Management Conference on a date to
be fixed not before 13 October 1997.
I note that there is a further issue which
has been sought to be raised concerning alleged settlement or assignment.
21. Costs are reserved.
DR DAMIEN CREMEAN
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
g:\detch96\0824-96.doc
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (33.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter