URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICCAT/1998/1307.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clarke v Knox CC Clarke v Knox CC [1998] VICCAT 1307 (22 December 1998)
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NO. 1998/49474
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. 98/2320
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON TUESDAY 22ND DECEMBER 1998
NATURE OF PROCEEDING
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING
GROUNDS OF REFUSAL
GROUNDS FOR REVIEW
APPEARANCES
Issues for Determination
2. Traffic Safety
3. Is the Design and Siting of the Development Site Responsive?
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NO. 1998/49474
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. 98/2320
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON TUESDAY 22ND DECEMBER 1998
Jane Monk, Member
Applicant for Review/Permit Applicant N.F.D. Clarke
Responsible Authority City of Knox
Respondent/Objectors E. & S. Venus, A. Harmer, A. & R. Seferth, P.
& A. Saglietti, and others
NATURE OF PROCEEDING
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
for review of a decision to refuse to grant a permit.
49 bedroom special accommodation house
13 - 15 Olive Grove,
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING
The land is within the Knox Residential Zone of the Knox Planning Scheme.
Within this zone
of the land for the purpose Institutional Home,
which includes a special accommodation house is a
use for which a
permit is required. Mr Atkins submitted that institutional home fell within
the wider definition of
"residential building"
, in the same way, for
example, that take away food premises falls within the definition of shop. The
Tribunal accepts this submission.
Residential Building is also a use for which
a permit is required in the Knox Residential Zone.
In addition to the matters for consideration set out at Clause 16 of the
Scheme, such applications must be assessed having regard
to the element
objectives, criteria and techniques of the Good Design Guide for Medium Density
Housing (G.D. Guide).
GROUNDS OF REFUSAL
1. The proposal is an overdevelopment of the site.
2. The proposed development and use will be detrimental to the amenity of
occupants of adjoining land and detrimental to the amenity
neighbourhood.
3. The proposed development will be detrimental to amenity in the area due to
its scale and form and the limited opportunities for
retention and
establishment of trees and landscaping.
4. The proposal is inconsistent with orderly planning of the area.
GROUNDS FOR REVIEW
1. The proposal is an appropriate use for the site and the location.
2. The proposal is not contrary to the purposes of the Knox Residential Zone or
the future and proper planning of the area.
3. The proposed use and development can be established and carried on without
undue impact on the area.
4. The proposal has been designed to provide the desirable levels of
accommodation for residents of the home while at the same time
respecting the
amenity of surrounding properties.
5. The development on the site has been laid out in the most appropriate form
responding to the topography and the vegetation of
6. The refusal by the Responsible Authority failed to take account of all the
relevant application details about the merits of the
APPEARANCES
* Mr Maugan Bastone, Consultant Town Planner with ERM Mitchell McCotter,
represented the Responsible Authority.
* Mr Adrian Atkins, Consultant Town Planner, represented a number of respondent
objectors. A list of the persons so represented
had been forwarded to the
Tribunal prior to the hearing.
* Mr Peter Saglietti, Mr Stephen and Mrs Elizabeth Venus, all respondent
objectors and represented by Mr Atkins, also sought and
were granted leave to
make individual submissions.
* Mr Geoff Underwood of Underwood and Hume Property Consultants, represented
the applicant for review. He called the following persons
to give evidence:
- Mr Sol Perch, Architect for the development;
- Mr Russell Fairlie, Consultant Traffic Engineer with Andrew O'Brien &
Associates;
- Ms Lyndi Garnett, Landscape Architect.
Except for Mr and Mrs Venus who made brief oral presentations, all persons
tabled and spoke to written submissions or reports. These,
together with the
plans, photographs and other documents tendered during the hearing have been
attached to the Tribunal's file.
Prior to making my determination I inspected the subject site and surrounding
properties in order to gain a better understanding
of the issues.
This was an application to review a decision of the City of Knox to refuse a
permit for a 49 bed special accommodation home.
The land on which it is proposed to site this development is located on the
north side of Olive Grove in Boronia some 210m east of
Dorset Road and
approximately 1km north of the Boronia Shopping Centre and station.
The site comprises two lots which together form a rectangle with a frontage of
approximately 40m, a depth of 103m and an area of
The site slopes upwards from the road such that the rear, north-east corner of
the land, is approximately 9m higher than the front
south-western corner.
A single storey brick dwelling with an undercroft garage is located
approximately 55m back from the street frontage. It extends
to within 2.4m of
the western boundary and 4m from the eastern boundary. It is accessed via a
driveway running through the centre
of the land. A tennis court occupies the
eastern half of the front setback and it is this quadrant which forms the
smaller of the
two lots. The site is notable for the mature shrubs and trees
which form a dense screen along much of the side boundaries. There
significant number of mature trees within the 30 to 36m deep rear yard as well
as along the frontage to Olive Grove. A
feature of the area is the row of
mature Cyprus pines along the ridgeline forming the northern or rear boundary.
For the most part
this line of trees occupies the rear of the property to the
north, with frontage to Stewart Street. This latter property is occupied
the Boronia Nursing Home.
The subject site is abutted to its east by Nos. 17 and 17a Olive Grove, the
dual occupancy development owned and occupied by Mrs
Venus and her son. This
development comprises a single storey dwelling set back approximately 10m from
the street and 12m from the
western boundary. A driveway extends along the
western boundary to link with the rear dwelling located some 20m from the back
and some 17m from the common boundary with the subject site. A number of
out buildings, including a bungalow and a large garage/shed,
are sited adjacent
to the common boundary. The front dwelling has habitable room windows and a
patio with an outlook across the
side drive and towards the subject site. An
extensive landscaped border to the driveway, which supports mature trees and
provides an attractive screen to this outlook. Windows within the rear
dwelling are oriented more towards the centre of the block
than towards the
subject site.
To the west of the site, at No. 11 Olive Grove, is the part one and part two
storey dwelling of Mr Saglietti. This possibly 20 year
old brick dwelling is
set back approximately 37m from the street and is accessed by a side driveway
adjacent to the subject site.
The dwelling is elevated above an undercroft
garage and has principal living rooms facing the front and rear as well as
and dining room windows facing towards the subject site. This dwelling
is positioned immediately to the front of the dwelling occupying
the subject
The front yard of the Saglietti's property includes a border of screen trees
and shrubs along its common boundary with No. 13 Olive
Grove. Indeed, due to
the absence of a side fence it is difficult to tell where the gardens of both
properties meet. A similar
situation prevails in the rear yards although the
density of the trees and shrubs along the common boundary is not as great. The
Saglietti's rear family room opens onto a patio which is bordered on its
eastern side by the side walls of the dwelling occupying
the subject site.
These walls extend to within 2m of the common boundary. A large Golden Ash
tree, located close to the boundary
of the subject site and between both
dwellings, is a dominant landscape element.
Mr Bastone described Olive Grove as comprising three different character areas
due primarily to the size of the blocks and topography.
The precinct within
which the subject site is located contains the largest and most heavily
landscaped lots. A prominent crest
in the road marks the centre of this
precinct and the subject site is positioned a short distance to the west of the
It is proposed to incorporate the structure of the existing dwelling into a
much larger development which would extend both forwards
of and to the rear of
the existing dwelling. The extensions to the rear would be single storey, with
a flat roof and would be partially
cut into the slope in the north-eastern
corner of the site by between 0.5m and 1m. This rear structure would be set
back between
3m and 5m from both side boundaries and to between 2.5 and 4.1m
from the rear boundary.
The new front wing would be two storeys and would extend forward of the
existing dwelling, to within 10m of the street. It would
be set back 12.8m
from the Venus' side boundary and 7.5m from the Saglietti's boundary. Most
existing trees within these side setbacks
would be retained and supplemented
with planting to form landscaped garden areas. An exception would be the
development of an open
lawned area to the east of the front wing which is to be
used for a croquet green.
A new crossover, slightly to the west of the existing central driveway, would
be formed and would provide access to a ground level
car park for 17 cars, plus
an ambulance and loading bay. The first floor would be on the same level as
the existing dwelling and
rear extensions although, even then, the slope of the
land will necessitate the use of a complex arrangement of internal ramps in
order that wheelchair and trolley access is possible throughout the whole
complex. The difference in levels between the rear and
front wings is some
A special accommodation home provides supported residential services to mostly
elderly citizens. Such persons, by virtue of their
age or failing health, seek
private hotel style accommodation with 24 hour monitoring. A prerequisite for
entry is however that
residents be ambulatory and not so frail as to require
nursing. The Tribunal was advised that the 49 rooms would provide
accommodation
for up to 56 residents and that each room would have its own
ensuite bathroom. Nine communal lounges or activity areas would be
distributed
throughout the complex as well as rooms able to be used by visiting service
providers such as hairdressers, medical practitioners
etc. A dining room would
occupy a central position in part of the existing dwelling structure. A
commercial kitchen, located on
the east side of the complex adjacent to the
Venus' side bungalow, would service the dining room and a two to three bedroom
flat would be located to the rear of the ground level car park.
The plans originally accompanying the application depicted a high masonry fence
or wall extending for much of the width of the property
- including across the
sides of the central driveway. The Tribunal was advised that fencing is needed
in order to prevent residents,
who may suffer a degree of dementia, from
"wandering"
. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Underwood informed
the Tribunal that upon the advice of Ms Garnett, his client's landscape
architect, a more transparent fence design with a height of 1.8m was being
considered and it was intended also that this fence be
screened from the street
by hedge like plantings.
Issues for Determination
Three principal issues for determination were raised in respect of this
application. They could be summarised as:
* Whether the development could lead to an unacceptable loss of amenity for
neighbours due to noise and overlooking.
* Whether the traffic and parking likely to be generated would lead to traffic
hazards in Olive Grove.
* Whether the siting and design of this development was site responsive or
would detract from the character of the neighbourhood.
Each of these issues is discussed below.
The plans accompanying the application depict windows and balconies to both
sides of the proposed front wing. These balconies would
be raised between 2.8
and 3.8m above the undercroft or ground level car park and would have views
towards Mrs Venus' front dwelling
as well as the side walls and front yard of
the Saglietti's dwelling. In the case of Mrs Venus, the distance between her
and the face of the balconies is between 20 and 25m. In the case of
the Sagliettis the distance to their windows is approximately
In addition, the rear wings would extend to within 3 and 5m of the side
boundaries, with the setback developed as a landscaped path
system. On the
Saglietti's side the windows would only be located in those sections of the
building set back at least 5m.
The plans also depict the construction of a 1.8m high side and rear boundary
fences as well as a degree of excavation for the rear
parts of the rear wing -
the latter in order to maintain a more level internal layout.
In a 1997 decision of the former Administrative Appeals Tribunal and with
respect to a proposal to use this land for a child care
N.F. Clarke
v City of Knox
Appeal No. 97/24163
[19 AATR 123])
, the Tribunal found that
the noise of children playing could be detrimental to the amenity of the
Saglietti's property. In the subject
case it was argued that detriment would
again result due to the noise of up to 56 residents and due to overlooking,
primarily from
the balconies in the front wing.
The Tribunal was provided with no evidence to suggest that special
accommodation homes are an inherently noisy use. Furthermore,
residents may, on the face of it, seem a large group, the evidence of Mr Perch
- who has had extensive experience in the
design of such accommodation - was
that only rarely would large gatherings occur. For the most part single
persons or small groups
may promenade within the grounds with little prospect
of loud and boisterous gatherings. Accordingly the Tribunal finds that the
proposed use would be unlikely to cause an unreasonable loss of amenity due to
The construction of a 1.8m high fence around the rear wings would prevent
overlooking towards the Saglietti's rear courtyard - especially
given the 5m
setback of windows within the rear wings. On the Venus' side there would be
even less prospect of overlooking from
the rear wings due to the intervening
sheds on their side boundary, the need to excavate and the substantial
distance to Mr Venus'
house at the back of their land. In the case of the
Sagliettis, the advent of a fence where none exists at present would alter the
present open outlook across treed rear yards. Whilst the Tribunal acknowledges
that this would amount to the loss of an attractive
outlook I do not believe it
is an outlook which the Sagliettis should have been able to rely upon for all
For the most part, the setback to the full width windows and associated
balconies from both adjoining neighbours is and will remain
well screened by
landscaping. An exception is with respect to the Saglietti's side windows,
where less depth of planting exists
at present. Five balconies, with floor
levels which I estimate to be at some 2.4m above the floor level of the
Saglietti's living
room, would face towards the side windows and wall of the
Saglietti's house. Below four of these balconies is the manager's flat,
with full height windows and doors.
Whilst the setback between windows is 9m and therefore complies with the
relevant technique of the Good Design Guide - Technique
E7.T1, I am not
satisfied that compliance with this technique will, in the subject instance,
meet the relevant objectives and criteria
of the Guide namely
views into neighbouring ... habitable rooms"
"habitable rooms of
adjacent existing dwellings to be reasonably protected from direct
overlooking"
Within this neighbourhood, due to the large lot size and the landscaped
character of those lots, I think it appropriate for new development
place less emphasis on side facing windows and balconies. One or two windows
might be appropriate but a full wall of
windows and balconies with little
prospect of vegetative screening - due to the topography - goes too far. The
application of obscure
glazing or high sills to these windows is also no
solution, given the negative impact on future occupants of such rooms.
following a levels survey, including levels of the Saglietti's
dwelling it might be possible to develop a balcony and/or eaves design
bearing in mind that these are west facing windows - which in conjunction with
other measures such as screen planting on the balconies
themselves, could
address the perception of overlooking. Whilst on this issue it should be noted
that this proposal has suffered
by the absence of a proper site analysis.
Although levels for the subject site have been taken, there is a dearth of
information
levels - an important consideration given the sloping nature of this
Adjoining buildings have not been accurately plotted and no windows or secluded
open space areas have been identified. Finally,
the location of significant
trees on adjoining lots should have been better identified in order to assess
the impact of this proposal
on the health of those trees and thus on the likely
maintenance of the landscaped character of this neighbourhood.
2. Traffic Safety
In the case of
N.F. Clarke v City of Knox and Others
the Tribunal found
that the use of this land for a child care centre should not be allowed due
primarily to the hazard of vehicles
entering and exiting the site near the
crest and at times when the angle of the sun can be blinding for persons using
Olive Grove.
This concern was again raised in the subject proceeding. In this
instance the driveway crossover is to be moved such that it is
now 80m west of
the crest. It was Mr Fairlie's evidence that this is now well in excess of the
55m stopping distance required for
vehicles travelling at 60km/h. He noted
also how, compared to a child care centre where peak parent arrivals and
departure times
may coincide, at certain times of the year with the rising or
setting of the sun, this is not a peak time for vehicles associated
subject use.
Mr Fairlie's evidence was persuasive also in relation to the volume of cars and
other vehicles likely to be generated by this use.
Due to the relatively low
staff to resident ratios in special accommodation houses (compared with nursing
following surveys of similar facilities, it was his
opinion that the likely peak parking demand for staff would be for six spaces
and for visitors, 11. This can be provided without recourse to kerbside
parking. He suggested also that the likely number of trips
generated by the
use per day would be in the order of 40 to 60, ie. between 20 and 30 in and 20
to 30 out. This would have very
little impact on perceived traffic flows in
Olive Grove.
3. Is the Design and Siting of the Development Site Responsive?
It was contended that the topographical constraints of this site , coupled with
the requirement for such uses to be all on the one
level, had resulted in a
development which was more bulky and visually dominant than would be case for a
use with less stringent
levels requirements. Mr Atkins observed also that, in
an attempt to address the issue of bulk, a circuitous network of internal
had had to be devised. He questioned the appropriateness of such a movement
In giving evidence Mr Perch pointed to other special accommodation house
developments where internal ramping had been successfully
applied, noting also
that at 1 in 14 the gradients of the proposed ramps were very shallow. He
acknowledged however that it was
not usual to apply such an extensive ramping
system. Mr Perch advised also that the internal layout of such facilities was
by other agencies and the Tribunal acknowledges this fact.
The topography of this site is however a constraint for a use that needs to be
on the one level. In the subject instance this has
led to the use of a two
storey wing projecting towards the street and a single level rear extension
which is partly excavated into
the rear boundary. It is apparent however that
in the subject instance this possible constraint has certain positive
attributes.
It has for example enabled the car parking area to be located
below the accommodation wing, with little need for excavation and
added benefit of maximising ground level landscaping rather than having this
filled by an open lot car park. On one reading,
this is a site responsive
response. An issue for determination is whether, by meeting this constraint
using a design which incorporates
a forward projecting two storey wing, and
rear excavation, will integrate well with the neighbourhood and not detract
from the character
of the area. I regard the following to be the relevant
objectives and criteria of the Guide in relation to these issues:
Neighbourhood Character
E3.O1 To achieve medium density development which is respectful of its
neighbourhood.
E3.O3 To maintain the garden character of neighbourhoods.
E3.C1 Medium density development among established housing should be
designed to respect the character of the neighbourhood (in design
built form, look for characteristics of; massing proportion, roof form and
pitch, façade articulation and detailing,
window and door proportions,
verandahs, eaves and parapets, building materials, patterns, textures and
colours, building setbacks).
E3.C2 New developments should respect and maintain the garden or landscape
character of an area where this is a dominant feature of
neighbourhood.
E3.C3 New development should provide for the retention or planting of trees
with spreading crowns.
Site Layout and Landscaping
E4.O1 To integrate the layout of developments with the neighbourhood and
abutting use and development.
E4.C1 Developments should integrate well with the neighbourhood. Enhance
existing streets, maintain amenity for adjacent residents
E4.C2 Layouts should respond positively to site features and overcome site
constraints."
It was Ms Garnett's evidence that the extent of supplementary
landscaping, taken with the existing boundary planting will ensure that
proposed development, when viewed from any side, would not be visually
intrusive or alien to the neighbourhood notwithstanding
its comparatively
greater visual bulk.
Mr Underwood raised the very relevant issue also that such uses must have a
place somewhere.
Arguing against Mr Bastone's submission that the appropriate
location for these uses is within or adjacent to a commercial precinct,
Underwood suggested that a residential location was to be preferred. He
contended that in the subject locality, the topography
and landscaping could be
employed as an aid to conceal the necessarily greater bulk which such a
facility presents. I accept these
submissions. In another special
accommodation case which came before me,
Currawong Lodge v City of
Manningham and Others
(Appeal No. 97/16056 referred to AATR editorial
comment page 2) I found, in a newly developing part of Donvale where the
was very open and undulating, that the visual prominence and bulk of
a 37 bed special accommodation house would be too much at odds
character of the area, notwithstanding that certain of the new dwellings were
of some size. I also found the location to
be too isolated from public
transport and services. The subject site is not so isolated. It is also
within a well established and
well vegetated residential neighbourhood and I am
satisfied that the necessary bulk of a special accommodation house has greater
potential for integration into such a setting.
Such integration cannot however rely on vegetation alone. As noted in the
criteria of Elements 3 and 4 of the Guide, which consider
neighbourhood character and site layout and landscaping, it is appropriate
take certain cues from other elements within the neighbourhood, including built
form elements. While I am satisfied that the
two storey bulk of the building
projecting forwards towards the street can, to some extent, be ameliorated by
the existing and proposed
vegetation, I find that a more sensitive
architectural treatment for this forward projecting wing is necessary in order
that it does not read as an alien structure in this setting.
In his written statement of evidence, Mr Perch made the following statement:
"The external character of the building is subject to more advanced and
detailed studies of preferred ultimate design expression which
will take place
prior to application for building permits. This presentation is schematic only
and begs to assume an attractive
roof design and wall treatment resolution when
more definitive design parameters are to be studied and confirmed."
As I suggested in the course of the hearing, I find this to be a rather
enigmatic statement. It suggests that the final appearance
of the building,
including the roof treatment and walls - both of which are fundamental
components - could be determined
any planning permit had issued.
Given the matters required to be taken into account when considering such an
application - including
the test of whether the development has been designed
to respect the character of the neighbourhood - I regard deferral of such
details until
a permit issued as an incorrect approach.
Having made a detailed inspection of the area I find that the parapeted and
somewhat terraced
style of the proposed development - as depicted on Mr Perch's
plans - bears no relationship with its Olive Grove neighbours. However,
little difficulty a skilled designer could, I am confident, devise a more
sympathetic treatment including a remodelling of the
front elevation to reduce
the visual impact of the garage entry and to engender a more domestic
appearance. The selection of a tiled
roof form and use of a recessive brick
colour, reflective of prevailing materials within the neighbourhood, would also
ensure a more
harmonious result.
The issue of neighbourhood character is not limited to the streetscape impact
of a development. As was noted
in the December 1994 report of the Vic Code 2
Review Panel at page 27:
"Character is the inter-relationship of various aspects of built form,
topography, vegetation, density, subdivision pattern and activity
both in the
public and private domain. Streetscape is one aspect of such character ...
character is also used to refer to the "feel"
of an area - the atmosphere
perceived not only from the street but from the backyard. This is a much more
amorphous concept, reliant
as much on intangible qualities such as "peaceful",
"secluded", "quiet", "friendly" etc, as on descriptions such as "green and
Most medium density developments, particularly on standard infill sites,
borrow their amenity from neighbouring properties. If these
are redeveloped
also, the cumulative impact of the loss of trees becomes obvious and begins to
significantly change the "character"
of the area ...
One of the hallmarks of Melbourne is its gardens and the predominance of
trees across the majority of its suburbs. It is the single
feature common to
most peoples perception of the character of their neighbourhood. It is the
loss of their softening effect and
the privacy they afford which is most keenly
felt when adjoining land is developed for units. Even where suitable design
are employed to prevent overlooking, buildings are still perceived as
intrusive without a buffer of vegetation.
Therefore, if change is to occur within the suburbs, it needs to do so in a
context which respects and maintains the essential garden
character of
Melbourne where gardens are a dominant feature of the "character" or "feel" of
a neighbourhood."
In the subject instance the presence of substantial trees on the site and on
neighbouring sites is an important feature of the neighbourhood.
rising topography, the trees in the rear gardens of dwellings on this northern
side of Olive Grove provide a well vegetated
backdrop to the neighbourhood.
The conifers on the rear boundary, most of which are within the car park of the
adjoining nursing
development would remove a majority of the trees in the rear yard and the
wing would be constructed to within approximately 4m of the trunks of the
conifers and a mature elm (inaccurately labelled as
a pine on Ms Garnett's
planting plan). Furthermore, whilst the plans indicate the retention of a
centrally located, semi-mature
Blue Spruce, Ms Garnett could not be clear about
the possible impacts on this tree of three walls to the rear wing which are to
within approximately 3m of its trunk.
I have noted already the absence of a site context plan showing the precise
location of trees
and other features on neighbouring sites. I could not be
satisfied from Ms Garnett's evidence, especially in view of the excavation
proposed for the rear boundaries, that the health of this Blue Spruce and of
nearby significant trees is assured. I find therefore
that a more detailed
appraisal of the impacts of the rear wings is required to be carried out. This
may well indicate that these
wings must be pulled further off the rear
boundary. This being the case the greater setbacks could be developed with
further gardens
and, more particularly, a range of new canopy trees which in
time could make their own contribution to the backdrop planting for
neighbourhood.
On the basis of the plans as presently submitted
it would have been the finding of this Tribunal that no permit should issue.
in view of the nature of my conclusions - which are essentially that
is acceptable provided the built form can be made more
respectful of its neighbours and the significant vegetation to the rear, I
think it appropriate in this instance to direct the preparation and circulation
of amended plans which address these concerns.
1. The applicant is directed to prepare amended plans which:
(a) Detail measures to be taken to screen views between west-facing windows and
balconies on the front wing and habitable room windows
in the dwelling at No.
11 Olive Grove. Such measures to include an analysis of levels and distances
to windows in No. 11.
(b) Depict an architectural style more responsive to elements within the
neighbourhood, including a reappraisal of the front elevation
to reduce the
visual dominance of the garage entry and to engender a more domestic
appearance.
(c) Give consideration to the likely impact of the rear wings and associated
excavation on the health of the Blue Spruce and significant
rear boundary trees
- both within and external to the site - including conifers and an elm. The
report of a professional arborist
must be obtained and must set out
recommendations in relation to appropriate setbacks, excavation and footing
designs. Such recommendations
to be depicted, where appropriate, on the plans
or in an accompanying schedule.
2. Upon preparation, the amended plans and associated reports and schedules
must be circulated for comment to all other parties and
a copy forwarded at the
same time to the Tribunal. If parties wish to make comment these must be
forwarded in writing to the Tribunal
within 14 days of receipt of the plans
etc. A copy must also be forwarded at the same time to the permit applicant.
The Tribunal
will then proceed to determine the matter.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter