URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2021/169.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:24:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Worboyes v The Queen [2021] VSCA 169 (18 June 2021)
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA
S EAPCR 2020 0222
TYLER WORBOYES
PRIEST, KAYE AND T FORREST JJA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
7 June 2021
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
18 June 2021
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2021] VSCA 169
JUDGMENT APPEALED FROM:
DPP v Worboyes
[2020] VCC 1099 (Judge
CRIMINAL LAW — Appeal — Recklessly causing serious injury,
reckless conduct endangering serious injury and failing to
render assistance
after a motor vehicle accident — Spectator seriously injured and others
endangered at illegal ‘skid’
meet — Sentence of two years and
five months’ imprisonment, with a non-parole period of one year and four
Whether sentencing judge failed to give sufficient utilitarian
value to guilty plea during COVID-19 pandemic — Whether judge
take into account forfeiture of appellant’s vehicle — Whether
sentence manifestly excessive — Appeal
APPEARANCES:
For the Appellant:
Ms M O’Brien
Armstrong Legal
For the Respondent:
Ms K Judd, QC, DPP, with Mr E S Dober
Ms A Hogan, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
FORREST JA:
Introduction
1 Pursuant to a grant of leave on the
the appellant, Tyler
Worboyes, now aged 27 years,
appeals against a total effective sentence of two years and five months’
imprisonment, with a non-parole period of one year
and four months, imposed upon
him by a judge of the County Court on 24 July 2020, following his pleas of
guilty to: recklessly causing
reckless conduct
endangering serious injury;
failing to render assistance after a motor vehicle
appellant was granted leave to appeal on four grounds, which are (as
renumbered):
learned sentencing judge erred in failing to take into account the impact of the
forfeiture of the [appellant’s] vehicle,
and in doing so failed to apply
and consider the relevant principles of proportionality and totality.
learned sentencing judge erred in failing to give meaningful attribution to the
benefit of a plea of guilty during the COVID-19
learned sentencing judge erred in failing to properly apply the principle of
parsimony, in that his Honour did not consider whether
a term of imprisonment in
combination with a community correction order was a sentencing option.
total effective sentence, individual sentences, orders for cumulation and
non-parole period fixed are manifestly excessive.
3 Having now had the benefit of full oral
argument, the Court is of the view that the appeal should be dismissed. Our
reasons follow.
The offending and its aftermath
4 The appellant’s offending may
briefly be summarised. Shortly before 11.00 pm on 27 March 2019, the eve
of his twenty-fifth
birthday, the appellant performed a ‘burnout’ in
his VU Holden utility — that is, he kept his motor vehicle stationary
while spinning its wheels, causing the tires to heat up and smoke — at a
‘skid meet’ (an illegal event where some
individuals gather to
perform, and others to watch, burnouts) attended by between 200 and 400 people
in an industrial area in Derrimut
(charge 1). In the course of the burnout, the
appellant’s vehicle clipped the kerb and struck a young man, Keanu
Gueli-Quaresma,
who was standing on the nature strip watching another car
perform a burnout. As a result of being struck, Mr Gueli-Quaresma suffered
serious injury (charge 2). Having initially stopped his vehicle, the appellant
left the scene upon being threatened by by-standers
5 Mr Gueli-Quaresma was rendered unconscious by
the collision. He arrived at hospital at 12.15 am on 28 March 2019, and was
to have suffered a left superior and inferior pubic ramus fracture, with
complete left sided sacral fracture extending into the face
joining the L5
vertebra, which required surgical stabilisation. On 31 March 2019, he underwent
an L4-sacrum posterior spinal in-fix.
He was released from hospital on 4 April
2019, the expectation being that he would have further surgery in a few
months’ time
to remove the spinal metalware. As at the date of sentence,
Mr Gueli-Quaresma had not returned to work, and, in a victim impact
said that he was ‘no longer able to pursue a career of a fully qualified
mechanic’. He also described his
significant physical and mental
Reasons for sentence
6 The judge commenced his sentencing
remarks by observing that the appellant, an apprentice roof tiler, was aged 25
years at the time
of offending.
7 Next, the judge
briefly described the charges and the offending, noting that he had watched CCTV
footage showing the ‘burnout’
a ‘number of times’
(albeit the footage does not show the circumstances of charge 2). He also
described Mr Gueli-Quaresma’s
injuries, and recited aspects of the victim
impact statements.
8 The judge then turned to the
appellant’s record of interview with police, stating that the appellant
‘cooperated with
police’, and observing that ‘given his age
and the type of event, [the appellant] no doubt had no perception of the change
in his life that was going to be brought about by what happened’.
9 Although, so the judge noted, the appellant had
‘no criminal priors as such’, he did have ‘concerning driving
priors’. Thus, his licence had been suspended three times between the
ages of 18 and 24. All of the suspensions related to
excessive speed,
‘where he was between at least 25 and up to 35 kilometres over the speed
limit’. The appellant had
also lost his licence for six months in
September 2013, for having a blood alcohol concentration of .048 per cent when a
probationary
10 Prior to sentence, the judge
had the appellant assessed for a community correction order (‘CCO’),
although, as the
judge noted, the prosecutor had submitted that ‘gaol was
inescapable’. The prosecutor had also submitted that ‘the
needs to deter the very audience which was attending this skid’; and, for
the purposes of charge 2, ‘that the
serious consequences of this reckless
driving need to be taken into account’.
11 The judge then referred to sentences of other
County Court judges that the prosecutor had raised, and he noted what he
as ‘the guideline judgment’ of
Next, the judge
referred to
and said that:
On the spectrum of seriousness for offending ... I
classify Charge 1 as being on such spectrum as between low to moderate. Charge
2 as moderate, in particular given the limited aggravating factors, despite the
recklessness, and Charge 3, I assess as low.
12 Turning to what he referred to as
factor’, the judge discussed the role of the
victim — citing
indicated that it would result in ‘a modest reduction in sentence’.
He said he took into account that
the victim had gone voluntarily to this skid meeting,
had placed himself on the edge of the road where cars were going to perform
donuts in front of him, in circumstances which I consider he thereby, exposed
himself to obvious risk, and as such, the second limb
established.
13 The judge accepted that the appellant
had shown remorse and had ‘been open and cooperative to the authorities in
this matter’.
His guilty pleas were ‘particularly valuable’,
and his plea to the first charge ‘a very valuable plea’.
said that the appellant ‘is entitled to an appropriate discount’,
not only because his was a ‘valuable
plea’, but because of its
‘utilitarian effects’ on the course of justice and because it
demonstrates remorse.
He added that the appellant ‘is a person who has
strong family support’, and ‘has an excellent employment
respect to the effects of the current pandemic, the judge said that he took into
the COVID-19 risks that this Court is well aware of, and
were further spoken of by [the appellant’s counsel] today, clearly
know of the imminent risks in the present system and consequential stress and
inconvenience to prisoners.
On being sentenced to gaol, a person is going to be subject, at least initially,
to a fourteen-day isolation. One is equally going
to be subject when one is out
of that, to half day lockdowns in any prison in the current system. One is also
going to be subject
to a totally reduced number of visitors, be it friends or
family, and of course the situation of living in an environment where such
15 Finally,
the judge cited passages from
and stated:
It would not be just to allow you to be sentenced by way
of a [CCO] in any form. It is inescapable, as was put by the prosecutor,
you must be sentenced to a period of gaol on the totality of the circumstances
in this case.
The event in which you took part was inherently dangerous to your knowledge.
You were aware that such events had previously caused
injuries. On this day,
you willingly, by your reckless behaviour, not only participated, but firstly
created a risk to all who were
there, and caused serious injuries to Mr
Gueli-Quaresma.
As you have heard today, and as confirmed in the two victim impact statements,
as a consequence of your criminality, you have caused
grave physical and mental
impact to him, the full consequences of which are still unknown. In those
circumstances, the principles
of general deterrence and denunciation, as put by
the learned prosecutor, are particularly important. Specific deterrence is also
a factor in this case, given your particular priors.
I accept that, as earlier put by [defence counsel], you have limited criminal
priors and that there has been otherwise on your behalf,
good plea material.
You are still relatively young and obviously I accept, the principle of
rehabilitation is particularly important,
and I do take it into account.
However, given the serious consequences and injuries to Mr Gueli-Quaresma and
the risk created by
your driving, and your objective criminality, the role of
rehabilitation must in the sentencing calculus, be necessarily reduced,
the words of [
Azzopardi v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 372
(2011) 35 VR 43
, 53–5 [34] to
16 Set out in tabular form, the sentence
that the judge then imposed was as follows:
Reckless conduct endangering serious injury
Recklessly causing serious injury
Failure to stop and render assistance after a motor vehicle
Total effective sentence:
2 years and 5 months’ imprisonment
Non-parole period:
1 year and 4 months’ imprisonment
Pre-sentence detention:
Section 6AAA declaration:
3 years and 2 months’ imprisonment with 2 years and 5
months’ non-parole
Other orders:
Licence cancelled and disqualified for 4 years (charge 3);
forfeiture (motor vehicle)
Ground 3: The utilitarian value of a guilty plea during the
17 It is convenient to turn first to
ground 3, which contends that the sentencing judge erred ‘in failing to
give meaningful
attribution to the benefit of a plea of guilty during the
COVID-19 pandemic’. The issue raised by this ground was common to
appeals argued the same day before a similarly constituted
is plain from his sentencing remarks, the judge specifically stated that in
fixing sentence he took into account the imminent
risks to prisoners posed by
COVID-19 and the stress and inconvenience thereby caused. The judge noted that,
upon being imprisoned,
a person is subject initially to 14 days’
isolation. Prisoners are also going to be subject to lockdowns, and have
reduced contact with family and
of the submissions of the appellant’s counsel on the plea were, however,
directed specifically to the notion that a
guilty plea entered during the
current pandemic should attract a greater ‘discount’ on sentence
than a guilty plea entered
in non-pandemic times due to an increased utilitarian
benefit. Notwithstanding that this is so, counsel for the appellant submitted
orally in this Court that the judge should have: first, recognised the greater
utilitarian benefit that flowed from the appellant’s
pleas of guilty;
secondly, specifically referred to that greater utilitarian benefit in his
sentencing remarks; and, thirdly, explicitly
reflected that greater utilitarian
benefit in the sentence imposed.
20 Although we
consider that — in circumstances where he was not asked to address the
issue — it is quite unrealistic
to criticise the sentencing judge for
failing to deal with the contention that he should have recognised a greater
utilitarian benefit
inheres in a plea of guilty entered during the pandemic, out
of deference to the earnest and comprehensive submissions advanced by
appellant’s counsel under cover of this ground, we consider it appropriate
to make the following observations.
matter of public record that the COVID-19 virus was first identified in Victoria
in late January 2020. Thereafter, in
March 2020, a state of emergency was
announced, and (among other things) the government shut down
‘non-essential services’
and ‘social distancing’ rules
(so-called) were introduced. Throughout May and June 2020, a second wave of
led to a strict ‘lockdown’ in Melbourne which lasted
several months. Jury trials in criminal cases were suspended, and
the capacity
of courts otherwise to dispose of criminal work was severely compromised,
leading to a drastic backlog of criminal cases
(particularly in the County Court
and Magistrates’ Court). Although some semblance of normality had started
to return to the
operation of the Courts by the early part of 2021 — by
way of example, some jury trials had recommenced in the Supreme Court
Court from 16 November 2020, and the Chief Justice and the Chief Judge of the
County Court had announced in a joint statement
dated 19 March 2021 that
criminal jury trials will progressively resume in regional courts across
Victoria in the coming months —
a further ‘lockdown’ related
to another COVID-19 outbreak in Melbourne was introduced on 27 May 2021. That
so-described
‘circuit breaker lockdown’ was still in operation when
the present appeal was heard.
22 Although one
might well debate the extent of their magnitude, and the length of time it will
take to bring them within acceptable
limits, it is an undeniable fact that
enormous and intimidating backlogs in the criminal lists of both the County
Court and Magistrates’
Court have resulted from the government’s
response to the pandemic. This Court cannot turn a blind eye to the fact that,
any yardstick, the backlogs in the resolution of criminal cases in those
courts will take years to rein
23 Of particular and abiding importance, there are
hundreds of jury trials in the County Court awaiting disposal. Furthermore,
in the limited number of jury trials that it has been possible to
resume since the second wave of infection (to an extent) has abided,
demonstrates that trials are far more resource-intensive and depleting than was
the case pre-pandemic. Thus, by way of example,
two courtrooms have been
required to conduct a single
is against that background that the contentions advanced in support of the
present ground of appeal fall to be
determined.
25 For some years, appellate courts have
recognised the desirability of encouraging accused persons to plead guilty in
order to reduce
the volume of cases in congested criminal business lists. Thus
had arisen during a sentence appeal in the Full Court of the Supreme Court of
South Australia consisting of three judges
as to the weight (if any) which the
sentencing judge should have given to the appellant’s plea of guilty.
Given the state
of the authorities, and in light of the apparent differences in
approach by judges of the Court, a Court of five judges was convened
authoritative guidance to judges and magistrates. Significantly, King CJ
recognised that the administrative demands alone
of an over-burdened system of
criminal justice justified a reduction in sentence when an accused pleads
guilty. An incentive to
accused persons to plead guilty should be offered by
way of mitigation of sentence, thereby resulting in court lists being eased.
willingness to co-operate in the administration of justice by pleading guilty
should mitigate sentence. Hence, King CJ
The volume of criminal business has placed the court
system under stress and has resulted in unfortunate delays in bringing accused
persons to trial. Congestion is greatly contributed to by offenders who put
forward false stories and make use of legal aid in an
effort to escape
conviction. The growth in the importance of these factors points, in my
opinion, to the desirability of providing
some encouragement to guilty persons
to admit their guilt.
If a plea of guilty, as distinct from remorse evidenced
by such a plea, cannot be regarded as a factor in mitigation of penalty, there
is no incentive, other than the demands of honesty, for an offender to admit his
guilt, and experience indicates that the demands
of honesty have but little
influence on many of those who appear in the docks of criminal courts. In most
cases, if the offender
has nothing to gain by admitting his guilt, he will see
no reason for doing so. I am impressed by the strong practical reasons for
recognising a willingness to co-operate in the administration of justice by
pleading guilty as conduct possessing a degree of merit,
quite apart from
remorse, which can be taken into account in assessing the
was decided in this State a few years after
, when s 4 of
Penalties and Sentences Act
set out the manner in
which a sentencing court was to deal with guilty pleas. The Court (Young CJ,
King and Beach JJ) said:
The result of this consideration of the section is that
a court may always take a plea of guilty into account in mitigation of sentence
even though it is solely motivated by self-interest and even though it is a plea
to lesser offences than those originally charged
or intended to be charged.
Doubtless, however, a plea of guilty which is indicative of remorse or of some
other mitigating quality
will ordinarily carry more weight than a plea dictated
solely by self-interest. Nevertheless, Parliament having indicated, by the
requirement that a court state the fact that it has reduced the sentence that it
would otherwise have passed on account of a plea
of guilty, that encouragement
is to be given to pleas of guilty, such a plea should ordinarily be taken into
account in the accused's
28 Later, in
— at a time
Sentencing Act 1991
required (as it still does)
that a sentencing court ‘must have regard to ... whether the offender
pleaded guilty to the offence
and, if so, the stage in the proceedings at which
the offender did so or indicated an intention to do so’ — Callaway
JA set out a number of principles applicable to pleas of
We need not
exhaustively set them out. But he
that a plea of guilty will
usually justify some mitigation of punishment in the
exercise of the wide discretion conferred on a sentencing judge. It is referred
to as a ‘discount’ to make it clear that a sentence is never
increased or made more severe because an accused person
puts the Crown to its
proof or declines to give such assistance.
8. A plea that evidences genuine remorse and prospects
of rehabilitation, that is entered at the earliest practical opportunity and
that saves the State a trial and the witnesses both trauma and inconvenience
normally justifies a high discount.
9. An early plea that does nothing except save time and expense is still
entitled to consideration, and should usually attract a
significant discount,
for the reasons explained by Hunt CJ at CL in
R v Winchester
(1992) 58 A
at 350 and by King CJ in
R v Shannon
(1979) 21 SASR 442
451. See also
[1986] VicRp 82
[1986] VR 863
the High Court
had cause to consider
Sentencing Act 1995
Section 7(2)(a)
gave effect to the common law rule that a person should
not be penalised for pleading not guilty, and
provided that ‘the
earlier in proceedings that [the guilty plea] is made, or indication is given
that it will be made, the
greater the mitigation’. Gaudron, Gummow and
Callinan JJ observed:
Once it is appreciated that
is to be reconciled with
, which gives effect to the common law
requirement that an offender not be penalised for pleading not guilty,
must be read as allowing that a plea of guilty may be taken into account in
mitigation for the reason that a guilty plea evidences
a willingness to
facilitate the course of justice and not simply because the plea saves the time
and expense of those involved in
the administration of criminal
30 Although in the minority — we do
not consider that fact affects the cogency of his observations — McHugh J
Australian courts have enthusiastically embraced the
proposition that a person who pleads guilty should receive a lesser sentence
than one who pleads not guilty and is convicted. In so far as a plea of guilty
indicates remorse and contrition on the part of the
defendant, the courts have
long recognised it as a mitigating factor of
importance.
But in recent
years, under the pressure of delayed hearings and ever increasing court lists,
Australian courts have indicated that
they will regard a plea of guilty as a
mitigating factor even when no remorse or contrition is
They have taken
the pragmatic view that giving sentence ‘discounts’ to those who
plead guilty at the earliest available
opportunity encourages pleas of guilty,
reduces the expense of the criminal justice system, reduces court delays, avoids
inconvenience
to witnesses and prevents the misuse of legal aid funds by the
31 Kirby J addressed the public interest
involved in providing a ‘discount’ for a plea of guilty, even when
the plea is
not accompanied by a quality such as
The main features of the public interest, relevant to
the discount for a plea of guilty, are ‘purely
utilitarian’.
include the fact that a plea of guilty saves the community the cost and
inconvenience of the trial of the prisoner which must
otherwise be
undertaken.
It also involves a
saving in costs that must otherwise be expended upon the provision of judicial
and court facilities; prosecutorial
operations; the supply of legal aid to
accused persons; witness fees; and the fees paid, and inconvenience caused, to
summoned to perform jury
Even a plea at a late
stage, indeed even one offered on the day of trial or during a trial, may, to
some extent, involve savings
of all these kinds.
Given that under our criminal justice system it is the right of the accused to
put the State to the proof of the crime charged; given
that by pleading guilty
the accused surrenders any chance of being acquitted, even undeservedly; and
given some empirical evidence
that sentences following contested trials are not
always substantially different from sentences upon a
it is in the public
interest to facilitate pleas of guilty by those who are guilty and to conserve
the trial process substantially
to cases where there is a real contest about
guilt. Doing this helps ease the congestion in the courts that delay the
such trials as must be
It also encourages
the clear-up rate for crime and so vindicates public confidence in the processes
established to protect the community
and uphold its
A plea of guilty may also
vindication and support from
their families and friends and possibly assistance
from the community for injuries they have
Especially in cases
of homicide and sexual offences, a plea of guilty may spare the victim or the
victim's family and friends the
ordeal of having to give
Redlich JA and
Curtain AJA, having cited
At common law, it can therefore be said that there has
been a very broad and long-standing acceptance that a sufficient and necessary
rationale for the public interest in providing a discount for a plea of guilty
is its utilitarian benefit and that there is no requirement
that there be
present any of the subjective criteria before the discount is
They had earlier
No accused person is obliged to plead guilty. Every
accused is entitled to put the Crown to its proof. No accused is to be
to a more severe penalty because they stood trial.
The orderly and
effective administration of criminal justice depends upon a large proportion of
accused persons pleading guilty.
Were it otherwise, the courts would be unable
to provide justice within any tolerable time frame and injustice would be done
to victims,
witnesses, accused persons and the community generally
public interest is always served where an offender pleads guilty, not the least
because it provides for certainty of outcome
and a resolution of the substantive
issue. A plea of guilty not only resolves the crime and releases investigators
to other duties;
resources are preserved for cases in which the guilt of the
offender is really in issue. The plea vindicates public confidence in
processes established to protect the community, relieves the victims and
witnesses of having to give evidence and provides
some closure and vindication
for victims of the crime.
33 More recently, in
returned to the issue of the utilitarian benefit flowing from guilty pleas in
the case of federal offences, paying particular
attention to the provisions of
Crimes Act 1914
It is unnecessary to
analyse what was said in
in any detail, it being enough to observe
that, following a very comprehensive survey of authority, the Court (Redlich,
and McLeish JJA) was of the view that, when sentencing for federal
offences, a sentencing judge must take into account the objective
utilitarian
benefit of a plea of guilty.
34 It may thus be
concluded that, commencing with
, the preponderance of authority
contemplates that mitigation of punishment should flow from a plea of guilty
based solely on the
utilitarian benefits of the plea. Hence, appellate courts
have recognised the public interest in facilitating pleas of guilty so
conserve courts’ trial processes, and so as to alleviate the congestion in
criminal courts that delay in the hearing
of contested trials creates.
35 As is abundantly clear, one of the pernicious
effects of the current pandemic is that the lists of the criminal courts in this
State have become severely congested. Unacceptable delay in the disposition of
criminal cases is endemic. Indeed, it is not an
overstatement to say that the
system of criminal justice in this State is in crisis, requiring a response from
the courts. We therefore
consider that, whilst the courts of this State
continue to labour under the adverse effects of the pandemic, a sentencing court
view a plea of guilty as carrying with it a greater utilitarian benefit
than at other times and in other circumstances, and, concomitantly,
attracting an augmented mitigatory effect on sentence, simply because the plea
will benefit the beleaguered administration of
justice. Given the unhappy state
of the courts’ lists, the courts must, in an endeavour to alleviate the
strain on the system,
encourage those accused who are guilty to so plead. Such
encouragement must come from an actual and palpable amelioration of
36 There are, it must be recognised, real
disincentives in the current climate for accused persons who are on bail to
plead guilty,
particularly if a sentence of imprisonment is on the cards. As
the judge observed in the present case, a newly-sentenced prisoner
in times of
the pandemic will spend the first two weeks of his or her sentence in
Thereafter, he or
she will have very restricted opportunities for contact with family and friends.
Further, rehabilitative and other
programs within prisons are severely
curtailed. That this is so is notorious. These circumstances must render the
prospect of imprisonment
even more unpalatable than is usually the case, and
operate as a further deterrent to the entry of a guilty plea. These
disincentives
to pleading guilty must be balanced by a proper inducement,
through mitigation of sentence, to accept guilt.
37 Self-evidently, the other side of the coin is
that there are real incentives for the cynical and unprincipled to exploit the
resulting from the pandemic. The longer the delay, the more the memory
(and enthusiasm) of witnesses dims, and the preparedness
of victims to actively
and willingly participate is tested, with associated forensic disadvantages to
the prosecution. In ordinary
times with ordinary delays, the lot of victims and
witnesses already is not a happy one. The longer the delays, the more
their plight.
38 Further, and
significantly, criminal jury trials in times of the pandemic are far more
resource-depleting than in times where the
threat of serious infection is not
present. One of the aspirations of encouraging utilitarian pleas of guilty must
be that scant
resources, upon which there is great demand, will be to an extent
39 For these reasons, we consider that
— all other things being equal — a plea of guilty entered during the
currency of
the COVID-19 pandemic is worthy of greater weight in mitigation than
a similar plea entered at a time when the community and the
courts are not
afflicted by the pandemic’s effects. A plea of guilty during the pandemic
ordinarily should attract a more
pronounced amelioration of sentence than at
another time. Although a sentencing judge need not quantify the extent of any
‘discount’,
he or she must ensure that the plea of guilty results in
a perceptible amelioration of sentence.
circumstances of the present case, however, none of this avails the appellant,
so that we cannot uphold ground 2.
41 As we have
said, the appellant’s counsel did not ask the judge to attribute greater
weight to the plea of guilty given that
it was entered during the pandemic. In
any event, the judge characterised the plea as ‘a very valuable
plea’, and said
that the appellant ‘is entitled to an appropriate
discount’, not only because his was a ‘valuable plea’,
because of its ‘utilitarian effects’ on the course of justice and
because it demonstrates remorse. Moreover, the
judge took into account the
additional ‘stress and inconvenience’ to the appellant as a result
of the conditions of custody
flowing from the pandemic. It is evident that, by
characterising the plea as ‘very valuable’, the judge gave it
weight, allowing for the additional circumstance that it was made
during the pandemic.
Ground 2: Claimed failure to take forfeiture into account
42 It is curious that the judge did not
in his reasons for sentence refer to the anticipated effect on the appellant of
the forfeiture
of his vehicle, or state the manner in which it may have
influenced the sentence imposed. Plainly, it would have been better had
so. That said, it may be gleaned from discussion on the plea that the judge did
not consider that the effect of the vehicle’s
forfeiture on the appellant
would be very significant, which perhaps explains why the judge did not refer to
43 Whatever the explanation may be, after full
argument we are not persuaded that the effect of the forfeiture, or the
failure to take it into account (if indeed he did so fail), could
have had any meaningful impact on the sentence
44 Ground 2 cannot be upheld.
Grounds 3 and 4: Parsimony and manifest excess
45 In oral argument, counsel for the
appellant accepted that ground 3 is in reality a particular of manifest
46 Counsel relied on a number of matters in
support of the contention that the sentence imposed (in each of its constituent
components)
is manifestly excessive,
• the appellant’s relative
• his remorse (which included going to
the hospital to check on the victim);
fact that the appellant surrendered himself to police and cooperated with
• the offending lacked aggravating
features (such as intoxication);
• the judge
characterised some of the offending as ‘low’ or
‘moderate’;
• the conduct of the
• the appellant’s history of
gainful employment;
• his lack of criminal
convictions;
• the forfeiture of his vehicle;
• his continued family
47 To once more traverse well-trodden
ground, manifest excess is a conclusion which does not depend upon the
attribution of identified
specific error. It is a conclusion that ordinarily
does not admit of much elaboration or sustained argument, since excess is, or
not, plainly apparent, and a sentence is, or is not, unreasonable or plainly
unjust. The sentence may be excessive because —
as was submitted by the
appellant’s counsel in this case — the wrong type of sentence has
been imposed, or because the
sentence imposed is manifestly too
We approach the task of
assessing whether a sentence is manifestly — as opposed to simply arguably
— excessive in much
the same way that a judge approaches the imposition of
sentence at first instance. Hence, we instinctively synthesise all relevant
factors in order to determine whether we consider that the challenged sentence
is just and appropriate.
not enough for intervention to be warranted, however, that we consider the
impugned sentence to be stern, or if we would not
ourselves have passed the same
sentence. It is only if we concluded that the sentence imposed is wholly
outside the range of those
open in the sound exercise of discretion that the
intervention of this Court would be
the advantage of full oral argument, we are not persuaded that the individual
sentences, the total effective sentence produced
by the orders for cumulation or
the non-parole period, are outside the range of those open in the sound exercise
of discretion.
49 We acknowledge that the
appellant is a relatively young man of generally good character (albeit he has
attracted penalties for
relevant driving offences), who has family support and a
good work record. We also acknowledge that, not only is this his first
custody, but that the conditions in which he has served (and will continue to
serve) his sentence are more onerous because
of the pandemic’s
50 It cannot be ignored, however, that the
victim suffered serious injury as a result of the appellant’s inherently
actions. The risk to life and limb was profound, and, sadly, was
realised in Mr Gueli-Quaresma’s case. It was perhaps fortunate
appellant’s loss of control of his vehicle did not have more devastating
effects. Quite plainly, there was need for
the sentence to be animated by a
significant measure of general deterrence, coupled with curial denunciation and
just punishment.
51 Balancing all relevant factors,
we have been unable to conclude that the sentence is manifestly
52 Grounds 3 and 4 cannot succeed.
53 For these reasons, the appeal must be
Worboyes v The Queen
(Unreported, Court of Appeal, Priest JA, 19 March 2021).
His date of birth is recorded
28 March 1994.
Crimes Act 1958
The maximum penalty is 15 years’ imprisonment.
Crimes Act 1958
The maximum penalty is five years’ imprisonment.
Road Safety Act 1986
and (3). The maximum penalty is 10 years’ imprisonment.
Leave to appeal was refused on
what was then the first ground, formulated as follows:
1. The sentencing discretion miscarried as a consequence of the
applicant’s representation failing to call evidence in relation
applicant’s character, in circumstances where compelling plea material was
available, and such failure meant that the
applicant was materially and unfairly
disadvantaged in the presentation of his plea.
Harrison v The Queen
[2015] VSCA 349
(2015) 49 VR 619.
Ibbs v The Queen
[1987] HCA 46
163 CLR 447.
DPP v Weybury
[2018] VSCA 120
, 165 [34] (Maxwell P and Hargrave JA), 170–1 [54] (Priest JA).
Spanjol v The Queen
(2016) 55 VR 350.
Guseli v The Queen
(2019) 87 MVR 340.
Hutchinson v The
(2015) 71 MVR 8
, 13 [17] (Priest JA).
The other cases were
Chenhall v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 175
Schaeffer v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 171.
See, for example, the
County Court Criminal Division protocol,
Revised Relisting Schedule of
Melbourne Criminal Trials Commencing in January 2021
, published 4 September
<https://www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/files/documents/2020-12/revised-relisting-schedule-melbourne-criminal-trials-commencing-january-2021.pdf>.
See, for example, the
County Court protocol,
Recommencement of Melbourne criminal jury trials
– guide for the profession and court users
published 14 April
2021, [3.23] et seq.
R v Shannon
21 SASR 442
[1986] VicRp 82
Court may take guilty plea into account in passing sentence.
(1) A court in passing sentence for an offence on a person who
pleaded guilty to the offence may take into account in fixing the
sentence the
fact that the person pleaded guilty.
(2) If under sub-section (1) a court reduces the sentence that it would
otherwise have passed on a person the court must state that
fact when passing
(3) The failure of a court to comply with sub-section (2) does not
invalidate any sentence imposed by it.
Ibid 214–5.
Cameron v The Queen
[2002] HCA 6
(2002) 209 CLR 339
Ibid 345 [19].
Ibid 350–1 [39]
(citations as in original; emphasis added).
R v Shannon
21 SASR 442
[1983] 3 NSWLR 245
[1986] VicRp 82
R v Winchester
(1992) 58 A Crim R 345
Verschuren v The Queen
(1996) 17 WAR
Atholwood v The Queen
(1999) 109 A Crim R 465
[2000] NSWCCA 2
(2000) 111 A Crim R 152
Pop v The Queen
[2000] WASCA 283
(2000) 116 A Crim R
Aconi v The Queen
[2001] WASCA 211.
R v Shannon
21 SASR 442
at 448, 451;
[1986] VicRp 82
[1986] VR 863
(1988) 34 A Crim R 325
R v Winchester
(1992) 58 A Crim R 345
Atholwood v The Queen
(1999) 109 A Crim R 465
[66]–[67] (citations as in original; emphasis added).
R v Winchester
(1992) 58 A Crim R 345
R v Shannon
21 SASR 442
R v Atholwood
(1999) 109 A Crim R 465
at 467 [9].
R v Thomson
49 NSWLR 383 at 414 [131].
R v Thomson
49 NSWLR 383 at 392-394 [33]-[39].
R v Shannon
21 SASR 442
at 295 [93];
Simpson v The Queen
(1993) 68 A Crim R 439
(1994) 71 A Crim R 360.
at 295 [93].
Phillips v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 140
(2012) 37 VR 594
, 609 [48] (citation as in original).
R v Winchester
(1992) 58 A Crim R 345
(citations omitted; emphasis added).
DPP (Cth) v Thomas
[2016] VSCA 237
(2016) 53 VR 546
At the time
was decided,
s 16A(2)(g)
(2) In addition to any other matters, the court must take into account such
of the following matters as are relevant and known to
(g) if the person has pleaded guilty to the charge in respect of the offence
— that fact; ...
Section 16A(2)(g)
has since been amended, and now provides:
(2) In addition to any other matters, the court must take into account such
of the following matters as are relevant and known to
(g) if the person has pleaded guilty to the charge in respect of the
(i) that fact; and
(ii) the timing of the plea; and
(iii) the degree to which that fact and the timing of the plea resulted in
any benefit to the community, or any victim of, or witness
to, the offence;
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321
, 325–6 [6]
(Gleeson CJ and Hayne J).
v The Queen
[1999] HCA 29
(1999) 195 CLR 665
, 671–672 [15] (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron,
McHugh, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne and Callinan JJ).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (323 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter