URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2007/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
07-096 [2007] VMHRB 2 (10 January 2007)
In the review of P
An involuntary patient at
West Area Mental Health Service - Sunshine
[2007] VMHRB 2
Date of Hearing:
Board Members
Mr F McCarthy
Ms T Harper
Involuntary status –
Mental Health Act 1986
– consent to treatment – insight
P was diagnosed with chronic paranoid schizophrenia.
P’s legal representative submitted amongst other things that
of the Act was not met. She stated that P now exhibited a considerable degree of
insight into his illness. This was set out in Dr
SS’s report and in
P’s file. Further, P believed that he suffered a mental illness and was
prepared to continue with
oral medication. He was able to identify his symptoms
of mental illness and could now also recognise symptoms of developing paranoia.
P had presented himself to the hospital emergency department seeking help when
that occurred on his last two admissions to hospital.
(1) The Board was satisfied that P appeared to be mentally ill, and required
immediate treatment for that illness.
(2) The Board considered that without treatment by way of medication it was
likely that a severe relapse of P’s mental illness
would occur. This
would involve a considerable disruption to his life in the community.
(3) Although the Board decided that P required treatment for his illness to
prevent deterioration in his mental state, he did not
need to be subject to a
community treatment order for that treatment to take place. Further,
involuntary treatment was not necessary
for his health or safety or for the
protection of members of the public.
(4) The Board was satisfied that at the date of the hearing, it was more
probable than not that P was able to consent to the necessary
treatment for his
mental illness and had not refused that consent. It was satisfied that it was
probable that he would remain compliant
with his treatment without the coercion
of a community treatment order. The Board was not satisfied that this criterion
Appeal against involuntary status - appeal allowed.
P was represented by Ms P Mutha-Merennege, Mental Health Legal Centre Inc.
Date of Decision:
10 January 2007
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
Mid West Area Mental Health Service - Sunshine
HEARING NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
10 January 2007
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER APPEAL
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: F. McCarthy
Community Member: T. Harper
Psychiatrist Member: Dr HD Chopra
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 10 January 2007:
Doctors: Dr RA (Consultant Psychiatrist), Dr SS
Case Manager: DB
Legal representative: Ms Pasanna Mutha-Merennege, Mental Health Legal
Centre Inc., Solicitor
Mr G Mukherji, Mental Health Legal Centre Inc
Volunteer (with P’s consent)
Patient’s Partner: Ms NP
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was not satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order was
The Board therefore discharged P from the community treatment order.
The appeal of P was therefore allowed.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
10 January 2007
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P was discharged from the community treatment order. Therefore P ceases
to be an involuntary patient.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
1. Clinical file of P.
on Involuntary Status dated 3 January 2007, prepared by Dr SS and presented to
Plan of P dated 7 December 2006, prepared by DB and presented to the Board.
evidence at the hearing.
of P, dated 1 December 2006, and lodged with the Board on
1 December 2006.
if, having regard to the criteria specified in
, the Board
is not satisfied that the continued involuntary treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to a community
treatment order is necessary, the
Board must order that the person be discharged from the community treatment
order. Therefore,
the Board considered:
P appear to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by P being subject to a community treatment
of P's mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P necessary for his health or
safety (whether to prevent a deterioration
in his physical or mental condition
or otherwise) or for the protection of members of the public; and
P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of his freedom of decision and action?
, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
P was a 34-year-old man diagnosed with chronic
paranoid schizophrenia with affective symptoms. On 1 December 2006 he lodged an
with the Mental Health Review Board, which stated:
“I do not meet the 5 criteria under
Mental Health
Submissions on behalf of P
Ms. Mutha-Merennege submitted that the criteria in
(c), (d) and (e) of the
were not met. She stated that P now exhibited
a considerable degree of insight into his illness. This was set out in Dr
report and in P’s file. Further, she said that P believed that
he suffered a mental illness and was prepared to continue with
oral medication.
He was able to identify his symptoms of mental illness and could now also
recognise symptoms of developing paranoia.
Ms. Mutha-Merennege stated that P
had presented himself to the hospital emergency department seeking help when
that occurred on
his last two admissions to hospital. She stated that P was
compliant with his oral medication. He had been compliant since March
had found that he suffered fewer side-effects from the oral medication and this
was a factor in his compliance with his
medication.
Ms. Mutha-Merennege stated that P was not a risk to himself or to others.
There had been past forensic issues but these had occurred
some time ago in 2002
when P was under considerable stress following his marriage breakdown and
problems concerning contact with
his children. Ms. Mutha-Merennege said that P
would attend the clinic as required and would discuss issues he might have with
case manager. She stated that P had settled down to a more stable personal
life for the last 12 months. She drew the Board’s
attention to the
Board’s decision in
Re the Appeal of
[2002] VMHRB 11
the following appeared:
“...it is important that the criterion of capacity to consent be
viewed realistically and not at a level which is impossible
of attainment by a
person with a mental illness. Insight is a spectrum with many aspects to it.
The acquisition of mature understanding
by a patient and by their family about
mental illness, its symptoms, its consequences, its relapse signatures and
appropriate measures
to reduce the likelihood of its recurrence is part of an
ongoing process of psycho-education (see
Re the Review of
01-039 [2000]
VHMRB 1). ... Moreover, insight is not a statutory end in itself although
undoubtedly its acquisition and escalation
are pertinent both to capacity to
consent and to the likelihood of ongoing compliance with clinically recommended
pharmacotherapy
and with treatment generally.”
Ms. Mutha-Merennege also drew the Board’s attention to a report dated 3
March 2006 prepared by Dr SB of the Mid West Area Mental
Health Service, which
contained the following:
“P has partial insight, is compliant with his oral and intramuscular
medication. ... He is currently on a CTO (Community Treatment
Order) and has
been compliant with his oral medication over the last few months. His mental
state has been stable during this time
and he feels that things are going well
Evidence of treating team
Dr SS, in his report to the Board, provided the
following information:
P had a current
diagnosis of a chronic paranoid schizophrenia characterised by a significant
disturbance of thought, perception and
That diagnosis
was supported by P displaying delusional symptoms of persecution. When he was
unwell P had complained of security
companies and police trying to poison his
drinking water. During his admission in 2002 he believed that gas was being put
the vents at the High Dependence Unit causing him considerable paranoia,
fear and agitation. More recently he had complained of
elaborate schemes to
keep his children from him and that police and staff were discriminating against
him as he was a Negro. P had
several admissions to psychiatric units between
1993 and 2002. He had exhibited inappropriate and dangerous behaviour including
naked through streets and pouring petrol over wood in a petrol station
with the intention of killing himself and others. P had been
on a community
treatment order and depot medication since his discharge from the Sunshine Adult
Acute Psychiatric Unit in 2002.
P was last seen
by the consultant psychiatrist on 6 November 2006. On that occasion he was
casually dressed, tidy and clean and maintained
good eye contact. His mood was
described as being euthymic. P’s affect was reactive and he exhibited no
psychotic symptoms
or suicidal ideation. He was sleeping well and had a good
appetite. At that time it was agreed that administration of depot Risperdal
Consta would be ceased and P would be medicated orally with risperidone, 5 mg at
P was seen again
on 3 January 2007. He was described as being appropriately dressed, well kempt,
pleasant and co-operative. He was
concerned about access to his children. His
mood was euthymic, his affect reactive and his speech relevant and coherent. He
no formal thought disorder, no paranoia or delusions and denied having
any perceptual disturbances or suicidal ideas. The report
stated " [P’s]
insight was improved with willingness to take medication and [he] accepted
having mental illness and felt sorry
for past behaviour when he was ill."
On 25 August
2005, P had presented to the Sunshine Emergency Department requesting help with
paranoid persecutory delusions. He had
recently returned from a trip to Nigeria
and had probably become non-compliant with his medication. He believed that he
surveyed by police and exposed to experiments. He was hostile and
irritable with pressured speech. He had expressed homicidal intent
against the
staff and was insightless.
insight had increased recently [14 December 2006] but he had a history of
non-compliance and elusiveness towards the service
and in the past this had led
to a relapse of his mental illness and readmission to hospital. There was a
chance that he might again
become non-compliant whilst being taken off his
community treatment order or being discharged into the care of a general
practitioner.
P had been taken
off depot medication since 2 November 2006 only, and it may be too early to
comment on his compliance with oral medication
in the light of his past history
of non-compliance.
The Board drew Dr SS’s attention to the issue of informed
consent as set out in his report. In answer to the question in the
“Is the patient capable of giving informed consent to the necessary
treatment?” Dr SS marked the answer “Yes”.
In answer to the
next question in the report, “If ‘yes’, has the patient
refused to consent to the necessary
treatment?” Dr SS marked the answer
“No”. In the report he gave the following reasons for the answers
“In his last visit he showed improvement in his insight and
appeared to be compliant with oral medication”. The Board
pointed out to
Dr SS the significance of those answers and advised him that if they correctly
represented his opinion then it most
likely would follow that the criterion in
was not met. The chairperson then drew Dr SS’s
attention to the following passage relating to informed consent, which appeared
in the report immediately above the questions referred to:
“In general terms, to be capable of giving informed consent requires a
patient to have a reasonable understanding of the broad
nature of his/her mental
illness and the need for treatment (based on information provided by the
treating team or otherwise available
to the patient). It involves making an
informed choice, that is, more than mere acceptance (or non-refusal) of, or
acquiescence
to, treatment offered by the service. (Note the concept
“patient insight” is one aspect only of the Board’s
consideration
under this sub-section of the
Dr SS was again asked in the light of that passage whether he still believed
that P was capable of giving informed consent to the
necessary treatment, and
had not refused to consent to the necessary treatment. Dr SS confirmed the
answers, which he has previously
given to the Board, as set out above.
P’s case manager DB advised the Board that he concurred with both answers
given to the
Board by Dr SS. Dr SS said that his view was shared by the
consultant.
The Psychiatric Consultant, Dr RA, then entered the hearing and said that he
had not seen Dr SS’s report. He told the Board
that P’s improvement
had been a gradual process “until now”. He said that from 2004
until the present, P has been
able to avoid admission to hospital because he was
being treated by way of depot medication. There had been a negotiated agreement
with P that depot medication would be stopped and oral medication continued. It
had sometimes been “a hassle” to bring
P to the Clinic for his depot
medication. However, Dr RA described P’s current progress as
“fantastic”. He told
the Board that P had received his last depot
medication on 6 November 2006, but that a further three months of observed
with oral medication by P was necessary before he could be satisfied
that P had sufficient insight to ensure future compliance without
the coercion
provided by a community treatment order. It was Dr R A’s opinion that at
this stage he could not confidently
state that P had sufficient insight to be
able to consent to the necessary treatment.
In answer to questions from Ms Mutha-Merennege, Dr RA told the Board that it
was his experience that P had relapsed in the past when
medication had been
switched from depot to oral. This had happened in 2002, 2003 and 2004. He said
he needed “enough time”
to ensure that this did not happen again.
He said that he had known P for five years and was very familiar with his past
He told the Board that the last time he had seen P was in November
2006, and that he would, personally, review patients only every
3 to 6 months
due to the time constraints that he experienced.
Dr RA told the Board that P had been having oral medication since December
2005. When he went to Sydney in 2006, he became non-compliant
with his oral
medication. He said there was no evidence that P was not taking his oral
medication since December 2005 but it was
not possible to check whether this was
the case. However, P wished to have oral medication because he found depot
injections of
Risperdal Consta painful. He said that if P were not subject to a
community treatment order, the service was prepared to continue
to monitor his
progress if he undertook to attend appointments.
Evidence of P
Answering questions from the Board, P said that he
had been medicated both by injections and by tablets for a little more than
months. He had been placed on depot medication after his admission to
hospital in August 2002. In September 2006 his community
treatment order was
revoked because he did not attend the clinic for his depot medication.
P said that when he was admitted in 2002 he was not well as he was
“still recovering, because of the breakdown of my marriage.”
said that he needed treatment because he was mentally ill suffering from
paranoid schizophrenia. He thought the medication helped
him. P told the Board
that he had refused the depot medication because of the “side
effects”. He said that he slept
well and took his tablets “every
night”. During the Christmas period [presumably in 2006] he went to
Sydney to spend
some time with his uncle from Scotland who was a doctor. He
said that he forgot to take his tablets with him and “missed four
days but I told my uncle who got me back on my medication. When I returned to
Melbourne I re-started my medication”
and “I have never missed
once”. He said he had continued to comply with his oral medication since
November 2006 when
the depot medication was stopped. He did not think he needed
three months “probation”. He thought the oral medication
“minimal” side effects compared with the injections, which
interfered with his sight and appetite and gave him
When the Board asked P how long he would need the medication he said he would
continue to take the tablets for “two, three,
four years”. He would
take the tablets every night because he needed them “to keep
When asked what he would do if he were not subject to a community treatment
order and could make all the decisions about treatment
himself, P said that he
would not reduce the medication because “I feel so well ... I feel so
great. I am not going to be
any better in 6 months than I am now. I
wouldn’t want to put myself in a position where I would make the decision
medication]. I would never stop until the doctors say so”.
When the Board asked P whether he thought the medication could
be reduced he
said that he had, in fact, asked the doctors to increase his oral medication
from 4mg to 5 mg daily. He said he would
wait “until the doctors
decided”. He did not see himself “getting off the tablets”
and that “I wouldn’t
take that decision”.
In answer to Ms. Mutha-Merennege’s questions, P said that he went to
hospital himself because he “felt unwell”.
He said that he could
now recognise symptoms of a relapse such as not sleeping well at night and would
never wait until he had a
“full relapse”. He said he was compliant
with the medication and felt better mentally since being on oral medication
only. He said that he could now understand more about his illness. P told the
Board that if he were not subject to a community
treatment order he would still
be “very happy” to come back for treatment for his own, his
family’s and his children’s
sakes. P said that he could see
“progress” in his condition. He needed the clinic’s help
“a great deal”.
He said, “I want to comply with treatment. I
don’t need a CTO to make me comply”. He thought the community
treatment order restricted his contact with his children.
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to an involuntary treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board considered the exclusionary criteria in
and has decided that
these were not relevant in this case.
The Board was satisfied that P appeared to be mentally ill. That conclusion
was based on the information contained in his clinical
file and on the evidence
set out above provided by Dr RA and Dr SS. It accepted that the diagnosis of
chronic paranoid schizophrenia
from which P suffered was characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, perception and mood.
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by P being subject to a community treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
Re the Review of RD
(1997) 2 MHRBD (Vic) 425 at 430 the Board
discussed what matters should be considered when determining whether immediate
was required. These were:
(a) the likelihood of imminent relapse;
(b) the possible severity of the relapse; and
(c) the degree of disruption a relapse would be likely to cause should the
patient immediately cease medication.
Dr RA told the Board that on three occasions, in 2002, 2003 and
2004, when there had been attempts to change P’s medication
from depot to
oral, P had become non-compliant and had relapsed quickly and significantly. In
view of Dr RA’s opinion and
the history set out above the Board considered
that without treatment by way of medication it was likely that a, possibly,
relapse of P’s mental illness requiring his admission to hospital
would occur. This would involve a considerable disruption
to his life in the
It also noted that P has been receiving treatment over the past year by way
of depot medication with Risperdal Consta 12.5 mg fortnightly,
and orally with
risperidone 5 mg nightly. Since November 2006, the depot medication had been
stopped and he has been medicated orally
with risperidone 5 mg nightly. The
medication provided pursuant to the community treatment order has substantially
lessened the
ill effects of his mental illness to the degree that led Dr RA to
describe P’s progress as “fantastic”.
The Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Because of P's mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P
necessary for his health or safety (whether to prevent a deterioration
physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the protection of members of
the public?
As set out below, when dealing with the question of insight and consent, the
Board accepted P’s evidence that he would remain
compliant with his
treatment. He was very happy with his current medication, being risperidone 5
mg nightly taken orally as he had
experienced some problems with depot Risperdal
Consta in the past. Accordingly, although the Board decided that P required
for his illness to prevent deterioration in his mental state, he did
not need to be subject to a community treatment order for that
treatment to take
place. Further, involuntary treatment was not necessary for his health or
safety or for the protection of members
of the public.
The Board was not satisfied that this criterion had been met.
Has P refused or is he unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness?
The Board has decided in earlier decisions that it was necessary for it to be
satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the criteria
set out in the
had been met before it could confirm the patient’s treatment as an
involuntary patient.
For example in
Re the Appeal of MM
(1987) 1MHRBD (Vic) 1 at 5
the following appears:
“It is legal truism that the standard of proof normally required in
civil proceedings is the balance of probabilities. That
is the standard which
the Board proposes to apply... Accordingly as the case before us involves, in
part, the appellant’s right
to liberty, the Board must act with much care
and caution before reaching a conclusion that we are satisfied on the balance of
probabilities
that the criteria set out in
section 8(1)
have been met and that
continued detention is necessary.”
This view was based on considerable legal precedent. In the Australian High
Court case of
Briginshaw v. Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 347, Latham
CJ stressed that in civil matters when applying the ordinary standard of proof
(the balance of probabilities) any
tribunal should act with much care and
caution before finding that a serious allegation is established. The proof
required must
satisfy a mind sensible of the gravity of the finding. Dixon J
(at 361-362) stated it as follows:
"Except upon criminal issues to be proved by the prosecution, it is enough
that the affirmative of an allegation is made out to the
reasonable satisfaction
of the tribunal. But reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is
attained or established independently
of the nature and consequences of the fact
or facts to be proved. The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent
unlikelihood
of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the
consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations
affect the answer to the question whether the issue has been proved to the
reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal."
In this Appeal, the Board found it useful to consider the view expressed in
Phipson on Evidence
ed., 1990 (Howard,
Crane & Hockley) 78 wherein it was stated that the standard of proof which
is generally expressed as proof
“on the balance of probabilities”
requires a decision to be made in determining if the evidence is such that it
said that something is more probable than it is not. If the
probabilities are equal then it cannot be said that the balance of probabilities
have been met.
In the Administrative Appeals Tribunal case of B
v Mental Health Review
Board and Dr W
(unreported 28 June 1988), Jones J also considered the
applicable standard of proof and stated that:
“As the authorities make clear, the standard of proof to be applied in
proceedings such as these is the civil standard but the
degree of persuasion for
which the civil standard or proof calls may vary according to the gravity of the
facts to be proved...The
position can perhaps be summed up in this way: in
deciding a matter, the Tribunal or the Board must examine the evidence
and thoroughly bearing in mind the seriousness of the consequences
but in the end only be reasonably satisfied on the balance of
probabilities
having regard to the evidence it regards as acceptable.”
The Board applied the standard of proof enunciated above when it considered
what was the appropriate decision it should reach in these
In addition, it was necessary for the Board to consider this criterion with
the assistance of decisions made by other divisions of
the Board. For example
the Review of MF
[1993] 2 MHRBD (Vic) 81 at 84, the following
“The following considerations need to be taken into account when
deciding whether there is a substantial risk of non-compliance.
Firstly, non-compliance must be shown to be likely from the patient's
immediate past record of treatment or an established pattern
of non-compliance.
Secondly, the risk of non-compliance must not be too remote. For example, a
stated intention to cease taking medication some time
in the future would be too
remote to constitute a present risk.
Finally, even if there is a substantial risk of non-compliance, in order for
the criterion to be fulfilled, it must be established
that the consequences of
non-compliance must be significant, in that it has been demonstrated, on a
present admission or in the past,
that if the patient does not receive the
proposed treatment his or her condition will significantly
deteriorate.”
Re the Review of AB
(1988) 1 MHRBD (Vic) 14 at
17, the Board elaborated upon the requirements for consent stating:
“...a person is competent, or has the capacity to consent to
treatment, when he or she understands the broad nature and effects
treatment for which consent is sought.”
Re the Review of CC
(1994) 2 MHRBD (Vic) 182 at 186, the Board
dealt with the ability of the patient to consent to the necessary treatment in
the following
“What is required, however, is that the person have a sufficient
appreciation of both the illness and its treatment for their
decision-making
with respect to their condition to be regarded as being founded in reality and
Re the Appeal of
[1997] VMHRB 18
, the Board
considered that:
“...it is more a question of whether a patient has sufficient
understanding of the nature and the existence of his or her illness
connection between the medication and the role that medication plays in keeping
that illness at bay or at least in lessening
its ill effects or the intensity of
its symptoms.”
As set out above, Dr SS expressed the view that at the
date of the hearing, P had insight into his illness and was not refusing to
consent to treatment. When questioned at length by the Board, he maintained
that view. Dr RA disagreed, citing previous episodes
of non-compliance when
P’s treatment was attempted to be changed from depot to oral medication.
He suggested that even though
he regarded P’s recent progress as
“fantastic” he would prefer to see a further three months of
satisfactory compliance
with medication by P before he was discharged from his
involuntary status. The Board noted that P had received his last depot
on 2 November 2006 and, at the date of the hearing over two months
later, it was reported that P was gaining increasing insight into
his illness
and that at the date of the Board hearing, he remained compliant with his
medication.
The Board also noted the apparent conflict between the views of Dr SS and Dr
RA in this regard. Dr RA had, it should be emphasised,
through no fault of his
own, not seen P since November 2006. In addition, Dr RA told the Board that he
had not seen the report prepared
by Dr SS before it was presented to the Board.
The Board accepted that there were some reservations expressed by Dr SS in his
to the effect that compliance issues in circumstances similar to those
now facing the Board had arisen in the past and, perhaps,
further time was
needed to ensure P’s compliance with treatment.
It was necessary for the Board to determine whether P’s assurances were
“founded in reality and reason” (see
Re the Review of CC
P had been questioned at length by the Board at the hearing of his appeal.
The answers which he gave confirmed that he understood
the need to continue with
his medication and the necessity of complying with the instructions from the
treating team even without
the coercion of involuntary status. His answers also
went some way in indicating that he was able to identify the development of
symptoms, which might herald the onset of a relapse in his mental illness. He
also told the Board that he had no intention at all
of ceasing his medication in
the short term or even in “two, three, four years”. A further
matter was that Dr RA has
stated that the last occasion upon which P had
suffered a relapse following a change in the method of medication occurred in
more than two years prior to this hearing.
After considering all the matters set out above, the Board was satisfied
that, at the date of the hearing, it was more probable than
not, that P was able
to consent to the necessary treatment for his mental illness and had not refused
that consent. It was satisfied
that it was probable that he would remain
compliant with his treatment without the coercion of a community treatment
The Board was not satisfied that this criterion was met.
Is P unable to receive adequate treatment for the mental
illness in a manner less restrictive of
his freedom of decision
and action?
In view of the findings of the Board with respect to
and (d) above,
it was not necessary to consider this criterion.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient’s treatment plan, the
Board must be satisfied that the requirements of
met. The Board considered each of the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
The Board was satisfied that the requirements of
Section 35A(1)(b)
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
The Board considered that the plan was capable of being implemented if P
remained an involuntary patient subject to a treatment order
but in light of the
Board’s determination above, there was no need to further consider this
requirement.
Therefore, the Board is satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has
complied with
in making, reviewing or revising the plan, and the plan is
capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
As a result, as all the
criteria were not met, the Board made the
determination set out on page 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (96 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter