URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Allisey v Otis Building Technologies Pty Ltd [1998] VADT 4 (5 November 1998)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANTI DISCRIMINATION LIST
No. 26/1997
age discrimination - redundancy package - exemption on the
ground of age
APPLICANT/COMPLAINANT:
Adrian Allisey
RESPONDENT:
Otis Building Technologies Pty Ltd
WHERE HELD:
Judge Davey, Vice President
DATE OF HEARING:
7 & 8 September 1998
DATE OF DECISION:
5 November 1998
1. The complaint is dismissed.
2. The question of the Respondent's costs is reserved for 7 days.
JUDGE DAVEY
VICE PRESIDENT
APPEARANCES
For the Applicant: Ms Cohen of Counsel instructed by Goddard Elliott
For the Respondent: Mr Griffin of Counsel instructed by Barker Gosling
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. BACKGROUND
The Complainant Adrian Allisey is a 41 year old male. He was formerly
employed by the Respondent , Otis Building Technologies Pty
Ltd. On 21 February
1996 he was made redundant and received a redundancy payment calculated in
accordance with a redundancy scheme
which had been established by the Respondent
with the assistance of outside consultants. The Complainant commenced employment
Johns & Waygood on 21 January 1974 as an apprentice electrical
mechanic. That business was taken over by Boral Ltd. and became
known as Boral
Building Technologies . Then in July 1995 Boral Ltd sold the business to the
Respondent. Combined with the Respondent's
existing business it then became the
largest lift repair and maintenance company in Australia. The Complainant
remained an employee
of the business throughout these changes in ownership and
accumulated 22 years of continuous employment. As a consequence of the
a number of redundancies were created. Although there was some dispute between
the Complainant and the Respondent's witnesses
as to the precise circumstances
in which the Complainant's employment was terminated most of the relevant facts
are common ground.
The areas in which there is some dispute concerning the
evidence cannot in my view affect the outcome of this application. The
Complainant
during his career had risen to the position of Deputy General
Manager of Boral's business in Taiwan. He returned from Taiwan shortly
July 1995. The Complainant had discussions with senior management of the
Respondent concerning his future employment and it
would appear that although he
was offered ongoing employment on the same or a similar remuneration package,
the position which he
was offered was of lesser rank than the position he had
occupied whilst in Taiwan. The Complainant rejected the offer of further
employment with the Respondent and accepted the redundancy package that was
offered to him. In these circumstances the redundancy
was a voluntary
redundancy. Mr Brian McKenzie, the Respondent's Group Manager, stated in his
witness statement that the position
offered to the Complainant was below the
position that he had occupied with Boral elevators.
Although the Complainant denies that prior to his acceptance of the
redundancy package there was any extensive consultation between
himself and
management, that does not appear to be a matter which could affect the outcome
of this application. In his statement
he asserts that he was not shown the
detailed breakdown of the redundancy package until after he had accepted it and
that he did
not know that there was a ceiling to one of the elements of the
package based on age, which meant that the amount of that part of
his redundancy
entitlement would be less than the entitlement of another employee on the same
salary and with the same number of
years service, but who was over 40 years of
The Respondent after having taken over Boral Building Technologies had set up
a redundancy plan in order to provide for the anticipated
redundancy payments to
those employees it no longer required. The redundancy plan had five main
components;
(i) weeks per year of service;
(ii) additional payment based on age/service;
(iii) long service leave;
(iv) out-placement;
(v) notice.
The Complainant received a redundancy payment of $78760.58. The total amount
was made up of several components but the only relevant
part of the payment for
the purposes of this proceeding was the payment of $52,700.07 which was
calculated as follows.
maximum weeks ceiling allowed under the scheme
for age at 39 years 40 weeks
= 1520 hours
= $52,700.07
The remainder of the payment was made up of $6060.51 being payment in lieu of
notice and a $20,000 lump sum making up a total payment
of $78760.68.
In the particulars of complaint the Complainant seeks 66 weeks pay on the
basis of 3 weeks for every year multiplied by 22 years service.
course of argument his Counsel made it clear that the payment he was seeking was
the difference between a payment based
on 60 weeks salary which was the maximum
ceiling provided for under the scheme and the amount he was paid. That is the
maximum number
of weeks salary which is payable to an employee over the age of
50 years under the scheme . It can be seen from the chart below that
the maximum
number of weeks salary increases progressively from the age of 39 years where it
is fixed at 20 weeks and thereafter
increases annually.
MAXIMUM CEILING
MAXIMUM CEILING
2. COMPLAINANT'S CASE
It is the Complainant's case that the Respondent unlawfully discriminated
against him contrary to s.14(a) and (d) of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
(EO Act 95) by denying or limiting his access to the benefits contained in the
redundancy package.
So far as is relevant s.14 is in the following terms:-
"An employer must not discriminate against an employee -
(a) by denying or limiting access by the employee to opportunities for
promotion, transfer or training or to any other benefits connected
employment:
(d) by subjecting the employee to any other detriment."
It was submitted on behalf of the Complainant that this redundancy plan
constitutes direct discrimination under s.8 of the EO Act
95. S.8 is in the
following terms:
"(1) Direct discrimination occurs if a person treats, or proposes to
treat, someone with an attribute less favourably than the person
treats or would
treat someone without that attribute, or with a different attribute, in the same
or similar circumstances.
(2) In determining whether a person directly discriminates it is
irrelevant-
(a) whether or not that person is aware of the discrimination or considers
the treatment less favourable :
(b) whether or not the attribute is the only or dominant reason for the
treatment, as long as it is a substantial reason."
Age is one of the attributes specified in s6.
Ms. Cohen submitted that because the Complainant had been employed for 22
years he should be entitled to be treated not less favourably
than an employee
aged 50 years who had a similar length of employment. The relevant attribute of
course being that of age.
Mr. Griffin of Counsel who appeared on behalf of the Respondent submitted
that if the redundancy plan did result in discrimination
against the Complainant
that he was in any event entitled to rely on ss 81 or 82. of the EO Act 95.
S.82 provides as follows:
" A person may provide benefits, including concessions, to another person
based on age."
So far as is relevant s.83 provides:
" (1) Nothing in Part 3 applies to anything done in relation to the
provision to people with a particular attribute of special services,
benefits or
facilities that are designed -
(a) to meet the special needs of those people;"
3. THE EVIDENCE
The Applicant was content to rely upon his witness statement and called no
other evidence. The Respondent called several witnesses
and also relied upon
witness statements.
Mr. Gregory Coolahan was called by the Respondent to give evidence in
relation to the establishment of the redundancy package. He
had been employed by
the respondent for 18 years in various positions. He was now the Legal Manager
and Director of Special Projects
but he had also had experience as State Manager
and as General Manager . The Respondent changed the location of its factory 1986
and at that time there was a substantial reduction in the workforce. He said
that at that time he examined his own industry and other
industries and found
that factory workers over the age of 50 years who were made redundant had
considerable difficulty in obtaining
other employment because of limited skills
and lack of computer skills. As a result of his research the company obtained
advice and structured a scheme to give greater assistance to older
workers. At the time of the Boral acquisition a similar approach
was taken. He
said that the other main elevator companies such as Kone and Schindler have
structured their redundancy packages in
a similar way. He claimed that there
were a substantial number of workers in a similar position as the Complainant
The Respondent's Human Resources Manager Ms. Danielle Fish gave evidence that
she was involved in developing the redundancy plan after
the Boral acquisition.
She said that its purpose was to provide people with compensation and support
after they had stopped working.
She also said that the company took advice from
outplacement consultants and consulted the bureau of statistics in relation to
demographics of persons who were unemployed. One of the concerns was that
persons over a certain age would have increased difficulty
in obtaining other
employment. The statistics showed that on average, the time taken to obtain
employment increases with age. The
role of the outplacement consultant was to
make the company aware of the issues surrounding re-employment of retrenched
It was considered that workers over the age of 40 years had special
needs and this was taken into account in designing the plan.
In addition Ms. Serenella Tonelli gave evidence in relation outplacement and
career transition . She said that in her experience most
if not all redundancy
programs provide greater benefits to older employees. She also said that in her
experience older employees
generally take longer to be re-employed.
4. SUBMISSIONS
There was no challenge to the Respondent's motive of providing a fair and
just redundancy plan for its employees. It was clear from
the Respondent's
witnesses that the plan consciously and deliberately discriminated in favour of
employees over the age of 40 years
by treating them more favourably than a
younger employee with the same of number of years employment and therefore, in a
sense, it may be said that it discriminates against any long term
employee who was of the Complainant's age or younger who accepts
the redundancy
package. Indeed it may be said that if the Complainant's argument is correct
then the plan may discriminate against
any employee who at the time he or she
was made redundant had twenty years continuous employment and was aged less than
The evidence led by the Respondent could only be based on a
statistical analysis and the evidence of persons expert in the field.
the basis of the Respondent's evidence that older workers will as a general rule
take longer to obtain re-employment than
younger workers and that those over the
age of 50 years may be unable to obtain further employment. The scheme was
criticised by
Ms Cohen on the basis that it contained no discretion. But a
worker's entitlement must be calculated in accordance with the plan's
and it therefore could not take into account the individual circumstances of
redundant workers. As a practical matter however
it is very difficult to see how
any scheme could operate which provided for an individual discretion to be
exercised without resulting
in many more complaints of unfair treatment.
S27A was referred to in argument by Mr. Griffin. That section was introduced
by an amendment in 1996 but it did not become effective
until 23 December 1996.
Accordingly it came into existence some ten months after the Complainant ceased
his employment with the Respondent.
However the section expressly provides that
an employer may expressly take into account the age of an employee when deciding
terms of a retirement offer.
Although s.82 was also referred to by Mr. Griffin it does not in my view
offer assistance to the Respondent in the present circumstances.
That section is
designed to enable special services, benefits or facilities to be provided to
assist people with special needs. I
do not think it can be said that a
redundancy plan of the type now under consideration is directed to providing
special services,
benefits or facilities to meet the special needs of a
particular class of persons.
5. CONCLUSIONS
I turn now to consider whether s.81 can be availed of by the Respondent.
S81 provides-
"A person may provide benefits, including concessions, to another person
based on age."
Brevity in this case cannot be equated with clarity of meaning. If
unrestricted by the context in which it appears, be capable of
a very wide
interpretation, and possibly an interpretation contrary to the scheme of the
legislation. I am of course obliged to interpret
the section in the context in
which it appears and in accordance with the scheme of the legislation: (for
example see
Waters and Others v Public Transport Corporation
[1991] HCA 49
(1991-2) 173
at 368 ("the Waters case") and
Australian Postal Commission v DAO (No
1986 NSW LR 497.)
It is obvious that there are many areas of activity where concessions and
benefits are granted on the basis of age. Many examples
readily come to mind.
Theatre tickets for both the very young and for those over 60 years are offered
on a concessional basis, many
concessions and benefits are also offered in the
areas of travel, insurance, entertainment and other areas either simply on the
of age. The Seniors Card is another example. These concessions and
benefits are provided not on an individual or discretionary basis,
basis of a person having attained a certain age or in the case of children on
the basis of being under a certain age.
In the absence of a section enabling
such concessions or benefits to be offered, it could be argued that such
discretions and benefits
discriminate on the basis of age and depending upon the
relationship between the parties may constitute unlawful discrimination.
Cohen has argued that this section should be given a narrow interpretation. She
submitted that the word "benefits" should be
interpreted so as not to include
payments made under a redundancy plan. In making this submission she relied on
case and in particular she relied upon part of the joint judgment
of Mason C.J. and Gauldron J where at pp. 368-369 they considered
construction of an exemption section s.39(e)(ii) of the
Equal Opportunity
. That section is in extremely wide terms and exempts from the
operation of the Act.
"an act done by a person if it was necessary for the person to do it in
order to comply with a provision of -(ii) any other Act..."
Their Honours preferred the narrow construction in part because of the fact
that it was an exempting provision militates against the
wide construction but
most significantly because the word construction would have been inconsistent
with the scheme of the Act. They
say as p369-
"More importantly, the wide construction seems to us to be inconsistent
with the general scheme of the Act. It is one thing to provide
that the Act
should give way to an express direction contained in an actual provision of
another Act or in a statutory instrument.
It is a quite different thing to
provide, in effect, that the Act shall give way to any subordinate direction, no
matter how informal,
to which a provision of any other act requires
obedience".
It is true that s.81 is found in
of the Act and s.12 provides-
"This Act does not prohibit discrimination if an exception in Part 3
(whether or not the same Division as the provision prohibiting
discrimination) or Part 4 or an exemption under Part 4 applies."
Accordingly s.81 is of the same general type of section as s.39(e)(ii) in the
1984 Act in that it is an exemption provision. However
the conclusion reached by
the Court to prefer the narrow construction in Waters Case does not mean that a
narrow construction which
excluded age related benefits in redundancy schemes
should be adopted in the present circumstances. The correct construction is the
construction that reflects "the nature and purpose of the provision in question
and the context in which it appears." (
PMT Partners v Parks and Wildlife
The objects of the Act are set out in s.3 and so far as relevant to the
present question are as follows:
"The objects of the this Act are-
(a) to promote recognition and acceptance of everyone's right to equality
of opportunity;
(b) to eliminate, as far as possible, discrimination against people by
prohibiting discrimination on the basis of various attributes;"...
It can be seen from the above, that there may be a potential tension between
the object of providing equality of opportunity and that
of eliminating
discrimination. In other words, if I accept the Complainant's submissions to the
effect that s.81 does not apply,
one may have a scheme, which attempts to be
fair by compensating for the perceived lesser employment opportunities for older
and yet by doing so discriminates against younger workers and thus
making the scheme unlawful under s.14. I have looked at the Minister's
reading speech on the introduction of the legislation to the House. It clear
that one of the objects of the legislation at
the time it was introduced was to
attempt to ensure that aged citizens were fairly treated. As noted by the
"For some time the Victorian government has recognised that age
discrimination is a serious problem for our community and accordingly
elimination is a high priority."
S.81 is capable of at least two constructions. The narrow construction, being
either that the word "benefits" should be read down,
so as not to include a
payment under a redundancy scheme, on the basis that the payment made is not a
benefit but merely compensation
for the loss of employment. However if this
interpretation is adopted it would create difficulties in the way that the word
is used in s.14(a). It is difficult to justify a redefining of the
same word in two sections in the same Act on the basis that one
section is to be
found in Part 3, which is the part of the Act specifying what discrimination is
prohibited, whilst the other section
is in the part of the Act which sets out
exemptions. In my view there is a substantial difference between the section of
Act which was considered by the High Court in
s.81 of the 1995 Act. The section is located in a group of three sections which
relate to permitting positive or beneficial
discrimination. S.80 is concerned
with discrimination for the purpose of health and safety including the person
discriminated against.
S.82 is concerned with the provision of special services,
benefits or facilities to meet special needs of a class or classes of persons.
Consistently with the other two sections s.81 would appear to be a section
intended to enable people to receive benefits or concessions
which they are
considered to need because of their age. In my opinion having regard to the fact
that the section would operate beneficially
towards a section of the community
which is specifically referred to by the Minister in the Second Reading Speech
as a sector intended
to be assisted it would be inconsistent with the purpose
and intent of the legislation to read the section down. If this view of
section is the correct one, then in my opinion to the extent that the
Complainant has been discriminated against by reason of
the age related ceiling
for the salary related component of the redundancy plan, such discrimination is
not prohibited by reason
of the operation of ss 12 and 81 of the 1995 Act.
It follows from the above that this Complaint is dismissed. I reserve the
question of the Respondent's costs for 7 days after the
publication of this
JUDGE F.G. DAVEY
VICE PRESIDENT
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (46.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter