URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2025/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gill v Kanda [2025] VMC 8 (4 July 2025)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
No. MAG-CI-240141020
HARPREET SINGH GILL
RAMAN KANDA
MAGISTRATE:
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
1 April 2025, affidavits filed 2 April 2025, 11 April
DATE OF DECISION:
4 July 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS:
Gill v Kanda
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VMC 8
INDUSTRIAL LAW –
Fair Work Act 2009
– Small claim – Alleged failure by
employer to pay employee any wages or entitlements – Pay slips falsely
payment made to employee’s bank account – Credit and
reliability of witness evidence – Operation of
burden of disproving non-payment allegation – Interest – Good cause
shown to the contrary.
APPEARANCES:
For the Plaintiff
Harpreet Singh Gill
Litigant in person
For the Defendant
Timothy Coleman
Kohli & Co Lawyers
HER HONOUR:
INTRODUCTION
Plaintiff Mr Harpreet Singh Gill (
) was employed by Mr Raman Kanda
from 30 December
2019 to 28 June 2020 as a front of house manager at Kanda’s business the
‘Steakhouse Grill66’
in Docklands. Gill worked regular full time
hours between Monday and Friday. Gill was introduced to Kanda by their mutual
Mr Amil Kumar.
was issued weekly pay slips in respect of this employment, which under the
heading ‘payment details’ reflected EFT
transfer of Gill’s net
wages to his bank account. There was no dispute about whether the sums reflected
in those pay slips
were the correct amounts due to Gill for work he performed.
However, Gill claims he was never paid by Kanda to his bank account,
He claims his wages for the entire period are owed, totalling $16,808.28. Gill
also claims he was not paid, and is owed,
$1434.90 in respect of 67.2313 hours
of annual leave he had accrued at the end of his employment, reflected on his
final pay slip,
but which was never paid. Gill further alleges that
superannuation payments reflected on his pay slips, totalling $1947.49, were
made by Kanda on his behalf, until December 2024 when two payments totalling
$409.87 were made from a superannuation guarantee
charge paid to the Australian
Taxation Office (
) by Rosenhart Pty Ltd. Gill also seeks interest
pursuant to
of the Act.
accepts that no payments were made to Gill’s bank account, but says that
he paid Gill’s wages as reflected on the
pay slips, and accrued annual
leave, to Gill in cash. He accepts that there is no pay slip reflecting any
annual leave payment. Kanda
further says that all of Gill’s outstanding
superannuation has now been paid to the ATO.
claim is brought as a small claim pursuant to
Fair Work Act
). It was not at issue that
applies in respect of Gill’s unpaid wages claim,
of the Act applies
in respect of Gill’s claim for annual leave pursuant to the National
Employment Standards entitlement in
of the Act, and that
applies in respect of Gill’s claim for superannuation, pursuant to clause
30.2 of the Restaurant Industry Award
2020. This Court, an eligible State or
Territory Court pursuant to
of the Act, has jurisdiction to remedy any
underpayment arising from the contravention of
(1) of the Act.
THE PAY SLIPS
pay slips were not in dispute. They generally reflected a weekly pay period
running from Monday to Sunday, and a payment date
of the following Wednesday.
Each pay slip to 1 April 2020 reflected a weekly wage of $1057.99,
superannuation of $100.48 (with the
words ‘SGC - fund details
pending’) and an annual leave accrual of 2.9231 hours. Each pay slip after
1 April 2020 reflected
weekly wages of $750, superannuation of $71.25 and an
annual leave accrual of 2.9231 hours. The first pay slip had a payment date
January 2020 for the pay period 30 December 2019 to 5 January 2020. The final
pay slip had a payment date of 1 July 2020 for
the pay period 22 June 2020 to 28
June 2020, and reflected a total annual leave balance of 67.2313 hours.
GILL’S EVIDENCE
said he has not been paid his wages, superannuation or annual leave for the
entire six months of his employment. He was provided
weekly pay slips by email
but the amounts on the pay slips were not paid. Gill relied on bank statements
from his Commonwealth Bank
Smart Access account over the employment period. The
account number of that account matches the account number recorded on the pay
slips under ‘payment details’. The statements illustrate that no
payment was made by Kanda during this period.
had moved to Melbourne from Queensland just prior to his employment and was
introduced to Kanda by their mutual friend Mr Kumar.
Kanda was going through
financial hardship however Mr Kumar vouched for Kanda, and Gill relied on his
word, agreed he would run Kanda’s
business and support him. Kanda said he
would pay Gill as soon as he had the money. Gill told Kanda to provide him with
of proof that he could rely on. Kanda provided the pay slips. Mr Kumar
was aware of the situation but was not guaranteeing any payment
by Kanda and
said it was between Gill and Kanda. Gill did not call Mr Kumar as a witness
because he is a good friend of Kanda’s.
the employment Gill asked Kanda every two to three weeks to be paid. Kanda said
the business was not doing well and he had
some personal debts he needed to
clear, but that he would pay. Those conversations always occurred outside the
venue. By 28 June
2020 Gill had had enough, and told Kanda that he
couldn’t come to work anymore, that Kanda had to fix his payments, and if
Kanda wanted to hire him again after that he could. Kanda told Gill that the
amounts owed would be provided in a week’s time.
Gill was never paid in
cash and has not received any payment at all. He denied that any other employees
ever saw him being paid in
cash for his wages. As far as he is aware, Gill was
the only person not being paid.
said he was able to survive financially because he had a personal loan from the
Commonwealth Bank, a credit card, and a friend
based in Melbourne was supporting
him. When cross examined as to his source of income in the 2019/20 financial
year he agreed that
as of 24 December 2019 he already had an overdraft of over
$2000, a personal loan and a credit card. He was paying these by instalments
after no wages were paid, that went down the drain. He had not been employed in
the six months prior to commencing at Steakhouse
Grill66, but was unsure of the
exact date his previous employment ended. Gill agreed he had no savings to fall
back on and was in
a dire situation but said that was his problem.
initially said that all the transactions reflected on his bank statements were
his. He was asked about a number of transactions
in Queensland in January 2020.
He said that he had returned to Queensland at the beginning of the employment as
he had a lease there
in his name. He then said that on various dates in January
2020 his card was used by his mate, who he had been living with, and he
didn’t need the card so he could have given it to his friend.
was also cross examined on a number of payments to his bank account from a
second account in his name. He said that second account
had been closed, he
didn’t remember where that money had come from and disagreed that the
money in the second account came
from cash payments from Kanda. He disagreed the
statements from the second account would show cash deposits, but said there was
possibility or a chance that he had deposited cash into that account, from his
friend, not from Kanda.
declared the income recorded on the pay slips in his 2019/20 tax return,
prepared by his Tax Agent. He reported the income as
he believed it was his
legal duty to reflect the documentation provided by Kanda, and he gave the pay
slips to his tax agent. He
didn’t know his rights back then, otherwise he
would have told his tax agent that he hadn’t been paid. He said his
documents do not confirm that the payments have been made in reality.
His Notice of Assessment reflects that taxation of $3,490 had
been remitted on
his behalf, and that he was entitled to a refund of that sum. He received the
refund of $3,490.
superannuation statement dated 26 July 2024 demonstrates that no payments were
made by or on behalf of Kanda at that
date. Gill also relied on two letters from
the ATO dated 6 December 2024 and 17 December 2024. Each letter stated
employer does not pay your minimum superannuation guarantee
amount on time and to the right fund, they must pay the superannuation
charge (SGC) to us.’ The letters stated that contributions of $115.29 and
$294.58 from Rosenhart Pty Ltd had been
transferred to Gill’s account on
13 September 2024 and 24 September 2024 respectively for the quarter ending 31
March 2020.
In an affidavit filed subsequent to the hearing, Gill said he had
been advised by the ATO that further payments of $1446.95 and $152.90
received by the ATO from Rosenhart Pty Ltd on 28 January 2025, and that letters
in similar terms to the earlier ATO letters
were pending.
took no steps to recover his wages for almost four years after the employment
ended, because he didn’t know his rights.
He first wrote a letter of
demand to Kanda on 31 May 2024. He had asked people and found out the limitation
period of six years.
also relied on a reference letter which he initially said had been provided to
him by Kanda by email in around May 2021. The
letter bears Kanda’s
signature and is not on letterhead. Gill was unable to produce the email by
which the reference was sent.
Under cross examination, Gill then said Kanda also
sent him a hard copy in the post. He then said he remembered that at the time,
he was in Melbourne and was provided with the hard copy at Kanda’s
premises, and also raised the non-payment issue then.
also provided a series of emails from debt collection firms evidencing his debts
in respect of his Commonwealth Bank personal
loan and credit card, as follows:
28 October 2020 email from Complete Credit Solutions regarding unspecified debt;
4 November 2020
email from Pioneer Credit regarding the personal loan, stating a
balance of $9637.40 was outstanding; 31 March 2022 email from Complete
Solutions regarding an outstanding balance of $11,516.69; 7 June 2024 email from
Complete Credit Solutions regarding an outstanding
credit card balance of
$15,441; 25 July 2024 email from Pioneer Credit regarding the personal loan,
stating the balance as $9044.20
with the last repayment having been 10 August
2020; 10 September 2024 email from Complete Credit Solutions regarding the
card with an outstanding balance of $16,857.80; and 20 October 2024 email
from Complete Credit Solutions stating the amount due as
$17,085.34. Gill agreed
he owed around $25,000 and said this was because he used it when he was not
being paid by Kanda. Gill denied
lying about being owed wages and pursuing Kanda
due to being under immense financial pressure, saying credit agencies had been
and calling him since 2020.
KANDA’S EVIDENCE
said that every week, on Friday, as soon as Gill finished his shift, Gill asked
for payment in cash because he always needed
the money straight away, and Kanda
paid him in accordance with the amounts on his pay slips. Kanda initially said
that as soon as
Gill asked to be paid cash, the same day, Kanda checked with his
accountant if he could pay cash, and was told that it was legal,
provided that
he gave a pay slip and paid tax and superannuation, and provided a group
certificate. Later in his evidence, upon questioning
him as to that matter,
Kanda said he had known how much to pay to Gill on the first occasion he asked
for cash, even though the pay
slip had not yet been generated, because
Gill’s weekly hours were always the same and Kanda did the calculations
the night, based on a weekly tax table in his office, and he checked
with his accountant after that.
the start of the employment Kanda obtained Gill’s details which were
inputted into the Xero accounting system which does
not allow cash payments. Pay
slips go automatically to employees every week. The EFT transfer detail was on
Gill’s pay slip
because it is not possible to run the pay slip without
bank details. Gill was paid cash exactly in accordance with the amount in
pay slips. Gill was the only person paid cash. Gill belongs to the same
community as Kanda and Kanda tried to help him.
annual leave, Kanda initially said that at the end of each week, he paid Gill
his annual leave in cash. Then, when his counsel
referred to the accruing annual
leave balances on the pay slips, and the final balance, Kanda said that he had
paid the annual leave
in cash on the evening of Gill’s final Friday shift.
He said his accountant had calculated the amount, and it was approximately
in cash. Upon questioning him about this payment, given Gill’s last shift
was 28 June and the pay slip was dated 1 July,
Kanda then said that the annual
leave was calculated and paid three to four days after Gill’s last shift,
within a week it
was cleared, and Gill was still in Melbourne and came back to
superannuation, Kanda filed a document titled ‘Intention to defend the
complaint,’ signed and dated 15 July
2024, in which he stated that Gill
had never provided his superannuation details. However, Kanda accepted in his
evidence that he
had paid superannuation until 2019, then there was a lag in
payments with a few employees short. Kanda was audited by the ATO and
payment arrangement for one year to pay the Superannuation Guarantee Charge
(SGC) for all employees. Kanda relied on undated
statements in respect of Gill,
demonstrating a superannuation guarantee shortfall of $1205.74 for the March
2020 quarter and $741.67
for the June 2020 quarter, and an undated receipt from
the ATO refers to ‘SGC lodgement for Financial Year End 2020’.
ultimately agreed that the sums referred to in the SGC statements had not been
paid to Gill prior to the payment arrangement
with the ATO, but maintained also
that Gill hadn’t provided details. In an affidavit filed subsequent to the
hearing, Kanda
said he had completed the payment plan, relying on an undated ATO
document indicating that Rosenhart Pty Ltd had a ‘$0.00’
superannuation guarantee balance.
said that the reference letter produced by Gill was a fraudulent document, the
signature was not his, he always gives letters
on letterhead, that month
Kanda’s son had been born and Gill did not come to the premises. Kanda
said his business was profitable
at the relevant time and he was not under
financial hardship.
MR SANDEEP KANDA’S EVIDENCE
Sandeep Kanda, Kanda’s brother, gave evidence for Kanda. He worked at the
Steakhouse Grill66 as a cook for around four and
a half years including the
period that Gill was employed. In an affidavit filed in the proceeding, Mr
Sandeep Kanda said:
Harpreet use to mentiomned his tight financial situation. Therefore, he used to
ask for his wages to be paid before the payday, so
the employer, after
calculating Harpreet ’s PAYG and super, used to pay him mostly in cash by
the end of harpreet’s last
shift of the week [sic].
his oral evidence, Mr Sandeep Kanda said he didn’t know if Gill got paid
or not. On two or three occasions he saw Gill speaking
with the boss and getting
paid cash for his salary, the other times he doesn’t know. He does not
remember the date, it was
a long time ago. He said Gill was a good employee but
always desperate for money and asking for money. He then said that he was not
close to Gill and Gill told him sometimes he needed money to send. Mr Sandeep
Kanda was paid into his bank account every Friday
and always got paid on time.
MS JYOTI KANDA’S EVIDENCE
Jyoti Kanda, Kanda’s wife, gave evidence for Kanda. She was employed at
the Steakhouse Grill66 at the same time as Gill.
In an affidavit filed in the
proceeding, Ms Kanda said:
I am ... aware that Mr Harpreet singh used to get his salary mostly in cash and
in advance explaining his adversed financial circumstances
, thus the employer
... used to pay him before the pay day citing his ... regular urgency of
finances [sic].
oral evidence, Ms Kanda said she worked front of house every day alongside Gill.
She was not involved in the back end of the business.
Everyone got paid into
their accounts, including Gill. He sometimes got cash from Kanda because he had
a tough time sometimes. She
saw Kanda give money to Gill at the restaurant. She
doesn’t remember what dates she saw this. She knows what the money was
because she asked Kanda and he said it was salary. Gill was on the books but was
working cash as well. Gill asked if he could
work a few hours on the books and
the rest he needed as cash. Ms Kanda was paid weekly into her bank account and
got pay slips.
MR JUNG GIL KIM’S EVIDENCE
Kim gave evidence for Kanda. He has been employed at the Steakhouse Grill66
since 2011 and is still employed. He was a chef in
the kitchen when Gill was
working front of house. In an affidavit Mr Kim stated:
I am ... aware that Mr Harpreet Singh used to get paid by the employer on last
shift of every week even before the payday, due to
his vulnerable financial
condition so the employer use to pay him as per his request in cash, After
calculating his Tax and super
obligations [sic].
oral evidence, Mr Kim said he heard from Kanda and another colleague, whom he
could not recall, that sometimes Gill needed money
so he took cash from the
till. Mr Kim didn’t see this as he was in the kitchen. Mr Kim was paid a
salary into an account, which
he always received on time.
CONSIDERATION
Operation of
contended that because there is no record of Kanda making payment to him in
of the Act applies, and Kanda bears the burden of disproving
Gill’s non-payment claim.
of the Act regulates how the Court must approach the burden of proof in
circumstances where the employer contravenes record keeping
or pay slip
requirements. It provides relevantly as follows:
557C Presumption where records not provided
(a) in proceedings relating to a contravention by an employer of a civil remedy
provision referred to in subsection (3), an applicant
makes an allegation in
relation to a matter; and
(b) the employer was required:
subsection 535(1)
or (2) to make and keep a record; or
(ii) by regulations made for the purposes of
subsection 535(3)
available for inspection a record; or
subsection 536(1)
or (2) to give a pay slip;
in relation to the matter; and
(c) the employer failed to comply with the requirement;
the employer has the burden of disproving the allegation.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the employer provides a reasonable excuse
as to why there has not been compliance with
subsection 557C(1)(b).
of the Act sets out the relevant civil remedy provisions, which include
and (2) of the Act require an employer to make and keep employee records
of a kind, in a form and containing information prescribed
Regulations 2009
Regulations
). Sections 535 (4) and (5)
provide that an employer must not make or keep a record for the purposes of s
535 that is false or misleading
in any material particular.
Regulation 3.33
requires records of amounts paid to an employee to be made and kept.
requires an employer to make and keep records of required superannuation
contributions, including the name of the fund to which contributions
536(1) and (2) require an employer to give a pay slip within one working day of
paying an amount to an employee, in a form
and containing information as
prescribed by the Regulations. Sections 536(3) and (4) provide that an employer
must not give a pay
slip for the purpose of s 536 that is false or misleading in
a material particular.
was not in dispute that no pay slip was provided in respect of any payment of
Gill’s annual leave by Kanda. It was also not
in dispute that the pay
slips were the only relevant record regarding wages. It is evident from the pay
slips that they did not contain
details of Gill’s superannuation fund.
final submissions, Counsel for Kanda did not dispute the application of s 557C,
accepting that the pay slips did not reflect the
cash payment and that the
material error in the pay slip reversed the presumption, and accepting that
Kanda had the burden of disproving
the allegations of non-payment made by Gill.
Accordingly,
I have considered the evidence in light of the application of s 557C.
General issues of credibility and reliability of the evidence
allegations made by Gill and Kanda against each other are serious. On
Gill’s evidence, Kanda falsely represented that he
was making payments to
Gill, and remitted taxation to the ATO accordingly, whilst paying Gill nothing.
On Kanda’s evidence,
Kanda paid all of Gill’s wages and annual
leave in cash payments, meaning Gill has dishonestly brought this proceeding for
money he has already been paid.
had concerns with the credibility and reliability of both Gill and Kanda’s
evidence. I formed the view in hearing their evidence
that there was more to the
background of their relationship and the financial arrangements between them
than was disclosed to the
Court by either witness. Further, in considering this
matter subsequent to the hearing it became apparent to me that the dates of
employment coincided with the commencement of the Covid-19 pandemic in March
2020. Neither witness referred to this event, each
giving evidence that Gill
worked full time regular hours over the period.
general concerns have caused me to treat the evidence of both Gill and Kanda
with caution, and I have addressed further specific
concerns in the course of
considering each aspect of Gill’s claim below.
The superannuation claim
was not in dispute, and I find, that Kanda did not make required superannuation
contributions on Gill’s behalf. On Kanda’s
own evidence, the
superannuation was not paid, and instead became the subject of a superannuation
guarantee charge and payment plan
with the ATO.
I am satisfied that by way of that payment plan, Kanda has subsequently made the
requisite payments to the ATO, to be remitted
to Gill. In particular, I rely on
Gill’s affidavit evidence of his conversation with an ATO representative
to this effect,
which corroborates Kanda’s evidence that he has
subsequently remitted these funds to the ATO. Accordingly, I accept that Kanda
has already completed the steps to rectify the non-payment of superannuation
contributions, and I will not make an order that Kanda
remit superannuation on
behalf of Gill in light of this.
The annual leave claim
am not satisfied that Gill’s allegation of non-payment of $1434.90 in
annual leave has been disproved by Kanda.
have reached this conclusion because Kanda gave three conflicting versions as to
how and when the annual leave was paid in cash.
I formed the impression that
Kanda proffered a new version each time it became apparent to him that the
previous evidence he had
given was not plausible given the documentary evidence.
Accordingly, I did not believe Kanda’s evidence that Gill’s annual
leave was paid in cash. Further, the final pay slip, dated 1 July 2020, reflects
that Gill has an annual leave balance of 67.2313,
and there is no pay slip at
all reflecting that annual leave having been paid.
The unpaid wages claim
for Kanda contended that Gill’s financial circumstances at the time he
brought the claim, in light of his lengthy delay
in doing so, establishes his
real motive for bringing the claim and lying to the Court. Yet, the relevant
documents relied upon illustrate
that Gill was being pursued for outstanding
debts in October and November 2020 and March 2022, as well as in 2024.
Accordingly, I
am not positively persuaded that Gill’s circumstances in
2024 were sufficiently different to those which existed at those earlier
to sustain this submission.
there were a number of matters referred to by Kanda’s counsel which I
agree undermined Gill’s evidence that he
was not paid at all. Gill’s
evidence as to how he survived financially in the absence of payment was vague
and imprecise. His
declaration of the income to the ATO was inconsistent with
not receiving that income, albeit that he provided an explanation for
declared it. Gill’s lack of evidence as to his second bank account was
insufficient to establish that he had not deposited
cash to the second bank
account from Kanda. Despite his explanation as to his lack of knowledge,
Gill’s failure to take any
formal action in respect of the non-payment for
a lengthy period after the employment, notwithstanding significant financial
due to his loans and credit card debts, was difficult to reconcile.
also changed his evidence during cross examination about some matters which
affected my view of his general credit. Gill initially
explained the Queensland
transactions in his bank account by saying he had returned to Queensland in
January 2020. He then said he
gave his bank card to his friend, however, gave no
persuasive explanation as to why he would do so. His pay slips indicate he was
continuously working 38 hours a week in Melbourne in January 2020. Further,
Gill’s evidence that Kanda provided him with the
reference letter by
email, then by post, then in person by hard copy was implausible. I am not
satisfied that the reference letter
was provided by Kanda to Gill. Further,
Gill’s ultimate evidence that he had also raised the payment issue when
visiting Kanda
in Melbourne conflicted with his earlier evidence that he had not
taken any action to pursue the matter subsequent to the employment.
on its own, in light of the issues of credit and reliability I have identified,
I do not consider Gill’s evidence sufficient
to establish on balance that
he was not paid the sum claimed. However, because of s 557C, this is not the
relevant question. Rather,
it is Kanda who must positively prove that Gill was
paid the sum claimed, despite these issues of credit relating to Gill’s
also had concerns about the credibility and reliability of Kanda’s
evidence. This arose from his implausible and contradictory
evidence as to
payment of the annual leave sum, which I have rejected. However, it also arose
from his evidence as to the general
cash payments. Regarding the unpaid wages
allegation, Kanda changed his evidence as to what occurred on the first occasion
to have paid Gill cash, and the timing of his conversation with his
accountant. As with Kanda’s change of evidence about the
annual leave
payment, I formed the impression that Kanda proffered the new version after it
became apparent to him that the first
pay slip had not yet been issued at that
time. Accordingly, I did not believe Kanda’s evidence as to the first cash
and this led me to doubt Kanda’s other evidence that he paid Gill
exactly what Gill was owed on Friday of each week. I am not
satisfied, based on Kanda’s evidence alone, that Gill was paid the sum he
is owed pursuant to a weekly cash payment
arrangement.
Kim’s evidence was of no assistance to Kanda’s case. His affidavit
stated he was ‘aware’ of such an arrangement,
however his oral
evidence was that he did not see any cash payment made to Gill and had only
heard this from Kanda and an unnamed
colleague. He was simply repeating what
Kanda had told him.
language and content of the affidavits affirmed by Mr Sandeep Kanda and Ms Kanda
was similar (and similar to Mr Kim’s affidavit).
They both stated they
were aware of the three key elements of Kanda’s evidence, being that Gill
had financial difficulties,
was paid in cash (although both used the term
‘mostly’) and was paid before payday. Neither affidavit stated how
were aware of these matters. I provided Kanda’s counsel with the
opportunity to lead evidence as to the extent of any discussions
between these
witnesses and Kanda but no evidence of this nature was given.
Sandeep Kanda’s oral evidence was internally contradictory. He said he
didn’t know whether Gill had been paid but also
said he knew he had been
paid cash for his salary. Ms Kanda’s evidence was inconsistent with
Kanda’s evidence that the
full payment was made in cash, despite her
saying it was based on what Kanda told her. Nothing in Ms Kanda’s oral
indicated Gill had directly spoken to her about financial troubles. Mr
Sandeep Kanda’s affidavit evidence as to Gill mentioning
financial situation changed in his oral evidence. Whilst both witnesses said
that they saw Gill being paid cash by Kanda,
neither could say when. Ms Kanda
did not say how often, and Mr Sandeep Kanda said only two or three times.
Mr Sandeep Kanda and Ms Kanda’s relationship to Kanda, the similarity in
their affidavit evidence, and the inconsistencies
in their evidence, I
considered each of their evidence to lack credibility and I gave it no weight. I
did not consider either of
them to be an independent witness. I formed the view
that they had Kanda’s interests in mind, and that their evidence was
derived from what Kanda had told them. In particular, I was not
satisfied that either of them had any direct knowledge of any cash
arrangement between Kanda and Gill. I did not consider their evidence of
observing cash payments being made by Kanda to
Gill to be reliable, and I reject
any event, even if I had accepted the evidence as to observing cash payments,
the evidence was insufficient to establish that regular
cash payments were made
or that the cash payment arrangement asserted by Kanda was in place. I consider,
had such an arrangement
been in place, with payments made each Friday at the end
of Gill’s shift, this would have likely been widely and regularly
by co-workers. This was not the effect of the evidence of either Mr Sandeep
Kanda or Ms Kanda.
was no other independent evidence of the cash payment arrangement. Kanda
produced no documentary evidence, such as how he had
accounted for these
payments from the business cash receipts. Kanda’s accountant was not
called to give evidence, despite Kanda
stating that he expressly approved the
cash payment arrangement. Kanda’s explanation as to the Xero system
requiring payment
to a bank account to issue a pay slip was not verified by any
kind of documentation.
was not in dispute, and I find, that Kanda remitted taxation to the ATO in
respect of the income recorded on the pay slips as having
been paid to Kanda.
However, it was also not in dispute that Kanda had not made requisite
superannuation contributions. Nor, based
on my findings, had he paid the annual
leave payments owing to Gill. On balance, taken together, these matters are
neutral as to
the likelihood that Kanda made cash payments of Gill’s
Accordingly,
notwithstanding the matters I have identified which throw doubt on Gill’s
allegation of non-payment, Kanda has
failed to positively persuade me on the
balance of probabilities that he paid Gill in cash the amounts stated on
slips to have been paid to his bank account. In light of the
reverse onus in s 557C, Kanda has failed to disprove Gill’s allegation
Gill’s claim must succeed.
will order that Kanda pay Gill the sum of $18,243.18, being $16,808.28 in
respect of unpaid wages and $1434.90 in respect of unpaid
annual leave.
applied for interest pursuant to s 547 of the Act. Section 547(2) requires that
on application, the Court must include an amount
of interest in the sum ordered,
unless good cause is shown to the contrary. Section 547(3) requires the Court to
determine interest
taking into account the period between the day the relevant
cause of action arose, and the day of the order.
consider there is good cause not to order interest from the date Gill’s
cause of action accrued, given the absence of a clear
explanation by Gill as to
his failure to demand payment or take any formal action for a lengthy period
after the employment ended.
I will not order pre-issue interest in light of
this. However, I will order interest be paid from the date of commencement of
proceeding, being 1 July 2024, to today’s date. Section 547 does not
specify the rate at which interest is to be calculated.
I have applied the rate
set out in the
Penalty Interest Rates Act 1983
(Vic), which is 10 per
cent. Accordingly, I award interest of $1,839.31.
Several documents in evidence
referred to Gill’s employer being the entity Rosenhart Pty Ltd. However,
each party maintained
that Kanda was the correct employer.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (756 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter