URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1614.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DPP v Phillis [2025] VCC 1614 (6 November 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT OF
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
CRIMINAL JURISDICTION
CR-24-01601
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
MARK PHILLIS
HIS HONOUR JUDGE DOYLE
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
31 October and 5 November 2025
DATE OF SENTENCE:
6 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS:
DPP v Phillis
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VCC 1614
REASONS FOR SENTENCE
Subject: Criminal Law - SENTENCE
Catchwords: Guilty by jury verdict – Recklessly cause injury –
Victim neighbour of the offender – Fishing spear
used by offender causing
injury to victim’s head requiring a staple - Relevant prior
convictions.
Legislation Cited:
Sentencing Act 1991
Cases Cited:
Sentence: 10 months’
imprisonment.
APPEARANCES:
For the Director of Public Prosecutions
Mr D. Cordy
Office of Public Prosecutions
For the Accused
Mr N. Rolfe
Rolfe Criminal Law
HIS HONOUR:
Phillis, on 30 September 2025 at the County Court in Bendigo, you were found
guilty by jury verdict of one offence of recklessly
causing injury. That was an
alternative charge to an intentional injury of which you were acquitted by the
that indictment, you also faced serious injury offences, where the prosecution
allege the principal offender was your son, or the
person who inflicted the
injury was your son, Jason Phillis, and that you were complicit in his offences.
I entered verdicts of not
guilty in relation to charges in respect of that
incident, because in my opinion, there was insufficient evidence, or there was
evidence on which a jury could have inferred complicity with that
is true that this matter, in retrospect, could have been dealt with in the
Magistrates' Court, as a indictable offence, triable
summarily. In my opinion,
the Magistrates' Court would have had sufficient sentencing power to deal with
the offence. So it is
now more than two years since the commission of the
offence in this case.
circumstances of the offence were the subject of evidence at the trial from the
victim Trevor Rosendale and other witnesses, Barbara
Stewart, Zoe Petty, Robert
Asia, whose statement was read to the jury and Mary Andrews, similarly. Most of
those witnesses were
able to describe the incident which gives rise to the
reckless injury.
background to the offence in this case is that you and Trevor Rosendale were
neighbours in a street in Maryborough and you had
been neighbours for an
extended period. There is not any doubt that there was bad blood between the
two of you. In fact, one of
your prior convictions relates to throwing a brick
through a window of Mr Rosendale's house. That offence was dealt with in
2022 and on that date, as well as being punished for the offending, an
intervention order was made against you in respect of Mr Rosendale
and his wife,
Lauren. That order was in place at the time of this offending.
this day, 16 September 2023, an argument broke out between you and
Mr Rosendale. That argument was captured on video taken by
your son Jason,
which was played during the trial. You abused Mr Rosendale, calling him a
paedophile. He was outside the fence
of your property, and he started to yell
back at you.
evidence was that he was sick tired of your abuse, of which this was another
example, and that you had called him a paedophile
before. Mr Rosendale gave
evidence, which I accept, that he saw a bike in the front yard that he believed
belonged to his son.
He entered your property for two reasons: firstly, to take
possession of the bike and secondly, to have a verbal confrontation with
were inside your property, behind a screen door. Mr Rosendale's evidence was
that he walked into the front yard and bent down
to pick up the bike. At around
that time, you came out of your house carrying a five-prong fishing spear which
you jabbed towards
him. In my opinion, he was in no position to defend himself
at that stage, because he was bending down to pick up the bike. The
spear made contact with his head and caused a cut to his head. There was
medical evidence in respect of that cut, and a
photograph which showed the
injury after treatment with a staple in it.
may well be that the fishing spear also made contact with his hoodie, because
there are several puncture marks in the hoodie, consistent
with the fishing
spear coming into contact with his clothing, but I sentence you on the basis
that you jabbed towards his head and
made contact, causing an injury.
followed was a struggle between you and Mr Rosendale over the weapon that you
had brought outside from inside your house, after
which your son Jason became
involved and he stabbed Mr Rosendale to the back at least a couple of times,
which caused a pneumothorax.
Mr Rosendale had to be taken to hospital and
received emergency treatment.
Phillis was found guilty of recklessly causing serious injury in relation to
that conduct. You are not to be punished for that,
but it seems to me your
conduct in initiating the verbal altercation with Mr Rosendale and then the
physical altercation caused this
situation to get very much out of hand.
are 54 years old. You have had a very lengthy criminal history, which starts
all the way back in 1990. You have got prior convictions
for dishonesty
offences, multiple offences of assault, offences relating to weapons. You have
received several periods of imprisonment
over the years. You have been placed
on community correction orders, which you breached. You have prior convictions
for contravening
a personal safety intervention order as recently as January
have been provided with summaries of quite a few of your prior convictions for
assault. I have already referred to the previous
criminal damage offence, which
involved Mr Rosendale. You have several other previous convictions for assault
offences relating
to neighbours and on a number of occasions, you seemed to have
some grievance against neighbours for supposed sexual transgressions.
accept any of your offerings about the supposed conduct of your neighbours. It
seems to me you have been a major nuisance
in your neighbourhood, not only in
relation to Mr Rosendale, but in respect of other people as well.
course, you are not to be punished again for your criminal history, but it is
highly relevant to a number of sentencing principles.
It is relevant to the
assessment of your prospects of rehabilitation. It is relevant to your moral
culpability for this offending.
You have been to court many times for assault.
You know what the score is and yet, here you were, initiating an altercation
Mr Rosendale, who you had offended against before and in relation to whom
there was a current intervention order in place. Those
matters are relevant
also to the assessment of your prospects of rehabilitation.
also need to take into account the victim impact material in this case and
several victim impact statements were tendered: from
Mr Rosendale, Lauren
Rosendale as well and others. have read and have regard to what is in those
victim impact statements. It is
somewhat hard to disentangle the consequences
of the other assault involving your son, with your conduct, but nonetheless, it
to me that your behaviour towards Mr Rosendale has had a significant
impact on him and his partner and the other witnesses, including
Ms Stewart, who
were present at the scene. The impact on the victims is a significant matter in
forming just punishment for these
offence of reckless injury carries a maximum penalty of five years'
imprisonment. This example of it was an unprovoked attack,
in my opinion, on
your neighbour, against whom you have a history. You escalated events by
bringing out a weapon from inside. You
then poked the weapon towards his head,
which is an inherently dangerous action. The use of the weapon, in my opinion,
necessitates
emphasising general deterrence in sentencing for this matter.
regard this as a reasonably significant example of a reckless injury offence and
having regard to your prior convictions, an example
of this offence that
requires a period of immediate imprisonment, as we have discussed on the
terms of your background, you are now 54 years old. You were born in Carlton.
You have three brothers, and you have a good relationship
with all of them, I am
told. When you left school, you started a painting apprenticeship, but you did
not complete that, although
your main employment has apparently been as a house
painter and commercial painter. You also worked as a slaughterman and a factory
the time of this offending, you had been living in Maryborough for about
20 years, and you were at the property for 18 years.
You have had two
significant relationships, the first from 1995 to 2010. You had two children
from that relationship, a daughter
Tahlia and a son Jason. You separated from
your wife some time ago and your wife moved to live in Marong, I was told, with
daughter. Jason remained living with you, although since this incident, I
was told he has moved away and lives now with his mother
in Marong as well.
the incident, you have also moved from the property in Maryborough, and I am
told you have been living in Bendigo yourself at
Flora Hill with a friend, and
you had had periods also living with your mother. Your residence in Maryborough
was a ministry residence,
which you were required to leave, because of the
ongoing issues with the Rosendales and you have not been able to source
accommodation
since then.
Healthwise,
I am told that in 2013, you had a pushbike accident and broke your hip and
because of that, you have struggled to work
on a full-time basis since, because
you find it difficult to stand up for long periods of time.
counsel, Mr Rolfe, told me that you have had problems with alcohol since your
teenage years and that your prior convictions have
often stimmed from your
excessive drinking. It seems as though you were drinking on the day of this
incident as well. You have
in recent times been receiving a Newstart
in terms of sentencing principles, general deterrence and just punishment are
both important, but in your case, having regard
to your repetitive assault
offending, specific deterrence is also significant. I need to try and impress
on you again that if you
continue to assault people, you will receive sentences
of imprisonment.
far as I can tell from your priors, the sentence I impose today will be the
longest period of imprisonment you have thus far received.
I need also to take into account the time that has passed since this incident.
This occurred in September of 2023. So, over two
years ago. The reason for that
is that your charges were bound up with those against your son Jason and his
charges necessarily required
a trial. In the end, the charge that you faced
could have been dealt with in the Magistrates' Court and if that had happened,
case would have been disposed of some time ago and you would probably have
already served whatever punishment the magistrate required
you to serve.
delay is a matter I do need to take into account and the loss of the opportunity
for summary jurisdiction. I do not regard you
as a candidate for a community
correction order at your age and having regard to your significant criminal
the other hand, the maximum penalty for this is five years and it could have
been dealt with in the Magistrates' Court and I am
inclined to the view that I
can impose a straight sentence without a non-parole period, but a sentence which
will be the longest
period of imprisonment you will have served, as I read the
prior convictions. So that is what I have decided to do in this matter.
must have some regard to your rehabilitation. Mr Rolfe submitted that perhaps a
period of imprisonment in which you are separated
from alcohol might be a
circuit breaker and that when you get out from the period that I will impose,
you will be in a better position
to lead a life where you do not get drunk all
the time and commit offences as a result.
are now 54 years old. It is really going to be a matter for you, whether you
have the wherewithal to address your alcohol problems.
If you do not, it seems
to me highly likely you will reoffend and you will be back before the courts and
no doubt you will receive
further sentences of imprisonment, if that is the way
it goes, but it is up to you.
need to stop drinking. If you can do that, your prospects of rehabilitation
would improve considerably. In the end, what I decided
to do is impose a
straight sentence of imprisonment. I do not have any doubt that given all the
matters I have referred to, that
is justified in this case.
have imposed the minimum period I believe is reasonable in the circumstances of
the offence and the sentence I impose is that you
are convicted and sentenced to
a period of imprisonment of 10 months for this offence of recklessly causing
injury. What is the
ROLFE: Seven days, Your Honour.
HONOUR: All right.
ROLFE: Not including today.
HONOUR: I will allow seven days presentence detention, which will be
administratively deducted from the 10 months that I have
imposed under
Sentencing Act
. Do I need to make forfeiture orders? Did we do that
CORDY: Yes ‑ ‑ ‑
HONOUR: So you want - you want the fishing spear forfeited?
CORDY: Yes Your Honour.
HONOUR: All right.
CORDY: I'll make sure that a draft order is forwarded to Your Honour's
HONOUR: Yes, yes, all right. Yes, all right, anything else I need to order, Mr
Cordy, or Mr Rolfe?
ROLFE: Not from my perspective, Your Honour.
HONOUR: Mr Cordy?
CORDY: No, Your Honour, thank you.
HONOUR: All right, okay and I'll strike out the alternative summary charges
that made their way up to this court.
CORDY: Yes.
HONOUR: I'll do that.
CORDY: Thank you, Your Honour.
ROLFE: Thank you, Your Honour.
HONOUR: All right, thank you both for your assistance in this matter and I'll
now stand down. Have we got - until 1 o'clock,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (131 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter