URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/71.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:47:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Something Better and Ors v Pyramid Building Society (In Liquidation) [1996] VicRp 71; [1996] 2 VR 352 (12 February 1996)
SOMETHING BETTER and ORS v PYRAMID BUILDING SOCIETY (IN LIQUIDATION)
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA COURT OF APPEAL
BROOKING and TADGELL JJA and MCDONALD AJA
13 November 1995, 12 February 1996
Brooking JA
Tadgell JA shows in his judgment how these two appeals arise. The first - that brought by the company - is a hopeless one. It should
be dismissed, for the reasons given by Tadgell JA. The second appeal raises a difficult question under the Commonwealth
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Mr Bruce M Terry, a developer, and his wife claim to have been discharged from liability under a guarantee given by them to the respondent
building society to support a loan made to the company to finance a real estate development. Under their guarantee the Terrys were
potentially liable for a sum in excess of $3m, but the realisation of the security given by the company over the property that was
developed has reduced that sum to somewhat more than $1.3m. The Terrys say that they are not liable on their guarantee because some
time before the principal debtor - the company - made default their creditors had accepted a composition under PtX of the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
whereby the creditors were to accept in full settlement the moderate sum of $10,000, subject to costs of administration. The primary
judge rejected this defence.
The statements of affairs disclosed that Mr Terry had unsecured debts of $101,575 and a modest $200 in assets, while Mrs Terry had
only $150 to set against her unsecured debts of $61,575. Thus, although the debtors dwelt in Moule Avenue, Brighton, the assets of
the wife might have been exhausted by filling to the brim a supermarket trolley. The statements of affairs also disclosed that within
the previous five years each debtor had sold shares for their par value to the children of the marriage or to a company, Moule Holdings
Pty Ltd, of which each debtor had been a director, controller or shareholder within the previous five years. They also showed that
one or other of the debtors or his or her relatives was or were, or had in the past five years been, associated with or interested
in no less than 37 trusts. At the meeting of creditors which resolved to accept the composition Mr Terry optimistically asserted
that he might have a buyer for the property to cover the mortgage debt. The meeting was chaired by Mr and Mrs Terry's solicitor,
who ruled (no doubt in reliance upon s198(2) of the
Bankruptcy Act
) that the respondent was not entitled to vote at the meeting. The debtors say that their contingent liability under the guarantee
was a provable debt and that by force of s240(1) the composition has released them from that debt. It is common ground that the debt
would have been provable in the bankruptcy of the debtors. The question is whether it was provable in relation to the composition.
Edward Christian, in the preface to the second edition of his Bankrupt Law, writing in 1818, advanced the counsel of perfection that
the only method by which we can arrive at any conclusion with certainty or confidence is, to trace the progress of the law from its
origin, through all its various changes to its present state of existence.
The bankruptcy laws originated in the days of the Tudors. A conspectus of the attempts to deal with the question what debts may be
proved - attempts which began in the reign of George the First and continued until the definition was brought substantially to its
modern form by the Bankruptcy Act 1869 - need not be undertaken, but something must be said of the former law. -
The first statute directed against bankrupts, 34 and 35 Hen 8 c4, enacted in 1542, was followed in 1570 by 13 Eliz c7, which remained
the foundation of the Bankruptcy Law until the nineteenth century. Neither of these statutes defined "creditor" or "debt", and the
enactments which, in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, liberalised the law of proof, did so, not by defining "creditor" or
"debt" for the purposes of the bankrupt law, but by allowing debts or liabilities of particular kinds to be proved. Until 1721 the
right of proof was narrowly confined. Only liquidated sums were provable and the debt had to be due and payable at the date of the
act of bankruptcy: Re Brown and Wingrove; Ex parte Ador [1891] 2 QB 574 at 579 per Lindley LJ; Trustees Executors and Agency Co Ltd
[1906] SALawRp 16
(1906) SALR 155
at 174 and 178; Christian's Bankrupt Law, 2nd ed, 1818, at 285-90; Cooke's Bankrupt Laws, 8th ed, 1823, at 217-21; Eden's Bankrupt
Law, 2nd ed, 1826, at 125; Griffith and Holmes, Bankruptcy, 1869, at 526 and 557; Robson, Bankruptcy, 3rd ed, 1876, at 201-3. So
where the maker of a promissory note dated 1 January and payable one month after date became bankrupt on 10 January the creditor
could not prove: Callowell v Clutterbuck Pasch 10 Ann BR, cited in argument in Tully v Sparkes (1729) 2 Str 867;
, where the basis of the decision is said by counsel to be that "though it was debitum in praesenti, yet the cause of action did not
accrue until after the act of bankruptcy". Similarly, where a man became bankrupt on 20 June and the fees for half a year's schooling
of his sons did not become payable until 24 June the debt was not provable: Parslow v Dearlove
(1803) 5 Esp 78
170 ER 743.
The first reform was made in 1721 by 7 Geo I c31, which allowed proof of a debt due at the date of the act of bankruptcy, though
not payable until after it, in favour of those who had given the bankrupt credit on the security of bills of exchange or promissory
notes given or made by him. The Act made the securities provable "in like manner as if they were made payable presently, and not
at a future day". It required a rebate to be given by discounting a security payable at a future time at the rate of 5% per annum.
A further relaxation was made in 1809 by 49 Geo III c121, whereby any person who had given the bankrupt credit upon valuable consideration
for any money which had not become payable at the date of the act of bankruptcy was allowed to prove the debt as if it was presently
payable, whether or not the credit had been given on the faith of a negotiable security. Again a 5% rebate was required. The early
statutes are conveniently to be found in Christian's Bankrupt Law, 2nd ed.
It was a consequence of the old rule that a debt was provable only if it had become due and payable before the bankruptcy that a
contingent debt could not be proved unless the contingency had taken effect before an act of bankruptcy had been committed. The alteration
to the law of proof made by 7 Geo I c31 was held not to avail contingent creditors. The holder of a guarantee could not prove in
the surety's bankruptcy if the guarantee was of payment on a day certain which had not passed or of payment on demand or notice which
had not been given: Ex parte Adney
[1776] EngR 50
; (1776) 2 Cowp 460;
; Alsop v Price (1779) 1 Dougl 160;
; Ex parte Minet
[1807] EngR 358
(1807) 14 Ves Jun 189
; Ex parte Gardom
[1808] EngR 336
(1808) 15 Ves Jun 286
For other examples of the effect of the old rule see Christian's Bankrupt Law, 2nd ed, at 285-90; Cooke's Bankrupt Laws, 8th ed,
at 221-59; Griffith and Holmes, Bankruptcy, at 572-86.
Gradually relief was given to contingent creditors by statute. Thus an exception was made by 19 Geo II c32 in favour of holders of
bottomry and -
respondentia bonds and insurance policies, allowing them to prove once the contingency had taken place. By 6 Geo IV c16, where a
debt payable upon contingency was contracted before the filing of the petition and without notice of an act of bankruptcy, the creditor
might apply to the court to set a value on the debt and, once the debt was valued, prove the debt, or, if the contingency happened
before the value was ascertained, the creditor might prove the debt.
There were other enactments which sought to modify the strict old rule that all that could be proved was a debt for a liquidated
sum due and payable at the date of the act of bankruptcy: the categories of provable debts gradually became more numerous and a large
body of law grew up around the statutory provisions. In the end, after the Bankrupt Law Consolidation Act 1849 (12 and 13 Vict c
106) and the Bankruptcy Act 1861 (24 and 25 Vict c 134), the Bankruptcy Act 1869 (32 and 33 Vict c 71) dealt with the question what
debts were provable by the widely drawn s31, from which the modern provisions derive and which they closely resemble. In Australia
the current provision is
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Speaking of legislative intervention before the new approach embodied in the Act of 1869, Lord Halsbury LC referred to "the gradual
steps taken by the legislature to extend the application of the bankruptcy law to future and contingent debts": Hardy v Fothergill
(1881) 13 App Cas 351 at 355. This is of course a reference to the steps taken to mitigate the old rule that no debt was provable
which was not due and payable at the date of the act of bankruptcy, the rule which had as one important consequence the inability
of a contingent creditor to prove. Lord Halsbury was using the term "future debt" in the sense of a debt which did not meet the old
requirement that there be a debt due and payable at the date of the act of bankruptcy. It is scarcely necessary to give other examples
of usage which shows that prior to the Act of 1869 "future debt" meant, in the law of proof, a debt which was not due and payable
by the date of the act of bankruptcy, but I shall instance the judgment of de Grey CJ in Goddard v Vanderheyden, noted to the report
of Bamford v Burrell (1799) 2 Bos and Pul 1;
[1799] EngR 829
126 ER 1120
at 1125 ("future debts, not then demandable, nor then due and owing") and the judgment of Lord Mansfield in Ex parte Adney
[1776] EngR 50
(1776) 2 Cowp 461
Ex parte Adney
[1776] EngR 50
(1776) 2 Cowp 461
[1776] EngR 50
at 1188 ("debts payable at a future day").
The foundation of the modern law of proof is s31 of the Bankruptcy Act 1869, a widely expressed provision, the object of which was
explained in Ex parte Llynvi Coal and Iron Co; Re Hide (1871) LR 7 Ch 28, in Morgan v Hardy
(1887) 18 QBD 646
and (on appeal) Hardy v Fothergill (1888) 13 App Cas 351 and in Trustees Executors and Agency Co, Ltd v Cowan
[1906] SALawRp 16
(1906) SALR 155
at 175. In the decision last cited the Full Court of South Australia said: All these limitations of the right of proof were swept
away by the English Bankruptcy Act of 1869, s31, which, while still preventing damages for torts being provable, enacted that "all
debts and liabilities present or future, certain or contingent, to which the bankrupt is subject at the date of the order of adjudication,
or to which he may become subject during the continuance of the bankruptcy by reason of any obligation incurred previously to the
date of the order of adjudication, shall be deemed to be debts provable in bankruptcy". As, under the Bankruptcy Acts, the debtor
is released from all provable debts, the goal which the Legislature and law reformers so long had in view was at last reached in
making almost every possible liability arising out of contract provable and the bankrupt's discharge therefrom complete.
S243 of the Commonwealth
Bankruptcy Act 1966
deals with the application of the general provisions of the Act to compositions: -
(1) S82 to s107 (inclusive) and s140 to s147 (inclusive) apply, with the prescribed modifications (if any), in relation to a composition
under this Part as if:
(a) a sequestration order had been made against the debtor on the day on which the special resolution accepting the composition was
passed; and
(b) the trustee of the composition were the trustee in his bankruptcy.
(2) In the application of the provisions of this Act specified in subs(1) in relation to a composition, a reference to a provable
debt shall be read as a reference to a provable debt within the meaning of this Part.
(3) Subs157(6) and subs157(7) and s162 to s184 (inclusive) apply, with the prescribed modifications (if any), in relation to a trustee
of a composition under this Part as if the debtor by whom the composition was made were a bankrupt and the trustee of the composition
were the trustee in his bankruptcy.
(4) If, after taking into account the prescribed modifications and the provisions of subs(2), a provision specified in subs(1) or
subs(3) is incapable of application in relation to a composition, or the trustee of a composition, as the case requires, or is inconsistent
with this Part, that provision does not so have application.
The corresponding sections dealing with the application of the general provisions of the Act to deeds of assignment and deeds of
arrangement are s231 and s237 respectively. Each of the three sections makes s82 apply "with the prescribed modifications (if any)".
"Prescribed modifications" is not itself defined in the Act, but there are definitions of "prescribed" and "modifications" in s5(1).
"Prescribed" is defined as meaning "prescribed by this Act or by rules under this Act" and "modifications" is defined as including
additions, omissions and substitutions. R82, r83 and r84 of the Bankruptcy Rules prescribe modifications of s82 for the purposes
of s231, s237 and s243 respectively; the modifications are the same in each case. They omit subs(1) and subs(8) of s82 and substitute
a new subsection in each case. The modifications may be shown as follows: 82(1) Subject to this Division, all debts and liabilities,
present or future, certain or contingent, to which a bankrupt was subject at the date of bankruptcy, or to which he may become subject
before his discharge by reason of an obligation incurred before the date of the bankruptcy, are provable in his bankruptcy.
[Editor's note: the words "present of future, certain or contingent," and "or to which he may become subject before his discharge
by reason of an obligation incurred before the date of the bankruptcy," were crossed out in hard copy.]
(1A) Without limiting the generality of subs(1), debts and liabilities referred to in that subsection shall be taken to include a
debt or liability by way of the whole or a part of -
(a) a periodical sum that became payable by the bankrupt before, but not more than one year before, the date of the bankruptcy under
a maintenance agreement or maintenance order (whether entered into or made, as the case may be, before or after the commencement
of this subsection); and
(b) a lump sum (whether payable in one amount or by instalments) that became payable by the bankrupt before the date of the bankruptcy
under a maintenance agreement or maintenance order (whether entered into or made, as the case may be, before or after the commencement
of this subsection).
(2) Demands in the nature of unliquidated damages arising otherwise than by reason of a contract, promise or breach of trust are not
provable in bankruptcy.
(3) Subject to subs(3A), penalties or fines imposed by a court in respect of an offence against a law, whether a law of the Commonwealth
or not, are not provable in bankruptcy.
(3AA) An amount payable under an order made under para1317EA(3)(b) of the Corporations Law of a State or Territory is not provable
in bankruptcy.
(3A) An amount payable under a pecuniary penalty order or an interstate pecuniary order is provable in bankruptcy. -
(3B) A debt is not provable in a bankruptcy in so far as the debt consists of interest accruing, in respect of a period commencing
on or after the date of the bankruptcy, on a debt that is provable in the bankruptcy.
(4) The trustee shall make an estimate of the value of a debt or liability provable in the bankruptcy which, by reason of its being
subject to a contingency, or for any other reason, does not bear a certain value.
(5) A person aggrieved by an estimate so made may appeal to the court.
(6) If the Court finds that the value of the debt or liability cannot be fairly estimated, the debt or liability shall be deemed not
to be provable in the bankruptcy.
(7) If the Court finds that the value of the debt or liability can be fairly estimated, the Court shall assess the value in such manner
as it thinks proper.
(8) In this section, "liability" includes:
(a) compensation for work or labour done; AND
(b) an obligation or possible obligation to pay money or money's worth on the breach of an express or implied covenant, contract,
agreement or undertaking, whether or not the breach occurs, is likely to occur or is capable of occurring, before the discharge of
the bankrupt; and
(c) (b) an express or implied engagement, agreement or undertaking, to pay, or capable of resulting in the payment of, money or money's
worth, whether the payment is:
(i) in respect of amount - fixed or unliquidated; OR
(ii) in respect of time present or future, or certain or dependent on a contingency; or
(iii) (ii) in respect of the manner of valuation - capable of being ascertained by fixed rules or only as matter of opinion.
[Editor's note: "(c)", "(ii) in respect of time present or future, or certain or dependent on a contingency; or" and "(iii)" were
crossed out in hard copy.]
In its original form, s243(1) referred to "such modifications and adaptations (if any) as are prescribed by the rules"; by s243(5),
"modification" was made to include the addition or omission of a provision or the substitution of a provision for another provision.
Bankruptcy Amendment Act 1987
brought s243 to its present form and introduced into
the definition of "modifications".
Mr and Mrs Terry contend in the first place that r84 is ultra vires. This argument is based on the circumstance that the power given
to the Governor-General by
Bankruptcy Act
is a power to make rules or regulations "not inconsistent with this Act". It is said that if, contrary to the appellants' contention,
the modifications made by r84 to s82 are more than mere drafting alterations and are intended to affect the operation of the section,
they are ultra vires as inconsistent with s82. The argument about invalidity has only to be stated for its weakness to be seen. The
rule which modifies s243 is not inconsistent with the Act, since s243 itself expressly contemplates that the Act may be modified
by rule. A rule modifying a section is not inconsistent with an Act which provides for the making of such a rule.
It may be noted that the
Bankruptcy Legislation Amendment Bill 1995
amends the principal Act by omitting from s5(1) the definition of "prescribed" (cl6(1)(g)) and by substituting a new section for
s315 (cl197).
In Gye v McIntyre
[1991] HCA 60
(1991) 171 CLR 609
at 618 the court found it unnecessary to consider the effect of the alteration to s82(1) made by r84 of the Bankruptcy Rules.
The prescribed modifications to s82 made for the purposes of s243 must have had some purpose. The respondent says that this purpose
was to make contingent debts and liabilities not provable where there is a composition. (In the course of this judgment I do not,
in general, hereafter distinguish between debts and liabilities.) Mr and Mrs Terry say that the modifications are nothing more -
than an inept attempt to modernise and simplify the verbiage of s82, considered in relation to compositions, by purging it of unnecessary
words. On this view the modifications are intended to do no more than improve the drafting of the section. This would be a strange
task to undertake in the exercise of a power to make "modifications" (an expression defined, as I have said by s5(1) as including
additions, omissions and substitutions). Mr and Mrs Terry contend that the section has not been modified: all that has happened has
been the expulsion of some unnecessary words which have been in the bankruptcy statutes for many years but which (so it is said)
contribute nothing to the meaning and effect of the section.
No less than 12 years elapsed between the appointment of a committee to review the bankruptcy law of the Commonwealth and the commencement
of the Act of 1966. I suppose pressure of business might be put forward as explaining the enactment of important legislation like
the Commonwealth
Bankruptcy Act
in a seriously incomplete state, leaving it to rules to fill in not unimportant gaps, although I seem to recall reading somewhere
the suggestion that the need for "flexibility" made this method of legislating desirable. Many matters of detail may legitimately
be left to be prescribed by means of delegated legislation, but the present example does not seem to me to be of this kind.
This regrettable approach in PtX is reflected by the remarkable s243(4), which recognises the danger that the filling in of important
gaps by delegated legislation will create discord; to legislate in this way is to invite difficulties of interpretation. It is the
same recognition that legislation is being brought into the world untimely, in an imperfectly developed state, which leads to the
enactment of such provisions as s447 a of the Corporations Law (as to which see Brash Holdings Ltd v Katile Pty Ltd [1996] 1 VR 24
at 26-7) and s1328 of the Corporations Law. With s1328 of the Corporations Law may be compared s300 of the
Bankruptcy Act
itself. The "prescribed modification" also finds its place in the Corporations Law
, s323, s323A and 446B), the
Australian Securities Commission Act 1989
Navigation Act 1912
National Health Act 1953
(s49AA and s68). In the
Bankruptcy Act
it appears not only in
, s237 and s243 but also in
, s193, s212F, s
(4) are similar to s243(4) in their attempt to deal with the problem of discord.
The modifications to
made by the rules are four in number, each consisting in the deletion of words. These deletions are:
First, from subs(1), of the phrase "present or future, certain or contingent";
Secondly, from subs(1), of the words "or to which he may become subject before his discharge by reason of an obligation incurred
before the date of the bankruptcy";
Thirdly, from subs(8), of the paragraph:
(b) an obligation or possible obligation to pay money or money's worth on the breach of an express or implied covenant, contract,
agreement or undertaking, whether or not the breach occurs, is likely to occur or is capable of occurring, before the discharge of
the bankrupt ...;
Fourthly, from subs(8), of the subparagraph of the former para(c):
(ii) in respect of time - present or future, or certain or dependent on a contingency.
With respect, I think there is a good deal to be said for the view of the primary judge that these modifications disclose an intention
to exclude from the category -
of provable debts contingent debts and liabilities, with the result that the contingent liability of a surety on a guarantee, which
would otherwise be provable, as in Re Galyer
(1931) GLR 539
, is not a provable debt. In the first place, the phrase "present or future, certain or contingent" is deleted from the primary provision
which states what debts and liabilities are provable, subs(1). In 1876, in the third edition of his work on bankruptcy, Robson began
his discussion of the proof of debts by distinguishing, at 201, between the two general classes of debt, "absolute or certain debts,
or such as are payable certainly and at all events; and contingent debts, or such as arise or become payable only upon the happening
or taking effect of some uncertain event or contingency".
The second half of the phrase "present or future, certain or contingent" is concerned with the distinction between debts which are
absolute and debts which are contingent. The first half is, in my view, concerned with the fundamental distinction drawn originally
by the law of proof between debts due and payable at the date of the act of bankruptcy and other debts; compare the language of 7
Geo I c 31 ("as if they were made payable presently, and not at a future day") and the passage earlier cited from Hardy v Fothergill
(1888) 13 App Cas 351 Hardy v Fothergill in which Lord Halsbury speaks of the gradual extension of the application of the bankruptcy
law to future and contingent debts. I would respectfully differ from the view on this point of Powell JA in Gye v Davies
(1995) 37 NSWLR 421
that a debt presently due but not payable until some time in the future is not a "future" debt within the meaning of
The meaning of "present or future" in
cannot be considered without reference to the history of the law of proof. I doubt whether the deletion of the six word phrase from
can be explained as an attempt (by way of making "modifications") to rid the section of unnecessary words. If this was the intention
of the supposed "modifications", then, for example, why was there preserved the inclusive reference to compensation for work or labour
done and what is the explanation of the treatment of para(b) and para(c) of subs(8)?
But, it may be said, if the intention was to remove contingent debts from the category of provable debts, why was not only the second
half of the six word phrase deleted from
It is arguable that the answer lies in the historical consideration that the reason why contingent debts could not be proved was
simply that they were a particular variety of future debt. On this approach, one would say that the deletion of the inclusionary
words "present or future, certain or contingent" was in aid of the exclusion of contingent debts and that the remaining modifications
show that what was sought to be excluded was only such "future" debts as were "future" by reason of their being contingent.
The second modification - the deletion from
of the reference to debts to which the bankrupt may become subject before his discharge by reason of an obligation incurred before
the date of the bankruptcy - would seem to be concerned with contingent debts: cf Community Development Pty Ltd v Engwirda Construction
[1969] HCA 47
(1969) 120 CLR 455
especially at 459 per Kitto J and at 461 per Owen J. I should say that it has not been suggested that this modification may be explained
on the ground that there will be no "discharge" in the case of a composition. Of course Mr and Mrs Terry contend that the effect
as modified is that the release resulting from s240(1) extends to a contingent debt.
The third modification - the deletion of para(b) from
- would appear to be concerned with contingent debts. The fourth modification closely resembles the first. -
Counsel for Mr and Mrs Terry have not been able to suggest any change of substance as opposed to form which the modifications to
were intended to achieve. Tadgell JA takes the view that acceptance of their case does not deprive the modifications to
of effect, in that what I have called the second modification is effective to prevent proof of a liability to which the debtor was
not subject at the date of acceptance of the composition but to which he becomes subject by reason of an obligation incurred before
the acceptance of the composition. But it seems to me, with respect, at least arguable that if this modification of
is to be treated - as Tadgell JA would treat it - as preventing proof of a liability of the kind described by the deleted words,
then the result is that there was no provable debt in the present case. For it may be said that, leaving aside the effect of the
composition as a release, Mr and Mrs Terry were not subject to a present or certain debt at the time of acceptance of the composition
but became subject to such a debt after that time by reason of an obligation incurred (under the guarantee) before the time of acceptance
of the composition. I do not pursue this question, beyond observing that any detailed consideration of the effect of what I have
called the second modification must face the problem (already mentioned) created by the deleted words "before his discharge".
Counsel for Mr and Mrs Terry rely on s198(2). S198 applies to all meetings of creditors under Div 2 of PtX. By it:
198(1) Subject to this section, every creditor is entitled to vote at a meeting under this Division.
(2) A creditor is not entitled to vote in respect of an unliquidated or contingent debt or a debt the value of which is not ascertained.
(3) For the purpose of enabling a creditor to vote, a debt that is certain but is payable in the future shall be deemed to be payable
at the time of the meeting. ...
Understandably, counsel for Mr and Mrs Terry rely especially on the omission to modify
, whereby the trustee is to estimate the value of a provable debt which, by reason of its being subject to a contingency, or for any
other reason, does not bear a certain value, and on the consequential provisions of
(7). The respondent says that s243(4) renders these provisions inapplicable to contingent debts in relation to a composition, although
they apply to debts which do not bear a certain value "for any other reason".
In McDonald, Henry and Meek's, Australian Bankruptcy Law and Practice, 5th ed, para387, the view is briefly expressed that the prescribed
modifications have the effect of making future or contingent debts not provable under PtX. But in para1077 the unreported case of
Re Wills; Wills v Abram (unreported, 1993) Re Wills; Wills v Abram (to which I shall shortly refer) is cited for the proposition
that future and contingent debts are provable in a composition.
It is time to turn to the authorities dealing with the effect of the modifications to
made for the purposes of PtX. The first is Morris v Maroudas
[1986] FCA 406
(1986) 12 FCR 346
, which concerned what debts were provable for the purposes of a deed of assignment. The debt or liability in question was held by
the Full Court of the Federal Court to have been wrongly regarded by the primary judge as contingent, and what was said by members
of the Full Court on what debts were provable was accordingly obiter. Northrop J considered that the primary judge had lacked jurisdiction.
His Honour was in dissent on this point, but concurred in the reasons of Toohey J on the question of substance raised by the appeal.
Spender J seems -
to have been of opinion that, whether or not the liability was contingent, it was provable. Toohey J, at 357, while expressly leaving
open the question whether a contingent liability was a liability for the purposes of an arrangement with creditors made under PtX,
said this: No argument was addressed to the Court to suggest that r82 did not lawfully give effect to
There is however a question as to how far the changes made to
by r82 provide a guide to the proper construction of the subsection as amended. It may be argued that the deletion of any reference
to "contingent" is an indication that contingent liabilities are not provable debts where there has been a deed of assignment. On
the other hand, "present" and "certain" no longer appear in subs(1) and it is not likely that the intention of r82 was to ensure
that a "present" or "certain" debt or liability was not provable. Equally, the removal of para(b) from subs(8) can hardly be taken
as an indication that an obligation to pay money on the breach of a contract is no longer a provable debt. By implication subs(2)
preserves a claim for damages arising from breach of contract as a debt or liability provable in bankruptcy. The method of permitting
a rule to amend a section for certain purposes carries its own dangers. But in my view, where r82 is applicable, the proper course
is to look at
as modified and not seek to construe it by reason of semantic differences that exist between
as modified and as unmodified.
A question arises as to the intended effect of the word "semantic" in this passage. Whatever the intended effect, it seems to me,
with the greatest respect, wrong to approach the interpretation of the modified section by looking only at the resulting modified
text and ignoring the differences between the section as it stood before modification and the modified version. Nor do I consider
that one should not try to derive assistance from the long history of the bankruptcy legislation and its judicial interpretation.
The second case is Re Wills; Wills v Abram (unreported, Federal Court, 12 May 1993), where Heerey J had to consider whether certain
debts were provable for the purposes of a composition under PtX. The composition had been accepted on 7 November 1991. The creditors
alleged that two debts, of $50,000 and $70,000 respectively, had arisen under an agreement made in February 1990 for the sale by
them of company shares to the debtor. The amount of $50,000 was an instalment of the purchase price, payable by 30 June 1992. The
amount of $70,000 was an amount made payable to the vendors in lieu of dividends in certain events, including the company's going
into liquidation, an event which occurred on 21 January 1992. Heerey J observed that on 7 November 1991, when the composition was
accepted, the $50,000 was a future debt, since it was not payable until 30 June 1992, and the $70,000 was a contingent debt. The
creditors argued that future and contingent debts were not provable for the purposes of a composition, but Heerey J, adopting the
reasoning of Toohey J in Morris v Maroudas, held otherwise.
These decisions were both considered by the primary judge in the present case. But his Honour did not have the benefit of the decision
of the Court of Appeal of New South Wales in Gye v Davies, to which I have already made passing reference. This, again, concerned
a composition, the question being whether a right of proof existed in respect of the debtor's contingent liability to contribute
to a co-obligor who discharged more than his fair share of the loss. The court was unanimously of opinion that there was a provable
debt. Kirby P was content to follow the considered opinions in Morris v Maroudas and Re Wills. Powell JA, in arriving at his conclusion,
was impressed by the retention unmodified of -
subs(4)-subs(7) of
The longest treatment is that of Cole JA, who agreed with the reasoning of Toohey J and Heerey J.
Had it not been for Gye v Davies
(1995) 37 NSWLR 421
131 ALR 723
Gye v Davies, I should have wished to give further consideration to what I regard as the difficult question of the proper construction
of the modified
With all respect to those who are of the contrary opinion, I am not as at present advised persuaded that the view taken by the primary
judge in the present case ought not, as a matter of the proper construction of the modified statute, to prevail. But I have not attempted
to arrive at a final conclusion on the question of construction of this Commonwealth Act, since in my opinion the proper course,
in the interests of uniformity, is simply to follow the decision of the Court of Appeal of New South Wales in Gye v Davies, supported
as it is by earlier judicial decisions or considered opinions.
Accordingly, while the appeal by the company must be dismissed, that of Mr and Mrs Terry should succeed. I reach this conclusion
with the strong feeling that what must be taken to be justice according to law is in the case of the Terrys' appeal by no means ideal
justice. I suspect that most fair-minded business men and women would not think well of what the law has allowed to be accomplished
in this case.
Compositions with creditors were popular in Tudor times, when the council interested itself in them. Perhaps in the olden days there
were compositions which took from the debtor most or all of the property really at his disposal, although Holdsworth tells us that
in the sixteenth century many debtors preserved their income by collusion and lived in comparative comfort until they forced their
creditors to some sort of compromise: History of English Law, vol 8, at 232-4. In present day Australia escape from bankruptcy by
payment of a trivial sum to settle huge debts has been seen by some as a public scandal and a reproach to the bankruptcy laws; compare
the recent article by G Dal Pont and L Griggs "The Journey from Ear-Cropping and Capital Punishment to the
Bankruptcy Legislation Amendment Bill 1995
" in (1995) 8 CBLJ 155. In the present case the debtors, having $350 to their name and debts of the order of $1.5m, were able to procure
the payment of $10,000 from some fund or other to their minor creditors and (by way of remuneration) those administering the composition:
much earlier in these reasons I mentioned their 37 trusts. As a result of this $10,000 payment they have destroyed the debt of their
major creditor, who, representing more than 90% in value of the total debts, was nevertheless prevented by law from voting on the
composition. This does not seem to me to be just, notwithstanding that the creditor had the right to embark upon litigation challenging
the composition under s239 of the
Bankruptcy Act
The appellant company, Something Better Pty Ltd, was at material times a property developer whose directors were one Hegarty and
the individual appellants, Mr and Mrs Terry. In 1988 the company proposed to build a shop and office complex on land it owned at
844-852 Nepean Highway, Moorabbin, with a view to long-term letting, and sought finance for the project from the respondent, Pyramid
Building Society. In January 1988 a sworn valuation of the land of $3.675m was made and, by letter dated 31 March 1988, the respondent
offered to lend the company $2.704m, that being rather less than 75% of the amount of the valuation. The letter of offer stipulated
that the loan was to "expire on the due date in December 1992 (Interest Only)", subject to early repayment. A higher interest rate
of 17.9% per annum, and a lower rate of 12.9% per annum conditional on prompt payment, were stipulated for the duration of the -
loan. In the event some modifications to the offered terms were agreed and the offered sum was lent and borrowed. The appellant company
provided security by first mortgage dated 20 April 1988 over the subject land providing, in effect, for repayment of principal on
20 October 1993 and for interest to be payable monthly. Each of the three directors of the appellant company, and another company
in the interest of Mr and Mrs Terry, executed a joint and several guarantee, also dated 20 April 1988, of the appellant company's
obligations under the mortgage.
It is notorious that Pyramid Building Society went into liquidation on 13 December 1990. The appellant company continued to make
due payment of interest, in accordance with the terms of the mortgage, until 20 October 1993. In the meantime, on 9 November 1992,
Mr and Mrs Terry made a composition with their creditors under Div 6 of PtX of the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
(s238-243A). By letter dated 13 July 1993 Mr Terry, on behalf of the appellant company, wrote to the liquidator of Pyramid to say:
We refer to the above mentioned matter and note that the same is due for rollover in October of this year. As a consequence of the
representations and warranties given by your lending staff, we entered into this mortgage on the condition that the same was a long
term advance that would be "rolled over" as matter of course provided that all interest payments were satisfactory. We note that
our payment history has been exemplary. We further note that it was further represented and warranted that the costs on such a rollover
would be negligible, as there would be no necessity to redraw mortgage documents (apart form a simple variation), and the property
would not need to be revalued. Lastly, it is noted that at the time of rollover you were to provide a competitive market rate of
interest. We therefore formally request a rollover of our mortgage, and look forward to the receipt of the appropriate documentation.
The liquidator denied that there had been any arrangement for a "rollover" such as Mr Terry asserted and contended that, in any event,
the liquidation of the respondent precluded any extension of the loan. Further, a valuation of the mortgaged property at October
1993 showed it to be worth between $1.4m and $1.5m, which was not much more than half the amount of the loan. The liquidator made
a demand for repayment on 16 November 1993, which was not met, and later in November 1993 the respondent sued the appellant company
for possession of the mortgaged property and for the principal sum lent and accrued interest. The respondent also sued the individual
guarantors upon their guarantee.
The mortgaged property was sold by arrangement before trial and the net proceeds were credited to the respondent's claim. Hegarty
consented to judgment against him for the balance but the proceeding continued against the three appellants, resulting in judgment
against each of them in favour of the respondent for $1,313,790.25 and costs. There was a counterclaim but it seems to have disappeared
without trace, for it is the subject of no authenticated judgment and its disposition is not mentioned in the learned trial judge's
reasons for judgment.
This appeal raises two points only. By the first all three appellants call into question the judge's failure to conclude, as the
letter set out above in effect asserted, that the respondent had promised to renew the loan upon its expiry. The second point challenges
the judge's conclusion that the composition with their -
creditors into which the individual appellants entered on 9 November 1992 did not have the effect of releasing their liability under
the guarantee given to the respondent.
As to the first point the learned judge made relevant findings of fact to the following effect: that before the loan was made Mr
Terry told one Acreman, a so-called "loans marketer" of the respondent, that what the borrower wanted was long-term finance; that
Acreman told him that if interest was paid on time the loan would be rolled over for a further period subject to the normal terms
and conditions; and that the borrower and those behind it relied on Acreman's statement and were induced by it to make the contract
of loan and to give the mortgage and the guarantee that they did. His Honour reasoned, however, as he put it, that: ... the bare
fact that the contract would not have been made had the statement about roll-over not been made is not sufficient to show that there
was a term of a contract (or a collateral contract) to that effect (JJ Savage and Sons Pty Ltd v Blackney
[1970] HCA 6
(1970) 119 CLR 435
at 442). As was said in Savage's Case the question is whether there was a promise to the effect alleged.
His Honour's conclusion was that there was no such promise, and it was a conclusion which, upon the evidence, I respectfully consider
to have been plainly correct.
By their pleadings the appellants had alleged that there were terms of the loan agreement (or representations or warranties) that:
... at the expiration of the initial period of five years Pyramid will extend the term of the loan for a further period of five years
on the same terms provided that at that date there was no subsisting breach.
The appellants' evidence below not only did not support that allegation but was so internally inconsistent as to justify a conclusion
that no certain promise or representation could reasonably be spelled out of it.
The learned trial judge dealt very fully with the matter in his reasons but it will be sufficient here to indicate in summary form
why I consider that his conclusion on this aspect of the case was inevitable. The appellants relied on the evidence of three witnesses
who purported to depose to what Acreman had promised or represented. The evidence as to the time when, and for how long and how often,
renewal of the loan was promised was various. Far from proving that there should be one renewal for five years, as had been pleaded,
Hegarty's oral evidence was that "[i]t was represented to us unequivocally that this loan was for as long as we needed it"; and that
the time when the loan was to come to an end was "up to us". In his written witness statement Hegarty had stated that Acreman said
the loan would be rolled over "each five years", and that he signed the guarantee: ... in the belief based on the promise made to
me by Acreman at the expiration of each term of five years, for a period of up to 20 years, that Pyramid would roll over the loan
facility providing Something Better paid the interest instalments as they fell due under the mortgage.
Mr Terry in his witness statement said "I had been assured by Mr Acreman that Pyramid promised categorically to me that it would
roll over the finance at the end of the five-year period, provided we paid our interest on time"; but swore orally, somewhat indefinitely,
that his discussions with Acreman produced "the concept of a 20-year time frame". In his letter of 13 July 1993 quoted above Terry
asserted a condition that the loan "would be `rolled over' as a matter of course provided that all interest payments were satisfactory".
The appellants by their pleadings alleged inferentially that the rate of interest to be paid upon any extension of the loan would
be the same as that originally payable. The evidence, by comparison, asserted variously that what had been agreed was interest at
"the going rate", "the market rate", a rate to be negotiated every five years, "benchmark rates", a "commercial rate", "the current
going commercial rate", a "competitive market rate", etc - I do not pretend to be exhaustive.
The general tenor of the evidence called for the appellants was that it had been settled that there should be no revaluation of securities
for the loan, even if it should be indefinitely renewed, unless the principal was to be increased. Mr Terry, moreover, suggested
that the respondent had bound itself to renew the loan even if the personal guarantees that he and his wife had given had become
There was debate at the trial on the questions whether the "normal terms and conditions" upon which the appellants (taking advantage
of an admission by Acreman) now contended that the respondent bound itself to renew the loan, were those current at the time of any
renewal, or those current at the time of Acreman's representations, and what in any event the normal terms and conditions were. The
learned judge concluded, having regard to the nature and quality of the evidence, that Acreman's statement that, if interest was
paid on time, the respondent would roll over the loan "subject to the normal terms and conditions" should not be taken to have been
intended by the parties to be contractual. Any other conclusion would, in the judge's view, be to depart altogether from commercial
reality. Moreover, even if an intention that the statement should be contractual were assumed, the judge's opinion was that it was
a statement to which contractual effect could not be given because it lacked sufficient certainty to admit of enforcement. These
conclusions appear to me to have been correct and as a result the first point raised on the appeal should fail.
The second point raised upon the appeal depends for its validity entirely upon the interpretation of provisions of the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
. In essence, the argument relies on s240(1) of the Act which provides, so far as is relevant, that a composition under PtX, unless
set aside, declared void or terminated under that Part, operates: ... to release the debtor from all provable debts, other than those
(if any) that would not be released by his discharge from bankruptcy if he had become a bankrupt on the day on which the composition
was accepted.
S240 is complemented by s238, which provides by subs(1) that a composition that has been duly accepted by a debtor's creditors is
binding on all creditors of the debtor; and by subs(2) in effect (so far as is now relevant) that a creditor may not sue for any
provable debt so long as a composition under PtX remains valid. The respondent did not dispute that the composition made by the individual
appellants was and remained valid under PtX until it was carried into effect, as it was before October 1993 when the appellant company's
loan became repayable. The crucial question for determination is whether the sum for which the respondent sued the individual appellants
was a "provable debt" within the meaning of that expression in s238 and s240. If it was, the appeal by the individual appellants
must succeed; and if it was not their appeal must fail.
"Provable debt" is defined by s5(1) of the Bankruptcy Act 1956, "unless the contrary intention appears", to mean "a debt or liability
that is, under this Act, provable in bankruptcy;" and in PtX s187(2) provides that: -
In this Part, a reference, in relation to a deed or a composition, to a provable debt shall be read as a reference to a debt or liability
that would have been a provable debt in the debtor's bankruptcy if the debtor had become a bankrupt on the day on which he executed
the deed or on which the special resolution accepting the composition was passed, as the case may be.
The following provisions of s243 are also relevant, viz:
(1) S82 to s107 (inclusive) and 140 to 147 (inclusive) apply, with the prescribed modifications (if any), in relation to a composition
under this Part as if:
(a) a sequestration order had been made against the debtor on the day on which the special resolution accepting the composition was
passed; and
(b) the trustee of the composition were the trustee in his bankruptcy.
(2) In the application of the provisions of this Act specified in subs(1) in relation to a composition, a reference to a provable
debt shall be read as a reference to a provable debt within the meaning of this Part.
(4) If, after taking into account the prescribed modifications and the provisions of subs(2), a provision specified in subs(1) or
subs(3) is incapable of application in relation to a composition, or the trustee of a composition, as the case requires, or is inconsistent
with this Part, that provision does not so have application.
The reference in s243(1) to s82 is of the first importance; for it is from its terms that one must endeavour to discern what debts
and liabilities are provable in bankruptcy and, looking at the section with the prescribed modifications, what are the provable debts
referred to in s240(1). The relevant prescribed modifications to s82, for the purposes of s243, are made, pursuant to s315, by r84
of the Bankruptcy Rules. Rather than setting out s82 as it stands without the prescribed modifications, and then setting out the
terms of the modifying rule, it is convenient to reproduce (so far as is relevant) a composite version of s82 as it was produced
to us by counsel for the respondent. This shows the section as enacted but enables a ready comprehension of the textual modifications
which s243 and r84 require.
(1) Subject to this Division, all debts and liabilities,
present or future, certain or contingent,
to which a bankrupt was subject at the date of the bankruptcy,
or to which he may become subject before his discharge by reason of an obligation incurred before the date of the bankruptcy,
are provable in his bankruptcy.
[Editor's note: The words "present or future, certain or contingent," and or to which he may become subject before his discharge
by reason of an obligation incurred before the date of the bankruptcy," were crossed out in hard copy.] ...
(2) Demands in the nature of unliquidated damages arising otherwise than by reason of a contract, promise or breach of trust are not
provable in bankruptcy.
(3) Subject to subs(3A), penalties or fines imposed by a court in respect of an offence against a law, whether a law of the Commonwealth
or not, are not provable in bankruptcy. ...
(4) The trustee shall make an estimate of the value of a debt or liability provable in the bankruptcy which, by reason of its being
subject to a contingency, or for any other reason, does not bear a certain value.
(5) A person aggrieved by an estimate so made may appeal to the Court.
(6) If the Court finds that the value of the debt or liability cannot be fairly estimated, the debt or liability shall be deemed not
to be provable in the bankruptcy.
(7) If the Court finds that the value of the debt or liability can be fairly estimated, the Court shall assess the value in such manner
as it thinks proper.
(8) In this section, "liability" includes:
(a) compensation for work or labour done; AND -
(b) an obligation or possible obligation to pay money or money's worth on the breach of an express or implied covenant, contract,
agreement or undertaking, whether or not the breach occurs, is likely to occur or is capable of occurring, before the discharge of
the bankrupt; and
(b) an express or implied engagement, agreement or undertaking, to pay, or capable of resulting in the payment of, money or money's
worth, whether the payment is:
(i) in respect of amount - fixed or unliquidated; OR
(ii) in respect of time - present or future, or certain or dependent on a contingency; or
(ii) in respect of the manner of valuation - capable of being ascertained by fixed rules or only as matter of opinion.
[Editor's note: the words "(b) an obligation or possible obligation to pay money or money's worth on the breach of an express or
implied covenant, contract, agreement or undertaking, whether or not the breach occurs, is likely to occur or is capable of occurring,
before the discharge of the bankrupt; and", "c", "(ii) in respect of time - present or future, or certain or dependent on a contingency;
or" and "(iii)" were crossed out in hard copy.]
Had the respondent's claims against the individual appellants been for money that was due and payable on 9 November 1992, and had
they become bankrupt on that day, it is clear that the claims would have been released by reason of the composition that was accepted
on that day. This would have been so because, on any view, the respondent's claims would have been for provable debts in terms of
s82(1). As it was, the claims that the respondent had against the individual appellants on 9 November 1992 were dependent upon, or
subject to, the appellant company's default as principal debtor. No such default was made until after 20 October 1993. What were
owed by the individual appellants to the respondent at the time the composition was accepted may therefore be appropriately described
as contingent debts or liabilities. The question now raised is whether those debts or liabilities were "provable" within the meaning
of s82(1) and therefore "provable debts" within s238 and s248. The learned judge accepted an argument for the respondent that they
were not "provable debts", essentially because he considered that the prescribed modifications to s82 exclude contingent debts and
liabilities from the ambit of s238 and s240. The respondent seeks to uphold the judge's decision largely for the reasons he gave.
The individual appellants, on the other hand, contend that the point, which depends only on the interpretation of federal legislation,
is covered by authority in their favour of at least one decision of the Federal Court which the learned judge below declined to follow,
and other authority.
A useful understanding of s82 is not to be had without some reference to its history. So far as is now material it reproduces all
of s81 of the Bankruptcy Act 1924 and in language which was taken directly from s30 of the English Bankruptcy Act 1914 (4 and 5 Geo
5 c 59) and, in turn, s37 of the Bankruptcy Act 1883 (46 and 47 Vict c 52), deriving from s31 of the Bankruptcy Act 1869 (32 and
33 Vict c 71). In particular, the relevant language of subs(1) of s82 reflects that of s31 of the 1869 Act, namely: ... all debts
and liabilities, present or future, certain or contingent, to which the bankrupt is subject at the date of the order of adjudication,
or to which he may become subject during the continuance of the bankruptcy by reason of any obligation incurred previously to the
date of the order of adjudication, shall be deemed to be debts provable in bankruptcy ...
Subs(2) and subs(4)-subs(8) of s82 also derive directly, and without material difference in language, from the provisions of the
In England, by the Bankrupts Act 1825 (6 Geo 4 c 16) provision was made for the first time to allow limited proof of contingent debts.
By the Bankrupt Law Consolidation Act 1849 (12 and 13 Vict c 106) provision was made for proof of "any Debt payable on a Contingency
which shall not have happened" (s107) and -
"a Liability to pay Money upon a Contingency which shall not have happened" (s108). Claims for unliquidated damages for breach of
contract were rendered provable in bankruptcy for the first time by s153 of the Bankruptcy Act 1861 (24 and 25 Vict c 134); and that
provision was applicable to composition deeds as well as to bankruptcies: In re Penton (1866) LR 1 Ch App 158. The provision, however,
was treated as being for the benefit of creditors, enabling them to have contractual claims for unliquidated damages assessed and
to prove if they chose, but it was not imperative: Sharland v Spence (1867) LR 2 CP 456 at 459; Williams, The Law and Practice in
Bankruptcy, 2nd ed, at 158. Bramwell LJ in Ex parte Neal; In re Batey
(1880) 14 Ch D 579
at 584, speaking of bankruptcy legislation enacted before the 1869 Act, confessed that he had been "surprised and to some extent
amused at seeing how the Legislature have been unable to accomplish their object of freeing bankrupts from all claims". S31 of the
1869 Act was regarded by the courts as succeeding where the other Acts had failed for it went much further than any of its predecessors
in specifying what were provable debts, and it applied "as well to cases where breach of contract had not occurred before the close
of bankruptcy as to cases where it had occurred, so far as to make the damages provable": Williams, loc cit.
Debts and liabilities that were provable by virtue of the provisions of the 1869 Act, and Acts that were modelled on it in this country
before 1966, were provable debts for the purposes of compositions made under those Acts. In particular, the liability of a surety,
though not ascertained at the time of his making a composition, and not a debt in respect of which an adjudication of bankruptcy
could be sustained, was provable and the surety was therefore released by virtue of the composition: Wolmershausen v Gullick [1893]
2 Ch 514 at 518, per Wright J. While the present case would therefore have been clear had it to be decided under the Bankruptcy Act
1924, the prescribed modifications of the 1966 Act made by r84 create some little difficulty. So far as I am aware no judicial decision
has directly considered the entire effect of a modification such as that made by r84. The High Court in Gye v McIntyre
[1991] HCA 60
(1991) 171 CLR 609
at 618, acknowledged that s82(1) "is altered" by force of r84, but found it "unnecessary to determine what, if any, is the practical
effect of that alteration". The alterations to subs(1) and subs(8) are tantalising in as much as they remove some words and phrases
which include those referring to debts and liabilities described as "contingent" and payments described as "dependent on a contingency".
There is a temptation to conclude, as we were urged on behalf of the respondent to conclude, and as the judge did, that the modifications
carry with them, by necessary implication, an exclusion from the ambit of the section of what are commonly called contingent debts
and contingent liabilities, and future debts and future liabilities too.
Such a conclusion is, however, contrary to the reasoning of Toohey J, sitting as a member of the Full Court of the Federal Court,
in Morris v Maroudas
[1986] FCA 406
(1986) 12 FCR 346
, with whom Northrop and Spender JJ were evidently in substantial agreement. In that case debtors made a contract, breached it, and
later executed a deed of assignment pursuant to Div 4 of PtX of the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
, and later still suffered a District Court judgment for damages for the breach of contract. The debtors sought various alternative
orders in the Federal Court the object of which was to preclude enforcement of the judgment on the footing that the plaintiff in
the District Court had at the time of the execution of the deed a "provable debt" which was released by virtue of s230 of the Act.
A submission -
for the judgment creditors was that the judgment debt was not provable by virtue of s82 because it was a contingent debt or liability,
and thus did not constitute a provable debt for the purposes of Div 4 of PtX. As in the present case, the provisions of Div 4 of
PtX depend partly for their efficacy upon s82, as modified by rule. The modifying rule is r82, which modifies s82 for the purposes
of Div 4 of PtX similarly to the way in which r84 modifies s82 for the purposes of Div 6 of PtX. At first instance in the Federal
Court an argument was advanced for the judgment creditor along the same lines as that which was accepted at first instance in the
present case. Muirhead J also accepted it, and concluded that because s82, as relevantly modified, did not cover contingent debts
or liabilities, the judgment creditors' claim was not discharged by reason of the deed of assignment, and he dismissed the debtors'
application. An appeal to the Full Court was allowed. The judgment creditors' claim was held not to be a contingent debt or liability
and, with respect, this was plainly correct: at the time of the execution of the deed of assignment the judgment creditors had a
legal chose in action for unliquidated damages which, on any proper view, constituted a provable debt within s82(1), modified or
not. Toohey J, however, took the opportunity to remark upon the interpretation of s82 as modified by r82, saying at 357: No argument
was addressed to the Court to suggest that r82 did not lawfully give effect to s231(2). There is however a question as to how far
the changes made to s82 by r82 provide a guide to the proper construction of the subsection as amended. It may be argued that the
deletion of any reference to "contingent" is an indication that contingent liabilities are not provable debts where there has been
a deed of assignment. On the other hand, "present" and "certain" no longer appear in subs(1) and it is not likely that the intention
of r82 was to ensure that a "present" or "certain" debt or liability was not provable. Equally, the removal of para(b) from subs(8)
can hardly be taken as an indication that an obligation to pay money on the breach of a contract is no longer a provable debt. By
implication subs(2) preserves a claim for damages arising from breach of contract as a debt or liability provable in bankruptcy.
The method of permitting a rule to amend a section for certain purposes carries its own dangers. But in my view, where r82 is applicable,
the proper course is to look at s82 as modified and not seek to construe it by reason of semantic differences that exist between
s82(1) as modified and as unmodified.
This passage must in any event be regarded as obiter, but the more so because Toohey J said, a little later, that: I find it unnecessary
to determine whether a contingent liability is, by reason of the modifications to s82(1) by r82, a liability for the purposes of
an arrangement with creditors made under PtX. For there was no contingent liability in the present case.
The other members of the court, Northrop and Spencer JJ, agreed with Toohey J that the judgment creditors' claim was discharged (although
Northrop J dissented in the result on another ground) but neither appears distinctly to have given support to the above cited obiter
In the present case the learned judge understandably did not take the case of Morris v Maroudas
[1986] FCA 406
(1986) 12 FCR 346
Morris v Maroudas to be an authority governing the case he had to decide. In Wills v Abram (unreported, 1993) Wills v Abram (unreported,
Federal Court, 12 May 1993) Heerey J was, however, confronted with much the same problem as that in the present case. He decided
that debts which he treated as future and contingent debts were debts or liabilities to which the debtor was subject on a date on
which a composition under -
PtX was accepted. His Honour accepted and applied the obiter dicta expressed by Toohey J in Morris v Maroudas. Referring to the reasons
of Toohey J, Heerey J said at 14: For present purposes, the critical step in that reasoning is that s82 as modified is to be construed
in its own terms and not by reason of "semantic differences" that exist between its modified and unmodified forms. So viewed, it
must follow that future debts and contingent debts, which are undoubtedly debts and liabilities, albeit particular species of debts
and liabilities must fall within the genus of "all debts and liabilities". Likewise a future debt and a contingent debt, are debts
to which the bankrupt is "subject" as soon as they come into existence, notwithstanding that they are payable in the future or on
a future contingency which may not happen. The bankrupt is "subject" to them in the sense that he is liable in respect of them in
accordance with their terms. Therefore if they are in existence at the date of bankruptcy they are debts to which the bankrupt is
"subject at the date of the bankruptcy" or, in the case of a composition, at the date of the special resolution accepting the composition:
With all respect, it is difficult to be sure what Toohey J intended to convey in the sentence in which he referred to "semantic differences".
If he meant that it is necessarily improper to construe a modified section by comparing the words it contains with the words it contained
before modification, I respectfully find it difficult to agree with him. The learned judge in the present case evidently had the
same difficulty, and he did not follow Wills v Abram.
I confess to having been at first favourably impressed by the respondent's submission that the prescribed modification of s82 is
determinative. It seemed attractive for the simple reason that to omit from s82 time-honoured words descriptive of some debts and
liabilities suggests an intention to exclude the debts and liabilities of which the words are descriptive. Future and contingent
debts and liabilities are, however, nowhere defined in the
Bankruptcy Act
and I do not think that they can properly be treated as terms of art. There are more ways than one of describing a debt or a liability
which is payable or to be discharged in futuro and a debt or liability which is payable or to be satisfied upon a contingency. Moreover,
the contingencies to which a liability may be subject are so various that the adjective "contingent", when applied to it, is likely
to be of imprecise connotation. It is to be remembered also that the statutory specification of provable debts, which is now contained
Bankruptcy Act
, was one achieved by degrees over a long period of time. Lord Halsbury LC in Hardy v Fothergill (1888) 13 App Cas 351 at 355-6, referred
to the engagement of the legislature for over 40 years up to 1869: ... in the effort to exhaust every conceivable possibility of
liability under which a bankrupt might be, to make it provable in bankruptcy against his estate and relieve the bankrupt for the
future from any liability in respect thereof.
The surprise and amusement of Bramwell LJ that I have already noted was directed to the same legislative enterprise. Mellish LJ in
Re Hide; Ex parte Llynvi Coal and Iron Co (1871) LR 7 Ch App 28 at 33, referring to the 1869 Act, regarded it as "quite plain that
the object of these sections is that the bankrupt shall be absolutely relieved from any liability under any contract he has ever
entered into". S82, in unmodified form, is to be given a similarly wide signification with a view to providing for the result, as
James LJ put it in Re Hide; Ex parte Llynvi Coal and Iron Co (1871) LR 7 Ch App 28 Ex parte Llynvi Coal and Iron Co, at 32, that:
... the bankrupt is to be a freed man - freed not only from debts, but from contracts, liabilities, engagements and contingencies
of every kind. -
For these reasons one finds an overlapping between some of the provisions in s82 so that claims need not, in order to be provable,
depend only upon the rubric "present or future, certain or contingent" in subs(1), which does not express words of limitation. Subject
to specific exceptions, as in subs(2) and subs(3), a liability which, for example, satisfies a description in subs(8) will be provable
by virtue of subs(1) irrespective of the words "present and future, certain or contingent". So much appears from the speech of Lord
Selborne in Hardy v Fothergill (1888) 13 App Cas 351 Hardy v Fothergill, at 360-1, to which I shall return. By the same token, s82(8)
does not provide an exhaustive definition of "liability": Morgan v Hardy
(1887) 18 QBD 646
at 655-6, per Bowen LJ; In re Pascoe
[1944] Ch 310
at 317, per Morton J. If, therefore, a claim is not within the description of "liability" in subs(8) it may nevertheless be the subject
of proof if it can fairly be described as any sort of a liability referred to in subs(1) subject, of course, to the specific exceptions
set out in s82.
Counsel for the respondent submitted that the express modification by r84 of s82 must be taken to indicate an intention to change
the meaning of "provable debt" for Div 6 compositions; and that to read the rule in such a way as not to allow it to make any practical
modification to s82 is to render the rule unnecessary and meaningless; that an argument to that effect should be rejected and that
Wills v Abram (unreported, 1993) Wills v Abram should be regarded as having been incorrectly decided. It may be conceded that the
rule is to be given some sensible and useful scope. It does not follow, however, that the contingent liability of a surety is excluded
by it. One kind of liability which by virtue of s82(1) may be proved in the estate of a bankrupt but which, by virtue of the modification
of the subsection by r84 may not be equivalently proved in a composition, is a liability to which the debtor was not subject at the
relevant date but to which he may become subject by reason of an obligation incurred before that date. To conclude that the contingent
liability of a surety is not excluded by the modified rule is therefore not to deny it work.
One cannot confidently say why all the modifications that r84 makes to s82 were made, but it is unnecessary to try to do so in this
case. In my opinion the individual appellants, having on 20 April 1988 executed a joint and several guarantee of the appellant company's
obligation under the mortgage of that date, were on 9 November 1992 subject to the liability which the guarantee created; and the
liability was one falling within the description of "liability" set out in subs(8)(b) (as modified) viz, "an express ... engagement,
agreement or undertaking, to pay, or capable of resulting in the payment of, money or money's worth ...". Again, I think that the
words following, "whether the payment" etc, are not words of limitation; and the deletion of what was para(c)(ii) of subs(8) is of
no present consequence. The width of the words in subs(8)(b), as modified, is shown by the speech of Lord Selborne in Hardy v Fothergill
in the passage at 361 to which I have referred. In that case an assignee of a lease covenanted to indemnify the lessees against damages
for breach of their covenants with the lessors to repair, etc. Eight years before the term expired, the assignee filed a petition
for liquidation by arrangement under the Bankruptcy Act 1869, and obtained an order of discharge. The lessees were not scheduled
in the debtor's statement of affairs, no notices were sent to them and they tendered no proof in the liquidation in respect of the
assignee's possible liability at the end of the term upon his covenant to -
indemnify. After the term expired, the lessors having recovered damages against the lessees upon the covenants for repair, the lessees
claimed an indemnity from the assignee in respect of his covenant to indemnify. The assignee successfully pleaded that his liability
under the covenant had been discharged because it had been provable by the lessees in the liquidation by arrangement. Lord Selborne,
referring to s31 of the 1869 Act, said, at 360-1: A contract to indemnify against the non-performance of covenants in a lease ...
is ... "an engagement to pay, or capable of resulting in the payment of, money or money's worth", if the contingency against which
the indemnity is provided should occur.
Difficulty in valuing the liability for the purpose of proof did not preclude its being provable.
The contract of suretyship into which the individual appellants entered was in my opinion, to all intents and purposes, in the same
position as the contract to indemnify that was in question in Hardy v Fothergill. The liability thereunder was accordingly a provable
debt within the terms of s82(1) as modified by r84, and the omission of the words "present or future, certain or contingent" from
the subsection has no bearing on the matter. Since this conclusion does not depend on the reasoning of Toohey J in Morris v Maroudas,
or that of Heerey J in Wills v Abram, I shall say no more about those decisions or the decision of the New South Wales Court of Appeal
in Gye v Davies
(1995) 37 NSWLR 421
, in which they were apparently approved. It also becomes unnecessary to deal with the effect of s243(4).
We were referred to Hawkins v Bank of China
(1992) 26 NSWLR 562.
The New South Wales Court of Appeal there had to consider whether a company "incurs a debt" within the meaning of s556(1) of the
Companies (New South Wales) Code when giving a guarantee. Gleeson CJ observed, at 568, that: Guarantees are sometimes executed in
advance of any principal debt coming into existence. A person may execute a guarantee in favour of a bank in a case in which the
bank has not yet made an advance to its customer. In such circumstances it is not normally said that the guarantor, upon the execution
of the guarantee, incurs a debt. Nor would it normally, and apart from some special context, be said that a person who gives a guarantee
in respect of a debt incurred by another thereupon himself incurs a debt, at least if the principal debtor is apparently solvent
and not in default. Equally, however, on any use of language, in the events that have occurred in a case such as the present, there
ultimately comes a time when the guarantor would be said to be indebted to the creditor.
I mention the decision only to indicate that I have not overlooked it, counsel for both sides having sought, as I understand, to
seek something favourable from it. In particular, counsel for the respondent, in the light of the passage I have quoted from the
judgment of Gleeson CJ, asked rhetorically whether the individual appellants incurred a debt to the respondent on the signing of
the guarantee. Of course they did not, he submitted, and neither did they do so when their composition was made. An answer to the
question whether a company giving a guarantee incurs a debt in terms of one statutory context cannot be determinative of the question
whether an individual surety who executes a guarantee becomes subject to a liability in terms of another statutory context: see the
discussion by Professor James O'Donovan in his article "Which Claims are Admissible Under Deeds of Company Arrangement?"
(1995) 69 ALJ 905
at 912-14. Whether or not the individual appellants incurred a debt when they executed the guarantee, it is in my opinion clear,
having regard to the history of s82 and the authorities upon it, that they did become subject to a liability as that expression is
used in the section, and as Hardy v Fothergill (1888) 13 App Cas 351 Hardy v Fothergill in particular demonstrates. -
I should mention one other submission for the respondent. Counsel argued that to uphold the construction of s82 (as modified) contended
for by the individual appellants would enable a surety to engineer an avoidance of his obligations under the guarantee. The argument
was that a surety for a debt which has not become payable might procure an acceptance, by tame creditors or other collusion, of a
composition when the creditor entitled to the benefit of the guarantee has possibly no knowledge of or opportunity to vote upon or
to benefit from the composition. One answer to this plea ad misericordiam is that any such result is not attributable to the 1966
Act: the same position has obtained for the last 125 years. Then it was said that the circumstances of the present case suggest some
impropriety: the individual appellants effected, for a mere $10,000, a composition of their debts owed to associates and willing
creditors of about $160,000 whereby, if the individual appellants are correct, their liability to the respondent of over $2.7m was
discharged.
The respondent was not entitled to vote at the meeting referred to in s238: s198(2); but it was entitled to receive, and did in fact
receive, notice of the meeting and it attended by its officer. The respondent did not, it seems, seek to prove as a creditor in the
composition. Presumably the effort would not have been financially worth its while having regard to the comparatively trifling amount
made available by the debtors. If, however, the respondent had grounds to suppose that the composition was wanting in good faith
or was made collusively, or that for some other reason it ought to be set aside, an application in that behalf might have been made
under s239. Evidently none was made.
In the circumstances my conclusion might be seen on the face of it to be very favourable - perhaps unduly favourable - to the individual
appellants and very hard upon the respondent. As Lord Selborne pointed out in Hardy v Fothergill, at 358, the consequences of admissibility
to proof of a debt or liability which is contingent, unliquidated or of unascertained amount may be two-edged: It might be a hardship
upon the creditors, to whom debts were then due, that a merely possible future liability, which might never have matured into a debt
at all, should be valued and admitted to proof, and to participation in dividends. In most cases, if any substantial dividend were
paid, this would be a benefit to the person interested in the performance of the contract under which such liability would arise
if the contingency happened; but there might also be cases in which it would be a hardship upon him to be compelled to prove such
a claim, so valued, at a time when the estate of the bankrupt might be inadequate to pay any substantial dividend, instead of waiting
for the occurrence of the contingency (if it ever should occur), and then taking his legal remedies against such property as the
debtor might at that time possess, whether previously bankrupt or not. But the legislature, for whatever reason, has gone at least
far enough to exclude from the consideration of the present question andagrave; priori arguments of that kind. And, in interpreting
the statute of 1869 it is important to bear in mind the progressive steps taken in that direction.
The interpretation of the present statute is in my view to be similarly undertaken, with the result I have indicated.
I would for the foregoing reasons dismiss the appeal by the appellant company and allow the appeals by the individual appellants.
McDonald AJA
I have had the advantage of reading the draft judgment of Tadgell JA. which sets out the facts relevant to this case and the issues,
the subject of this appeal. -
It was the primary contention of the appellants, as pleaded, that on 20 October 1993, the date on which the principal was due to
be repaid under the loan agreement, that the respondent was bound to "roll-over the loan for another five years on the same terms
at the expiration of the five years provided that there was no subsisting default at that time". It was alleged that the respondent
was bound to do so because it had so agreed as a term or condition of the loan agreement, or as a collateral agreement to it or that
it had represented or warranted to the appellants that it would do so. Mr and Mrs Terry contended that the refusal or failure of
the respondent to "roll-over" the loan had discharged them from the guarantees given as part security for the performance of the
loan agreement or alternatively that they were entitled to rescind the guarantee. It was the contention of the appellants that the
agreement of the respondent to "roll-over" the loan was constituted by oral statements made by Acreman before the loan agreement
was entered into or the mortgage and guarantee given.
In the events of the trial the contractual issues fell to be determined by the trial judge on the acceptance by the appellants of
the evidence given by Acreman as to what he said to Mr Terry before the loan agreement was entered into. That was in substance that
if "Something Better" entered the agreement with the respondent to borrow money from it, the loan would be rolled over for a further
period of five years from the due date subject to normal terms and conditions providing interest on the loan was paid on time.
The learned trial judge in his judgment drew attention to the difference between this statement and the specific allegation pleaded.
However he noted that the respondent had made no point of the difference and in his judgment made no finding of fact based on the
difference between the oral representation as pleaded and the manner in which the appellants' case was finally put to the court.
As to this statement made by Acreman his Honour held that there was no promise made by the respondent to the effect alleged by the
appellants and that there was no intention of the parties to give contractual effect to the same. He further held that even if it
was the intention that the statement be contractual it lacked sufficient certainty to admit of enforcement. In reaching these conclusions
his Honour examined a number of matters and issues that would result if the statement made by Acreman was to be given contractual
effect. These included the question as to what rate of interest would be fixed on the "roll-over" of the loan and whether it would
be the "ruling", "current" or "market" rate of interest. A further question was whether the "terms and conditions" referred to by
Acreman was a reference to the terms and conditions of the respondent as they stood at the time of the statement or at the time of
the proposed "roll-over". After examining these matters his Honour, in my opinion, rightly concluded that to give the statement of
Acreman contractual effect would be to "depart altogether from commercial reality" and would be to give to the words of Acreman a
meaning that no reasonable hearer of the words could give to them.
No argument addressed to the court on this appeal leads me to conclude that there was any error in the findings of the learned trial
judge or his conclusions of law relevant to these contractual issues.
Before leaving this aspect of the appeal mention should be made of an argument addressed to the court on behalf of the appellants,
which was to the effect that on the evidence the learned trial judge erred in not holding that the respondent was estopped from refusing
to "roll-over" the loan. This argument is unable to be sustained as it has no foundation in the pleadings of the appellants. Accordingly
this submission should be put to one side. -
As to the other aspect of this appeal, which challenged the learned trial judge's conclusion that the composition entered into by
Mr and Mrs Terry with their creditors on 9 November 1992, did not have the effect of releasing them from their liability under the
guarantee, I agree with the conclusion of Tadgell JA. on this matter and the reasons expressed by him in reaching that conclusion.
In Gye v Davies
(1995) 37 NSWLR 421
held that a debtor was released pursuant to s240(1) of the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
from contingent and future debts by a composition entered into by the debtor with his or her creditors under PtX of the Act.
In his judgment Powell JA, after expressing that he did not regard himself bound or even entitled uncritically to follow the observations
of Toohey J in Morris v Maroudis
[1986] FCA 406
(1986) 12 FCR 346
or Heerey J in Wills v Abram (unreported, Federal Court, 12 May 1993), said at 430: To say the least, s82 of the Act as amended by
r82 is hardly a shining example of the draftsman's art. However, the fact that, notwithstanding the omission from s82(1) of the words
"present or future, certain or contingent" and the further words "or to which he may become subject before his discharge by reason
of an obligation incurred before the date of the bankruptcy", the provisions of subs4 to subs7 inclusive - which provide for what
is to occur when "a debt or liability provable in bankruptcy which, by reason of it being subject to a contingency, or for any other
reason, does not bear certain value" - are retained tends strongly to suggest that, notwithstanding that debts and liabilities may
be future or contingent, they are nonetheless to be regarded, for the purposes of a composition with creditors, as debts provable.
Cole JA, with whose opinion Kirby P agreed, cited with approval that part of the judgment of Heerey J in Wills v Abram where his
Honour after stating that he would apply the reasoning of Toohey J in Morris v Maroudis said at 14-15: For present purposes, the
critical step in that reasoning is that s82 as modified is to be construed in its own terms and not by reason of "semantic differences"
that exist between its modified and unmodified forms. So viewed, it must follow that future debts and contingent debts, which are
undoubtedly debts and liabilities, albeit particular species of debts and liabilities, must fall within the genus of "all debts and
liabilities". Likewise a future debt and a contingent debt, are debts to which the bankrupt is "subject" as soon as they come into
existence, notwithstanding that they are payable in the future or on a future contingency which may not happen. The bankrupt is "subject"
to them in the sense that he is liable in respect of them in accordance with their terms. Therefore if they are in existence at the
date of bankruptcy they are debts to which the bankrupt is "subject at the date of the bankruptcy" or, in the case of a composition,
at the date of the special resolution accepting the composition: s187(2). Support for this construction is to be found in subs(4),
subs(5), subs(6) and subs(7), which remain in s82 in its modified form. Subs(4) expressly provides for the valuation of a debt or
liability which is "subject to a contingency". This is not consistent with a construction which would have s82, as modified, inapplicable
to contingent debts. Likewise s(4) would apply to a future debt, this being an example of a debt or liability which "for any other
reason [scil. than being subject to a contingency] does not bear a certain value". The value of a future debt may often be uncertain
because of, amongst other things, the question of the appropriate discount rate to be applied.
Likewise I am of the opinion that considerable support for construing "debts and liabilities to which a bankrupt was subject at the
date of the bankruptcy" in s82(1) of the Act, as modified by r84, to include contingent debts and liabilities is to be obtained from
subs(4) to subs(7).
I am of the opinion that the contingent liabilities of Mr and Mrs Terry to the respondent pursuant to the guarantee were released,
pursuant to s240(1) in -
consequence of the composition entered into by them with their creditors under PtX of the Act. Although the respondent was not entitled
to vote at the meeting of creditors (s198(2)) it was bound by the composition (s238(1)). However it was within the capacity of the
respondent to apply to the court for an order setting aside the composition (s239(1)). This it did not do. It did not dispute that
the composition was a valid arrangement under PtX of the Act.
I agree that the appeal by the appellant company should be dismissed but that the appeals of Mr and Mrs Terry should be allowed.
Appeal of first appellant dismissed; appeal of second and third appellants allowed.
Solicitors for the appellants: Joseph di Mauro and Associates.
Solicitors for the respondents: Holding Redlich.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter