URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/258.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DPP v Raux; DPP v Talanoa [2025] VSCA 258 (27 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCR 2025 0123
DIRECTOR OF
PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
DAMIAN RAUX
First Respondent
S EAPCR 2025 0124
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
RAWIRI TALANOA
Second Respondent
PRIEST, OSBORN and KAYE JJA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
9 October 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
27 October 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 258
JUDGMENT APPEALED FROM:
(County Court of
Victoria, Judge Blair, 23 May 2025)
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal – Sentence
– Crown appeal – Home invasion – Armed robbery – Theft
First respondent subject to
-year community
correction order at time of offending – Low intellectual capacity and
autism spectrum disorder – Whether
judge erred in finding first
respondent’s impaired mental functioning satisfied requirements of
s 5(2H)(c)(ii)
Sentencing Act 1991
– Whether judge
ought to have imposed custodial sentence otherwise than in combination with
community correction order for
category 2 offending – Burden of
imprisonment materially greater by reason of first respondent’s impaired
mental capacity
– First respondent at greater risk of ongoing
institutionalisation – Statutory discretion existed to impose combination
sentence – No error.
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal – Sentence
– Crown appeal – Whether sentence manifestly inadequate –
First respondent
assessed as unsuitable for community correction order –
Expert evidence given in respect of earlier offending that first respondent
high risk of future violence – Whether judge failed to give due weight to
need for denunciation and general deterrence –
Personal circumstances upon
which judge placed significant weight do not justify leniency of sentences
– Sentence manifestly
inadequate – Appeal allowed – First
respondent’s moral culpability reduced to some degree on account of
youth, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder and history of
childhood deprivation – First respondent substantially
served custodial
element of sentence – First respondent resentenced to total effective
sentence of 5 years and 6 months’
imprisonment – Exercise of
residual discretion cannot be justified.
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal
– Sentence – Crown appeal – Home invasion – Armed
robbery – Theft –
Judge found offending was not so serious as to
entirely displace principles that apply to sentencing of young offenders
Whether judge erred in finding combination of mitigating factors
including youth, intellectual disability and childhood deprivation
constituted
substantial and compelling reasons that are exceptional and rare pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1991
– Whether judge ought to
have imposed custodial sentence otherwise than in combination with community
correction order for
category 2 offending – Offending is of a kind
commonly perpetrated by young offenders including persons of low intelligence
who have suffered some childhood deprivation – Not open to judge to regard
mitigating factors as giving rise to rare and exceptional
circumstances –
Sentence imposed beyond power – Appeal allowed.
CRIMINAL LAW
– Appeal – Sentence – Crown Appeal – Whether sentence
manifestly inadequate – Sentence
does not adequately reflect gravity of
offending – Sentence manifestly inadequate – Appeal allowed –
Second respondent’s
moral culpability reduced to some extent on account of
his youth, intellectual disability and childhood deprivation – Second
respondent’s intellectual disability does not offer ready explanation for
offending – Second respondent at high risk
of further violent offending
– Custodial element of current sentence almost complete – Second
respondent resentenced
to a total effective sentence of 5 years and 2
months’ imprisonment.
Azzopardi v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 372
(2011) 35 VR 43
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
(1998) 164 CLR 465;
DPP v Lombardo
[2022] VSCA 204
(2022) 302 A Crim R 329
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
(2011) 244 CLR 120
considered.
Sentencing Act 1991
ss 5(2H)(c)(ii)
Ms EH Ruddle KC with Mr L Andrews
First Respondent:
Ms CA Boston SC with Ms OM Thompson
Second Respondent:
Mr DA Dann KC with Mr T Glass
Ms A Hogan, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
First Respondent:
Chester Metcalfe Lawyers
Second Respondent:
Slink & Keating Solicitors
Introduction
the early hours of the morning of 29 April 2024 the respondents, Raux and
Talanoa, travelled to a house in Clayton.
was wearing a black mask as face covering, dressed in black clothes, and was
wearing gloves and armed with a steel rod. On arrival,
Talanoa forced entry
into the house by kicking in the front door (charge 1 – home
two offenders then entered the house and confronted the five occupants as they
moved through it. They forced their way into occupied
bedrooms, threatened the
occupants with violence and demanded phones, laptops and car keys. They stole
an iPhone mini and two sets
of car keys from the occupants (charge 2 –
armed robbery).
leaving the house, the offenders stole a Mercedes motor vehicle from the
driveway (charge 3 – theft). Police were able
to track the Mercedes via
GPS and arrested the offenders a short time later in the vicinity of the stolen
consequence of the offending, the first respondent contravened an existing
community correction order (‘CCO’) to which
he was subject.
pleas of guilty, the first respondent (Raux) was sentenced in the County Court
on 23 May 2025 as
Indictment C2400284
(contrary to s 77A of
Crimes Act 1958
imprisonment
15 months’ imprisonment and a 2 year CCO
Armed robbery
(contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
25 years’ imprisonment
15 months’ imprisonment and a 2 year CCO
(contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
10 years’ imprisonment
Contravention of CCO (Re-Sentencing)
Attempted aggravated carjacking
(contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
20 years’ imprisonment
6 months’ imprisonment (aggregate sentence)
1 month upon the sentence imposed on Indictment C2400284
Unlawful assault
(contrary to
Summary Offences Act 1966
3 months’ imprisonment
Total Effective Sentence
19 months’ imprisonment with a 2 year CCO
Non-Parole Period:
Pre-Sentence Detention declaration pursuant to
Section 6AAA
3 years’ imprisonment with a non-parole period of 18 months
Other relevant orders:
Cancellation of driver’s licence for 3 months
pleas of guilty, the second respondent (Talanoa) was also sentenced on 23 May
Crimes Act 1958
imprisonment
15 months’ imprisonment and a 2 year CCO
Armed robbery
(contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
25 years’ imprisonment
15 months’ imprisonment and a 2 year CCO
(contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
10 years’ imprisonment
Total Effective Sentence
18 months’ imprisonment with a 2 year CCO
Non-Parole Period:
Pre-Sentence Detention declaration pursuant to
Section 6AAA
3 years’ imprisonment with a non-parole period of 18 months
Other relevant orders:
Cancellation of driver’s licence for 3 months
Director now appeals the sentences pursuant to
Procedure Act 2009
grounds of appeal raise two issues:
(a) whether in each case the sentencing judge failed to give effect to
provisions requiring the imposition of a custodial sentence
(otherwise than in
combination with a CCO) in respect of charges of home invasion and armed robbery
committed in company; and
(b) whether the sentences imposed are manifestly inadequate?
the reasons which follow, we are satisfied that:
(a) a statutory discretion existed to impose the sentence which was imposed upon
the first respondent;
(b) nonetheless, that sentence was manifestly inadequate;
(c) the sentence imposed upon the second respondent was beyond power because it
imposed a CCO; and
(d) moreover and in any event, the sentence imposed upon the second respondent
was also manifestly inadequate.
Accordingly,
(subject to the question of the Court’s residual
) each respondent must be
resentenced.
conclusions with respect to manifest inadequacy are founded in our view of the
gravity of the offending.
community expects, and the
Sentencing Act 1991
contemplates, that save in
exceptional cases, offending of the type with which we are concerned will result
in a substantial custodial
sentence without the benefit of a reduction by
combination with a CCO.
Considerations
of just punishment and general deterrence in general require this to be so. In
the present case, considerations of
specific deterrence and protection of the
community reinforce these factors.
personal circumstances of the offenders upon which the sentencing judge placed
very significant weight do not, in our respectful
view, justify the leniency of
the sentences which were imposed.
although the Court retains a residual discretion with respect to the increase of
sentence upon an appeal by the Director
(and putting to one side the effect of
the category 2
Sentencing Act
provisions), the discrepancy between the
sentences imposed and those which should be imposed in this case is such that
the exercise
of the residual discretion in favour of the respondents cannot be
Accordingly,
the Director’s appeals must be allowed.
order to explain these conclusions it is necessary for us to address the gravity
of the offending; the personal circumstances of
the respondents; the reasoning
of the sentencing judge; the application of the statutory control upon
sentencing disposition which
is the subject of the first ground of appeal in
each case; our reasoning and conclusions as to the adequacy of the sentences
at first instance which are the subject of the second ground of appeal
in each case; and our decisions with respect to re-sentencing.
The gravity of the
the sentencing judge recognised at the outset of her reasons, home invasions and
armed robberies committed in company are inherently
very serious offences. Such
offending involves a very serious assault upon the personal safety and sense of
security and personal
integrity of both victims and the community
consequence, a relative increase in the prevalence of home invasions in recent
years is a matter of serious community concern.
response to the seriousness of offences of this kind, Parliament has imposed a
maximum term of 25 years’ imprisonment for
each offence of home invasion
and armed robbery. This penalty underlies the gravity of each offence.
has also designated each offence, when carried out in company, as what is called
a category 2 offence. The consequence
of this characterisation is that the
Court must impose a custodial sentence other than a custodial sentence forming
part of a combined
sentence with a CCO, unless one of a series of special
circumstances set out in
Sentencing Act
established.
the present case, both the offences of home invasion and armed robbery were
carried out in company and accordingly they each constituted
the combination of means which the offenders adopted was cumulatively calculated
to enhance the impact of the offending
upon the victims.
offender was masked, dressed in black and carried a steel rod. They entered the
house after dark in the early hours of the morning
by kicking in the door. The
steel rods which they carried were used to threaten and intimidate the
occupants. The use of the rods
occasioned genuine fear. The invasion of the
house was comprehensive. The offenders moved through the house sequentially
confronting
each of the five victims. The invasion was utilised to facilitate
the theft of valuable personal belongings and a motor vehicle.
short in duration, the home invasion was pre-planned, deliberately
confrontational, and coupled with armed robbery and consequent
theft. In the
case of the first respondent, it was further aggravated by the fact that at the
time of the offending he was the subject
sentencing judge correctly characterised the offending as a whole as
demonstrating a brazen, violent and outrageous disregard
for the safety and
security of others. She further found that it constituted a serious example of
the kind of offending in issue.
respectfully agree and endorse that conclusion.
also agree that considerations of parity require broadly similar penalties to be
imposed upon each offender despite some differences
in both the circumstances of
their offending and personal
backgrounds.
The gravity of the
joint offending supports this conclusion.
Personal circumstances of the first
sentencing judge addressed the personal history of the first respondent in
careful detail.
We will seek to
summarise what we take to be the most significant matters.
first respondent was born on 9 August 2001 and was 24 years of age at the date
of the sentence in issue.
parents emigrated from Sri Lanka and he was born and raised in the southeastern
suburbs of Melbourne.
has four siblings to whom he remains close, but his childhood was marred by
domestic violence on the part of his father.
did not flourish at school and left early. He did not successfully obtain any
employment until many years later.
was ‘kicked out’ of home at the age of 15 following an argument with
his father and became homeless thereafter.
commenced substance abuse at an early age and was using alcohol, cannabis, ice
and cocaine during the period in which the offending
first respondent is of low intelligence and an assessment undertaken in 2008
placed his IQ in the first percentile. Subsequent
assessments have placed him
in the range of borderline to extremely low intellectual capacity.
Psychological
assessments in 2014 and 2022 also found that the first respondent meets the
criteria for autism spectrum disorder.
report from Mr Matthew Staios, neuropsychologist, of 4 August 2022
confirmed that the first respondent has low intellectual capacity
spectrum disorder. The report stated in part:
Overall, he displayed limited capacity for tasks assessing reasoning skills,
vocabulary knowledge, general knowledge, spatial processing,
attention and
working memory, speed and information processing, and his memory for information
presented in verbal format was inefficient
and unreliable. Tasks assessing
executive functioning, including verbal fluency and divided attention also fell
within the extremely
low ranges.
Mr Raux’s overall cognitive profile is consistent with previous
psychological assessments conducted throughout the course
of childhood and
adolescence noting that his overall level of intellect has generally [fallen]
within the borderline too [sic] extremely
low range ... While previous
assessments have noted variations in his general level of intellectual
functioning, his profile as of
2022 indicates further reductions in overall
cognitive function, which are likely reflective of a lack of ongoing education
to [assist]
with maintaining his previous discrete cognitive strengths and the
possibility of substance use which has likely serve[d] to further
already limited cognitive skill-set.
to 2022, the first respondent had come before the Children’s Court and the
Magistrates’ Court on a number of occasions
and has convictions for theft,
deception, assault, robbery, affray, possession of a controlled weapon and
breach of bail.
significantly, in December 2022 the first respondent had come before the same
judge who imposed the current sentences. On that
occasion he was sentenced to
two years imprisonment for serious offences of aggravated carjacking and theft.
For other offences of
attempted aggravated carjacking and unlawful assault, the
first respondent was placed on a two year CCO with conditions requiring
supervision, a Justice Plan and judicial monitoring.
circumstances of the aggravated carjacking deserve specific notice. On
10 January 2021, the first respondent approached a car
which had stopped at
traffic lights in Hallam. He opened the driver’s side door and held a 30
cm long hunting knife against
the driver’s throat. He told the driver
‘if you don’t get out, I will kill you’. He then dragged the
out of his car and punched him to the head several times. The victim
fell to the ground and lay with his eyes closed, finding it
difficult to see.
The first respondent and a co-offender then stole the victim’s wallet
which contained bank cards and other
personal cards together with $540 in cash
and a gold iPhone X.
her Honour’s 2022 sentencing reasons record, the following day after a
co-offender had persuaded a second victim to drive
her to a bus stop, the
following occurred:
At the bus stop, you entered the car and sat in the rear passenger seat behind
your co-offender. She asked Mr Faieq to drive you
both to the Dandenong railway
station. During the drive, you produced a knife, held it to the neck of your
second victim, and demanded
that he 'stop the car or I will kill you'. Mr Faieq
stopped the car on Kidds Road in Doveton and got out. You also got out of the
car still holding the knife and walked towards him. He ran away. Your
co-offender got into the driver's seat of the vehicle, and
you entered the
passenger seat and your co-offender drove away. Mr Faieq attempted to hold on to
the driver's side door, as a result
he fell to the ground. This conduct gives
rise to Charge 3, aggravated
carjacking.
January 2021, the first respondent and his co-offender attempted to hijack a
further car. It is this offending which underlies
the CCO forming the basis of
charge 4 and summary charge 10 in the present case. Again, as her
Honour’s 2022 sentencing reasons
Your co-offender entered the car and asked if Mr Shah had any drugs with him.
When he told her that he did not, she produced a knife,
10 to 15 centimetres in
length, and pointed it at the victim, demanding that he give her his car keys.
You confronted Mr Shah when
he stepped out of his car. You called Mr Shah a
paedophile. Both you and your co-offender pushed Mr Shah. He did not surrender
vehicle. Mr Shah thinks he was stabbed by your co-offender at this point
– the prosecution concede that you are not responsible
for the stabbing of
Mr Shah, and you were not charged with that offending and accordingly you will
not be sentenced for it.
Mr Shah began running from both of you calling for help as you pursued him.
CCTV depicts your co-offender chasing him with the knife
in her hand. You caught
up with Mr Shah, and punched him in the head several times, causing him to fall
to the ground. You put Mr
Shah in a headlock. (related summary charge 10
aggravated unlawful assault). Witnesses who heard this incident called Triple 0,
heard Mr Shah yelling ‘Help, they are going to kill me’. Another
witness who heard Mr Shah cry for help attempted to
deescalate the situation and
witnessed your co-offender attempt to stab Mr Shah. Eventually both you and
your co-offender stopped
and left the area. This conduct gives rise to Charge 4,
attempted aggravating carjacking.
sequence of offending carries the hallmarks of serious confrontational violence
in company which characterises the current offending.
It is of material
contextual significance to the sentencing exercise in this case.
Catherine Leigh-Smith acted as a treating psychologist assisting the first
respondent from 2020 to late 2022 (funded through an
NDIS package provided in
respect of the first respondent’s intellectual disability). She gave
evidence on the plea hearing
in 2022 that the first respondent had experienced
alienation and marginalisation for most of his life, having poor planning and
organisational
skills and a very rigid and inflexible thinking style. He
struggled to accurately interpret the intentions and behaviours of others,
resulted in him being vulnerable to their influence. She held concerns that he
was at risk of becoming
institutionalised.
the time of the 2022 plea hearing, a comprehensive report had also been received
from Dr Bonnie Albrecht, forensic psychologist,
which both summarised the first
respondent’s problems and identified consequent risks.
Albrecht reported that the first respondent had experienced early and repeated
exposure to violence and disrupted living situations,
and that he struggled to
understand and cope with his father’s violence. He experienced distress
and ruminative thinking related
to his homelife, and inattentiveness at school
which, in Dr Albrecht’s view, was likely related to joint contributions of
a learning disorder and potential neurodevelopmental disorders
interfering with his attention, behavioural regulation, social interactions
understanding. She reported that he struggled to navigate the additional stress
caused by the school’s attempts to provide
him with support, and that this
led to him avoiding school and channelling his anger towards others.
expressed the opinion that:
Unfortunately, this precluded his cognitive and mental health needs being
attended to in a consistent manner, and fostered early
development of violent
behavioural templates, building on behavioural models of his father’s
violence, and reinforced by the
fiscal benefits of robbing strangers, catharsis
from anger, and social recognition from his older brother and, later, antisocial
Albrecht reported that the first respondent’s anger towards others
amplified when he was kicked out of home in his mid-teens.
He used drugs to
improve his mood and remove distressing thoughts, and he continued to engage in
offending behaviour for protection,
anger expression and offensive purposes. She
said that the first respondent has a desire to be accepted and is sensitive to
the approval
of those around him, which stems from disrupted attachment with his
father and feelings of being unloved as a result of being removed
This supports his ongoing engagement in violence and means that he is more
strongly affected when interpersonal relationships
break down.
went on to say that the first respondent’s untreated cognitive, regulatory
and psychological needs influence limitations
in his impulse control, emotional
reactivity and rigidity in thinking. As prison affords him with structure,
stability in living
arrangement and meals, and an opportunity to self-isolate to
support coping or keep safe, criminal justice consequences offer little
deterrent effect.
Dr Albrecht’s view, the current offending occurred in the context of these
background factors, in addition to more acute
distress related to a friendship
breakdown and daily substance use. Moreover, the first respondent had a fun,
reinforcing relationship
with his co-offender (the second respondent). The
offending seemed to have provided considerable entertainment and contributed to
furthering the first respondent’s reputation, noting his
‘active’ engagement in prison politics and jocular manner
as obtaining cars. He showed
little care for the victims.
Dr Albrecht opined that:
Mr Raux is considered a
risk of future violence, both in custodial
and community settings. Important treatment needs include his violent attitudes,
interpersonal
sensitivity for acceptance, and coping approaches, as well as
close attention to his learning and neurodevelopmental responsivity
Treatment and case management will need to be trauma-informed, and he will
likely require considerable environmental supports
in order to effect change,
including exposure to, and reinforcement within, more prosocial networks.
Albrecht’s opinion that the first respondent was at high risk of future
violence has proved to be prescient.
his release in mid-January 2023, pursuant to the CCO, the first respondent
appeared to make some real progress. He obtained
accommodation and, with the
behavioural programs.
He also obtained meaningful employment for the first
sentencing judge had the opportunity to observe this progress by way of judicial
supervision during the CCO. She was satisfied
that the engagement with the
behaviour specialist, Ms Markham, had materially benefitted the first
respondent. On the other hand,
the first respondent had not flourished since
his return to custody.
report from Mr Warren Simmons, consulting psychologist, dated 7 March 2025
expressed the following opinion:
Mr Raux’s prospects for rehabilitation must be considered guarded,
particularly as he is currently in an environment where
he felt that he could
assert himself as some sort of powerful figure in the correctional system where
he has been aggressive and
violent, but has only resulted in him ending in a
management unit. He appeared to be unable to recognise that his behaviour is
problematic
or that it was never going to achieve his stated aims.
report of 2 April 2025 from Mr Ian Berrisford, a mental health clinician
employed by Forensicare, confirmed the potential for continuing
Mr Raux reported that he is currently ‘locked down’ in a management
unit and isolated for 23-24 hours per day. This
was ‘due to an
incident’ which he did not expand upon, although commenting that he
suspected he had been ‘set up’.
He said that he was seen by staff
as being easy to manage away from the general population.
However, Mr Raux said that he has found prison ‘a bit like a holiday, my
own room, the food’s good’. He has developed
his own routine, will
read for a while, then watch TV, and work out later. He is comfortable in his
own company but stressed that
he misses social engagement with others. He said
that he keeps positive and keeps himself occupied. He is keen to be released
custody and on several occasions indicated that he intended to both avoid
drugs and to not get into legal difficulties again.
Mr Raux’s judgment and insight appeared superficially intact today,
presenting with a positive outlook and expressed his intention
to remain both
drug free and not reoffend. However, he has poor problem solving and impulse
control issues along with heavy and
consistent drug use indicate the potential
for poor decision making in future. His impaired judgement did not appear to be
the consequence
of any chronic or acute mental health issue, but because of the
cognitive deficits caused by his intellectual disability.
The sentencing judge’s
reasons with respect to the first respondent
sentencing judge set out the circumstances of the offending and then described
the first respondent’s personal history and
circumstances. She noted the
terms of the sentence imposed in December 2022 and the fact that a CCO was
operating at the time of
the current offending. She further recorded the
significant support and supervision the first respondent received under the CCO
prior to the current
Honour then summarised the evidence as to the intellectual capacity and mental
health of the first
respondent.
next addressed the application of the
Sentencing Act
provisions relating
to category 2 offending. She concluded that as a result of the first
respondent’s impaired mental functioning
he is subject to substantially
and materially greater than ordinary burdens of imprisonment and substantially
and materially greater
risks as a result of imprisonment. Accordingly the
requirements of
s 5(2H)(c)(ii)
sentencing judge then considered the applications of
principles.
Her Honour was
satisfied that there was a nexus between the combined effect of intellectual
disability and autism spectrum disorder
on the one hand and the offending on the
other hand. Accordingly, the first respondent’s moral culpability was
reduced. In
turn, the need for just punishment and denunciation were also
reduced; and the need for both general and specific deterrence was
Honour found that the first respondent’s childhood deprivation gave rise
to a significant mitigating consideration in accordance
with the principles
Bugmy v The
In your case, I accept your childhood involved significant deprivation as a
result of the following factors: your early and repeated
exposure to violence at
the hands of your father; disrupted living situations when your mother would
repeatedly remove herself and
the children from the family home for safety, only
for the violence to resume upon return; and being ‘kicked out’ of
where you have an intellectual disability and autism.
I note this history was in
part confirmed by the report of Shirley Hou in the disability overview report
dated 26 October 2022. Ms
Hou confirmed that ‘according to the
departmental file, Mr Raux experienced early and repeated exposure to violence
and disrupted
situations’.
Honour then referred to the report of Dr Albrecht which we have summarised
above and concluded that there was a nexus between
the first respondent’s
childhood deprivation and the current offending. This nexus also reduced the
first respondent’s
moral culpability and provided a context for
understanding the first respondent’s troubled criminal
her Honour noted that at the age of 23 the first respondent remained a youthful
turn, she concluded that the first respondent had reasonable prospects of
rehabilitation in light of the efforts he made pursuant
to the previous CCO and
continuing contact with his care
Honour then turned to the contravention by the first respondent of the previous
CCO. She found that, despite inconsistent attendance
at supervision meetings
with the Department of Corrections, the first respondent had largely complied
with his CCO for 15 months.
He had completed Alcohol and Other Drug counselling
as part of his Justice Plan and engaged in disability counselling with Ms Sarah
Honour further took into account the first respondent’s early pleas of
guilty, considerations of parity, and the purposes
for which a sentence may be
imposed together with current sentencing
she noted that the first respondent was assessed by Disability Justice as
unsuitable for a CCO but was assessed as suitable
for a Justice Plan by reason
of his intellectual disability.
the above matters, her Honour imposed the sentences upon the first respondent
which we have set out above.
Ground 1 of appeal with respect to
the first respondent –
Sentencing Act
Director contends that the sentencing judge erred in finding that
s 5(2H)(c)(ii)
Sentencing Act
applied and that, in
consequence, special circumstances existed, which permitted the imposition of a
CCO in conjunction with a term
of imprisonment in respect of the offending now
order to make good this ground, the Director must show that it was not open to
the sentencing judge to come to the conclusion that
she did, or that her finding
involved some error of fact or
order to enliven the discretion to impose a CCO the first respondent relied in
the first instance on the provisions of
s 5(2H)(c)(ii)
which exempts an
offender from the generally applicable category 2 rule if:
(c) the offender proves on the balance of probabilities that—
(ii) the offender has impaired mental functioning that would result in the
offender being subject to substantially and materially
greater than the ordinary
burden or risks of imprisonment; ...
sentencing judge reasoned as follows:
In my view, although there is
some evidence that you appear to cope in custody, you have experienced harsh
conditions, including long
periods of social isolation. Your poor
decision-making skills, impaired ability to make rational choices, vulnerability
to negative
peer influences and lack of appreciation of the wrongfulness or
consequences of your actions are all enduring characteristics of
your impaired
mental functioning associated with ASD and intellectual disorder. In my view
your tendency to ‘assert yourself’
in a custodial environment is
likely the consequences of your impaired functioning.
In light of the evidence from Dr Bonnie Albrecht, who is a senior forensic
psychologist with Forensicare, Cathy Leigh-Smith, psychologist,
Matthew Staios,
neuropsychologist, Disability Justice co-ordinator Shirley Hou, psychologist
Warren Simmons, and MHARS [Mental Health
Advice and Response Service] senior
mental health clinician, Ian Berrisford, I am satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that
pursuant to
s5(2H)(c)(ii)
, that a special reason exists
in your case.
note I made a similar finding in relation to your previous matter. Mr Raux,
I find that you have impaired mental functioning, that
is an intellectual
disability, diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder and other psychological
vulnerabilities, that have resulted
in you being subject to substantially and
materially greater than ordinary burden or risks of imprisonment. I consider
experience of being contained in management units, the high risk of
institutionalisation and the further entrenchment of antisocial
and pro-criminal
values, exemplify this
reliance upon the evidence of Mr Simmons and Mr Berrisford, the Director submits
that the evidence demonstrates that the first
respondent does not find the
burden of imprisonment unusually onerous and that insofar as he has been subject
to unusually burdensome
conditions of imprisonment that is not due to his
impaired mental functioning. Accordingly, her Honour’s conclusions should
be rejected.
first respondent submits that the evidence substantiates the conclusion that he
is subject to greater than ordinary burdens and
risks as a result of the
imprisonment. It is further submitted that the respondent’s statements to
Mr Simmons and Mr Berrisford
may be unreliable because of his mental
disability.
our view, the Director is correct to submit that the evidence establishes that
the first respondent does not find the burden of
imprisonment subjectively
unduly onerous and that his problems whilst imprisoned are largely the products
of attempts to run ‘crews’,
i.e. to assert a position of criminal
leadership. Conversely, however, it is plain that he struggles with
imprisonment and has failed
to adapt to it behaviourally. At the time of
sentence, he had been placed in management as a result of ongoing aggressive
On the balance of probabilities his aggressive behaviour is in part
a product of his impaired mental functioning. We are satisfied
that objectively
by reason of his impaired mental capacity the burden of imprisonment is
materially greater than it would ordinarily
be. Further, the evidence
establishes that for the same reason the first respondent is at greater than
ordinary risk of ongoing
institutionalisation.
follows that ground 1 fails. Having reached this conclusion it is unnecessary to
deal with alternative provisions of
which the first respondent’s
counsel relied on by way of a fallback position.
Ground 2 of appeal with respect to
the first respondent – manifest inadequacy
The sentences imposed on charges 1, 2, 3, 4 and 10, the order for cumulation on
charges 4 and 10, and the total effective sentence,
are manifestly inadequate.
order to establish manifest inadequacy in the sentence imposed at first instance
the Director must show that the sentence was ‘wholly
outside the
range’ of the sentencing options available to the sentencing
The Director must
demonstrate that something has gone ‘obviously, plainly or badly
The ground is a
stringent one, difficult to make
The Court must be
‘driven to conclude that there must have been some misapplication of
principle’.
fact that the discretion existed in the first respondent’s case enabling
the judge to impose a combined sentence which adopted
a CCO as one element, does
not mean that the sentencing discretion should necessarily have been exercised
first respondent was formally assessed as unsuitable for a CCO prior to its
grant and both the breach of the previous CCO and
his prior convictions raise a
real question as to the appropriateness of such an
in our view the sentence imposed simply failed to give due weight to the need
for denunciation of the serious offending,
the need for general deterrence in
respect of like offending and the need for protection of the community.
offending was dramatically violent and, as we have emphasised, it constituted a
totally unacceptable violation of the victims’
security, personal integrity and safety.
as general deterrence is concerned, it is apparent both from the scheme of the
Sentencing Act
with respect to category 2 offences and the specific terms
s 5(2HC)(a)
that general deterrence is intended to constitute a factor
of primary importance in the exercise of the sentencing discretion in
this type. There is commensurately less weight capable of being given to
circumstances personal to the offender. Accordingly,
in our view ground 2 must
be upheld in respect of the first respondent.
accept that the first respondent’s pleas of guilty, and the evidence as to
the first respondent’s intellectual limitations,
behavioural disorder,
youth and background require some moderation of the sentence which must be
imposed in order to give proper
effect to denunciation and both general and
specific deterrence. Nonetheless, they do not justify a sentence of the order
at first instance.
violent home invasion and armed robbery in which the first respondent engaged
require the imposition of a substantial custodial
sentence. The sentence
imposed falls well outside the range of the sentencing options open on the facts
of the case.
Resentencing of the first
first respondent was entitled to call in aid the following matters in mitigation
of sentence:
his early pleas
his relative
his intellectual
disability;
spectrum disorder; and
his history of
childhood deprivation.
of these matters demand due weight and we accept that taken together they reduce
the moral culpability of the first respondent
to some degree, moderate the
appropriateness of the first respondent as a vehicle for general deterrence, and
qualify the weight
which should be given to specific deterrence. Nonetheless,
as we have sought to emphasise, the penalty imposed for the offending
subject to considerations of totality, reflect the gravity of the offending and
the need to give due weight to denunciation
and both general and specific
deterrence.
make the following further observation concerning the matters upon which the
first respondent relies. First, the first respondent’s
early pleas of
guilty were of real utilitarian value and constituted some evidence of remorse.
In addition, there is evidence of
further remorse which has been expressed to
his Disability Justice Coordinator during the time the first respondent has been
imprisoned.
although not young at the date of both offending and sentence, the first
respondent remained at an age where the evidence
tendered on his behalf
confirmed that he remained in the process of neural development, i.e. physical
development of the brain.
As such, his moral culpability was reduced and his
prospects of rehabilitation must remain to some extent an open question.
the other hand, the first respondent was far from being a first offender.
it is well accepted that the greater the seriousness of the offending the less
scope is available to regard youth as a moderating
Azzopardi v
examined the history of the treatment of youth as a sentencing consideration in
this Court. After reviewing the relevant
authorities, Redlich JA
The general proposition which flows from these authorities is that where the
degree of criminality of the offences requires the
sentencing objectives of
deterrence, denunciation, just punishment and protection of the community to
become more prominent in the
sentencing calculus, the weight to be attached to
youth is correspondingly reduced. As the level of seriousness of the criminality
increases there will be a corresponding reduction in the mitigating effects of
the offender’s youth.
although youth might theoretically be regarded as moderating the extent to which
the first respondent can be regarded as
an appropriate vehicle for general
deterrence, it is plain that the sentencing regime applicable to the offences in
this case was
intended amongst other things, to deter young
Regrettably young
offenders are responsible for a significant proportion of the offending of this
we accept that the first respondent has an underlying intellectual disability
and behavioural disorders which reduce his
moral culpability in a general sense.
Nonetheless, the offending in this case was deliberate, carefully planned and
implemented in
coordination with the second respondent. It was not the product
of an impulsive or misguided reaction to some perceived provocation.
adopted reflect the fact that the offending was the product of calculated
decision making. This is not a case where the
offending can be regarded as the
direct product of mental
disability.
as Dr Albrecht’s report makes clear, the first respondent’s mental
disability underlies the possibility that
he is at a high risk of further
violent offending. This raises the conflicting considerations identified by the
High Court in
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
[A] mental abnormality which makes an offender a danger to society when he is
at large, but which diminishes his moral culpability
for a particular crime, is
a factor which has two countervailing effects: one which tends towards a longer
sentence, the other towards
a shorter sentence. These effects may balance out,
but consideration of the danger to society cannot lead to the imposition of a
more severe penalty than would have been imposed if the offender had not been
suffering from a mental
abnormality.
whilst we accept that the first respondent’s childhood deprivation should
be accepted as moderating somewhat his moral
culpability in a general way, it
cannot be said to explain repeated violent offending in early adulthood.
despite the combination of personal factors to which we have referred and which
can be regarded as mitigatory, we take the
view in accordance with the opinion
of Dr Albrecht expressed in 2022, that the first respondent remains at high risk
of future violence.
views expressed by Dr Albrecht were amply vindicated by the offending with which
we are concerned. Further, the evidence as to
the respondent’s behaviour
since he returned to custody makes clear that his behaviour is marked by
aggression which is sufficiently
problematic to require his ongoing supervision
under a management regime. This behaviour is both antisocial and
pro-criminal.
risk with which we are concerned raises a serious issue of protection of the
community. It was submitted that the risk is ameliorated
by arrangements which
have been made for the first respondent’s supported accommodation if he is
released under a CCO. We
do not accept that these arrangements are sufficient
to significantly ameliorate the risk of further violent behaviour when the
as a whole is taken into account. Whilst we accept the submission made
on behalf of the first respondent that in the long term the
protection of the
community will be best achieved by the first respondent’s rehabilitation,
the community requires and deserves
protection in the short term. This is
particularly so while the first respondent progresses into adulthood and
completes the process
of the neural development of his brain.
the mitigating factors we have referred to above, the first respondent’s
offending requires condign punishment and the
imposition of penalties which
adequately reflect the need for denunciation and general and specific deterrence
together with protection
of the community. Because of the related nature of the
offending, the total effective sentence must however be moderated to reflect
the particular circumstances of this case, the sentence imposed must also be
moderated to reflect the fact that the first respondent
has substantially served
the custodial element of his sentence imposed at first instance. As a result,
the first respondent would
shortly be released upon a CCO but for the
Director’s appeal. Accordingly, we have materially moderated the
sentences which
we would otherwise have imposed to reflect the fact that this
resentence will result in an increased burden during the additional
imprisonment which we propose to impose.
all the circumstances and bearing in mind the principle of parsimony, we would
resentence the first respondent as
Indictment C2400284
(contrary to s 77A of
Crimes Act 1958
imprisonment
imprisonment
Armed robbery
(contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
25 years’ imprisonment
imprisonment
(contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
10 years’ imprisonment
6 months’ imprisonment
Contravention of CCO (Re-Sentencing)
Attempted aggravated carjacking
(contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
20 years’ imprisonment
imprisonment (aggregate sentence)
4 months’ imprisonment (upon the sentence imposed on Indictment
Unlawful assault
(contrary to
Summary Offences Act 1966
3 months’ imprisonment
Total Effective Sentence
5 years and 6 months’ imprisonment
Non-Parole Period:
3 years and 6 months’ imprisonment
Section 6AAA Statement:
9 years’ imprisonment with a non-parole period of 6 years
Other relevant orders:
Cancellation of driver’s licence for 3 months
regard to the very substantial difference between the sentences which we regard
as appropriate and those imposed at first instance,
this is not an appropriate
case for the exercise of the residual discretion which the Court may exercise
upon appeals by the
Personal circumstances of the
second respondent
second respondent was 21 years of age at the date of sentencing having been born
on 5 April 2004.
was born in Australia to parents of Māori and Tongan descent. His parents
separated soon after his birth. He has three maternal
half siblings and five
paternal half siblings.
second respondent’s biological father had a history both of serious
violent offending and significant drug addiction. He
was incarcerated on
multiple occasions. He died when the second respondent was 10 years old, and
following his death, the second
respondent lost contact with his paternal
grandparents and cousins who had been involved in his life up to that
his parents’ separation, the second respondent grew up in the care of his
mother. His mother suffered from a significant
opioid addiction in his early
years and this resulted in intervention from child protection authorities.
Nonetheless, it appears
that she came to grips with this addiction and was able
to provide substantial care for him.
turn, the second respondent developed a close and supportive relationship with
his mother and stepfather. Unfortunately this deteriorated
as he grew older.
As the sentencing judge
after the death of his
father the second respondent demonstrated increasingly aggressive conduct in the
family home. Attempted discipline
measures resulted in him running away from
second respondent experienced difficulties at school with concentration,
listening, following directions and hyperactive behaviour.
He was diagnosed in
prep with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (‘ADHD’). He
subsequently exhibited aggressive
behaviour towards teachers and students. He
left school in year 9 after incurring suspensions and detentions for aggressive
leaving school, he worked as a labourer with his stepfather and then found
employment in a factory packing boxes.
second respondent started using cannabis at the age of 14 and commenced using
methamphetamines around the age of 19. At the time
of the offending, he was
using cannabis, methamphetamines, MDMA and ecstasy in large amounts together
with alcohol occasionally.
second respondent has serious prior convictions for armed robbery, aggravated
burglary, affray, property damage and other matters.
He has been sentenced to a
variety of Children’s Court supervisory orders which have consequently
resulted in breach proceedings.
He has spent several periods in Youth Justice
sentencing judge found that the current offending occurred in the following
It appears that your last prior conviction was in October 2021. At that time,
you were sentenced to 10 months’ Youth Justice
Centre order, and 150 days
or five months was reckoned as served. On my calculation, had you served this
sentence in full you would
have been released in approximately March 2022. In
the two years from then until April 2024 you were working and had been living
the family home. Several months before your offending, or the offending before
this court, one of your cousins, who was also a
work colleague of yours,
committed suicide. This had a devastating impact upon you, and you relapsed into
the use of drugs. The cultural
bereavement process was very difficult for you
and numerous relatives converged on your family home. Your work performance
and you were terminated from that job. In this context, that is grief,
unemployment and drug addiction, you made the decision to
steal a car hence you
committed the offences of home invasion and armed robbery and theft of motor
report from Dr Sami Yamin, a neuropsychologist, dated 3 March 2025 concluded
that the second respondent suffers from an intellectual
disability of mild
On the whole Mr Talanoa has a severe cognitive impairment with reduced
intellectual function, memory and learning and executive
function. His
performance is consistent with a DSM-V diagnosis of an intellectual disability
of mild severity and the reported functional
difficulty that he continues to
experience. Individuals with his level of function will have difficulties in
reasoning, problem solving,
planning, abstract thinking, judgment, learning from
instruction and experience, and practical understanding. Furthermore, they have
deficits in areas of more complex adaptive function such as self-management
across life settings, including personal care, school/job
responsibilities,
money management, recreation, and self-management of behaviour.
Dr Yamin’s opinion, the deficits outlined represent an immaturity in the
second respondent’s thinking that would have
influenced his behaviour by
impairing his ability to exercise appropriate judgment and make clear and
rational choices at the time
of the offending.
sentencing judge also relied on a report from Ms Andrea McNeill, psychologist,
dated 10 December 2024.
McNeill noted that the second respondent stated he adapts well to custody and
has no concerns or difficulties with the prison environment.
McNeill reported that, despite recalling a safe and loving home, the second
respondent felt severe rejection and abandonment from
his biological father, and
commenced acting out at a young age. It is plausible that his experience of
shame and belief that no one
could manage him caused him to develop an inherent
sense of being unlovable and unwanted. He experienced difficulties with
concentration, impulse control and aggressive conduct from a young
age, and by early secondary school, he was starting to use illicit
drugs regularly. It was her opinion that there were clear indications of
long-term substance use disorder (Cannabis Disorder,
Alcohol Disorder, Stimulant
Disorder) and that his criminal offending is directly correlated to long-term
substance dependence.
noted that the second respondent experienced parental incarceration, interrupted
school attendance and educational opportunities,
juvenile incarceration and
periods of unemployment.
McNeill reported that he has largely remained psychologically untreated and
therefore lacks insight into his problems. It was her
opinion that the presence
of an antisocial personality disorder with narcissistic traits and the legacy of
his childhood means that
he has struggled to adhere to rules and regulations,
failed to respond to discipline measures and seeks to engage in life on his
terms. He perceives loyalty as equating to love, which has translated into adult
perceptions of low regard for others, reduced empathy
and lack of consequential
and long-term thinking, and therefore has found belonging in antisocial
networks. His personality structure
and vulnerabilities have evolved as a
response to his childhood experiences, and in his adult life he becomes
dysregulated when experiencing
relationship loss or abandonment.
regards the second respondent’s previous diagnosis of ADHD whilst at
primary school, Ms McNeill noted that when tested by
her he scored in the very
low range. She noted that it was plausible the results could be explained by
his current structured routine
custodial environment and abstinence from illicit
substance use. Further, Ms McNeill cautioned that the assessment measures
on were obtained solely via self-report and, given his lack of mental
health insight, it is plausible that he unintentionally minimised
McNeill noted that the second respondent’s psychometric test results
indicated he did not have symptoms of depression, anxiety
or stress however he
presented as flat, detached and uninterested throughout the assessment. Ms
McNeill was of the view that the
discrepancy between his clinical presentation
and normalised test scores may be explained by denial, emotional detachment and
resignation
to his criminal life.
was Ms McNeill’s opinion that the second respondent appeared to have
adapted well to custody. He displayed some insight and
judgment into his
offending, identifying precipitating factors related to his offending behaviour
and explicitly identifying the
relationship between his substance use and
offending. She was of the view that he presented as highly institutionalised
since a young
age and that reinforcing incarceration as the deterrent would
expose him to antisocial behaviour and peers rather than opportunities
rehabilitation and development of prosocial skills.
regards the risk of reoffending, Ms McNeill expressed the opinion
Mr Talanoa is considered at moderate to high risk of reoffending in the
community. He is well entrenched in the criminal lifestyle,
has low self-esteem
and self-image, and his peer group and supports are essentially all
criminal-oriented. His greatest stability
is attained in custody to date,
reinforcing institutionalised behaviour and thinking and limiting his capacity
to cope within the
community when experiencing day-to-day demands and
responsibilities. Although his self-report does not indicate any acute
psychological
concerns, it is likely that this is due to his limited insight
into his psychological state. It is highly probable that there are
unresolved mental health issues and the effects of his personality structure
which continue to impact his behaviour and
functioning and require intervention.
her view, further treatment for the second respondent’s substance abuse is
critical and residential treatment such as that
provided at Odyssey House would
be appropriate.
the plea hearing, the prosecutor conceded that the second respondent’s
intellectual disability resulted in impaired mental
functioning and that the
disability appeared to be connected to the offending before the
The sentencing judge’s
reasons with respect to the second respondent
describing the circumstances of the offending and setting out details of the
second respondent’s personal history, her
Honour summarised the opinions
of Ms McNeill and
concluded that the principles stated in
had application
to the second respondent’s case and that their application justified the
conclusion that the second respondent’s
moral culpability was reduced at
the time of the offending. Further, the need for both general and specific
deterrence was moderated.
She was not satisfied, however, that
s 5(2H)(c)(i)
Sentencing Act
was enlivened in the second respondent’s
Honour further considered that the second respondent’s experience of
childhood deprivation was such as to enliven the principles
in a general way. The circumstances of the second
respondent’s childhood supported the conclusion that his moral culpability
was somewhat reduced.
Honour then turned to consideration of the second respondent’s age and
concluded that although the offending before the
court was very serious, it was
not so serious as to entirely displace the principles that generally apply to
the sentencing of young
offenders. These principles include:
(a) that the youth of an offender should be a primary consideration for a
sentencing court where the matter properly arises;
(b) young offenders are immature and may not fully appreciate the nature,
seriousness and consequences of their criminal conduct;
(c) courts recognise the increased potential for young offenders to be
rehabilitated, which is in the public interest; and
(d) incarceration can impair rather than enhance a young offender's prospects
of rehabilitation.
turn, her Honour was satisfied that the second respondent’s age and
circumstances at the time of offending reduced his level
of moral culpability
and reduced the weight that should be put on general deterrence. She was
further satisfied that notwithstanding
the second respondent’s significant
prior history he did have prospects for
rehabilitation.
Honour then turned to the requirements of the
Sentencing Act
with respect
to category 2 offending. She concluded that a combination of mitigating factors
satisfied the requirements of
Sentencing Act
constituted substantial and compelling reasons that are exceptional and rare,
justifying the exercise of a discretion to make
orders for imprisonment coupled
with a CCO. The factors relied on were:
(a) the second respondent’s youth;
(b) the death of the second respondent’s cousin and the cultural
bereavement process that occurred prior to the offending;
(c) the second respondent’s recent diagnosis of intellectual disability;
(d) her Honour’s findings with respect to
Honour then recorded that she had taken into account the second
respondent’s early pleas of guilty, considerations of parity,
the purposes
for which a sentence may be imposed and current sentencing
noted that the second respondent had been approved as suitable for a CCO but was
not granted a certificate of intellectual disability
as required for a Justice
the above matters, her Honour then imposed the sentences which are now under
Ground 1 of appeal with respect to
the second respondent –
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act
provides an exception to the general rule
stated under
(e) there are substantial and compelling circumstances that are exceptional and
rare and that justify not making an order under Division
not a sentence of imprisonment imposed in addition to making a community
correction order in accordance with
operation of this provision requires the Court first to be satisfied that there
are substantial and compelling circumstances justifying
the exercise of the
discretion, and secondly, that such circumstances are exceptional and rare.
the present case, the Director concedes the existence of substantial and
compelling circumstances in the relevant sense, but disputes
that they are
exceptional and rare. In consequence, it is unnecessary to consider the
application of
These subsections govern the determination
of the question whether there are substantial and compelling circumstances.
DPP v Lombardo
analysed the statutory scheme in the following way:
First, the court must identify whether there are ‘substantial and
compelling circumstances’. In that context, ‘substantial
compelling’ means that the circumstances are weighty and forceful or
powerful. The issue is whether the circumstances are
substantial and compelling
so as to justify not imposing a custodial sentence. That is the criterion by
which the substance and compulsive
force of the circumstances are to be
The second critical step, if the circumstances are substantial and compelling
in the sense described above, asks whether they are
also ‘exceptional and
rare’. In our view, this is to be regarded as a composite phrase imposing
a single test, rather
than as two discrete tests. That is because the meanings
of the two words overlap; in particular, ‘exceptional’ means
‘out of the ordinary course, unusual, special’, which includes that
which is ‘rare’. In that situation, a
separate test asking whether
something that is ‘exceptional’ is also ‘rare’ would be
redundant. Instead,
the two words operate together and each influences the
meaning of the overall phrase.
The ‘exceptional and rare’ language is not merely a description of
the empirical outcome of applying the law of sentencing
to a collection of
offences. It is a threshold which must be met before it is open to impose a
non-custodial sentence. The question
then is the meaning of the language
In construing the phrase ‘exceptional and rare’, it is relevant
that, in the context of deciding whether circumstances
are ‘substantial
and compelling’, Parliament has stated its intention that imprisonment
should ‘ordinarily’
be imposed for a category 2 offence:
s 5(2I)(a).
This statement of intention is expressed in moderate terms, suggesting that the
‘exceptional and rare’ requirement has
a meaning closer to
‘out of the ordinary’.
On the other hand, the expression ‘out of the ordinary’, while
capable of describing something that is ‘exceptional’,
something that is ‘rare’, does not fully capture the force of the
phrase ‘exceptional and rare’.
Both the expression
‘exceptional and rare’ and the legislative object that imprisonment
should ‘ordinarily’
be imposed are, however, consistent with earlier
case law, such as
, which described provisions such as the present
as requiring circumstances of a kind ‘wholly outside “run of the
factors typical of’ the relevant kind of offending.
Accordingly, in our view that language properly captures the meaning of the
phrase ‘exceptional and rare’ in this context.
It refers to
circumstances that are wholly outside the ordinary factors typical of the
relevant offence, in this case dangerous driving
causing death.
Applying the two steps of the mandated analysis calls for the sentencing judge
to make an ‘evaluative judgment’ once
the underlying facts have been
established, and unaffected by notions of burden of proof. It is possible that a
set of circumstances
may engage the exception in combination, even where the
constituent circumstances are mainly, or even wholly, ‘relatively
agree with, and respectfully adopt, this analysis.
the Court went on to exemplify the application of the relevant
concepts as follows:
For example:
, this Court considered that in combination, the
applicant’s ‘appalling childhood experiences’ of ‘war
conflict’ in Somalia, along with his youth, remorse, lack of criminal
history, and risk of deportation, enlivened the exception.
, this Court considered that the applicant’s youth,
remorse and co-operation with authorities, lack of criminal history, and
vulnerability in custody, together with the wide-ranging effects of a medical
condition (alopecia) which had given rise to diagnosed
mental disorders, and
contributed to the offending itself, enlivened the exception and it had not been
open to find otherwise.
By contrast:
, this Court considered it was open to find that the
exception was not enlivened by a combination of factors including the low
gravity of the offending, the applicant’s low moral culpability,
youth, early guilty plea, remorse, lack of past criminal history,
debilitating mental illness with its origins in the applicant’s upbringing
in a war-torn country.
, this Court considered it was open to find that the
exception was not enlivened by a combination of factors including the
applicant’s
youth, childhood of trauma and disadvantage overseas, his
assistance to police in relation to a separate investigation (for which
suffered retribution), and his emergence as a positive role model for other
, this Court considered that the same exception to
could not have been enlivened by the applicant’s youth, significant
immaturity, difficulties during adolescence, and likely
vulnerability in prison.
The Court concluded that while that combination of circumstances may well be
‘substantial and compelling’,
it could not also be described as
‘exceptional and
itself the Court had to consider whether the circumstances of
the case were rare and exceptional in the context of a sentence for
driving causing death. The Court concluded that the fact that the offence was
committed by a young person of previously
impeccable character who was racked
with remorse and grief and had excellent prospects for rehabilitation did not
render the case
rare and exceptional.
Ultimately,
each case must turn on its own facts. The abovementioned cases illustrate the
difficulty in meeting the relevant test
but they and like cases cannot be used
as somehow determining the application of the test in the present case.
our view, it was not open to the sentencing judge in the present case to regard
the factors upon which her Honour relied as giving
rise to rare and exceptional
circumstances. The offending in issue is of a kind which is commonly
perpetrated by young offenders
including persons of low intelligence coming from
circumstances of a deprived background. The fact that the offending also
in the aftermath of some emotional stress resulting from the death of
the second respondent’s cousin and subsequent events
at his family home
likewise does not constitute a rare and exceptional circumstance.
for the second respondent emphasised that the question in issue had to be
assessed by reference to the combination of matters
the second respondent could
point to in circumstances where he had already served 333 days by way of
pre-sentence detention. We
accept that this is so but this circumstance does
not elevate the case to the category of rare and exceptional.
for the second respondent further emphasised the combined cumulative impact of
the factors upon which the second respondent
relied, but in our view the
combination of factors which was emphasised does not cumulatively amount to rare
and exceptional circumstances.
Accordingly,
the first ground of appeal with respect to the second respondent must
Ground 2 with respect to the second
respondent – manifest inadequacy
the sentence that was imposed upon the second respondent did not comply with
it is not strictly necessary to determine ground 2 which raises the
allegation of manifest inadequacy.
Nonetheless,
it is appropriate for completeness to summarise our views with respect to this
have set out the relevant principles in the course of addressing the appeal
relating to the first respondent.
Director contended the second respondent’s sentence was manifestly
inadequate having regard to:
the objective
seriousness of the offending;
sentencing practice; and
the moderate
weight that should be given to the second respondent’s youth, mental
limitations, childhood deprivation and the
background circumstances concerning
the second respondent’s offending.
second respondent submits that there were powerful matters in mitigation of
sentence including:
cooperation with
the police;
early pleas of
respondent’s young age at the time of offending and sentence;
the application
principles resulting in reduced moral culpability;
the application
principles by reason of the second
respondent’s intellectual disability;
the finding that
the second respondent still retained prospects for rehabilitation;
considerations arising from the fact that the three offences comprised closely
associated actions; and
the significance
of the sentencing judge’s conclusion that the catalyst for the present
offending was the impact of the suicide
of a cousin upon the second respondent.
The second respondent who had been out of trouble for two years offended in the
grief, unemployment and drug addiction.
our view, despite the matters urged on his behalf, the sentence imposed was
manifestly inadequate. In particular, it failed to
give due weight to
considerations of denunciation, general deterrence and protection of the
community. Put simply, the sentence
imposed does not adequately reflect the
gravity of the offending and the consequent need to give effect to the
sentencing purposes
we have identified.
Resentencing of the second
second respondent was entitled to call in aid the following matters in
mitigation of sentence:
his cooperation
with police, early pleas of guilty and apparent remorse;
his intellectual
disability;
his history of
childhood deprivation; and
the background
of emotional disturbance caused by his cousin’s death prior to the
is necessary to say something further in respect of each of these factors.
First, the second respondent’s early pleas of
guilty were of considerable
utilitarian benefit and together with his cooperation with police constituted
evidence of remorse. As
his counsel submitted, remorse was further demonstrated
by insight into the impact of the offending on the victims displayed in his
record of interview.
the second respondent was relatively young when the offending occurred. His
youth should be regarded as reducing his moral
culpability to some extent and
increasing the potential for his rehabilitation. Nonetheless, as we have sought
to explain in addressing
the personal circumstances of the first respondent, it
is well accepted that the more serious the offending the less that can be
excused on the basis of an offender’s youth. Moreover, by the date of the
current offending the second respondent had a serious
criminal record involving
offences of violence although he had not previously been sentenced to adult
on the evidence the second respondent’s prospects of rehabilitation must
be guarded.
the second respondent suffers from an intellectual disability of mild severity
and ongoing behavioural disorders. We accept
that these circumstances also
lessen his moral culpability to some extent and reduce to some extent the weight
to be given to general
and specific deterrence. Nonetheless, the offending was
not the product of impulsive behaviour or a disproportionate reaction to
provocative circumstances. It was not the product of momentary misjudgement.
The offending was calculated and deliberate, carefully
planned and
well-coordinated with the co-offender. The second respondent intended to obtain
a substantial financial advantage through
the theft of a luxury motor vehicle.
Thus, while the second respondent’s intellectual disability must be
regarded as contextually
relevant to his offending, it does not offer any ready
explanation for that offending.
we accept Ms McNeill’s evidence that the second respondent has adapted
well to imprisonment and the evidence does not
justify a finding that his
intellectual disability renders imprisonment more burdensome than would
ordinarily be the case.
we accept that the second respondent’s childhood history and subsequent
difficulties as a teenager, were such as to
enliven the principles articulated
. They result in some reduction of the second respondent’s
moral culpability.
said, the second respondent’s significant criminal history includes
ongoing offending involving violence including armed
robbery and aggravated
burglary. This aspect of his background at the time of sentencing does not
assist him.
we accept that the offending occurred in the aftermath of the suicide of the
second respondent’s cousin who was also
a workmate. This led to an
increase in drug use and coincidental overcrowding of the second
respondent’s home. We accept
that the offending occurred in the aftermath
of a very difficult family episode and that this also may be regarded as
reducing the
second respondent’s culpability to some extent.
against these matters, the evidence as a whole concerning the second
respondent’s personal circumstances, including the second
respondent’s criminal record, the nature of the current offending and the
opinion of Ms McNeill, support the conclusion that
the second respondent is at a
relatively high risk of further violent offending. The circumstances give rise
to the need for the
sentence to embody an element of specific deterrence and
provide for the protection of the community.
the other hand, as in the case of the first respondent we accept that the fact
the second respondent has almost completed the custodial
element of his current
sentence, means that any increase in the term of prison sentence will involve an
unusual burden. Accordingly,
we will materially moderate a sentence which we
would otherwise impose.
the mitigating factors we have referred to above, ultimately the sentence we
impose must give due weight to denunciation,
just punishment, general and
specific deterrence, and protection of the community.
we have emphasised in resentencing the first respondent, the offending with
which we are concerned was dramatically violent and
constituted a totally
unacceptable violation of the victims’ safety, security and sense of
personal integrity. As such it
requires condign punishment. Bearing in mind
the principle of parsimony, we would resentence the second respondent as
(contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
imprisonment
4 years’ imprisonment
Armed robbery
(contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
25 years’ imprisonment
4 years’ imprisonment
(contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
10 years’ imprisonment
6 months’ imprisonment
Total Effective Sentence
5 years and 2 months’ imprisonment
Non-Parole Period:
3 years’ imprisonment
Section 6AAA Statement:
8 years’ imprisonment with a non-parole period of 5 years
Other relevant orders:
Cancellation of driver’s licence for 3 months
if we are wrong in our conclusion with respect to
Sentencing Act
and a discretion existed to allow the sentences imposed at
first instance upon the second respondent to stand, we would not do so.
view, the sentences imposed were manifestly inadequate and the very substantial
difference between the sentences we regard
as appropriate and the sentences
imposed at first instance mean that this is not a case for the exercise of a
residual discretion
which exists with respect to appeals by the
See s 290(1)
Procedure Act 2009
Court of Victoria, Judge Blair, 23 May 2025), [26] (‘Reasons’).
Reasons, [110].
Reasons, [29]–[46].
(County Court
of Victoria, Judge Blair, 14 December 2022), [3]–[4] (‘Reasons
Reasons (2022), [7].
Reasons, [44].
Reasons, [38]–[41].
Reasons, [37]–[39].
See Reasons,
See [72] below.
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
(2013) 249 CLR 571;
Reasons, [60].
Reasons, [64].
Reasons, [70].
Reasons, [71].
[109]–[113].
Peers v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 264
(2021) 97 MVR 379
, 389 [51] (Niall and Sifris JJA);
[2021] VSCA 264.
DPP v Karazisis
[2010] VSCA 350
(2010) 31 VR 634
, 662–3 [127] (Ashley, Redlich and Weinberg JJA, Warren CJ
and Maxwell P relevantly agreeing at 637 [1]);
[2010] VSCA 350
Clarkson v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 157
(2011) 32 VR 361
, 384 [89] (Maxwell ACJ, Nettle, Neave, Redlich and
Harper JJA);
[2011] VSCA 157.
[2010] VSCA 350
, 662 [127] (Ashley, Redlich and Weinberg JJA);
[2010] VSCA 350.
Pham v The Queen
[2015] HCA 39
(2015) 256 CLR 550
, 559 [28] (French CJ, Keane and Nettle JJ);
Reasons, [113].
(2011) 35 VR 43
[2011] VSCA
Ibid 57 [44] (with whom
Coghlan AJA [92] and Macaulay AJA [93] agreed);
[2011] VSCA 372.
DPP v Lawrence
[2004] VSCA 154
(2004) 10 VR 125
, 132 (Batt JA);
[2004] VSCA 154.
Alessawi and Snowball
[2025] VSCA 23
, 24 [108] citing
DPP v O’Neill
, [59] (Warren CJ, Redlich and Kaye JJA).
(1988) 164 CLR 465,
[1998] HCA 14
Veen (No 2)
’). See also
Wahame v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 4
, 23[90] (Whelan and Kyrou JJA);
v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 218.
As to which see
[2011] HCA 49
(2011) 244 CLR 462
, 479 (French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ);
Reasons, [78].
Reasons, [86].
Reasons, [96].
See Reasons,
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
Reasons, [100].
Reasons, [102] (citations
Reasons, [103].
[106]–[107].
[109]–[112].
Reasons, [113].
DPP v Lombardo
302 A Crim R 329
[2022] VSCA 204
[66]–[72] (McLeish, Niall and Kennedy JJA) (citations omitted).
[73]–[74] (McLeish, Niall and Kennedy JJA) (citations omitted).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (605 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter