URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2011/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
11-088 [2011] VMHRB 1 (31 January 2011)
In the Appeal and Review of PP
An Involuntary Patient at
Northern Area Mental Health Service
[2011] VMHRB 1
Date of Hearing:
January 2011
Board Members:
Mr D Risstrom
Dr A Dunsis
Involuntary Status –
Mental Health Act 1986
– ss 12 and 14
and ss 8(1)(a) to (e) Application for Non-disclosure – ss 26(7), (8) and
PP’s matter came before the Board as an initial review of her
involuntary patient status and as an appeal made by PP on 16 December
against her involuntary status.
PP was a 37 year old mother of three young children who was not currently
engaged in other formal employment. PP’s partner was
currently serving an
undetermined length of imprisonment. PP’s three younger children were
currently in the care of the Department
of Human Services.
The Report on Involuntary Status dated 11 January 2011 stated that PP was, at
the time of the hearing, diagnosed with Delusional Disorder
provisional/differential diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder, characterised
by a significant disturbance of thought.
PP also had proceedings on foot in the Supreme Court against Dr AA and the
Approved Mental Health Service (AMHS) and provided to the
Board an Order of that
Court dated 24 December 2010. The Order had the effect of restraining Dr AA from
administering any anti-psychotic
medication upon PP, ordering the AMHS to make a
full copy of PP’s file available for inspection by her solicitors and
the matter to the Practice Court on 14 January 2011.
PP was also said to have other proceedings on foot in relation to an injury
she sustained from an electric shock through her telephone.
Application for Non-disclosure of documents
Under s26(7) of the Act, unless the Board makes an order under s26(8),
patients and persons representing them are entitled to inspect
or otherwise have
access to any documents to be given to the Board in connection with the hearing
at least 24 hours before the commencement
of the hearing. The right of a patient
and those representing him or her to have access to information relevant to the
also an important aspect of procedural fairness, specifically, the
‘hearing rule’,
which is part of the rules
of natural justice which the Board is required to apply pursuant to 24(1)(b) of
the Act. This is further
strengthened by s24 of the
Charter of Human Rights
and Responsibilities
(“the Charter”). Section 24 of the Charter
provides that parties to proceedings have the right to a fair hearing by a
competent, independent and impartial court or tribunal.
1 At a minimum, the hearing rule requires a decision maker to give an
opportunity to be heard to a person whose interest will be adversely
affected by
the decision.
Whilst what will ultimately constitute satisfaction or observance of the
hearing rule will depend on the circumstances of the particular
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550)
, if the hearing rule is observed the person
affected will, amongst other things, be given:
sufficient notice of the place, time and purpose of the hearing;
to prepare for the hearing; and
of any specific adverse allegation being made against him/her and/or the
‘general scope and purpose of the hearing’
Dainford Ltd v
Independent Commission Against Corruption
(1990) 20 ALD 207
The exceptions to the right of access or inspection, are set
out in s26(8). the Board may order that the patient is not entitled to
or have access to documents referred to in s26(7) if it is satisfied that the
inspection or access by the patient would:
(a) cause serious harm to the patient’s health or the health or safety of
another person; or
(b) involve the unreasonable disclosure of information relating to the personal
affairs of any person; or
(c) breach a confidentiality provision imposed by a person who supplied
information that is contained in the documents or document.
application in this case was stated as being based only on s26(7)(a). During
this part of the hearing the Chairperson questioned
the applicant as to the
applicability of s26(7)(c). Consequently, the applicant sought to amend its
application for non-disclosure
so as to rely on s26(7)(c), in addition to
s26(7)(a) of the Act. The Patient’s solicitor did not object to this
amendment and
it was allowed by the Board.
Section 26(9) of the Act empowers the Board to permit “
representing the patient
” before the Board to inspect or otherwise
have access to any document to which an order made under sub-section (8)
Criteria set out in section 8(1) of the Act
The treating team gave written and oral evidence that PP had a provisional
diagnosis of Delusional Disorder. Their evidence was that
PP had delusions about
the abuse of her three young children, she also reported having received a shock
from her telephone on 7 June
2008 and believes she is infected with a sexually
transmissible disease.
Dr AA stated that all of the psychiatrists who have reviewed PP have
concurred on the diagnosis of delusional beliefs. Dr AA described
information
provided by a Dr P, who PP had seen privately at monthly intervals for 3 years
from 2006-2009.
Dr AA said no organic cause for the symptoms PP reported had been
established. The MRI findings are not consistent with a brain injury
North West CATT involvement during this period further supported the view that
her beliefs were interpreted in a delusional
way with a delusional
Dr AA stated that DHS informed him that they indicated to PP that her
complaints of abuse were unfounded, that there was no evidence
of abuse and that
welfare checks had been completed. Dr AA said a paediatric examination on 8
November 2010 by Dr SA did not support
the conclusion that abuse had occurred,
though PP disputed this saying these welfare checks predated when the abuse
When asked by the Board Chair about the injuries PP reported that her
children had received, Dr AA agreed that there did appear to
have been some
injuries, including those in the nature of a burn and rash. Dr AA further stated
that there had been threats made
that PP would kill the children’s carers
and that DHS expressed their concern to Dr AA about PP trying to abduct her five
old son from school, which required police involvement.
The Report on Involuntary Status stated in November 2009 that PP’s
general practitioner, “
Dr [H] was concerned about [PP]. [PP] believed
that her partner was trying to infect her with a STD. Screening for STD was
and was done 4 times. Yet she continued to ask him for further tests
and did not believe the results. He was concerned she was
Dr AA gave his opinion that PP had a Delusional Disorder with psychotic
symptoms and that the second opinion of psychiatrist Assoc
Professor SS also
concluded that PP suffers from a Delusional Disorder.
Dr AA stated that the admission to hospital had been beneficial in that it
had contained PP and reduced the risks to the children.
Dr AA said that PP had been provided with escorted day leave and overnight
leave and that the children had remained safe during PP’s
periods outside
the hospital on leave.
When asked by the Board Chair, Dr AA said the plan of the treating team was
to place PP on a Community Treatment Order for case management
to provide for a
period of engagement in order to further observe PP and to assess ongoing
Ms Fritze of Victoria Legal Aid put to the Board that in relation to s8(1)(a)
PP disputes the diagnosis, in relation to s8(1)(b) that
there is no need for
immediate treatment, in relation to s8(1)(c) that PP is not a risk to herself or
others, in relation to s8(1)(d)
that PP refuses to provide consent and is in
fact capable of providing consent and in relation to s8(1)(e) that if PP does
need treatment,
she can receive it in a less restrictive environment in the care
of her family.
(1) The application for non-disclosure was granted pursuant to s 26(8) of the
Act. Given the evidence in relation to the concerns
for the health and safety of
others and the presence of notes confirming the purported understanding that
certain information was
provided on the basis that it would not be disclosed,
the Board concluded that an order for non-disclosure under s26(8)(a) and (c)
justified, and so made that order.
(2) The Board allowed partial access or inspection of the documents the subject
of the application for non-disclosure by Ms Fritze,
of Victoria Legal Aid,
representing PP.
(3) Pursuant to Clause 3 of Schedule 2 of the Act, the Board Chair has the
responsibility of determining questions of law that arise
during a hearing. The
Board Chair determined that in reading s26(9) of the Act, the term ‘a
person representing the patient’
related to matters being dealt with by
the Board under the Act and did not extend to mean a person representing the
patient in another
forum, such as the Supreme Court.
(4) Board Chair also clarified that whilst the Supreme Court matter was evidence
before the Board that related to the documents in
question, the Board was
focussed only the operation of the Act.
(5) While acknowledging the natural impulse PP would feel as a mother in trying
to do what she felt was best for her children, the
Board did not accept that her
behaviour could be described as that of any justifiably concerned mother.
PP’s apparent misinterpretation
of things, including the reported belief
by her psychologist in 2006 that she may be delusional, pre-dated the 7 June
that PP said she received from her telephone. Further, the
documentary evidence and evidence of symptoms resulting from that incident
inconclusive and inconsistent with symptoms reasonably expected as resulting
from such an incident.
The Board was satisfied that PP appeared
to be mentally ill, likely suffering from Delusional Disorder and accordingly,
the criterion
set out in s8(1)(a) of the Act was met.
(6) In relation to the criterion set out in s8(1)(b), whilst PP had not been
administered any anti-psychotics, the treatment being
provided consisted, among
other things, of more vigorously controlled and monitored surroundings and,
while not what PP wanted, had
afforded some respite from the stresses, duties
and responsibilities she would normally face. It appeared that there had been an
improvement in PP’s condition, particularly with reference to the risks
she faced from a worsening of her illness or the potential
that she was a risk
to others if unwell. The Board therefore accepted that this treatment remained
necessary for PP and that it was
required to lessen the ill-effects or pain and
suffering PP was likely to endure if she were not appropriately treated.
(7) The Board was satisfied that the involuntary treatment of PP was necessary
for her health, but not for her safety and did not
form a conclusion as to
whether involuntary treatment was necessary for the protection of members of the
public. This makes clear
that only one
of the three possible
limbs set out in s8(1)(c) is necessary to be determined by the Board on
(8) In relation to the criterion set out in s 8(1)(d) the Board noted the two
possible limbs and, though only one of these is necessary
to be found on
balance, weighing the evidence, the Board concluded that DR was both refusing
and was unable to consent to necessary
treatment of her mental illness.
(9) The Board found that whilst the criterion set out in s8(1)(e) was met, in
that adequate treatment of PP could not be provided
without the involuntary
order, it could, pursuant to s36(4) of the Act, order the authorised
psychiatrist to make a community treatment
order within a reasonable period
specified by the Board. The Board made such an order, with discharge to a
community treatment order
to be effected within 4 days.
and appeal of involuntary status – The Board found the continued treatment
of PP as an involuntary patient was necessary.
The Appeal was therefore
PP was represented by Ms E Fritze of Victoria Legal Aid
Date of Decision:
13 January 2011
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS
FOR THE DETERMINATION
Northern Area Mental Health Service
HEARING NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
13 January 2011
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER REVIEW:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under s12AC of the
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of PP as an involuntary
patient subject to an involuntary treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: Mr D Risstrom
Community Member: Dr K McShane
Psychiatrist Member: Dr A Dunsis
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 13 January 2011:
Patient: PP
Doctor: Dr AA
Doctor: Dr BB
Legal representative: Ms E Fritze, solicitor, of Victoria Legal Aid.
Brother-in-law: W
Family friend: Z
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was satisfied that the continued treatment of PP as an involuntary
patient subject to an involuntary treatment order was
The Board therefore confirmed the involuntary treatment order.
The Board also ordered the authorised psychiatrist place PP on a community
treatment order on or before Monday 17 January 2011.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
13 January 2011
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That PP continues to be treated as an involuntary patient subject to an
involuntary treatment order, with PP being placed on a community
treatment order
by the authorised psychiatrist on or before Monday 17 January 2011.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
file of PP.
on Involuntary Status dated 11 January 2011, prepared by Dr AA and presented to
Plan of PP dated 12 January 2011, prepared by Dr NY, authorised by Dr AA and
presented to the Board.
evidence at the hearing.
of PP, dated 16 December 2010 and lodged with the Board on 17 December
of the Supreme Court of Victoria made by Justice Davies in the case of [PP] vs.
[Dr AA] and the AMHS, No. XXXXX XXXX, dated
24 December 2010.
from Dundas Street Medical Centre, authored by Dr JA dated 5 December 2010.
from Dundas Street Medical Centre, authored by Dr KB dated 9 December 2010.
from Dundas Street Medical Centre, authored by Dr KB dated 10 August 2010.
from Dundas Street Medical Centre, authored by Dr KB dated 12 December
from Dundas Street Medical Centre, authored by Dr KB dated 13 December
from Dundas Street Medical Centre, authored by Dr KB dated 12 January 2011.
from Austin Radiology titled ‘MRI brain’, co-authored by Dr GS and
Dr KW dated 6 June 2008.
from St Vincent's MRI Centre titled ‘MRI Brain’, co-reported by Dr
KY and Dr CT dated 18 August 2010.
from Cabrini Medical Imaging titled ‘ Re [PP] ... MRI of the Brain
...’, authored by Dr IC dated 27 September 2010.
from MIA Victoria titled ‘MRI Review of Outside Films, authored by Dr TA
dated 27 September 2010.
invoice of BC Electrical Contractors dated 12 May 2010.
from DTS Data & Telecommunication Services authored by IS, undated.
invoice and report of E. T. Telecom authored by PK, dated 26 December
from St Vincent' MRI Centre titled ‘MRI Brain’, co-reported by Dr KY
and Dr CT dated 18 August 2010.
from JK, psychologist, dated 14 December 2010.
from JK, psychologist, dated 24 December 2010.
of Melbourne Pathology, dated 1 December 2010.
of Assoc. Prof. SS, dated 29 December 2010.
s36(2) if, having regard to the criteria specified in s8(1), the Board is not
satisfied that the continued involuntary treatment
of a person as an involuntary
patient subject to an involuntary treatment order is necessary, the Board must
order that the person
be discharged from the involuntary treatment order.
Therefore, the Board considered:
PP appear to be mentally ill; and
PP's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by PP being subject to an involuntary treatment
of PP's mental illness, is involuntary treatment of PP necessary for her health
or safety (whether to prevent a deterioration
in her physical or mental
condition or otherwise) or for the protection of members of the public; and
PP refused or is she unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
PP receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less
restrictive of her freedom of decision and action?
Under s35A,
the Board must review the patient’s treatment plan to determine
authorised psychiatrist has complied with s19A in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
PP’s matter came before the Board as an initial review of her
involuntary patient status and as an appeal made on 16 December
2010 against
being an involuntary patient.
PP was a 37 year old mother of three children who was not currently engaged
in other formal employment. PP’s partner was currently
undetermined length of imprisonment. PP’s three younger children were
currently recorded as being subject to Custody
to Secretary Orders, one being
made for one child on 24 February 2005 and for each of the other two children on
20 December 2010.
PP is an acronym made of the first name and surname of the patient used in
this Statement of Reasons. While it was noted that PP,
and a number of documents
relating to her, used a surname beginning with the letter Q, PP is used in this
Statement of Reasons for
consistency.
PP was most recently admitted as an involuntary patient to the Northern
Hospital on 16 December 2010 and remained an inpatient until
the day of the
hearing. The Report on Involuntary Status dated 11 January 2011 stated that PP
was currently diagnosed with Delusional
Disorder with a provisional/differential
diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder, characterised by a significant
disturbance of thought.
The Report on Involuntary Status described the symptoms leading up to or
justifying the current diagnosis as,
“[PP] believes she had an injury through an electric shock via her
telephone ... and symptoms like her head seems to be not
connected to her body,
episodes of paralysis, tinnitus, headaches and memory impairment. She has spend
money to investigate this and has seen 3 neurologists and has had 3
MRI’s. She intends to have another opinion on her injury
and then seek
compensation. Due to the paralysis that she had she asked the DHS [Department of
Human Services] to look after her
children. She currently sees a psychologist
and a psychiatrist for her ‘injury’.”
The Report on Involuntary Status also described the circumstances leading up
to the most recent admission to involuntary status as:
“[PP] believes that since 12 months or so her 3 children in foster care
are being abused. Her children are ... under DHS care.
[PP] wanted her children
to be moved. ... [PP] became concerned that her children are being physically
and sexually abused. [PP]
stripped her children to photograph the bruises and
took them to physicians for investigation. ... The DHS have done paediatric
examinations
and police welfare checks were done on 8 to 10 occasions for the
children. No evidence of sexual or physical abuse was found. [PP]
then tried to
abduct one of her children from school. On one occasion she took her child to
court, say she was going to a medical
appointment. In court she pleaded the
judge to remove the children and even lifted her young daughter’s dress to
show abuse.
Concerns were raised because she threatened to harm the carers. She
told the Orona
Family Service worker ‘you will be dead soon
and maybe God will kill you’. She called an out of hours helpline and said
‘She will have to commit murder’. She was seen by the Northwest CATT
team who admitted her.”
The current appeal was written by PP on 16 December 2010 and was faxed to the
Board on 17 December 2010. The appeal was written in
the name of QQ, which the
Board Chair confirmed was written by PP. The appeal stated that PP wished to
appeal against being an involuntary
patient because, “I have absolutely no
mental illness and been set up by DHS Preston because I have had grave concerns
my 3 young children 5, 4, 2 yrs who have been mentally, physically, sexually
abused. I have done genetic blood testing in the past
for medications. And I
have genes that do not accept me taking any psychotic, anti-depressants etc. If
I take psychotic medications.
I would become psychotic and anti-deprasents
I would overdose.”
Application for non-disclosure
The Board was informed earlier during an extremely busy day that an
application for nondisclosure was being sought on behalf of the
service. The
Board was not provided with a written application ahead of the hearing date,
though prior to commencement of the formal
hearing, the Board confirmed with the
service that those representing PP were aware of the application.
The Board chose not to sight the material the service sought to be subject to
non-disclosure prior to it being considered as part
of the application. The
Board asked for the material to be identified, taken from the available
documents and placed in an envelope,
which was then given to the Board.
Prior to commencement of the hearing, the Board sought
confirmation from those representing
the parties in the application for
non-disclosure that they were aware of the application and
whether or not it would proceed. During those preliminary discussions the
parties agreed to the hearing proceeding without further
delay, with Dr AA,
representing the service, confirming that an order for non-disclosure was
Ms Fritze of Victoria Legal Aid represented PP during the application for
non-disclosure without PP being present in the hearing room.
brother-in-law, confirmed that he was acting as instructing solicitor in matters
initiated in the Supreme Court on
23 December 2010, which were then heard on 24
Under s26(7) of the
, unless the Board makes an order under s26(8),
patients and persons representing them are entitled to inspect or otherwise have
to any documents to be given to the Board in connection with the hearing
at least 24 hours before the commencement of the hearing.
Since the date of the hearing, the Board Chair subsequently confirmed that
the Board’s administrative arm received the appeal
of PP on 17 December
2010 and that a Notice of Hearing was sent to the Northern Hospital on the same
day, where PP was currently
an involuntary inpatient. As 13 January 2010 was the
next available hearing date, the hearing of both PP’s initial review and
appeal were scheduled for that day. Therefore, in the absence of any order or
instruction directing otherwise, it appeared Northern
Hospital was on notice
that PP or any person representing her was entitled to inspect or otherwise have
access to any documents to
be given to the Board in connection with the hearing
at least 24 hours before the commencement of the hearing on 13 January 2010.
Under s26(8), on the application by or on behalf of the authorised
psychiatrist, the Board may order that the patient is not entitled
to inspect or
have access to documents referred to in s26(7) if it is satisfied that the
inspection or access by the patient would:
(a) cause serious harm to the patient’s health or the health or safety of
another person; or
(b) involve the unreasonable disclosure of information relating to the personal
affairs of any person; or
(c) breach a confidentiality provision imposed by a person who supplied
information that is contained in the documents or document.
on the principles set out in s26(7), it is clear that the
intends that a
patient should have access to documents to be given to the Board in connection
with the hearing, unless the Board
orders otherwise. The right of a patient and
those representing her to have access to information relevant to the hearing is
an important
aspect of procedural fairness, which is part of the rules of
natural justice which the Board is required to apply. This principle
strengthened by
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities
, which came into operation on 1 January 2008.
the principle that parties to proceedings have the right to a fair hearing by a
competent, independent and impartial court
or tribunal.
Section 26(9)
empowers the Board to permit a person representing the patient
before the Board to inspect or otherwise have access to any document
to which an
order made under sub-section (8) applies.
The Board Chair raised the possibility of an order made under
possibility that such an order could lead to unwanted consequences. This issue
was pertinent, particularly given the lack
of existence of any previous
application for non-disclosure, in what appeared to be a prima facie breach of
clause 2 of Justice Davies
24 December 2010 Supreme Court Order that the
respondents [Dr AA and the Northern Hospital] make a full copy of the applicants
available for inspection by her solicitors, such inspection to take place
by 31 December 2010.
The Board was informed by Dr AA that he had attended the Supreme Court on 24
December 2010 but that no one else representing the second
respondent, the
Northern Hospital, had attended. W, PP’s brother-in-law, said that the
application before the Supreme Court
was “part of preliminary discovery in
relation to habeus corpus.”
The Board Chair sought clarification and confirmed with W that despite his
role as instructing solicitor in the matter initiated in
the Supreme Court, he
was appearing as a witness in the Board proceeding and not as a person
representing PP. While the Board Chair
confirmed he was not aware of any legal
rule under the
prohibiting W from being PP’s legal representative in
the proceeding, W accepted that Ms Fritze, and not himself, would represent
at the hearing.
Pursuant to Clause 3 of Schedule 2 of the
, the Board Chair has the
responsibility of determining questions of law that arise during a hearing. The
Board Chair determined that
in reading s26(9) of the
, the term ‘a
person representing the patient’ related to matters being dealt with by
the Board under the
and did not extend to mean a person representing the
patient in another forum, such as the Supreme Court, where W said he was
acting as instructing solicitor on behalf of PP. Having explained that
reasoning to those present, it was agreed that if an order
were made under
s26(9), that order on its own would not authorise W to have access to PP’s
file, as W was not ‘a person
representing the patient.’
Subsequently, towards the end of non-disclosure hearing W stated, “I am
happy to make an undertaking
to not disclose information to [PP].”
As was disclosed during the non-disclosure application, W said that he had
sought access to PP’s file prior to 31 December 2010,
but had been
declined. W also said that he had sought access to PP’s file after 31
December 2010, but had been told the order
[of the Supreme Court] had now
expired and he could not have access to PP’s file. W further said that he
had attended earlier
on the day of the hearing to see PP’s file. W said
the hospital provided him with a photocopy of “the balance of the
file”, but confirmed at no stage was a full copy of the PP’s file
available for inspection by him, who in acting as PP’s
solicitor in the
Supreme Court matter it should have been, as was ordered by Justice Davies on 24
December 2010.
It was common ground that the application for non-disclosure was made on the
day of the hearing. It was put by W that he first became
aware of the
service’s application for non-disclosure on the day of the hearing after
raising the issue of the whole of PP’s
file not being provided.
Following an explanation of procedures by the Chair and discussion with the
parties, it was understood that the application being
made by Dr AA was based on
s26(7)(a) only.
In relation to s26(7)(a) Dr AA gave evidence to the Board that information
had been supplied to hospital staff on the basis that its
provision and source
not be disclosed. Dr AA said that information had been provided to him in a
telephone conversation by someone
PP had sought advice from. Dr AA said that the
information provided to him was relevant to the diagnosis of Delusional Disorder
was different from what was discussed with PP herself. Dr AA added that the
person providing the information had not disclosed his/her
opinion to PP and had
requested that this opinion remain confidential in order to protect the
therapeutic relationship.
Further it was put by Dr AA that with the children currently being cared for
at an undisclosed location [while subject to Custody
to Secretary Orders], that
further disclosure of information may wrongly identify the then location of the
The Board Chair questioned Dr AA about his application for non-disclosure
being made under s26(7)(a) only, as the evidence he provided
seemed to also rely
upon s26(7)(c). Dr AA agreed that the criteria in s26(7)(c) was applicable.
The Board Chair asked Ms Fritze if she had any objection to Dr AA being given
permission to vary the grounds of his application, even
though it appeared clear
to those present that the ability to make an application to vary the
non-disclosure was first raised by
the Board Chair during the hearing. Ms Fritze
said she did not object to the grounds being varied to include s26(7)(c).
The Board Chair then asked Dr AA to identify what he based his understanding
on that the information supplied to him was not to be
disclosed to PP. Dr AA
confirmed that the information from the person PP had sought professional advice
from was provided on 24 December
2010 with a clear intention it not be disclosed
to PP, but that this information only related to one page of the information
to the non-disclosure application.
Dr AA also confirmed the information relating to the location of the children
was provided on the basis it was not disclosed to PP.
The Board Chair asked Dr AA why he and the Northern Hospital appeared to not
have complied with clause 2 of Justice Davies 24 December
2010 Supreme Court
Order to make a full copy of the applicants file available for inspection by her
solicitors by 31 December 2010.
The Board recorded Dr AA’s reason as
“inspection was not allowed.” The Board Chair then stated that as
a matter for the Supreme Court to deal with and, while it was evidence
before the Board that related to the documents in question,
the Board was
focussed on the operation of the
The Board briefly adjourned to consider the merits of the non-disclosure
application.
Given the evidence in relation to the concerns for the health and safety of
others and the presence of notes confirming the purported
understanding that
certain information was provided on the basis that it would not be disclosed,
the Board concluded that an order
for non-disclosure under s26(8)(a) and (c) was
justified, and so made that order.
Pursuant to s26(8)(a), the Board ordered that all information marked
‘FOI exempt’ in the envelope provided to the Board
not be disclosed
to PP on the grounds that inspection or access by PP would cause serious harm to
PP’s health or the health
or safety of another person.
Pursuant to s26(8)(c), the Board ordered that all information relating to the
care arrangements for family members not be disclosed
to PP on the grounds that
inspection or access by PP would breach a confidentiality provision imposed by
the person or persons who
supplied the information.
Pursuant to s26(9), the Board also ordered that PP’s legal
representative have access to the documents subject to non-disclosure
the documents regarding the care arrangements for family members.
Consideration of adjourning the hearing
The Board Chair then raised the possibility of adjourning the further hearing
of this matter to a later date, given it was late in
a very busy day and a
number of other patient’s hearings had yet to be heard.
Ms Fritze and W put to the Board that PP had been held in hospital since 16
December 2010 and had been unable to get a hearing prior
to today. Mr W put to
the Board that PP’s treatment was subjected to a Supreme Court injunction
and that the hearing was due
to return to the Court the following morning. It
was put that submissions would be made concerning PP’s diagnosis and the
appropriateness
of her involuntary treatment. W said that to deny PP her hearing
today is an “incredible infringement on her rights.”
W said that the
diagnosis of Delusional Disorder will be challenged and that pursuant to the
Supreme Court order PP had remained
in hospital without having been treated with
anti-psychotic medication.
Despite the lateness of the hearing and the inevitable consequence that other
patients would not have the hearings scheduled for that
day, the Board
determined to continue the hearing and arranged for PP and other participants to
come into the hearing room.
When the hearing re-commenced, the chairperson briefly explained to PP that
there had been an application for non-disclosure lodged
by the service and that
was the reason why her legal representative, W and Drs AA and BB had been before
the Board in her absence.
The Chairperson further confirmed that while it was a
matter for PP and her legal representative as to how her case was presented,
presence of a lawyer who spoke on her behalf did not limit her ability to
Submissions on behalf of PP
PP’s legal representative, Ms Fritze, made submissions on the five
criterion in s8(1) of the
. Ms Fritze put to the Board that PP wished to be
discharged from involuntary status.
Ms Fritze put to the Board that in relation to s8(1)(a) PP disputes the
diagnosis, in relation to s8(1)(b) that there is no need for
treatment, in relation to s8(1)(c) that PP is not a risk to herself or others,
in relation to s8(1)(d) that PP refuses
to provide consent and is in fact
capable of providing consent and in relation to s8(1)(e) that if PP does need
treatment, she can
receive it in a less restrictive environment in the care of
her family. Ms Fritze added that PP does not contest s8(1)(d) is applicable,
even though she is capable of providing informed consent, she refuses
While W had agreed that he was not acting as PP’s solicitor in this
hearing, W presented evidence as a witness that included
the making of legal
argument about PP’s mental health status.
W added to the submissions of Ms Fritze, saying PP believes that the carers
are abusing her children. W submitted that PP’s
beliefs are all founded in
reality and do not constitute evidence of Delusional Disorder
In relation to the shock PP reported receiving from her telephone on 7 June
2008, W said that lawyers had been retained on a “no
win, no fee”
basis for proceedings against the telephone company. W said that the evidence
supports a conclusion that the reported
shock was possible or likely, and is
therefore not a delusion as the treating team were proposing.
W also said that it was PP who had approached DHS requesting respite for
herself and for help with the care of her children. It was
put that the father
of PP’s children had been in and out of jail and had been in custody since
February 2005. DHS had had prior
involvement with the children on the basis that
their father was in prison, and it was put that PP placed her children into the
of DHS. DHS was said to have granted PP’s former sister-in-law care
of PP’s children in February 2010, with PP making
a number of complaints
during that time.
W presented numerous photos of children to the Board purported to have been
taken between February and December 2010 to substantiate
the claim about abuse
of the children. W said PP was concerned about the children being hit and
sexually abused.
W said that DHS had arranged for a number of carers, with the children put
under the care of another person in October 2010 when PP’s
sister-in-law
went overseas. W said that PP reported that while PP’s son was in that
care, he had complained of being hit with
a belt and on the head with a wooden
spoon. W said PP’s daughter had told her that she was touched in a way
that was inappropriate
and that PP’s youngest son showed evidence of
abuse. W said PP raised concerns with DHS many times, but that no feedback was
being provided by DHS about the reported abuse. W also said that police welfare
checks were carried out from time to time.
W told the Board that a matter was to be listed for revocation of the Custody
to Secretary Orders, but that as she had been made an
involuntary inpatient on
16 December 2010 she was unable attend court at a hearing listed for 20
W referred to a number of handwritten notes/reports written by Dr KB,
PP’s general practitioner from the Dundas Street Medical
Centre. Dr KB had
written in a note dated 13 December 2010 that “[PP] has attended our
clinic regularly for twenty years”,
other notes reporting and requesting
PP sought the investigation of reported abuse of her children and one note dated
2011, which stated, “Re [PP] [PP’s date of birth]. [PP]
is not delusional.”
W said that PP’s behaviour is consistent with being a mother who is not
getting a satisfactory response from DHS. W said PP’s
children had told
her they were being abused and what she has done has escalated the matter
appropriately in order to protect her
W argued that PP does not require immediate treatment, that she had had no
treatment in the hospital setting, and that there was insufficient
justify involuntary treatment. He stated that PP could go home with her family,
as evidenced by overnight leaves having been
successful.
At the conclusion of the hearing, W said that Justice Davies
had asked Dr AA if treatment was
needed for PP immediately, to which he said
Dr AA said it wasn’t. Further in conjunction with
subsequent unescorted and escorted leave, W argued that s8(1)(b) was not
satisfied. W added that the question of the risk to the children
under consideration of s8(1)(c) could not be made and was being dealt with by
other courts.
Evidence of PP
PP appeared to support the submissions and evidence provided by Ms Fritze and
PP said that her children had been in the care of her former sister-in-law
from February 2010, but that the level of care was not
as good as when the
children were in her care. PP said the arrangement was made through DHS, but
that throughout that time in care
from February 2010 the children were receiving
injuries and that they were dirty and wearing odd socks.
Towards the end of the hearing, PP confirmed that she believed that
antipsychotic medication would cause psychosis in her as she is
very sensitive
to medication and had done tests to verify this. She was very distressed at the
prospect of having to take medication
because she believed it would cause
PP concluded her evidence by saying, “As a mum I try to protect my
kids. I would do what any mum would do. I would not be delusional.
want you to take into account that I don’t want to take any
medications.”
Evidence of treating team
Dr AA said that PP had a provisional diagnosis of Delusional Disorder, saying
she has delusions about the abuse of her three young
children. He also said PP
reported having received a shock from her telephone on 7 June 2008 and that she
believes she is infected
with a sexually transmissible disease.
Dr AA said that PP had presented to a psychologist in 2006 for treatment and
that the opinion of the psychologist was that PP had
delusional beliefs.
Dr AA said that the MRI imaging presented as evidence to the Board to support
the view that that PP sustained brain damage secondary
to a shock from her
telephone does not support that conclusion.
Dr AA stated that all of the psychiatrists who have reviewed PP have
concurred on the diagnosis of delusional beliefs. Dr AA described
information
provided by a Dr P, who PP had seen privately at monthly intervals for 3 years
from 2006-2009, to which PP said she presented
to Dr P because she was sad. PP
also said that in 2008 when she received the telephone injury, Dr P felt she was
imagining the telephone
Dr AA said that PP had approached the Department of Human Services following
reporting having received the shock. Dr AA said that
in February 2010 that the
reported symptoms were intermittent, including vision loss and tinnitus in both
ears. Dr AA said DHS had
been involved with the family for some time.
Dr AA said no organic cause for the symptoms PP reported had been
established. He said there were no abnormalities evidenced on 6
June 2008 or
from a report from St Vincents Hospital and a 27 September 2010 from Cabrini
Dr AA said Dr P’s opinion was that PP suffered from depressive symptoms
and a Delusional Disorder and that Dr P reported observing
a progression from
depressive symptoms to a psychotic process. Dr AA said that during treatment
[before becoming an inpatient on
16 December 2010] PP had paranoid beliefs about
being stalked by a hit man that had required CATT involvement.
The Report on Involuntary Status stated that in July 2009 PP
“Kept going to Preston Police saying
she is being stalked by a hitman.
She had covered her windows with silver foil. She believed she
was being followed. CATT saw her and she was followed up by her private
psychiatrist Dr [P] who felt that [PP] had developed a Delusional
Dr AA said that a Dr AK had treated PP for six to seven months, and that he
thought PP had needed medication and had become psychotic.
Dr AA emphasised that the MRI findings are not consistent with a brain injury
and that North West CATT involvement during this period
further supported the
view that her beliefs were interpreted in a delusional way with a delusional
Dr AA stated that DHS informed him that they indicated to PP that her
complaints of abuse were unfounded, that there was no evidence
of abuse and that
welfare checks had been completed. Dr AA said a paediatric examination on 8
November 2010 by Dr SA did not support
the conclusion that abuse had occurred,
though PP disputed this saying these welfare checks predated when the abuse
When asked by the Board Chair about the injuries PP reported that her
children had received, Dr AA agreed that there did appear to
have been some
injuries, including those in the nature of a burn and rash. Dr AA further stated
that there had been threats made
that PP would kill the children’s carers
and that DHS expressed their concern to Dr AA about PP trying to abduct her five
old son from school, which required police involvement.
The Report on Involuntary Status stated in November 2009 that PP’s
general practitioner, “Dr [H] was concerned about [PP].
[PP] believed that
her partner was trying to infect her with a STD. Screening for STD was negative
and was done 4 times. Yet she
continued to ask him for further tests and did not
believe the results. He was concerned she was delusional.”
Dr AA gave his opinion that PP had a Delusional Disorder with psychotic
symptoms and that the second opinion of psychiatrist Assoc
Professor SS also
concluded that PP suffers from a Delusional Disorder. Dr AA stated that the
admission to hospital had been beneficial
in that it had contained PP and
reduced the risks to the children. In response to an earlier comment, Dr AA also
added that the treating
team had not suggested that PP is suffering from
schizophrenia.
Dr AA said that PP had been provided with escorted day leave and overnight
leave and that the children have remained safe during PP’s
periods outside
the hospital on leave.
Following questions by the Board psychiatrist arising from progress notes
dated 8 January 2011, the Board was told that an intervention
order had been
sought last week on the basis of an agreement between PP, her family, DHS and
the Northern Hospital. W told the Board
the hearing was an ex parte application
made at the Melbourne Children’s Court on 6 or 7 January 2010, and that it
was adjourned
to 22 January 2011 with no interim order being made.
When asked by the Board Chair, Dr AA said the plan of the treating team was
to place PP on a Community Treatment Order for case management
to provide for a
period of engagement in order to further observe PP and to assess ongoing
Dr AA concluded that he had concerns about PP being a voluntary patient. He
stated that the containment and observation provided had
de-escalated PP’s
behaviour and reduced the risk to the children and carers.
When asked by the Board Community Member about PP being an voluntary patient,
Dr AA said that containment on the ward can be called
treatment and that he
could not predict whether or not PP posed a risk to the children or not. Dr AA
stated that he was concerned
predicting risk to the children based on the behaviour of the successful leave
of the last week in the context of her behaviour of the last few months.
Other evidence
When asked by the Board Chair if any family members wished to contribute to
the hearing, PP’s father X said, “I feel very
sorry that they are
accusing her of delusions. She is very kind to people.” Y, PP’s
mother intimated through words translated
by X that she would like PP to come
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to an involuntary treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in s8(1) of the
have been met. The
Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
1. Section 8(1)(a)
Does PP appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A) states:
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board considered the exclusionary criteria in s8(2) and decided that
these were not relevant in this case.
Based on the evidence before it, the Board conclude that PP appeared to be
suffering from a mental illness, concurring with the diagnosis
of Delusional
Disorder for the reasons considered below.
The Board considered the evidence from the clinical file, the Report on
Involuntary Status, the submissions of PP’s legal representative,
evidence from Dr AA, Dr BB, PP’s brother-in-law W, PP’s father X,
PP’s mother Y and from PP herself.
While this was PP’s first involuntary inpatient admission, PP had a
reported psychiatric history that appeared to date back
to at least 2006, when
it was reported that PP’s then psychologist had expressed concerns about
PP having delusional beliefs.
The current diagnosis was provided as Delusional Disorder with a
provisional/differential disorder of Major Depressive Disorder, characterised
a significant disturbance of thought. PP clearly disagreed with the current
diagnosis, which was reflected in her belief she did
not have a mental illness
and that accepting any anti-psychotic medication would cause her to become sick.
PP also appeared to place
emphasis on the reported shock she received from using
her telephone on 7 June 2008, though nothing further was said in relation
stated belief that her partner had tried to infect her with a sexually
transmissible disease.
An examination of the radiology reports available to the Board indicated the
MRI’s of PP’s brain did not disclose any
significant abnormalities,
with the small hyperintensities described, considered to be within normal limits
for her age by three
different radiologists and therefore not causal of the
symptoms PP described.
With regard to PP’s reported shock she received from her telephone on 7
June 2008, the Board psychiatrist member concluded that
the intermittent,
medically inexplicable symptoms she reported were not consistent with any mild
electrical shock she may have received.
Further, it appeared that these symptoms
were accompanied by the development of persecutory delusions about the telephone
and several mental health professionals reported the experiencing of
delusions by PP that pre-dated this incident.
The constellation of symptoms and resulting disability PP reported led her to
placing her children in the care of DHS and ultimately
what the Board concluded
was the subsequent development of persecutory delusions of maltreatment of the
children. Given the constraints
of the Board to draw conclusions about the care
of the children beyond what that had reportedly already been
undertaken by
police, by DHS and the available scrutiny of court proceedings at which PP
sought to bring this issue to the presiding
Magistrate, the Board acknowledges
the limitations of its ability to comprehensively conclude whether or not any
mistreatment had
occurred while the children were in care, or whether it was of
the extent and nature PP stated she believed. Nevertheless, the Board
conclude that the photographs produced as evidence of such were not convincing
of the alleged maltreatment. This view was further
buttressed by PP’s
elaboration of persecutory ideation regarding DHS.
Further, as disclosed in the Report on Involuntary Status, PP made repeated
reports to police in 2009 that she was being stalked by
a hit man, which amongst
other things, resulted in her private psychiatrist forming the view that PP had
developed a Delusional Disorder.
The Board also concluded that PP displayed delusional interpretation of
genetic testing that had been performed regarding her ability
to metabolise
psychotropic medication in that she believed that antipsychotic medication would
cause her to become psychotic.
From the material provided in the clinical file, it appeared that it was the
opinion of PP's private psychiatrists Dr AK and Dr P
that PP suffered from
persecutory delusions and required treatment with antipsychotic medication. This
view accorded with that of
Assoc. Prof. SS, who provided a second opinion dated
29 December 2010. While the note of PP’s general practitioner, Dr KB,
dated 12 January 2011 stated “[PP] is not delusional”, the Board
noted Dr KB appeared to have no specific psychiatric
qualifications that
displaced their conclusion that PP did suffer from a Delusional Disorder as
expressed by the above practitioners.
In contrast, the opinion of a number of
psychologists and psychiatrists was that PP was currently, or at least at the
time of their
respective examinations of PP, suffering from a Delusional
Further, while not pursued in oral evidence at the hearing, as referred to
above, the Report on Involuntary Status recorded in November
belief that her partner had been trying to infect her with an STD and that she
had been infected, despite four negative
tests which indicated she was not
While acknowledging the natural impulse PP would feel as a mother in trying
to do what she was best for her children, the Board did
not accept that her
behaviour could be described as that of any justifiably concerned mother.
PP’s apparent misinterpretation
of things, including the reported belief
by her psychologist in 2006 that she may be delusional, pre-dated the 7 June
she said she received from her telephone. Further, the documentary
evidence and evidence of symptoms resulting from that incident
were inconclusive
and inconsistent with symptoms reasonably expected as resulting from such an
Given the factors discussed above, the Board was satisfied that PP continued
to be suffering from a Delusional Disorder, and acknowledged
the likelihood that
her difficult circumstances were accompanied by depressive symptoms.
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
2. Section 8(1)(b)
Does PP's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that
treatment be obtained by PP being subject to an involuntary treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in s3 of the
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it
The Board accepted evidence that PP required immediate
treatment for her mental illness and was satisfied the treatment could be
by her being an inpatient subject to an involuntary treatment
In forming its view, the Board accepted the medical evidence provided by Dr
AA and Dr BB, which was supported by evidence in PP’s
medical records,
that the necessary treatment had been provided by means of involuntary treatment
since 16 December 2010. Dr AA acknowledged
that in accordance with PP views and
the subsequent order of the Supreme Court, PP had not been administered any
anti-psychotic medication.
He did however argue that in conjunction with the
more vigorously controlled and monitored surroundings the hospital provided, PP
had been afforded more involved treatment than would have been available to her
in a community setting.
Based on the conclusion discussed above that PP was suffering from a mental
illness, the Board accepted that ongoing treatment was
required and that a
failure to provide that treatment would risk PP becoming more unwell. Despite
PP’s apparent progress made
since her admission and her presentation as an
intelligent and capable person at the hearing, the evidence before it at the
satisfied the Board that ongoing treatment was still necessary and that
the need for that treatment was immediate.
While the Board acknowledged that despite a long period of treatment the
mental illness PP experienced had not been ‘remedied’,
it appeared
that there had been an improvement in her condition, particularly with reference
to the risks she faced from a worsening
of her illness or the potential that she
was a risk to others if unwell. The Board therefore accepted that treatment
remained necessary
for PP and that it was required to lessen the ill-effects or
pain and suffering PP was likely to endure if she were not appropriately
Accordingly, this criterion was met
3. Section 8(1)(c)
Because of PP's mental illness, is involuntary treatment of PP
necessary for her health or safety (whether to prevent a deterioration
physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the protection of members of
the public?
The Board was satisfied that the involuntary treatment of PP was necessary
for her health, but not for her safety and did not form
a conclusion as to
whether involuntary treatment was necessary for the protection of members of the
As discussed above, the Board accepted evidence that PP’s mental health
had deteriorated to the point that in December 2010
she required hospital
admission. While PP appeared to have a complex history of engagement with
treating professionals since at least
2006, the Board formed the view that PP
had likely been suffering a degree of disability from her delusions for some
time prior to
her admission. This was evidenced by the significant involvement
of a number of agencies and medical practitioners who by and large
that PP was suffering from delusions that could amount to a mental illness.
Although PP had not been administered any anti-psychotic medication, which
the treating team considered would have benefitted her,
as discussed above the
Board accepted that the more vigorously controlled and monitored surroundings
the hospital provided, while
not what PP wanted, had afforded some respite from
the stresses, duties and responsibilities she would face if that support were
not available.
The Board concluded there was not sufficient evidence to conclude that
PP’s involuntary treatment was necessary for her own
safety, though it was
open to speculation that the repeated allegations PP had been making and the
actions she took could place her
at risk of coming into conflict with other
persons. Further, while PP perceived her actions as being protective of her
for the same reasons the Board considered it foreseeable that if PP
acted on a delusional belief or misperception that the children
might be placed
at some risk.
Nevertheless, given that the criterion described in s8(1)(c) was satisfied by
the Board’s conclusion that PP’s involuntary
treatment was necessary
to prevent a deterioration in her mental condition, the Board did not make a
formal determination as to whether
PP involuntary treatment was necessary for
the protection of members of the public. As involuntary treatment was determined
necessary for PP’s health, this was sufficient to satisfy the
criterion contained in s8(1)(c).
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
Has PP refused or is she unable to consent to the
necessary treatment for the mental illness?
The Report on Involuntary Status stated that PP was not capable of providing
informed consent, stating that “[PP] lacks insight
condition.” When questioned by the Board about PP’s current mental
state, Dr AA confirmed that this remained
his view. Ms Fritze, on behalf of PP
acknowledged that PP had refused treatment and so did not argue this criterion
was not met.
While the pro forma used by services to develop the Report on Involuntary
Status invites a response to whether a patient has refused
treatment only if a
patient is described as being capable of giving informed consent, the
these out as an alternative.
This criterion is met if as section 8(1)(d) states, “the person has
refused or is unable to consent to necessary treatment for
While Dr AA confirmed his view that PP was not capable of providing consent
to necessary treatment, the Board concluded that given
her history of treatment
and deterioration to the extent that she required hospitalisation on 16 December
2010, her refusal to accept
necessary treatment was sufficient to satisfy this
The Board noted that Justice Davies of the Supreme Court in her order of 24
December 2010 recorded the undertaking of Dr AA not to
administer any form of
anti-psychotic medication in accordance with an order that “Until 14
January 2011 or further order,
[Dr AA and the Northern Hospital] are restrained
from administering any form of involuntary anti-psychotic treatment upon
While the Board acknowledged that the order of Justice Davies remained in
place, with the return of the matter set down for the day
following the
Board’s hearing, PP’s decision to refuse such treatment from 16
December 2010 predated the making of that
order. The Board were also satisfied
that the order was sought as a means of formalising and giving judicial force to
wish to not be given the medication considered by the treating team
to be appropriate for her.
It was the Board’s view that PP’s understanding of her current
mental health status remained poor. FS appeared highly
resistant to accepting
medication as part of her treatment, saying, “I don’t want you to
take into account that I don’t
want to take any medications.”
Therefore, weighing the evidence discussed above, the Board concluded that DR
was both refusing and was not capable of providing consent
to necessary
treatment of her mental illness.
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
Is PP unable to receive adequate treatment for the
mental illness in a manner less restrictive of her freedom of decision and
The Board was required to consider if PP was able to receive
adequate treatment for her mental
illness in a manner less restrictive of her
freedom of decision and action than that provided by
being an inpatient. In
PP’s case, being treated by community treatment order or as a
patient were the two less restrictive forms of treatment than her continuing
to remain an inpatient subject to an involuntary treatment
PP believed she could be treated in a less restrictive manner than as an
involuntary inpatient. While PP did not believe she had a
mental illness or
needed treatment, she said she preferred to receive treatment in the community,
preferably as a voluntary patient.
While the Board noted that this was PP’s first admission to a
psychiatric ward and that she had been treated voluntarily for
some time in the
preceding years, as was evidenced by the need for her hospital admission since
16 December 2010, the Board were
satisfied that she had experienced a
significant deterioration in her mental state. The Board were not satisfied that
PP would receive
the necessary treatment as a voluntary patient, especially
given her fixed views about her inability to be treated by a specific
medicines that the treating team considered were justified.
The Board also concluded that if PP were made a voluntary inpatient, she
would be very unlikely to remain in hospital of her own volition
and the ability
of a treating team to sustain needed interaction with her and observation of her
symptoms would be inadequate.
Dr AA had said that the current plans were to discharge PP onto a community
treatment order on the day after the hearing, though it
had earlier been stated
that not all of the arrangements regarding case management had been finalised.
Given the importance of a
treating team to maintain some interaction and
monitoring of PP’s progress and the potential for great difficulties for
if she relapsed, the Board considered in the absence of confirmation that
case management and other supports were immediately available,
insufficient evidence to conclude that PP would receive the treatment currently
necessary for her mental illness if the
Board ordered she be immediately
discharged from hospital.
Integral to this consideration was the observation that PP was less likely to
receive necessary treatment if the proper advance arrangements
were not in place
for her to receive that treatment, particularly given the lateness of the day
and the stated intention of the treating
team to assess PP for discharge onto a
community treatment order the following day.
Accordingly, this criterion was met.
Order That The Authorised Psychiatrist Place PP On a Community Treatment
As discussed above, the Board concluded that PP currently met the s8(1)
criteria authorising involuntary status under the
Section 36(4) of the
authorises the Board to make a further order in its
assessment of the least restrictive means by which PP can receive necessary
If the Board confirms the involuntary treatment order, the Board may order
the authorised psychiatrist to make a community treatment
order for the patient
within a reasonable period specified by the Board, if the Board considers that
the treatment required for the
person can be obtained through the making of a
community treatment order.
The Board did however conclude there was evidence to justify making an order
that PP continued to be treated as an involuntary inpatient
for up to four days,
during which time it was envisaged that PP’s treatment would be continued
by making her subject to a community
treatment order. While Dr AA’s
evidence had been that he expected PP would be placed on a community treatment
order on the
following day, the Board considered it prudent to not unduly limit
the service’s discretion given that the hearing was concluding
and were unsure how this might affect arrangements for everyone involved on the
following day.
Accordingly, the Board concluded that the least restrictive
manner with which PP could be treated
was to continue her involuntary
inpatient status for a period of up to four days, being Monday 17
January 2011, during which the treating psychiatrist would discharge PP to
the community, subject to a community treatment order.
Following the Board delivering its decision, Dr BB in conjunction with Dr AA
informed the Board that in accordance with the Board’s
decision, PP would
be discharged to a community treatment order immediately after the hearing so
that she could go home with the
family members who attended the hearing.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient’s treatment plan, the Board must be satisfied
that the requirements of s35A(1) of the
have been met. The Board considered
each of the requirements in turn.
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
s19A in making, reviewing or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
The treatment plan was prepared by Dr NY and authorised by Dr AA on 12
January 2011. The copy provided to the Board was not marked
as being due for
review. The plan provided to the Board was not signed by PP, though PP confirmed
that she had seen the treatment
The treatment plan provided was brief and offered generic information
outlining the types of treatment to be provided to PP, including
the observation
that she was not currently being given psychiatric medication.
The current treatment plan was made the day before the hearing and included
the stated intention to engage with PP, commence community
treatment, initiate
medication, work with her psychologist, discuss possible case management and to
keep the welfare of the children
and the safety of the carers in mind.
The Board determined it was not efficacious to order a new treatment plan
given the circumstances it was reviewing and the Board’s
intention to
order treatment in the community in the near future, for which a new plan would
be necessary.
While more information would have been of assistance, given that a new
treatment plan was already acknowledged as being needed for
her intended
treatment on a community treatment order, the Board was satisfied the authorised
psychiatrist had complied with s19A
in making the treatment plan.
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental
health service?
Subject to the issues discussed above, the
Board was satisfied that PP and her treating team were aware of the issues being
by the treatment plan and concluded that the plan was capable of being
implemented by the mental health service.
Therefore, the Board was satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has
complied with s19A in making, reviewing or revising the plan,
and the plan is
capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
As a result, as all the s8(1) criteria were met, therefore the Board made the
determination set out on page 1.
Dated the 31st day of January 2011
FOR THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (233 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (114 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter