URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VRAT/2008/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pullicino (HAR) - App 05 2008 [2008] VRAT 8 (21 July 2008)
THE COUNTY COURT OF VICTORIA
AT MELBOURNE
CIVIL DIVISION
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL (VICTORIA)
APPEAL NUMBER 5 0F
TONY PULLICINO
THE STEWARDS OF HARNESS RACING VICTORIA
Respondents
HIS HONOUR JUDGE HICKS
MR P BEAUMONT
MR B PEARCE
DATE OF HEARING
DATE OF JUDGMENT
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Pullicino v Harness Racing Victoria
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
Catchwords:
APPEARANCES
For the Respondents
Mr T Forrest, QC
Harness Racing Victoria
For the Appellant
Mr M Higgins
Matthew Hammond
HIS HONOUR:
1 This is an appeal by Tony Pullicino, licensed trainer, against a decision
of the Stewards made on 10 April 2008 whereby Mr Pullicino
was found guilty
of breaching Harness Racing Rule No 190(1) in respect of his horse
‘Chipsamissing’ and was subsequently
found guilty and disqualified
for a period of six months as from 10 April 2008.
2 Harness Racing Rule No.
190(1) states:
“A horse shall be
presented for a race free of prohibited substances.”
3 Rule 190(2) states:
“If a horse is presented for a race otherwise
than in accordance with Sub-rule (1), the trainer of the horse is guilty of an
4 Rule 190(4) states:
“An offence under Sub-rule (2) ... is committed
regardless of the circumstances in which the prohibited substance came to be
present in or on the horse.”
5 Rule 188A(1) states:
“The following are prohibited substances:
(b) ... alkalinising agents.”
6 Rule 188A(2) states:
“The following substances when
present at or
the levels set out are excepted from the provisions of subrule
(a) Alkalinising Agents, when evidenced by total carbon dioxide (TCO2)
present at a concentration of 36.0 mmol/L in plasma.”
7 The net result of the rules means that if a horse has within its system on
race day a total carbon dioxide reading (TCO2) present
at a concentration of
greater than 36.0 mmol/L in plasma, it has within its system a prohibited
8 The appellant is a licensed trainer, and on 1 November 2007 at the Cranbourne
harness race meeting he presented his horse ‘Chipsamissing’
1, the Freeway Ford Claiming Pace.
9 ‘Chipsamissing’ was placed
fourth in the event.
10 A pre-race blood sample was taken from
‘Chipsamissing’ prior to it competing in Race 1. Such blood sample
was subsequently
analysed and found by two independent laboratories to have a
TCO2 level of 37.1 mmol/L.
11 On 10 April 2008, after holding an inquiry into
the matter, Stewards found the appellant had presented his horse
‘Chipsamissing’
at such harness race meeting when it was not free
from a prohibited substance, in that such horse had an elevated TCO2 reading
the prescribed limit.
of Analysis
Certificates
12 At approximately 6.04 pm before the race in which it competed,
‘Chipsamissing’ was presented before the veterinary
Dr Simon Bray, where a pre-race blood sample was taken from the horse. At
the completion of the blood sample being taken,
registered trainer Tony
Pullicino signed Racing Analytical Services Limited Sample Identity Document
13 Subsequently that sample was conveyed to Racing Analytical
Services Victoria for analysis.
14 On 5 November 2007, Racing Analytical
Services Limited notified Harness Racing Victoria that Sample No V107420 had
been analysed
and indicated a TCO2 level of 37.1 mmol/L which is subject to an
uncertainty in measurement of plus or minus 1.0 mmol/L.
15 As is standard
practice, Racing Analytical Services Limited forwarded a reserve sample to be
tested by a second independent laboratory,
in this case Racing Science Centre in
Queensland, for analysis.
16 On 7 November 2007, Racing Analytical Services
Limited notified Harness Racing Victoria that Racing Science Centre had
its referee analysis. The results indicated that Sample No V107420
contained a TCO2 level of 37.1 mmol/L, a reading which is again
subject to an
uncertainty in measurement of plus or minus 1.0 mmol/L.
17 Harness Racing
Rule 191(1) states
certificate from a person or drug testing laboratory ... which certifies the
presence of a prohibited substance in ... a
horse at ... a particular time ...
is prima facie evidence of the matters
certified.”
18 Rule 191(2) states:
“If another person or drug testing laboratory ...
analyses a portion of the sample ... referred to in sub-rule (1) and certifies
the presence of a prohibited substance in the sample ... that certification
together with the certification referred to in sub-rule
(1) is conclusive
evidence of the presence of a prohibited
substance.”
19 Rule 191(3) states:
“A certificate furnished under this rule ... from
a horse at a meeting shall be prima facie evidence if sub rule (1) only applies,
and conclusive evidence if both sub rules (1) and (2) apply, that the horse was
presented for a race not free of prohibited
substances.”
20 Rule 191(7) states:
“Notwithstanding the provisions of this rule,
certificates do not possess evidentiary value nor establish an offence,
it is proved
that the certification procedure or any act or omission forming
part of or relevant to the process resulting in the issue of a certificate,
was materially flawed
21 In my opinion, the onus of proof as to all issues lies upon the Stewards to
prove the charge to the relevant standard of proof,
including the onus upon the
Stewards of proving under Rule 191(7) that the process resulting in the issue of
the certificate was
not materially flawed. Whilst not free from legal
controversy, both parties desired to proceed on the basis that Rule 191(7) casts
an evidentiary burden on the appellant to raise the issue as to whether the
“process” was materially flawed but that
the ultimate onus of
proving that the process was not materially flawed rests with the Stewards. As
both parties agreed to this
approach, I propose to proceed on that basis for the
purpose of this appeal.
22 I note, however, an argument could be mounted that
the onus – considering the words of Rule 191(7) is for someone to prove
that “it was materially flawed” and that onus, as a matter of logic
considering the words, is on the appellant. Rule
191(7) speaks in terms of ,
“Proving ... the process ... was materially flawed”.
23 Further,
Rule 191(7) follows deeming provisions making certificates issued by two
independent laboratories as conclusive evidence
of the matters stated therein.
It is only when subject to Rule 191(7) where it is proved that the process
– was materially
flawed do the certificates lack evidentiary
24 However, as stated, both parties desire to proceed in the way
suggested and as it is favourable to the appellant, I propose to
proceed as the
parties suggest.
25 The onus is on the Stewards to prove on the balance of
probabilities that Mr Pullicino breached Rule 190(1). I regard a breach
rule as a serious offence. The standard of proof to be applied is that standard
of proof referred to in Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
confirmed again by the High Court in Rejfek v McElroy
[1965] HCA 46
(1965) 112 CLR 517.
Whilst the standard is on the balance of probabilities, I must be reasonably
satisfied that the Stewards have proven the charge.
It is not a mere matter of
a mechanical comparison between competing views. I am bound and must consider
the seriousness of the
charge and the gravity of the consequences which may
follow a particular finding.
26 Accordingly, if the Stewards prove to the
relevant standard that a horse is presented for a race not free of prohibited
substances,
then the licensed trainer of such horse is guilty of an
27 As the High Court has stated, however, in Rejfek v
difference between the criminal standard of proof and the civil standard of
proof is no mere matter of words: it is a matter
of critical substance. No
matter how grave the fact which is to be found in a civil case, the mind has
only to be reasonably satisfied
and has not with respect to any matter in issue
in such a proceeding to attain that degree of certainty which is indispensable
the support of a conviction upon a criminal
The Challenge to the Process of
28 There was no challenge in this case to the taking of the blood sample from
the relevant horse, the safe conduct and continuity
concerning such blood sample
or that Racing Analytical Services Ltd (Victoria) (RASL) was not an accredited
testing agency or that
Racing Science Centre (Queensland) was not an accredited
agency for testing of such blood.
29 The challenge in this case was mounted
on a very specific issue. It concerned the use of the Beckman Synchron ELISE
Autoanalyser
(the ELISE machine) which is a machine used in RASL and other
laboratories throughout Australia and overseas to test for TCO2 in
30 The challenge concentrated on whether there had been a proper
calibration of the ELISE machine during the analytical process to
ensure it had
been operating correctly.
31 By consent, there was tendered before me a
transcript of the Stewards’ Inquiry.
32 The only witness called
before this tribunal was Dr John Howard Vine, who was the director of RASL.
Dr Vine gave detailed evidence
concerning the operation and use of the ELISE
machine to analyse TCO2 in equine plasma.
33 Dr Vine, in addition to giving
evidence before this tribunal, tendered a statement which fully set out his
qualifications and the
analytical process involved in the use of the ELISE
34 There was no challenge to Dr Vine’s qualifications as
a relevant expert in the field under examination.
35 The transcript from the
Stewards’ Inquiry was tendered before me and, accordingly, becomes part of
the evidentiary material
for this tribunal to consider, including as it does
unsworn statements from Dr Kibby, a witness called by the appellant before
36 As however, Mr Higgins, who appeared on behalf of the
appellant, properly conceded that, as Dr Kibby was not called before this
tribunal, the well-known rule in Jones v Dunkel applied.
37 As Newton and
Norris JJ, in O’Donnell v Reichard
[1975] VicRp 89
[1975] VR 916
at 929 stated:
where a party without explanation fails to call a witness a person whom he might
reasonably be expected to call, if that
person’s evidence would be
favourable to him, then, although the jury may not treat as evidence what they
may as a matter of
speculation think that that person would have said if he had
been called as a witness, nevertheless it is open to the jury (tribunal)
infer that that person’s evidence would not have helped that party’s
case; if the jury draw that inference, then they
may properly take it into
account against the party in question for two purposes, namely: (a) in deciding
whether to accept any
particular evidence, which has in fact been given, either
for or against that party, and which relates to a matter with respect to
the person not called as a witness could have spoken; and (b) in deciding
whether to draw inferences as fact, which were open
to them upon the evidence
which has been given, again in relation to matters with respect to which the
person not called as a witness
38 In all the circumstances, I state that I have applied the rule in Jones v
Dunkel. Irrespective of the rule in Jones v Dunkel,
I should state at the
outset that I found Dr Vine a most credible witness. I accept his evidence
as both truthful and accurate.
I state that I prefer and accept the evidence of
Dr Vine as to all issues and matters, including those where it is said they
in conflict with Dr Kibby.
The Beckman Synchron ELISE
Autoanalyser
Background summary
39 The Beckman ELISE machine has been used in a number of Australian and
overseas laboratories for the testing of TCO2 in equine
40 A number
of safeguards are utilised by the operator to ensure the Beckman ELISE machine
is operating properly. The machine is
calibrated on several occasions both
prior to and during its operation testing for screening purposes. If such
screening process
turns up a positive result in the equine plasma, then the
whole process is repeated again on the particular positive sample, but
quadruplicate, to ensure greater accuracy.
41 There are a number of
calibrations or checks made along the way to ensure the Beckman ELISE machine is
operating properly.
(1) The machine is calibrated using Beckman low and high calibrators.
Step (2) The machine is then set to analyse a set of known standards.
This step involves using ASE standards, which are of concentrations of 27, 30,
33, 36 and 39 mmol/L, and the accuracy of the results
returned is checked by
linear regression analysis.
The linear regression process provides a means of verifying that the response of
the ELISE is linear over the range 27-39 mmol/L
and is then used to calibrate
the ELISE by enabling measured TCO
concentrations to be corrected
to “true” concentrations based on the known values of the ASE
The linear regression analysis may be represented graphically as shown in
Attachment 2 in Dr John Vine’s statement where it
can be seen in the
calibration graph that the measurements lie very closely to straight line. That
is, there is a linear relationship
between the measured value and the known
values of the ASE standards.
Step (3) The next step is the instrument is flushed.
Step (4) After flushing, certified reference material (C.R.M.) is then run
through the machine to further ensure acceptable accuracy
at the critical level
of 36 mmol/L.
42 It is only if all these calibration checks are satisfactory does the testing
methodology allow the relevant sample to be tested
and then just for screening
43 Thereafter, if the screening test has identified a positive
sample or a sample for further testing, the whole process is repeated
in quadruplicate, to ensure greater accuracy.
44 The result is also subject
to a statistical safeguard by the program that is on a notebook computer which
is attached to the machine.
Specific Challenges to the Use of the ELISE machine
45 The first challenge may be disposed of relatively quickly.
orally before this tribunal and in his written submissions, Mr Higgins, who
appeared on behalf of the appellant, mounted a
challenge that one of the
calibration methods used to test the accuracy and reliability of the analytical
process, namely, the method
called linear regression analysis, Step (2) was
materially flawed.
47 As stated, this process (Step (2)), involves certain
known standards (ASE standards) to be run through the ELISE machine.
48 The ASE standards are reference materials with known TCO2 concentrations
at levels of interest, namely, 27, 30, 33, 36 and 39 mmol/L.
After these five
samples have been run for analysis, the machine transmits to a computer graph
page so as to show whether such analysis
produced a linear response on the graph
in the notebook.
49 This linear regression process provides a means of
verifying that the response of the ELISE machine is linear over the range 27
39 mmol/L and is then used to calibrate the ELISE machine by enabling measured
TCO2 concentrations to be corrected to “true”
concentrations based
on the known values of the ASE standards.
50 The linear regression analysis
may be represented graphically and where it can be seen in the calibration graph
that the measurements
lie very close to a straight line; that is, there is a
linear relationship between the measured value and the known values to the
standards then the testing process has passed this calibration test.
screening analysis calibration process is accepted if the correlation
coefficient (r) is greater than 0.999 and the calibration
graph shows no obvious
abnormalities.
52 When Dr Kibby, scientist and analytical chemist, was
called by the appellant before the Stewards, he gave evidence before the
that there had been no proper linear regression analysis upon the
sampling of the five ASE standards as there was no proper linear
relationship
between the measured value and the known values of the ASE standards. He was of
the opinion that no true linear response
had resulted and that the variations on
the graph were outside the acceptable range for a linear response. However,
when Dr Vine
gave evidence before this tribunal, he was of the opinion that
Dr Kibby was wrong and that he applied a wrong mathematical formula
determining that the response in question was outside scientifically acceptable
linear relationships.
53 It is clear on the evidence before me that
Dr Kibby was wrong before the Stewards and had applied an incorrect
mathematical analysis.
Dr Kibby had applied r2 (namely 0.9994) not r (namely
this correlation co-efficient – in question 0.9997). After hearing
explanation given in the witness box from Dr Vine, Mr Higgins, who
appeared on behalf of the appellant, properly and sensibly
in my opinion,
accepted that one of the arguments mounted before the Stewards, and was intended
to be mounted before this tribunal,
could not be maintained and that the opinion
of Dr Kibby on this point was wrong.
54 As a result, Mr Higgins no
longer challenged on behalf of the appellant that one of the calibration methods
used, namely, a linear
regression response, had not been properly and accurately
55 A second challenge was made to the use in the RASL laboratory
of a flush put through the ELISE machine (Step (3)).
56 After the linear
regression analysis calibration takes place, a flush is then run through the
ELISE machine. The flush solution
can be any solution with a known TCO2 reading
of approximately 30 mmol/L or less (in other words, under the 36 mmol/L
57 Usually in the RASL laboratory, the Beckman high calibrator
solution, normally 30 mmol/L, was the material used for the purpose
flush. Whilst Dr Vine gave evidence that it was normally 30 mmol/L, there
would be nothing prohibiting one of the lower standard
solutions being used as
58 Dr Vine gave evidence that, as the flush is put through the
machine, the machine reads the flush material.
59 Dr Vine stated though,
that the readings obtained from the flush material are not reliable and should
not be used as a measure
of ensuring proper performance of the
60 The reasons given by Dr Vine, and which I accept, are as follows.
Firstly, as the flush material is left in an open cup and can
be used regularly
as a flush, changes to the flush material through evaporation or other
atmospheric conditions may change the exact
TCO2 levels within the flush.
Therefore the flush material is unreliable insofar as producing any known
measurement is concerned.
That is, the flush is not a reliable standard. Dr
Vine stated that the flush may have significantly variable TCO value during the
day. As Dr Vine stated, this flush material:
an unreliable material to use for any purpose other than as a flushing
61 Secondly, no matter what the machine reads of the flush material, there is no
linear regression process applied to such a reading
to produce a true
62 During the tribunal hearing, Mr Higgins, on behalf of the
appellant, challenged the accuracy and proper calibration of the machine
basis that the flush material being used was producing consistently high
readings, i.e. higher than the believed level of
the flush 30
63 However, as Dr Vine stated, as far as the flush material is
concerned, there is no known TCO2 level in the flush. Secondly, no
regression processes is applied to such readings to ensure they are corrected to
true readings.
64 As stated, the challenge was made that the machine was
reading the flush material at a high level. In response, Dr Vine stated:
“And, in fact, if you were to do a linear regression calculation of this
measured value of 31, you would actually come up
with a value sum of less than
30. So, in fact, if anything, that material would be reading low.”
Again, I accept the evidence
of Dr Vine as being credible, truthful and
accurate. This challenge can be dismissed.
65 The third challenge that was
raised to the analytical process using the ELISE machine was the use of the ASE
66 ASE stands for Australian Scientific Enterprises which is a
laboratory which produces standard solutions to be used in scientific
such as the ELISE machine.
67 The challenge was that Australian Scientific
Enterprises (ASE) standards were not independently certified.
submissions were put before this tribunal concerning the presumption of
regularity and, accordingly, I will not deal with the
issue as to whether such
presumption applies here or not.
69 Further, it should be acknowledged that
whether a standard is certified or not the question must remain as to whether,
of evidence, the Briginshaw test can be satisfied that an accurate
standard was used.
70 Dr Vine gave evidence that ASE itself provides an
internal certification process. Such process certifies as to the accuracy of
the standard used.
71 In addition, Dr Vine gave evidence that it is
virtually impossible to purchase standards to be processed through the ELISE
which is certified by a third party to national standards of
measurement. Those materials simply do not exist.
72 Dr Vine gave evidence
that the materials purchased from ASE were the best available materials for this
purpose and were regularly
used throughout laboratories in Australia.
addition, Dr Vine gave evidence that, within the laboratory, there is
independently certified reference material prepared to
a certain known TCO2
level which is used through the Beckman ELISE machine.
74 The certified
reference material (CRM) used by the laboratory is material supplied by ASE to
the National Measurement Institute.
Dr Vine gave evidence that the
certified reference material has a certified TCO2 concentration of 36.3 mmol/L,
plus or minus 0.05
mmol/L at 95 per cent confidence level.
gave evidence that the CRM is used to provide traceability to national standards
of measurement.
76 The use of the CRM in the operating process checks on the
validity of the ASE standard measurements provided.
77 Considering the
evidence of Dr Vine that ASE is a provider of the best standards available,
that ASE itself certifies the accuracy
of the material supplied, that it is
virtually impossible to buy standards which have been certified by a third party
to national
standards of measurement, that a known CRM sample for 36.3 mmol/L
provides a fully traceable reference to a national standard of
measurement and
that the use of such CRM acts as a validity check on the ASE measurements, I am
satisfied to the relevant standard
that the ASE standard used in the ELISE
machine is, on all the evidence, a proper, accurate and reliable standard to be
the purposes of calibration of the ELISE machine to ensure that such
machine produces a reliable and accurate result.
78 A further challenge was
made concerning the use of the CRM that is put through the machine (Step
79 The CRM certifies a reading of 36.3 mmol/L, plus or minus 0.05
millimoles.
80 Dr Vine gave evidence that the CRM is analysed in
quadruplicate after the flush solution is put through the ELISE machine. The
data for the CRM, is shown on page 133 of the Exhibit Book (Exhibit 2) and
headed “Control Sample”. Dr Vine stated that
the calculated value
of the “control” on such worksheet was within the acceptable range
of 35.8 to 36.8 mmol/L.
81 Dr Vine gave evidence, for instance, that the
reading of 36.784 on page 133 of the Exhibit Book referring to the TCO2
was a perfectly proper and acceptable range.
82 Dr Vine gave
evidence that, if it had been outside the range, namely, outside 36.8, then the
sample would have been re-run and,
if it remained over thereafter, the ELISE
machine would have been recalibrated.
83 As Dr Vine stated, the
calculated values of the CRM analysed before and after the blood sample tubes
must be in the range of 35.8
to 36.8 mmol/L and, as such, the two controlled
samples, as so analysed on page 133 of the TCO2 worksheet, demonstrate that the
readings of 36.784 and 36.535 were within the acceptable range.
stage, it would be fair to say that Mr Higgins, on behalf of the appellant,
started cross-examining Dr Vine that the standard
deviation of the
replicated measurements of the CRM must be in the range of 0.03 to 0.46 mmol/L
and confused the standard deviation
with, in fact, the range. The proper range
was between 35.8 and 36.8 mmol/L.
85 The standard deviation is entirely
different. The standard deviation is that the four replicate measurements of
CRM must be in
the range of 0.03 to 0.46 mmol/L.
86 As Dr Vine stated in
cross-examination, it was not comparing apples with apples.
87 The acceptable
range of a reading for the CRM must be in the range of 35.8 to 36.8 mmol/L.
That range was satisfied.
88 The standard deviation of the replicate
measurements of the CRM must be in the range of 0.03 to 0.46 mmol/L and that
standard deviation
was acceptable – see attachment 4 to the statement of
Dr Vine tendered in evidence before me.
89 Accordingly, I accept the
evidence of Dr Vine as both accurate and reliable where he stated the
acceptable range for the CRM in
the sample analysed was within acceptable
standards, both as to range and standard deviation.
90 At one stage,
Mr Higgins also mounted a challenge on behalf of the appellant as to why
0.5 millimoles was an allowable range variation,
i.e. had to be between plus or
minus 0.5 of 36.3, namely, 35.8 to 36.8 mmol/L.
91 Dr Vine gave evidence
before the tribunal that was the standard variation for the range allowed in all
laboratories and was consistent
with a report of Professor Hibbert into this
area, including one of the working papers that came out of Professor
92 Again, I accept the evidence of Dr Vine that the
allowance of 0.5 millimoles for the variation in the range from the CRM as
is the proper and scientifically acceptable allowance to make and in
no way affects the reliability and accuracy of any ultimate
93 Finally, though not greatly pursued, was the question of the
overall uncertainty of measurement allowed in the certification process
mmol/L. Dr Vine gave evidence that such uncertainty level is a
scientifically reliable level of uncertainty and one which
Professor Hibbert, in
a leading paper in Australia, has concluded is a safe allowance, and one which
takes into account the various
uncertainty of measurements allowed for during
the working process of the Beckman ELISE machine.
94 On all the evidence, I
am satisfied that, with regard to the relevant Briginshaw test, the Stewards
have proven that the certification
procedure, or any act or omission forming
part of or relevant to the process resulting in the issue of a certificate, was
not materially
95 As such, the certificates have the evidentiary
value prescribed to them by Rule 191 of the Harness Racing Rules and, as such,
production of the two relevant certificates from the Victorian laboratory
and the Queensland laboratory are conclusive evidence of
the presence of the
prohibited substance in ‘Chipsamissing’, being 37.1 mmol/L and, as
such, outside the prescribed limit.
96 Accordingly, I find that Chipsamissing
was presented for race 1 at the Cranbourne harness race meeting on 1 November
when it had
within its system a prohibited substance.
97 It should be noted
that the sample so analysed and tested in Victoria, and the sample analysed and
tested in Queensland each produced
a result of 37.1 mmol/L as being present in
the equine plasma of ‘Chipsamissing.’
98 As has been stated by the Racing Appeals Tribunal on a number of occasions,
the rule which prohibits the presentation of a horse
at a race meeting with a
prohibited substance within its system is a rule designed to ensure, as far as
possible, that there is a
level playing field. The use of drugs is something
that must be deterred. It is a matter of critical importance to the racing
and integrity of the racing industry. The responsibility is on the
trainer, and on the trainer alone, to present his or her horse
free from a
prohibited substance. The rule itself is, of course, one of absolute liability
and designed to preserve integrity and
public confidence in the racing industry.
Principles of general deterrence and denunciation clearly apply to a trainer who
his or her horse with a prohibited substance in its system.
this case, specific deterrence also has its part to play as the appellant has
one prior conviction relating to presenting a
horse at a race meeting when it
was not free of a prohibited substance, namely, an excess TCO2 reading some six
years ago when he
was disqualified on appeal for a period of five months.
100 I have applied the well-known sentencing principles that relate to the
treatment of prior convictions for sentencing purposes
when determining an
appropriate penalty in this case.
101 I should add that the appellant has
other matters for which he has been convicted, but I regard those of little or
no relevance
to this penalty exercise.
102 In the tribunal hearing before
me, a penalty schedule document was tendered outlining the various penalties
that persons have
received for breaching excess TCO2 readings over a number of
103 In the end, whilst such schedule is useful insofar as it provides
an approximate range of appropriate sentences or penalties,
each case and each
penalty must depend on its own individual circumstances.
104 On the facts in
this case, I am prepared to accept there is no evidence whatsoever of any
deliberate intubation or drenching of
the horse in question by use of an
alkalizing agent.
105 However, in the circumstances before me, it cannot be
said that the appellant has demonstrated remorse as he has pleaded not
106 As to the appellant’s personal circumstances, he is still
relatively a young man with a large team of horses. He now trains
Victoria with some 20 horses under his and his family’s control and he
pays the bills for some 10 to 15 of the horses.
107 As to his financial
status, he has got some personal loans totalling $120,000 with monthly
repayments of $2,500. He has currently
a staff of two working for him and any
period of disqualification would have repercussions for them in that they would
employment. Further, any period of disqualification would mean that
the 20 horses mentioned would all need to be transferred to
108 Further, he is part-owner of a horse named
“Sandler”, which has an excellent chance of achieving success in
which carry substantial prize money, and another horse, which the
appellant described as a particularly special horse with outstanding
opportunities for success in future significant races.
109 The appellant,
since approximately the age of 14, has spent his whole life in the harness
racing industry and substantially relies
upon it for his livelihood. The
tribunal accepts that, apart from his experience in the harness racing industry,
the appellant is
not qualified in any other skill or trade.
110 In short, the
tribunal accepts that any period of disqualification upon the appellant will
have significant and substantial consequences
111 Nevertheless,
applying all relevant penalty principles, it is my opinion that a period of
disqualification is the only appropriate
112 In all the
circumstances, the appellant is found guilty of breaching Rule 190(1) of the
Harness Racing Rules and is disqualified
for a period of six months.
all the circumstances, I order a refund of the deposit.
114 I should state
that this decision is mine and mine alone. However, I am grateful to my two
experienced colleagues for their assistance.
I note that they each unanimously
support my decision.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (220 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter