URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/275.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sternfein v Bloom [2025] VSCA 275 (14 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCI 2024 0109
JONATHAN BLOOM and KELVIN GULEY (who are sued as the
Executors of the estate of MAURICE BRUMER, deceased)
Respondents
RICHARDS, KENNY JJA and J FORREST AJA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
16 October 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
14 November 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 275
JUDGMENT APPEALED
VSC 506 (Moore
ADMINISTRATION AND PROBATE – Application
for leave to appeal against summary dismissal of claim for family provision
Administration and Probate Act 1958
stepchild of deceased – No provision in will – Applicant lived with
deceased for seven years in childhood after
mother formed relationship with
deceased – Deceased and applicant’s mother separated – Whether
applicant an ‘eligible
person’ within the definition in
Administration and Probate Act 1958
– Application for leave to
appeal granted – Appeal allowed.
Administration and Probate Act
Innes-Irons v Forrest
[2016] VSC 782
Scott‑Mackenzie
[2016] VSC 563
Whitehead v State Trustees Ltd
(2011) 4 ASTLR 528, discussed.
Ms C Sparke KC
Respondents:
Mr W F Gillies
Respondents:
RICHARDS JA
Sternfein is the son of Barbara and Chaim Sternfein. Chaim died in 1988 and in
1990 Barbara formed a relationship with Maurice
Brumer. From about May 1990,
Barbara and her two children, son Ilan (who was 12) and daughter Tali, lived
with Maurice. In January
1997, when Ilan was 19, he left home.
died on 16 July 2022 at the age of 78. He made no provision in his will for
Ilan or his two biological children.
March 2023, Ilan commenced a proceeding under
Administration
and Probate Act 1958
(‘the Act’) seeking that the court make
further provision for him. To bring a claim under Part IV, Ilan must establish
that he is an ‘eligible person’ within the definition contained in s
90 of the Act.
executors of Maurice’s will argue that Ilan is not an eligible person
within the meaning of that section. In August 2023,
they sought to have
Ilan’s claim summarily dismissed. The judicial registrar refused to do so
in March 2024,
and the executors
appealed to the Trial Division of this Court. The judge in the Trial Division
(Moore J) upheld the appeal and dismissed
Ilan now applies for leave
to appeal that decision.
fate of the application for leave to appeal turns on a discrete point — is
Ilan an ‘eligible person’ within
the definition in s 90 of the
Ilan to succeed on the application, he does not need to show that he is
necessarily an eligible person but must establish pursuant
Civil Procedure Act 2010
has a real, as opposed to a fanciful prospect of establishing at the trial of
his claim that the facts of his case
fall within the definition of
‘eligible person’ in s 90 of the
However, s 63 is subject
to a significant condition. Section 64 of the
provides that
‘[d]espite anything contrary in this Part’ and ‘despite there
being no real prospect of success’
a court may order that the proceeding
go to trial in the interests of justice or because the nature of the dispute
(including its
complexity) demands a full hearing on the merits.
Part IV of the Act — Family
90A of the Act enables an application for a family provision order to be made to
the court by ‘an eligible person’.
expression ‘eligible person’ is defined in s 90, which we set
out in full below, noting that paragraph (g) of the
definition is in issue in
the present case:
eligible person
(a) a person who was the spouse or domestic partner of the deceased at the time
of the deceased’s death;
(b) a child of the deceased including a child adopted by the deceased who, at
the time of the deceased’s death, was—
(i) under the age of 18 years; or
(ii) a full-time student aged between 18 years and 25 years; or
(iii) a child with a disability;
(c) a stepchild of the deceased who, at the time of the deceased’s death,
(i) under the age of 18 years; or
(ii) a full-time student aged between 18 years and 25 years; or
(iii) a stepchild with a disability;
(d) a person who, for a substantial period during the life of the deceased
believed that the deceased was a parent of the person
and was treated by the
deceased as a natural child of the deceased who, at the time of the
deceased’s death, was—
(i) under the age of 18 years; or
(ii) a full-time student aged between 18 years and 25 years; or
(iii) a child with a disability;
(e) a former spouse or former domestic partner of the deceased if the person, at
the time of the deceased 's death—
(i) would have been able to take proceedings under the
of the Commonwealth; and
(ii) has either—
(A) not taken those proceedings; or
(B) commenced but not finalised those proceedings; and
(iii) is now prevented from taking or finalising those proceedings because of
the death of the deceased;
(f) a child or stepchild of the deceased not referred to in paragraph (b)
a person who, for a substantial period during the life of the deceased,
believed that the deceased was a parent of the person and
was treated as a
natural child of the deceased
not referred to in paragraph (d);
(h) a registered caring partner of the deceased;
(i) a grandchild of the deceased;
(j) a spouse or domestic partner of a child of the deceased (including a
stepchild or a person referred to in paragraph (d) or (g))
if the child of the
deceased dies within one year of the deceased’s death;
(k) a person who, at the time of the deceased’s death, is (or had been in
the past and would have been likely in the near future,
had the deceased not
died, to again become) a member of the household of which the deceased was also
definition of ‘parent’ relevant to (g) is contained in s 3(1) of the
In this Act unless inconsistent with the context or
subject‑matter—
of a child includes a person who has day to day care and
control of the child and with whom the child is ordinarily resident;
91(1) enables the court to order ‘that provision be made out of the estate
of a deceased person for the proper maintenance
and support of an eligible
person’. Section 91(2) then sets out the requirements that must be
met by a person seeking such
an order, while s 91(3) and (4) set out the manner
in which, if the court is satisfied, the amount of provision should be
Factual background
only evidence before the judge below was an affidavit sworn by Ilan on
23 August 2023, which is summarised in the following
paragraphs.
Sternfein is Ilan’s mother. She and Chaim Sternfein, Ilan’s
biological father, married on 31 October 1976 and
had two children, Ilan
born on 13 June 1977, and his sister, Tali.
lived with his mother, father and sister in Caulfield. When Ilan was
7 years old, the family relocated to Israel. Chaim died
in 1988 when Ilan
was 10 years old.
with Ilan’s grandmother. Barbara and Maurice
met around April 1990 and
commenced a relationship shortly thereafter. Barbara and Ilan began residing
with Maurice in about May
1990, when Ilan was 12 years old.
to Ilan, Maurice immediately took on a fatherly role by playing an important
part during his Bar Mitzvah in June 1990. He
said that Maurice also took on a
fatherly role in other aspects of his life, including disciplining him. Maurice
was actively involved
in Ilan’s schooling, extra-curricular activities and
social activities. Ilan worked at Maurice’s optometry practice from
resided with Maurice until about January 1997, when he was 19 years old. Ilan
then moved into a share house while studying at
university.
relationship between Maurice and Barbara ended in about April 1997, and a
property settlement was reached in November 1997. Barbara
died in November
Maurice and Barbara's separation in 1997, Ilan had no contact with Maurice until
2013, when Maurice reconnected with him through
Facebook. Ilan deposed that he
and Maurice subsequently established a ‘solid relationship’.
met Ilan’s two young children during a trip to visit him in Melbourne.
Maurice expressed adoration for Ilan’s
children and requested to attend
their respective Bar Mitzvah and Bat Mitzvah, although COVID-19 restrictions
prevented that from
occurring. Maurice asked Ilan to refer to him as his
children’s ‘unofficial Godfather’. Ilan deposed that Maurice
referred to him as his son and that he house-sat at Maurice’s house when
Maurice was away travelling. Ilan remained in weekly
telephone and through Facebook until Maurice died.
has two biological children,
Heller and David Heller.
They are between four and eight years older than Ilan.
will makes no provision for his biological
Ilan, or any other
person. Instead, Maurice provided for the whole of his net estate to be held by
a trust to be established by his
trustees for a specific public charitable
purpose directed at funding research and promoting awareness of myopization.
The judgment below
careful and detailed written reasons, the judge set out the statutory
provisions, the factual background, the details of the decision
of the judicial
registrar and the arguments of the parties.
judge noted that the only other decision of the Court dealing with the
application of paragraph (g) of the definition of ‘eligible
was that of Derham AsJ in
Innes-Irons v Forrest
Innes-Irons
judge then commenced his analysis of Ilan’s claim by noting that the test
under ss 62 and 63 of the
of ‘no real prospect of
success’ requires the applicant to demonstrate that the claim is
‘fanciful’ as opposed
to ‘real’; however, the power to
terminate a claim is to be exercised with caution and it must be clear that
no real question to be
judge also noted that s 64 of the
permits a court to allow a
proceeding to proceed to trial if it is in the interests of justice to do so or
if the dispute is one
that requires a full hearing on the
judge then turned to the definition of ‘eligible person’ in s 90 of
he recited the principles of statutory construction as set out by this Court in
Verraty Pty Ltd v Richmond Football Club
judge then noted that three requirements must be satisfied for a person to be an
eligible person within the meaning of paragraph
(g) of the definition, namely:
(a) ‘for a substantial period during the life of the deceased’ the
person must have:
(b) ‘believed that the deceased was a parent of the person’; and
(c) been ‘treated as a natural child of the deceased not referred to in
paragraph (d)’.
considering s 3 and the definition of ‘parent’ in that
provision (set out above at [
judge concluded that there was an arguable case that Ilan believed Maurice was a
parent, as Maurice had the day-to-day care
and control of Ilan, who
judge reasoned as follows:
As the Judicial Registrar stated, a care-giving,
residential parent requires no biological or genetic relationship with their
to come within the definition of ‘parent’ in the Act. On the
basis of the plaintiff’s evidence to which the Judicial
Registrar referred
at [45] and [49] of the primary reasons, I respectfully agree with her
conclusion that the plaintiff has a real
prospect of establishing that the
deceased was a care giving, residential parent of the plaintiff from when the
plaintiff was 12
years old, until when he bec[a]me independent of the
deceased’s care and control by maturity, the point of transition being
matter of evidence at trial. The defendants’ submissions that there was no
evidence that the plaintiff believed that the
deceased was a parent of his is
wrong: the plaintiff deposed to this belief in his affidavit. On that basis,
this issue is properly
a matter for
(b) was satisfied. The judge next considered the question of
‘treatment’: whether there was an arguable case that
treated as a natural child of Maurice.
judge noted that paragraph (d) is an analogous category of person to that in
paragraph (g) of the definition, but that (d) was
limited to persons who at the
time of the deceased’s death were either under 18 years of age, a
full-time student aged between
18 years and 25 years of age, or a
child with a disability. The judge observed that Ilan did not fall into any of
these categories.
judge then turned to the use of the words ‘treated as a natural
child’ and observed:
In the context of all of the paragraphs which comprise the definition of
‘eligible person’ in s 90 of the Act, the striking
the ‘treatment element’ of paragraph (g) is the use of the term
‘natural child’. The paragraphs
variously refer to
categories of children: a
‘stepchild’
‘natural child.’
Importantly, these provisions were not the result of piecemeal legislative
amendment over time; the entirety of the definition of
person’ was inserted by s 3(2) of the Amendment Act and has remained
unchanged since its enactment in 2015.
These are strong contextual
indications that, in providing for the category of eligible persons in paragraph
(g), Parliament intended
to specifically refer only to persons there identified:
those who, relevantly, were treated as a natural child (as distinct from
other child) of the deceased.
interpolate here that the ‘Amendment Act’ referred to by the judge
Justice Legislation Amendment (Succession and Surrogacy)
(the ‘2014 amendments’), which commenced operation
on 1 January 2015. We examine the 2014 amendments at [
judge was mindful to be cautious when applying the maxim
expressio unius est
exclusion alterius
(the expression of one thing is the exclusion of
another). However, his Honour considered it safe to apply the maxim when
the definition of ‘eligible person’, for several reasons:
(a) First, the provisions of s 90 and the definition of eligible person
were not a result of piecemeal amendments but rather comprehensive
limiting who can make a claim on the deceased’s
His Honour noted that
the overarching purpose of the amendments was to confine, rather than expand,
the class of persons able to
bring a claim under Part IV of the
(b) Second, this purpose was achieved by defining specific categories of
‘eligible persons’ and, as Derham AsJ’s
careful consideration
of the intrinsic materials in
Innes-Irons
shows, the definition
ultimately enacted, including paragraph (g), was a specific matter of
parliamentary debate and consideration.
Accordingly, the reference within
paragraph (g) to a natural child ‘was a product of “deliberate
legislative intention”
as distinct from “inadvertence or
accident”’.
(c) Third, the use of the word ‘natural child’ was uncontroversial
and meant a child by birth, also termed a biological
child or genetic
Honour then said:
Eligibility under paragraph (g) is accordingly dependent on a putative claimant
establishing, amongst other things, that they were
‘treated as’ a
biological child of the deceased. The expression ‘treated as’ is not
defined in the Act. In
that circumstance, the starting point when construing
family provision legislation, as recognised by the High Court, is the
natural meaning of the words of the
judge was then confronted with how, having reached this point, the words
‘treated as’ a biological child could be
given a sensible and
workable application when determining whether a putative claimant fell within
the definition.
the expression is not defined in the Act, to ascertain its ordinary natural
meaning, the judge considered it was necessary to have
recourse to the
dictionary definition and noted the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
(‘OED’) relevantly defines the
verb ‘treat’ as
Deal with or behave or act towards in a specified way; regard in a particular
way and deal with accordingly...
critical parts of his Honour’s judgment were as follows:
Given the impossibility of identifying behaviours or actions which are
specific to the treatment of natural children in particular,
as distinct from
children generally, in order for paragraph (g) to have operation and effect, the
expression ‘treated as a
natural child’ is to be construed,
consistent with one of its ordinary meanings, as meaning ‘regarded as a
natural child’.
For these reasons, I do not, with respect, consider
Derham AsJ’s construction of the term ‘treated as a natural
in Innes‑Irons set out in [43] above to be correct.
It follows from the determination of these points of statutory construction
that the plaintiff’s claim for provision for the
deceased’s estate
must fail: there is no suggestion in the evidence that he was ever regarded by
anyone as the deceased’s
biological child so as to satisfy this element of
paragraph (g) and to thereby be an ‘eligible person’ entitled to
a claim under the Act.
It was not submitted that there was any basis
in the plaintiff’s affidavit for this particular matter to be a matter of
at trial. This is unsurprising given the age at which the plaintiff
came to reside with the deceased and the circumstances in which
that occurred
referred to in [10]-[11] above.
on this basis, Ilan’s claim was dismissed.
Honour then went on to make a series of observations concerning the
executors’ argument that, even if Ilan had satisfied
the ‘treatment
provision’, it was not for ‘a substantial period during the
life of Maurice’ and therefore
failed to meet condition (a).
Honour concluded:
In light of the foregoing discussion, it would appear that ‘a substantial
period during the life of the deceased’ may
be capable of being satisfied
by evidence that, for a significant stage of a person’s life during the
deceased’s lifetime,
the person believed that the deceased was their
parent and was treated as a natural child, even if that stage was not a
proportionately
large part of the deceased’s lifespan. However, in light
of my conclusion in [68], it is unnecessary to resolve this
The decision in
Innes-Irons
decision of Derham AsJ in
Innes-Irons
involved consideration of whether
the claimants in that case arguably fell within the terms of paragraph (g) of
the definition of
‘eligible person’ within s 90 of the Act. It
was also a summary judgment application brought by the executors on the
that the terms of paragraph (g) were not satisfied.
claimants in
Innes-Irons
were two natural children of the deceased who
had been adopted by their stepfather when their mother (who had divorced the
remarried. By virtue of the
Adoption Act 1984
, the children
were to be treated as the natural children of the adoptive father.
Notwithstanding
the estrangement of the birth parents and the later adoption of the children by
their stepfather, from their late
teens onwards, the children had a close
relationship with the deceased over a number of years. The question that had to
be resolved
by the associate justice was whether those facts were sufficient to
conclude there was a real prospect of success in satisfying paragraph
Justice Derham, after carrying out a thorough examination of the statutory
provisions and their history (which we shall
children, as a consequence of the operation of
could not satisfy the requirements of either paragraphs (b) or (f) to
establish that the children fell within the definition of an
eligible person. He
then examined the terms of paragraph (g) noting:
The Act uses the term ‘treated as a natural child’ in its natural
and ordinary meaning with no definitional provision
expanding on this. The
Macquarie Dictionary defines to ‘treat’ as ‘to act or behave
towards in some specified way’,
and ‘treatment’ as ‘the
act or manner of treating or the action or behaviour towards a person.’ It
to me that the term ‘treated’ refers to the mere behaviour
towards another, and contains no negative or exclusionary
connotations, as is
advanced by the defendant.
As I have said, in order to give to s 90(g) of the Act the meaning advanced
by the defendant, it is necessary to read into the provision
additional words,
namely, that ‘the person was treated as
if the person
was a natural
child of the deceased.’ Treated ‘as’ a natural child of the
deceased and treated ‘as if’
the natural child of the deceased
appear to be different propositions. Treating someone ‘as’ a natural
child has a wider
meaning than treating someone ‘as if’ they were a
natural child. The latter may exclude those persons who are in fact
deceased’s natural
Honour concluded:
Having regard to the ordinary meaning of the words of s 90(g) of the Act,
these extrinsic materials provide some support for the
plaintiffs’
construction having a real, as opposed to fanciful, prospect of success at
trial. There is a real prospect of the
plaintiff successfully arguing that the
drafting of s 90(g) of the Act was intended to recognise that persons who
believe they are
a child of the deceased, and who are treated as a
deceased’s natural child, even though they are, or it turns out that they
are, the natural child of the deceased, should be eligible to claim for
provision under Part IV of the Act. Further, because of the
interaction
Adoption Act
and the distinction in
the issue of the plaintiffs’ eligibility in this
proceeding is of such a nature that only a full hearing is
appropriate.
The proposed ground of appeal
sole proposed ground of appeal is that:
The trial judge erred in law by failing to properly construe the definition of
‘child’ as an eligible person under s
Administration and Probate Act
in that he failed to correctly interpret
the definition of ‘treated as’ in the phrase ‘was treated as a
child of the deceased’ as including ‘to deal with or behave
towards’ the applicant as a natural child.
contends that the test used by the judge ignored the clear wording of the
legislation and its intended purpose. The reason the
judge concluded that the
first part of the dictionary definition was impractical — that there was
no objectively identifiable
conduct or behaviour indicating a reference to
biological children as opposed to children generally — was incorrect.
(g) was meant to include a long-standing domestic relationship with
the deceased, including that of former stepchildren. By relying
only on the
second part of the Dictionary definition, the judge created an impossible
standard that rendered the section unworkable.
executors argue that the judge’s reasoning should be accepted and that the
only sensible and workable application of the
definition of the verb
‘treat’ was to apply only the second part of the Dictionary
definition, namely ‘regard in
a particular way and deal with
accordingly’.
executors also contend that the only provisions that permit a stepchild (whether
former or extant at the time of the deceased’s
death) to be treated as
eligible are paragraphs (c) and (f) of the definition. Otherwise, if a stepchild
claimant did not fall within
those categories, they are necessarily excluded by
the intended restrictive provisions of the 2014 amendments.
Consideration
judge accepted, and we agree, that two of the elements of paragraph (g) of the
definition were, at least arguably, satisfied.
There was sufficient evidence
that Maurice may fall within the statutory definition of a parent (see [
] above) and that the period of around
seven years may satisfy the ‘substantial period’ (see [
] above) of
testator’s life
requirement.
left the question of whether, during that period, Ilan was regarded as a natural
child by Maurice. We disagree with the judge’s
interpretation of the
phrase ‘treated as a natural child’ in paragraph (g). Our
disagreement with the judge’s conclusion
can be explained quite simply. We
do not consider (as the judge did) that the phrase requires any departure from
the OED definition
of the verb ‘treat’, and that both parts of that
definition can be used in assessing whether a potential claimant meets
statutory criteria. Our detailed reasons are as follows.
exercise of statutory construction in determining the meaning of ‘eligible
person’ generally, and paragraph (g) particularly,
is well understood and
was explained by the High Court in
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner
of Territory Revenue
This Court has stated on many occasions that the task of statutory construction
must begin with a consideration of the text itself.
Historical considerations
and extrinsic materials cannot be relied on to displace the clear meaning of the
text. The language which
has actually been employed in the text of legislation
is the surest guide to legislative intention. The meaning of the text may
consideration of the context, which includes the general purpose and
policy of a provision, in particular the mischief it is seeking
Court recently said:
The construction of s 78(2) of the
must begin with the text of
the provision, having regard to its context and purpose. If the words of the
provision have more than
one possible meaning, a meaning that promotes the
purpose or object underlying the statute is to be preferred over one that does
not. Ordinarily, the legislature is assumed to have intended to pursue its
purposes by coherent means and to give effect to harmonious
there is the legislative direction in
Interpretation of
Legislation Act 1984
which provides that ‘[i]n the
interpretation of a provision of an Act or subordinate instrument’:
(a) a construction that would promote the purpose or object underlying the Act
or subordinate instrument (whether or not that purpose
or object is expressly
stated in the Act or subordinate instrument) shall be preferred to a
construction that would not promote that
purpose or object; and
(b) consideration may be given to any matter or document that is relevant
including but not limited to—
(i) all indications provided by the Act or subordinate instrument as printed by
authority, including punctuation;
(ii) reports of proceedings in any House of the Parliament;
(iii) explanatory memoranda or other documents laid before or otherwise
presented to any House of the Parliament; and
(iv) reports of Royal Commissions, Parliamentary Committees, Law Reform
Commissioners and Commissions, Boards of Inquiry, Formal
Reviews or other
similar bodies.
history and background of family provision legislation and the 2014 amendments
were analysed in detail by Derham AsJ in
Innes‑Irons
Scott‑Mackenzie
following is adapted from his Honour’s analysis in both those
provision in this state was introduced by the
Widows and Young Children
Maintenance Act 1906
. This allowed the widow or children of a testator
and the children of a testatrix to apply for provision. Children were defined as
not including any person who was a male over 18 years of age, a female over
21 years of age, or married.
1997, there was a significant change: categories were abolished and
‘responsibility’ became the primary criterion.
was amended to enable the Court to order provision out of an estate for
‘the proper maintenance and support of a
person for whom the deceased had
responsibility to make
provision’.
the ensuing years, this broad test was the subject of considerable criticism. In
August 2013, the Victorian Law Reform Commission
(‘VLRC’) in
its Succession Laws Report noted:
6.8 In the course of this reference, the Commission has heard a number of
criticisms about the operation of family provision law
in Victoria. The
Commission identified several in its consultation paper on family provision:
(a) a belief that the current law encourages opportunistic or non-genuine
(b) the high legal costs in family provision proceedings and the fact that they
are often borne by the estate, even where a family
provision claim fails;
(c) the settlement of a high proportion of claims that may not otherwise have
succeeded at trial;
(d) the fact that, due to the high rate of settlement, the courts have little
oversight over costs in family provision matters;
(e) the lack of certainty that exists in this jurisdiction and the difficulties
experienced by legal practitioners when advising
clients about the validity and
strength of the claim;
(f) the perception of some members of the public that their will can effectively
be challenged by anyone, and that they do not truly
have freedom to dispose of
their property by will.
VLRC recommended that Victoria should abolish the ‘responsibility’
test and s 91(1) should be replaced with a test
based on the New South
Wales test for eligibility but extended to include stepchildren, as
The following are eligible persons who may apply to the court for a family
provision order in respect of the estate of a deceased
(a) a person who was the wife or husband of the deceased person at the time of
the deceased person’s death;
(b) a person with whom the deceased person was living in a registrable domestic
relationship or registered domestic relationship
at the time of the deceased
person’s death;
(c) a child of the deceased person;
(d) a former wife or husband of the deceased person;
(e) a person:
(i) who was, at any particular time, wholly or partly dependent on the deceased
person, and
(ii) who is a grandchild of the deceased person or was, at that particular time
or any other particular time, a member of the household
of which the deceased
person was a member
(f) a person with whom the deceased person was living in a registrable caring
relationship or registered caring relationship
(g) a stepchild of the deceased
government of the day accepted a number of the VLRC recommendations. In the
second reading speech for the Justice Legislation
Amendment (Succession and
Surrogacy) Bill 2014 (the ‘2014 Bill’), the Attorney General said
In 1997, the Victorian legislation was amended to remove any requirement for a
specific relationship with the deceased, and instead
based a person’s
entitlements to family provision on demonstrating that the deceased had a
responsibility to provide for them.
However, the fact that there is no
restriction on who can make a claim, together with the broad nature of the test
to be applied,
has led to a wide range of claims, putting pressure on executors,
administrators and other beneficiaries to settle even dubious claims
in order to
prevent the estate being consumed by legal costs.
To reduce the potential for opportunistic claims, and to better reflect the
underlying policy objectives of family provision laws,
the bill amends the
current family provision scheme to limit who can make a claim on a deceased
estate and the grounds on which a
claim can be made.
Only specified categories of people will be eligible to make a claim. The
deceased’s children and stepchildren, spouses or
domestic partners at the
time of death, and former spouses and partners who have not had recourse to the
Family Law Act 1975
before the death may apply for a family
provision claim as of right.
However, the bill makes a distinction between applications brought by a child
or stepchild of the deceased who is under 18 or a
full-time student up to the
age of 25 or who has a disability and, on the other hand, a child or stepchild
who does not fall under
one of these categories. Most adult children will fall
outside these categories. In such cases, in determining the amount of provision,
if any, to be ordered, the court must take into account, amongst other things,
the degree to which the applicant is not capable,
by reasonable means, of
providing adequately for their own proper maintenance and support. This is
intended to reflect the position
that parents should not usually be regarded as
having a moral duty to make provision for adult children who are capable, by
means, of providing adequately for their own proper maintenance and
Attorney-General then went on to identify some of the specific categories but
did not refer to the class of persons identified
in paragraph (g) of the
definition of ‘eligible person’ in cl 90 of the 2014 Bill
— and subsequently in s 90 of
the 2014 Bill reached the upper house it was the subject of considerable
criticism. As Derham AsJ observed in
Innes-Irons
As a result of the Government accepting the overtures of the opposition, the
dependency restrictions applying to the categories of
adult children, step
children and persons treated as natural children for a substantial period were
lifted. The restrictions on any
family provision order applicable to these
classes of eligible persons were left to those in s 91(2)(c) and (d) of the Act,
the presence of a moral duty by the deceased and the traditional test that
under the will or intestacy the deceased failed to make
adequate provision for
the proper maintenance and support of the eligible person.
Thus, although the 2014 amendments brought back restrictions they were not as
severe as they might have been. The Parliamentary debates
show a concern not to
exclude independent adult children, stepchildren and persons treated as children
from contesting the deceased’s
will. As Mr Pakula went on to say in
relation to these classes of eligible applicants, including persons treated as
children of the
Not in every
case would it have meant, and nor does it mean now, that those children who were
cut out of their parents wills would
have succeeded in those cases, but the
opposition thought the notion that they would be left without a right to contest
was inappropriate.
Mr Pakula noted that the changes to the Bill aimed to prevent those persons with
no valid claims, appropriate relationships or real
closeness to the deceased
from being able to contest wills and eat up the value of the estate, leaving the
intended beneficiaries
without the bequest they were entitled to. However, he
added that conversely, it is important to recognise that there are circumstances
where people are left out of wills, particularly the children of the deceased,
in a way that causes substantial injustice. This is
not deserved where children
have been faithful, good family members, but left out because of some other
person’s nefarious
influence or otherwise. These people ought to have a
right to contest the deceased’s will.
From these thoughts and statements an intention is evident, and one that is
relevant because of the amendments to the Bill advanced
by the opposition, that
persons who were equated with children of the deceased, being those treated as
the deceased’s children,
were allowed through the eligibility gateway and
their right to contest the will or intestacy was
agree with his Honour’s conclusion. There is nothing in the extrinsic
material to suggest that persons who, as children,
had lived in a close domestic
relationship with the deceased for a lengthy period of time were to be excluded,
notwithstanding the
restrictive purpose of the 2014 amendments. Moreover, prior
to the 2014 amendments, this category of claimants was well
It would be odd in the
extreme if the Parliament wished to exclude this category without a mention in
the parliamentary material.
To the contrary, we consider, as did Derham AsJ,
that the extrinsic materials point to the legislation preserving this class of
the judge, the executors relied upon the maxim
expressio unius est exclusio
to argue that paragraphs (c) and (f) of s 90 (which specifically
refer to stepchildren) cover the field in relation to a stepchild’s
eligibility, with the result that former stepchildren are excluded from the
operation of the family provision legislation.
like Derham AsJ, reject this submission.
proper interpretation of the definition of ‘eligible person’ in s 90
is that each paragraph creates a separate category
within which a claimant may
satisfy the eligibility requirement. The inability of a former stepchild to fall
within paragraphs (c)
or (f) does not exclude that person from claiming under
paragraph (g). It seems to us that paragraph (g), notwithstanding its
limitations,
was intended to create an avenue to eligibility for former
stepchildren as well as others who, as children, had for a substantial
time regarded the deceased as a parent
been treated as a natural
child of the deceased.
takes us to the final matter: the proper interpretation and application of the
expression ‘treated as a natural child’.
We agree with the judge
that it was appropriate to have recourse to the OED to determine the natural
meaning of the verb ‘treat’,
deal with or behave
or act towards in a specified way, regard in a particular way and deal with
accordingly.
we disagree with the judge’s conclusion as to the impracticality of
relying upon the first part of the definition.
Both limbs of the definition are
operative and capable of practical application. Merely because the legislature
did not provide an
objective standard to define the nature of the treatment of a
natural child by a deceased does not make the first part of the definition
unworkable.
with provisions of other pieces of legislation, paragraph (g) requires a court
to determine subjectively, as part of an evaluative
process, lacking any
objective criteria, two aspects of the deceased’s relationship with the
applicant — the nature of
their relationship and whether its duration was
for a substantial period of the deceased’s life.
see no difficulty with a court examining the deceased’s behaviour and
conduct towards a claimant and, in a case such as this,
determining whether it
was comparable to the deceased’s behaviour and conduct towards his natural
children. Where no such comparison
can be made or the comparison is inapposite
for some reason, there may be other evidence of relevant behaviour and conduct,
on the circumstances of the case. Parliament regularly requires courts
to apply subjective tests to specific factual circumstances.
In a context quite
different from the present case, the serious injury provisions within the
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
Transport Accident Act 1986
do precisely
Each mandates, with
minimal statutory guidance, a subjective assessment by the court of whether the
injury meets certain vague criteria
to determine if it is serious.
decided cases under the pre-2014 amendment legislation considered the conduct
and behaviour of the deceased in determining whether
the claimant was a person
for whom the deceased had responsibility to make provision. For example, in
Hargrave J had no difficulty in holding that the deceased treated the
claimant as his daughter, notwithstanding that the deceased
had real doubts as
to his paternity, which were, subsequent to the deceased’s death,
verified. In reaching this conclusion,
his Honour had regard to the conduct and
behaviour of the deceased towards the claimant in their daily life.
summary, the text of paragraph (g) is clear and aligns with the evident
statutory purpose of allowing persons, including former
stepchildren, who had a
relevantly lengthy parent-child relationship with the deceased during their
childhood, to be eligible to
make a claim under
of the Act. This
involves assessing the relationship between the two over the relevant period and
considering both aspects of the
meaning of ‘treat’ (as identified in
the OED) in determining whether the person was treated as a natural child.
at the trial, the question regarding eligibility will be whether Maurice, by his
behaviour and conduct towards Ilan, treated him
as his natural child. In other
words, did Maurice treat or interact with Ilan as he would with a natural child?
There may perhaps
be evidence at trial about how Maurice engaged with his two
natural children, which might also provide a relevant point of comparison.
However, this is not essential or determinative — what matters, as we have
said, is the court’s assessment of Maurice’s
conduct and behaviour
towards Ilan during his lifetime.
the course of oral argument, it was contended (for the first time) that the
affidavit evidence of Ilan as to his relationship
with Maurice was inadequate
and that he could not satisfy the eligibility test, even if the whole OED
definition were adopted.
is nothing in this point.
aside the absence of a notice of contention, this was a summary dismissal
application, and Ilan was only required to adduce
sufficient evidence to
demonstrate that he had a real as opposed to a fanciful claim. Ilan did not need
to descend into chapter and
verse either as to his own treatment by Maurice or
as to Maurice’s treatment of his two natural children. They are matters
if we thought there was something in this point, we would have applied s 64
and allowed Ilan’s claim to proceed to trial.
Accordingly,
the result is that at this level — on a summary judgment application
— Ilan has satisfied us that he has
a real, as opposed to fanciful,
prospect of success in establishing that he falls within paragraph (g) of the
definition of ‘eligible
person’ in s 90 of the Act.
disagree with the judge’s interpretation and application of the clause to
the facts as deposed by Ilan. Therefore, the application
for leave to appeal
should succeed, and the appeal should be allowed.
have necessarily confined our views on this issue to that raised on the
application — namely, whether Ilan has a strong enough
case to go to trial
on the basis that he was treated as a natural child by Maurice. Whether that
contention is made out at trial
will be a matter for the trial judge, as will
the question of whether the period of time over which he was so treated is
to satisfy the test within paragraph (g).
Re Brumer; Sternfein v
(2024) 72 VR 433 (Englefield JR);
[2024] VSC 121.
Re Brumer; Sternfein v
Bloom (No 2)
[2024] VSC 506 (Moore
See s 63 of the
Lysaght Building Solutions Pty Ltd (t/as Highline
Commercial Construction) v Blanalko Pty Ltd
[2013] VSCA 158
(2013) 42 VR 27 (Warren
Nettle and Neave JJA);
[2013] VSCA 158.
Emphasis added.
See generally
Society for the Propagation of the Faith and St Charles Seminary, Perth v
[1962] HCA 19
(1962) 107 CLR 9
, 19–20 (Dixon CJ);
[1962] HCA 19
National Trustees, Executors and Agency Co of Australasia
[1979] HCA 2
(1979) 143 CLR 134
, 146–148 (Gibbs J);
[1979] HCA 2.
Reasons, [10]–[16].
Referred to in the will as
Maurice’s biological
children have each lodged a Part IV claim in respect of Maurice’s estate.
[2016] VSC 782
Innes-Irons
Reasons, [50].
Reasons, [50].
[2020] VSCA 267
(2020) 63 VR 150
163–5, [53]–[62];
[2020] VSCA 267.
Reasons, [52].
Reasons, [54].
Reasons, [56].
Reasons, [57] (emphasis
added) (citations in original).
Paragraph (i) also refers
to a ‘grandchild’.
Paragraphs (b) and (f).
Paragraphs (c) and (f).
Paragraphs (d) and (g).
Reasons, [60].
Reasons, [61] citing
(pseudonym) v The Queen
[2023] VSCA 12
Reasons, [62].
Reasons, [63] citing
Barns v Barns
(2003) 214 CLR 169, 187–8, [44];
[2003] HCA 9.
Reasons, [65].
Reasons, [64].
Reasons, [67]–[68]
(emphasis added).
Reasons, [78].
Innes-Irons
, [45]–[46] (emphasis added).
Reasons, [44].
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
46–7, [47] (Hayne, Heydon, Crennan and Kiefel JJ) (citations omitted);
[2009] HCA 41.
ENT19 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2023] HCA 18
(2023) 278 CLR
, 105, [86] (Gordon, Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ);
[2023] HCA 18.
Concrete Construction
Systems Pty Ltd v Inglese
[2025] VSCA 218
, [95] (Walker, Lyons and
Richards JJA) (citations omitted).
[2016] VSC 563
’). See also
Whitehead v State Trustees Ltd
(2011) 4 ASTLR 528, [21]–[29] (Bell J);
[2011] VSC 424
4 ASTLR 528, [21]–[29] (Bell J);
[2011] VSC 424
, for a detailed
discussion of the legislative history of the family provision legislation.
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Succession Laws: Report
(August 2013).
Ibid Recommendation 38.
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 18 September 2014, 3443 (Rob Hulls,
Attorney-General).
[2016] VSC 782
[57]–[60] (emphasis added).
[2004] VSC 90 (Nettle
Borebor v Keane
(2013) 11 ASTLR 96
(Hargrave J);
[2013] VSC 35
Quinn v Robertson
[2009] VSC 245
See the definitions of
‘serious injury’ in
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act
Transport Accident
. Of course, at times the legislature will state specific
criteria that need to be met and provide a guide to courts as to the objective
assessment of a particular phrase or expression. Again, returning to the serious
injury example and claims under the
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act
a worker must satisfy a series of
mathematical calculations as to earnings before pursuing a claim for economic
(2023) 11 ASTLR 96;
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (565 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter