URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clayton v Boyce [1998] VADT 25 (28 October 1998)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LIST
Complaint No. 174 of 1997
Complaint No. 182 of 1997
Eric Clayton
COMPLAINANT
Carmel Boyce
MS C. McKENZIE
, Deputy President
TRANSCRIPT OF DECISION
AT MELBOURNE ON MONDAY 28 OCTOBER 1998 AT 4.56
MR E. CLAYTON appeared on his own behalf.
MS C. BOYCE appeared on her own behalf.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I do apologise to the parties for the delay. There are
some difficulties with the hearing room which is being slightly
moved around for
a different seminar which is to take place tomorrow and also there are some
difficulties with recording equipment.
The Tribunal does apologise for that
I said that I would hand down my decision on this application today and I
am in a position to be able to do so. After considerable
thought, my decision is
that the application should be granted and the complaint should be struck out. I
now give my reasons. The
registrar has copies of the orders that I have made and
she will give one to you, Mr Clayton, and we will send one to you, Ms
I now give my reasons. This is an application by Ms Boyce to strike
out two complaints made by Mr Clayton. The first complaint, the
reference of which is 174 of 97, is a claim of discrimination on the ground of
imputed impairment in the provision of services
against the Rooming House
Tenants Association which I will call RHTA in these reasons, and Ms Carmel Boyce
who is the former coordinator
of that body. I will call that complaint in these
reasons the discrimination complaint.
The second complaint which bears the Tribunal reference 182 of 97, is a
claim of victimisation against the RHTA and Ms Boyce and I
will call that
complaint the victimisation complaint.
Both complaints were lodged with the Equal Opportunity Commission, which
I will call the Commission in these reasons, on 22 August
1997. The Commission
declined to entertain both complaints for lack of substance. Acting under s.108
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
, which I will call the Act in these reasons,
and at Mr Clayton's request, the Commission referred these complaints to the
Discrimination Tribunal.
The discrimination complaint was referred to that Tribunal on 21 October
1997. The victimisation complaint was referred to that Tribunal
by letter dated
27 October 1997, received by the Tribunal on 31 October 1997.
After some adjournments, a preliminary conference was eventually held at
the Tribunal on 31 March 1998. From the notes made by the
member who conducted
that conference which appear on the Tribunal file, it appears that some doubts
were raised as to whether the
RHTA was still in existence but there is nothing
further on the file to resolve those doubts. For the purpose of this proceeding,
I assume that the RHTA still exists.
At the preliminary conference directions were given as to the filing and
service of particulars of complaint and particulars of defence.
preliminary conference it appears that, certainly in a preliminary way, Ms Boyce
was identified as a respondent to both complaints
and certainly Ms Boyce
subsequently filed particulars of defence.
In accordance with the directions, particulars of complaint were filed
and served in respect of both complaints and Ms Boyce filed
particulars of
defence in relation to both complaints. There is nothing on file from the RHTA.
On 1 July 1998 the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
will call the VCAT Act, and the Tribunals and Licensing Authorities
Miscellaneous Amendments Act 1998, which I will call
the Miscellaneous
Amendments Act, came into operation.
The effect of those Acts is to create the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal, which I will call VCAT, and among other things
abolish the Anti Discrimination Tribunal and to confer the jurisdiction formally
exercised by the Anti Discrimination Tribunal
on VCAT. The effect of clause 9(1)
of the Miscellaneous Amendments Act is that if proceeding here, these
complaints, was pending
before the Anti Discrimination Tribunal immediately
before its abolition and the Tribunal had not begun to hear that proceeding,
that is these complaints, the proceeding is taken to have been commenced before
VCAT. Anything done by the Anti Discrimination Tribunal
or the parties in
relation to that proceeding is to be taken to have been done by or in relation
The procedures under the VCAT Act apply to the proceeding on and after 1
July 1998 and VCAT has, in relation to the proceeding, the
powers, duties and
functions that the former Anti Discrimination Tribunal had under the
Opportunity Act
before 1 July 1998. These complaints, having been referred to
the Anti Discrimination Tribunal but not heard by it before 1 July
1998, clause
9(1) applies to these complaints and to any proceedings in relation to
On 7 September 1998 a call over was held and directions were given for
the filing and service of witness statements and the matter
was listed for
hearing on 14 December 1998. On 10 September 1998 a directions hearing was held
by VCAT, at which Ms Boyce was clearly
identified as a respondent to the
complaints. She, as I have already said, having been preliminarily identified at
the preliminary
conference.
In addition at that hearing Ms Boyce applied to have the complaint struck
out and the Tribunal then gave directions to enable the
parties to make written
and oral submissions on the application. Ms Boyce subsequently filed written
submissions on the application
and Mr Clayton handed to the Tribunal,
during the hearing of oral submissions, some documents which, after Ms Boyce had
them, the Tribunal gave Ms Boyce an opportunity to comment on and took
those documents into account in making its decision.
The Tribunal heard oral submissions from the parties on 26 October 1998.
At that hearing the parties appeared in person. I need to
say two things about
the application; first it states that it is made under s.109 of the
Opportunity Act
but since, according to the effect of clause 9(1) of schedule 2
of the Miscellaneous Amendments Act, the Tribunal must apply the
procedure after 1 July, the application should properly have been expressed to
have been made under s.75 of the VCAT Act.
However, there is no prejudice in my treating the application as having
been made under that section because, again under clause 9(1)
Miscellaneous Amendments Act, the VCAT has the powers which the Anti
Discrimination Tribunal formally had and they, of course,
include the powers
under s.109 and s.109(1), apart from a mention of dismissal which is not
relevant here because the application
is to strike out the complaints, is
expressed in effectively identical terms to s.75. That is it permits a complaint
to be struck
out if it is frivolous, vexatious, lacking in substance or
misconceived. It has also been held to permit the striking out of a complaint
that is an abuse of process and I refer to the case of
El Hakim v. Armstrong
which is a Supreme Court case before Mr Justice Byrne where the
decision was dated 22 October 1997.
The second thing to say is that the strike out application only was
expressed to require the complaints to be struck out as misconceived
both written and oral submissions, Ms Boyce also relied on the ground that the
complaints lacked substance. Again, I intend
to treat the application as having
been made on both those grounds and I am satisfied that Mr Clayton is not
prejudiced by my doing
so because both written and oral submissions raised these
grounds and Mr Clayton had a chance to reply to them, both in written and
submissions.
I now deal with the legislation. First the legislation and principles
relating to the application which Ms Boyce now makes. I have
mentioned the
grounds of the application and they are the same, both under s.75 of the VCAT
Act and 109 of the
Equal Opportunity Act
. The principles, I am satisfied, that
apply to applications under s.109 and its earlier equivalent, s.44(c) of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
were discussed in a case called
Rabel v. SEC
(1998), Volume 1, V.R. at p.102 and again were discussed in a case in the Anti
Discrimination Tribunal called
Devos v. City of Kingston
, the decision of
which is dated 3 January 1997.
In my view those principles also apply to applications under s.75 of the
VCAT where, for present purposes, the wording is identical.
The relevant
principles set out in those cases are these. The application is for the summary
termination of a proceeding, in this
case of the complaints. The application is
a serious matter and it is a very serious matter for the Tribunal in
interlocutory proceedings
where generally oral evidence is not heard to deprive
a complaint of the chance to have the matter heard in the ordinary course.
that the Tribunal should act with caution before striking out a complaint in
The Tribunal should only strike out proceedings that are obviously
hopeless or obviously unsustainable in law or in fact. Or, on no
view, can justify relief or are bound to fail. This will include but is not
limited to a case where a complaint does not
disclose reasonable a course of
action or where a respondent could show that there is a good defence which
completely answers the
claim so as to justify its summary termination.
In determining the application the Tribunal must not construe a complaint
in a technical or artificial sense but must give complaint
interpretation. The Tribunal must be careful to distinguish between the claim
and the evidence which supports it. If the
material before the Tribunal only
shows that the parties are in dispute as to a fact in issue and does not assist
it to resolve the
dispute, then it is hard to see how a respondent will have
satisfied the Tribunal that a complaint should be struck out. And the
satisfying the Tribunal on this matter is on the respondent because the
respondent is the applicant.
I now turn to the relevant provisions of the
Equal Opportunity Act
dealing with Mr Clayton's claims. As I have said, those claims are
discrimination on the basis of imputed impairment and victimisation.
Opportunity Act 1995
defines "attribute" in s.4 to mean an attribute in s.6. It
defines "detriment" to include humiliation and denigration. It relevantly
defines "impairment" to mean, in paragraph (d), "malfunction of a part of the
body including (1) a mental or psychological disease
or disorder".
In s.6 there is a statement, "The following are the attributes on the
basis of which discrimination is prohibited in the areas of
activity set out in
and then paragraph (b) states that one of those attributes is
impairment. Section 7 is headed, "Meaning of discrimination" and sub-s.1
provides, "Discrimination includes direct or indirect discrimination on the
basis of an attribute". Sub-s.2 provides, "Discrimination
on the basis of an
attribute includes discrimination on the basis, (a) that a person has that
attribute or had it at any time whether
or not he or she had it at the time of
the discrimination; (b) of a characteristic that a person with that attribute
generally has;
(c) of a characteristic that is generally imputed to a person of
that attribute; (d) that a person is presumed to have that attribute
had it at any time".
On a proper reading of the complaints, it seems to me that this
complainant does not claim indirect discrimination but claims a direct
discrimination so I deal only with the provisions concerning direct
discrimination. Section 8 is headed, "Direct discrimination"
and sub-s.1
provides, "Direct discrimination occurs if a person treats or proposes to treat
someone with an attribute less favourably
than a person treats or would treat
someone without that attribute or with a different attribute in the same or
similar circumstances."
The effect of sub-s.2 is that the attribute need not be the sole or
dominant reason for the treatment but must be a substantial reason
that it is irrelevant, whether or not the person, that is the alleged
discriminator, is aware of the discrimination or
considers the treatment less
favourable. The effect of s.10 of the Act is that motive of the alleged
discriminator is irrelevant.
This is a claim for discrimination in services and services are dealt
with in s.42 of the Act. That provides by sub-s.1 that, "A person
discriminate against another person, (a) by refusing to provide goods or
services to the other person; (b) in the terms
on which goods or services are
provided to the other person; (c) by subjecting the other person to any other
detriment in connection
with the provision of goods or services to him or
There is also a complaint of victimisation. That is dealt with in ss.96
and 97 of the Act. Section 96 provides, "A person must not
victimise another
person". Section 97 is headed, "What is victimisation?" Sub-s.1 relevantly
provides, "A person victimises another
person if the person subjects or
threatens to subject the other person to any detriment because the other person,
or a person associated
with the other person (a) has made a complaint against
any person".
The effect of sub-s.3(a) in the context of this case is that the making
of a complaint need not be the sole or dominant reason for
the treatment but
must be a substantial reason for it. I turn now to the material before the
That material comprises the two complaints, the particulars of complaint
and defence relating to both of them from Mr Clayton and
Ms Boyce, and the
submissions by the parties, both oral and written, in relation to the
application.
I now summarise the material before the Tribunal. RHTA is a body that
advises, advocates for and represents where appropriate, tenants
and residents
of rooming houses, particularly those who wish to pursue legal remedies in
relation to issues concerning their accommodation.
It was funded by the Office of Fair Trading and Business Affairs and at
the relevant time it was governed by a committee of management
of which Mr Tony
Adami(?) was the chair. Again, at the relevant time, its coordinator was Ms
In July 1997 the Office of Fair Trading and Business Affairs informed
RHTA that it was discontinuing its funding and on 31 August
1997 the Association
ceased to be active and Ms Boyce's employment with it was terminated. She had
worked there since 1991. In August
1995, at Mr Clayton's request and on his
instructions,
Ms Boyce issued to the owner of the rooming house in which Mr Clayton then
lived a breach of duty notice under the Victorian
Rooming Houses Act
The notice alleged that the owner had unreasonably interfered with Mr
Clayton's quiet enjoyment of his room and had indulged in behaviour
amounted to an attempt to evict Mr Clayton or to induce him to abandon his room
even though his rent was not in arrears without
either notifying the Residential
Tenancies Tribunal pursuant to one specified provision of the Rooming House Act
or obtaining an
appropriate order from the Residential Tenancies
The behaviour was alleged to have occurred at a time when Mr Clayton was
detained as an involuntary patient at Royal Park Hospital
under the Mental
Health Act. Mr Clayton maintains that although he was admitted to Royal
Park, that there was no diagnosis of his
condition, the diagnosis of his
condition was not made. There is no dispute, certainly, that he told Ms Boyce of
this admission and
that this fact, the fact of the admission, was mentioned in
the breach of duty notice which was issued on his instruction.
In his complaint of discrimination he states that before he disclosed
this fact to Ms Boyce. The staff of the rooming house in which
he lived had been
cordial and polite to him but that after the disclosure of this fact the staff's
attitude changed and his complaint
is I think, on a proper reading of it, that
Ms Boyce disclosed the fact of his admission to the staff of the rooming house
he lived, that they in turn disclosed that to the residents and that the
residents and staff who had previously treated him well
then began to treat him
as though he were unbalanced and, as he puts it, as though he were an
Mr Clayton asserts that he believes that Ms Boyce would not have
disclosed this information if his illness had been some other physical
and would not have presumed a number of things about his illness. He states his
belief that Ms Boyce has discriminated against
him in this way because of his
past medical history or because she imputes to him a mental illness or imputes
to him a past mental
Mr Clayton's particulars of complaint contain a number of additional
claims. For example that the chair of the committee of management
of the RHTA
Mr Clayton by imputing to him an impairment and that, he claims in his
particulars of complaint, is evidenced by a letter sent to
him by Mr Adami on
letterhead of the Office of the Public Advocate, an official who is charged with
the statutory responsibility
to advocate and on occasion to be guardian for
disabled people who are unable to make certain decisions about their
But Mr Clayton has not applied to amend the complaint to include these
additional allegations which in any case would seem to relate
to the RHTA rather
than to Ms Boyce. And I must only in this application deal with the complaints
as they are and as I construe them.
From the material placed before the Tribunal by Ms Boyce, there is
no doubt that she believed at the relevant time that Mr Clayton
suffered from
some kind of mental illness resulting in what she perceived to be obsessive
behaviour and an inability to distinguish
between the perceived and the real.
But she denies disclosing her knowledge of the fact of Mr Clayton's
hospitalisation or her belief
that he was mentally ill to any of the staff or
any of the residents of the rooming house where Mr Clayton lived.
She admits disclosing these matters to Mr Adami and says that she did
this to enable her to respond to her complaint which Mr Clayton
had made about
her handing of his case to the Department of Justice which had then been
referred to the RHTA. She also admits disclosing
this knowledge and this belief
to the Equal Opportunity Commission and says that it was to enable her to
respond to Mr Clayton's
complaint of discrimination which had been forwarded to
her by the Commission.
She asserts that the letter written by Mr Adami on Office of Public
Advocate note paper was written without her knowledge or consent.
also asserts that in one conversation with Ms Boyce she mentioned her friendship
with some of the staff of the rooming
house where he lived. Ms Boyce asserts
that she cannot recall that conversation.
I now turn to the material concerning the victimisation complaint. That
complaint claims that after Mr Clayton lodged his complaint
of impairment or
disability discrimination with the Equal Opportunity Commission, Mr Clayton
received from Ms Boyce a letter dated
13 June 1997 that he interprets as a
refusal to assist him further with any of the services that the RHTA could
Mr Clayton asserts that he had previously lodged a complaint under the
Disability Discrimination Act with the Commonwealth but then
withdrew that
complaint and relodged a similar complaint with the Equal Opportunity Commission
under the Victorian
Equal Opportunity Act
. From his particulars of complaint it
appears that that Disability Discrimination Act complaint was lodged in February
1997. It also
appears that on 10 June 1997 Mr Clayton requested from Ms
Boyce copies of certain correspondence and then on 13 June 1997 Ms Boyce
by the letter that is mentioned in Mr Clayton's victimisation
In that letter she said that she was not prepared to enter into further
correspondence in relation to the matter and said also that
she wasn't prepared
to provide Mr Clayton with any other documents, and I am quoting from the
letter, "Except through the Commission
and except at the request of the
Commission". Ms Boyce's defence to this claim is first that Mr Clayton has
misinterpreted her letter.
That it is not a refusal to him of the services which
the RHTA can offer, that it merely relates to his Equal Opportunity Commission
complaint, the complaint that was before the Equal Opportunity
Commission.
Second, she asserts that when she wrote that letter she believed that in
fact all relevant documents relating to the victimisation
complaint were in the
Commission's possession and had been released to Mr Clayton by the Commission
and that in fact she had advised
one of the Commission's officers, Ms Ziems,
that she expected that the Commission would release all those documents to
and that in fact all the relevant documents had been supplied to
the Commission by Ms Boyce.
Her third assertion in her defence is that the letter was intended to,
and I am quoting from her particulars of defence, "to try to
limit the variety
of complaints and to ensure that the complaints would be dealt with in an
appropriate forum". This is in a context
where Mr Clayton had made a number of
complaints about Ms Boyce's handling of his case to some newspapers, to the
Minister for Justice,
to the Office of Public Advocate, to the Minister for
Housing, and in addition of course, to the Commission.
Her fourth assertion is that she did not intend, not only did her letter
in her view not on its face indicate that RHTA services would
be denied to Mr
Clayton, but what did she intend that those services would be denied to Mr
Now I deal with the submissions in fact on these claims. First the
complaint of discrimination on the basis of impairment. Ms Boyce
submits that I
should strike out this complaint for lack of substance and on looking at the
material as a whole I agree with the
submission. Mr Clayton is asking the
Tribunal to make a number of inferences. There is no direct statement that Ms
Boyce disclosed
Mr Clayton's medical history to the staff of the rooming house
in which Mr Clayton lived.
Mr Clayton is asking the Tribunal to infer that Ms Boyce disclosed
this material. There are a number of cases which indicate that
an inference like
that can only be made if it is a logical and reasonable inference that can be
drawn and it can only be drawn on
the primary facts. The only fact which Mr
Clayton puts forward as a foundation for this inference is the alleged
coincidence in time
between his disclosure of his medical history to Ms Boyce
which is August 1995 and his claim that the residents and staff of his
house had begun to treat him as unbalanced or as an imbecile.
The tribunal then has to infer that the residents and staff treated him
in this way, in the way he alleges, because of the disclosure
and not for some
other reason. There may, of course, have been other reasons for that. That is
another possibility. The particulars
of complaint in fact also refer to another
breach of duty notice which was issued on his behalf by Ms Boyce in July 1996
and relates
to claims of unlawful entry into his room, moving of his goods and
in fact the taking, the removal of some of his goods.
This, I take to be, evidence of the way in which he claims that his
treatment became worse. On the basis of the material before the
consider that it is not open to the Tribunal to make the inferences which
Mr Clayton seeks. It is simply in law not possible
for the Tribunal to make
these inferences. On that basis, it seems to me that this particular complaint
is bound to fail and should
be struck out.
I now turn to the complaint of victimisation. Mr Clayton says that
the letter of 13 June 1997 is to be interpreted in a particular
way. Ms Boyce
asserts that the letter, on its face, cannot be interpreted in the way that Mr
Clayton has interpreted it. It cannot
be interpreted as the denial to Mr Clayton
of RHTA services and I agree. I agree that on its face this letter does not
RHTA services but relates properly to Mr Clayton's complaint.
Probably that is the complaint under the Disability Discrimination
might be preliminary inquiry to the Commission which preceded Mr Clayton's
complaint in August 1997 under the
Equal Opportunity Act
But either way it seems to me that the letter relates to those matters
and not to any services of RHTA. Ms Boyce, on that basis, has
also satisfied me
that the complaint is bound to fail because the letter cannot be of a
construction that Mr Clayton asks for it
and on that basis that complaint should
also be struck out as against Ms Boyce.
The orders that I make relate only to Ms Boyce and not to the RHTA. The
RHTA does not seem to have responded at all to Mr Clayton's
particulars of
complaint. There is no response on the Tribunal's file. Certainly Ms Boyce
responded to those particulars of complaint
and it may be that Mr Clayton should
have discussions with the registrar to ascertain why it is that there has been
no response and
to find out whether that organisation still exists, and if it
does, Mr Clayton may wish to apply to the Tribunal for some appropriate
directions.
Before leaving this case, I feel that I should make some comments on a
number of perceptions and misunderstandings which in my view
have made these
proceedings more difficult for both parties. First, Ms Boyce has been
particularly distressed by the making of these
complaints because she feels that
they were in some way taken into account in the making of the decision to remove
funding from RHTA
which in turn led to her losing her job.
She also feels that the fact of the complaints have played some part in
her not being able to find another permanent job. Because
of these perceptions,
she sees the complaints, not as a genuine exercise by Mr Clayton of his rights
under the Act, but as an attempt
to destroy her.
Second, because of the repeated use of words in the various documentation
placed before the Commission and this Tribunal of words
such as "mental illness"
and "delusion" and "obsession" by Ms Boyce and in addition, I think, because of
the letter from Mr Adami
which was on OPA letter, Office of Public Advocate
letterhead, Mr Clayton perceives that Ms Boyce is stereotyping him and
stereotyping
his behaviour as that of a mentally ill person.
He does not understand that if Ms Boyce wishes to respond to the
complaints in a way that will make her answers to the complaints
clear to the
Equal Opportunity Commission and will then assist the Commission to determine
whether or not to decline the complaint
which is a critical function of the
Commission, Ms Boyce must set out her answers to the claims and her versions of
events truthfully
and as clearly as she can.
I should say that in my view Mr Clayton's misunderstanding of the
complaints and of the Commission's processes is understandable because,
processes, there are often complexities and difficulties which unrepresented
people trip over. The Tribunal has no doubt
that both parties genuinely believe
in these perceptions but having commented on these perceptions, it doesn't alter
my conclusion
that for the reasons I've earlier given, the complaints should be
struck out.
As far as costs are concerned, while Ms Boyce mentions costs in her
particulars of defence in relation to the whole complaints proceeding,
no specific request in her submissions for orders for costs and I accordingly
make no orders for costs. Thank you very
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (32.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter