URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2025/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Labour Hire Licensing Authority v Gobally Talent Group Pty Ltd [2025] VMC 9 (4 July 2025)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
No. MAG-CI-240191981
LABOUR HIRE LICENSING AUTHORITY
GOBALLY TALENT GROUP PTY LTD
(ACN 659 983
First Defendant
SHENG-YAO HO
Second Defendant
MAGISTRATE:
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
Determined based on written material filed 16 December
2024, 25 February 2025, 26 May 2025.
DATE OF DECISION:
4 July 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS:
Labour Hire Licensing Authority v Gobally Talent
Group Pty Ltd
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VMC 9
INDUSTRIAL LAW –
Labour Hire Licensing Act 2018
– Labour hire licence required to advertise provision of
labour hire services – Admitted contravention of civil penalty
– Persons involved in contravening civil penalty provision – Agreed
statement of facts – Agreed submissions
on liability and penalties –
Nature and extent of any loss or damage suffered as a result of the
contravention – Course
of conduct principles.
APPEARANCES:
For the Plaintiff
Michael Vickers, Labour Hire Licensing
For the Defendant
Caanan Lawyers
HER HONOUR:
INTRODUCTION
Labour Hire Licensing Authority (
the Authority
) is responsible for
administering the
Labour Hire Licensing Act 2018
objects of the Act include to protect workers from being exploited by providers
of labour hire services and to improve the
transparency and integrity of the
labour hire industry
The purposes of the Act include the establishment of
a licensing system to regulate the provision of labour hire services and the
imposition of civil penalties upon unlicensed providers
obtain a licence under the Act, a labour hire provider must declare its
compliance with laws including workplace, superannuation,
occupational health
and safety, migration and tax laws
A labour hire provider must also
declare each relevant person to be a fit and proper person
(s 17(4)(a)).
Authority maintains a public register of licensed labour hire providers
The Act prohibits the provision of labour hire services without a licence (s 13)
and also prohibits the advertising of labour hire
services without a licence (s
is the first proceeding brought by the Authority for contravention of s 14 of
the Act. The Authority alleges that on six occasions
in 2024, the First
Defendant (
) advertised that it provided, or was willing to
provide, labour hire services despite not holding a licence, in contravention of
s 14 of the Act. The Authority alleges that the Second Defendant (
directly or indirectly knowingly concerned in, or party, to, those
contraventions contrary to s 95(1)(c) of the Act, such that,
pursuant to s
95(2), s 14 applies to Ho as if Ho had contravened the provision.
to ss 93(1) and 93(6) of the Act, the Authority may apply to this Court for
orders in relation to a person who has contravened
a civil penalty provision,
where the maximum penalty is 500 penalty units or less for a natural person or
2500 penalty units or less
for a body corporate. Pursuant to s 94(2) of the Act,
the maximum penalties for contravention of s 14 are 200 penalty units for a
natural person and 800 penalty units for a body corporate, meaning the Court has
parties have reached agreement as to proposed penalties to be imposed in respect
of the matter. Gobally and Ho admitted the contraventions
in a Statement of
Agreed Facts and Admissions dated 16 December 2024 (
), accompanied by
a Joint memorandum on liability and penalties (
First Joint Submissions
The parties initially proposed by consent the following orders:
THE COURT DECLARES BY CONSENT:
the period between February 2024 and September 2024, the First Defendant
contravened
Labour Hire Licensing Act 2018
(Vic) (Act)
six times by causing advertisements to be published on Facebook and its website
representing that it provides or is willing
to provide labour hire services,
when the First Defendant did not hold a valid licence to provide labour hire
the period between February 2024 and September 2024, the Second Defendant
contravened
of the Act, by being directly or indirectly knowingly
concerned in, or a party to, the First Defendant’s contraventions of
THE COURT ORDERS BY CONSENT:
First Defendant pay pecuniary penalties totalling $100,000 for its
contraventions of
of the Act.
Second Defendant pay pecuniary penalties totalling $25,000 for his
contraventions of
section 95(1)(c)
of the Act.
be no order as to costs.
to directions for the filing of further material, on 25 February 2025 the
Authority filed an affidavit of Michael Vickers
Vickers Affidavit
the parties filed a Supplementary Joint Memorandum on Penalties (
Second Joint
Submissions
16 April 2025 the parties alerted the Court to the 11 April 2025 Supreme Court
decision in
Labour Hire Licensing Authority v Cameron Workforce Pty Ltd and
is the first decision dealing with agreed penalties under the
, agreed penalties of $1.37 million for Cameron Workforce
were reduced by the Court to $200,000. Agreed penalties of $65,000 for involved
individuals were reduced to $15,000 and $40,000 respectively.
Subsequently,
pursuant to furthe74,000r directions, the parties filed: Affidavit of Steven
Dargavel, Labour Hire Licensing Commissioner
dated 21 May 2025 (
Commissioner
); First Defendant’s Affidavit of Ho dated 22 May 2025
First Ho Affidavit
); Second Defendant’s Affidavit of Ho dated 22
Second Ho Affidavit
); First Defendant’s Affidavit of Ho
dated 23 May 2025 (
Third Ho Affidavit
); Second Defendant’s
Affidavit of Ho dated 23 May 2025 (
Fourth Ho Affidavit
); and Further
Supplementary Joint Memorandum on penalties dated 26 May 2025 (
Third Joint
Submissions
Third Joint Submissions proposed the same declarations and costs order as
initially proposed, but the following revised penalty
THE COURT ORDERS BY CONSENT:
3. The First Defendant pay pecuniary penalties totalling $74,000 for its
contraventions of
of the Act.
4. The Second Defendant pay pecuniary penalties totalling $17,000 for his
contraventions of
section 95(1)(c)
of the Act.
parties sought to have the matter determined without an oral hearing, and I
consider the evidence and submissions to be sufficient
for the Court to make the
required assessment of the proposed penalties without an oral hearing.
RELEVANT FACTS
The contraventions
15, 27 and 28 February and 8 March 2024, advertisements were posted on behalf of
Gobally on the public Facebook page ‘Visa
Turis dan WHV Australia’
Visa Turis Advertisements
). Each of the Visa Turis Advertisements state
that there was a ‘Gobally Talent Group Job’ for ‘Mildura farm
Picking’ located in ‘Mildura Vic 3500.’ They variously
state ‘Start the Work immediately’ or ‘We
are open job
vacancies’ or ‘can work
immediately.’
They included a
link to an application form which described Gobally as follows (omitting content
not in English):
Globally [sic] Talent Group (GTG) is a legitimate subsidiary newly established
by Taiwan’s New Southbound company in Australia.
The company’s
purpose is to provide legal employment opportunities in Australia ...
Main Business: Various meat processing plants and farms
Company Benefits No agency fees or deposits
Assistance in
applying for working holiday visas
superannuation
insurance provided
Accommodation
arrangements (if assistance is needed)
Q-Fever vaccine
administration arrangement (if assistance is needed)
overtime pay at a rate of 1.5 to 2 times the regular rate (varies by plant)
20 days annual
leave and 10 days sick leave (Full-time only).
Full-Time position
Wages: $23.23 - $41.2 (depends on position)
Licence number: LHL-07489-Y7C6J
of 28 May 2024, the Visa Turis Facebook page had 31,100 members. There are a
number of posts in another language which the parties
jointly contend, and I
accept, is Bahasa Indonesian, as is the title of the page which the parties
contend translates to ‘Australian
tourist visa and working holiday
visa’. Collectively, the four Visa Turis Advertisements had 84
‘likes’, 34 ‘comments’
9 March 2024, a public advertisement on the Facebook Page ‘Sheng AU’
was posted on behalf of Gobally (
Sheng Advertisement
). The Facebook Page
features the word ‘Recruitment’ prominently in its image and
includes a ‘Gobally Talent Group’
logo. It states ‘[H]i guys,
we’re looking for people who would like to work in farm that we can offer
jobs for whole
years. The location is in Mildura.’ The parties agree there
is similar information in Taiwanese. The profile has nine ‘friends’
and the post has three ‘likes’.
28 May 2024, Gobally’s website stated as follows:
Globally Talent Group (GTG) is a company dedicated to providing effective
manpower problem-solving solutions. Our primary objective
is to address the
challenges associated with manpower shortages and seamless transitions. Acting
as a reliable bridge, GTG facilitates
open communication and resolves any
uncertainties or misunderstandings between employees and employers. ...
... GTG recognises the widespread availability of talent across the globe. Our
mission is to assist both of companies and candidates
in identifying and
harnessing their full potential by guiding them towards suitable positions that
align with their skills and aspirations.
Furthermore, we have established
strategic partnerships with reputable entities based in Taiwan, Vietnam, and
Indonesia, enabling
us to share invaluable expertise, job opportunities and a
pool of talented individuals.
Our head office base in Taiwan Which name Taiwan New South School Centre ... and
cooperates with Indonesia and Vietnam. We have successfully
solved the labor
problems of many companies in Taiwan.
Now, our company will focus on Australia to send talents in Australian and solve
the problem of manpower shortage.
‘Employers’ tab of the website referred to ‘hiring labor on a
temporary or project basis’, ‘hiring
labor on a temporary or
contract basis’ and ‘hiring temporary labor through staffing
agencies or contractors.’
Under ‘Featured Openings’, next to
an ‘apply’ button, the website stated (
Advertisement
Skilled Meat Workers
(slaughterers/boners/slicers)
Stawell, Horsham
& Grampians Vic
Other (Farming,
Animals & Conservation)
$59,999 per year
of the Visa Turis Advertisements, Sheng Advertisement and Website Advertisement
the Advertisements
) remained online until at least 31 October
on the language and location of the Visa Turis Advertisements and the Sheng
Advertisement, along with the description of Gobally’s
activities, I
conclude that the Advertisements were primarily directed towards Indonesian or
Taiwanese working holiday visa holders.
instructed and directed each of the Advertisements to be posted, with Ho’s
knowledge and involvement. Both Gobally and
Ho knew that absent a licence, the
licence requirements did not allow Gobally to advertise or hold itself out as
providing labour
hire services in Victoria. Both Gobally and Ho knew each of the
Advertisements advertised that Gobally provided or was willing to
provide labour
hire services.
Gobally and Ho
was registered in June 2022. Ho is the sole director, secretary and shareholder
of Gobally. At the time of the contraventions,
Gobally was a relatively small,
Queensland-based operation, without significant market power, in the business of
providing labour
hire services.
has never held a labour hire licence under the Act but had applied for a licence
in Victoria which was not approved by the
Authority. Despite advertising its
willingness to provide labour hire services in Victoria, it never commenced
operations or derived
previously held a valid labour hire licence in Queensland and was advertising
farm labour positions in Queensland as of February
2025. Its Queensland licence
expired in June or July 2024 and was not renewed. Gobally has ceased operating
as a labour hire service
provider, having not been actively operating since
August 2024. Its current financial position is limited, and it does not intend
to operate in the labour hire services industry in the future, in light of the
events leading to this proceeding and the non-renewal
of its Queensland
February 2025, Ho has been employed on a casual basis as a mover, his only
current source of income. Prior to this, he had not
been able to find employment
due to an injury. He currently receives no income from Gobally. His assets are
valued at around $83,000.
He does not intend to operate in the labour hire
services industry in the future.
and Ho accepted and agreed with the Authority to pay penalties of $100,000 and
$25,000 respectively. At the time, Ho considered
the individual penalty fair and
reasonable. With his current financial circumstances, a reduced penalty would
ease his financial
burden. Gobally and Ho respectively agree to the Revised
Penalties and Ho considers the penalty in respect of him to be a fair and
reasonable resolution. Gobally expresses its regret for the error of advertising
its services in Victoria without a licence and has
ensured this will not be
repeated by not commencing operations in Victoria, agreeing to the significant
penalty, and deciding not
to operate in the industry in
The Authority and its compliance activities
Act was enacted in response to the Victorian Government inquiry into the Labour
Hire Industry and Insecure Work (
). The Inquiry and
subsequent studies established unlawful exploitation of labour hire workers by
labour hire providers and by host
businesses.
Authority’s first years of operation focused on bringing the labour hire
industry into the scheme, and associated education.
In 2022, the Authority began
enforcing the Act through civil penalty proceedings in the Supreme Court. These
proceedings were expensive
to investigate and litigate. Based on the
Authority’s field operations, interactions with stakeholders, intelligence
agencies and complaints, the Authority understands the prevalence of
unlicensed labour hire remains too high. The Authority cannot
prosecute every
instance of prohibited conduct under the Act and is reliant on the general
deterrent effect of its enforcement
Authority intends enforcement of s 14 of the Act to serve an important
prevention role in its enforcement strategy. Because advertising
offences are
easy to detect and prove, the Authority can respond to and deter unlicensed
advertisers before labour hire services
are provided. An effective sanction will
deter prohibited conduct by removing unlicensed operators and reducing
non-compliant arrangements.
horticulture industry has been identified by multiple inquiries as having a very
high risk of non-compliance and has required
significant attention from agencies
including the Fair Work Ombudsman, Australian Taxation Office, Australian
Federal Police, Border
Force and WorkSafe Victoria. Despite awareness of the Act
in the industry being high, the Authority has refused or cancelled more
in the industry than any other industry. Temporary migrant workers in the
industry are particularly
vulnerable.
Authority budgeted around $38,000 for Counsel’s fees to conclude this
matter by way of a contested hearing. It had incurred
fees of $13,200 up to the
First Joint Submissions and anticipates total fees to be between these sums. The
Authority’s investigation
and enforcement costs in this matter to date
have been modest, as the matter resolved by consent, meaning the parties have
significant resources.
APPROACH TO AGREED PENALTIES
Commonwealth v Director, Fair Work Building Industry Inspectorate
Agreed Penalties
the High Court
[57] ... [I]n civil proceedings there is generally very considerable scope for
the parties to agree on the facts and upon consequences.
There is also
very considerable scope for them to agree upon the appropriate remedy and for
the court to be persuaded that it is
an appropriate remedy.
Accordingly, settlements of civil proceedings are commonplace and orders by
consent for the payment of damages
and other relief are unremarkable. ...
More generally, it is entirely consistent with the nature of civil proceedings
for a court
to make orders by consent and to approve a compromise of proceedings
on terms proposed by the parties, provided the court is persuaded
that what is
proposed is appropriate.
[58] Possibly, there are exceptions to the general rule. There is,
however, no reason in principle or practice why civil penalty
proceedings should
be treated as an exception. Subject to the court being sufficiently
persuaded of the accuracy of the parties'
agreement as to facts and
consequences, and that the penalty which the parties propose
is an appropriate remedy in the circumstances
thus revealed, it is
consistent with principle and ... highly desirable in practice for the court to
accept the parties' proposal
and therefore impose the proposed penalty.
summarised the approach to agreed penalties as follows:
There is an important public policy involved in promoting predictability of
outcome in civil penalty proceedings. This policy consideration
supports the
Court receiving and, if appropriate, accepting an agreed pecuniary penalty to be
imposed in a civil penalty proceeding.
However, the Court is not bound by the
quantum of penalty suggested by the parties. Rather, the Court must satisfy
itself that the
penalty submitted by the parties is appropriate. In this regard,
the Court asks itself whether the proposed penalty is an appropriate
rather than
appropriate
also stated:
Where a poorly resourced defendant is a party to a joint penalty submission, the
Court ‘should scrutinise the submission and
supporting statement of facts
with particular care to ensure, so far as possible, that the statement of facts
[i]s accurate and the
contravener’s will ha[s] not been
overborne’.
parties contended that where an agreed penalty is ‘an’ appropriate
penalty having regard to all relevant matters,
it is ‘highly
agreement be accepted by the Court and the Court should exercise restraint in
scrutinising proposed
settlements.
Further, the Court
may adopt an agreed penalty if considered appropriate, even if it ‘might
otherwise have been disposed to
select some other
The parties
relied on the following statement from
Minister for Environment v ACN 089 171
415 Pty Ltd
Ozone Protection Act
It is a serious step for the Court to depart from the parties’ agreed
position, notwithstanding it is open to the Court to
do so. A departure is
capable of undermining trust and confidence in negotiated outcomes, and is
capable of affecting parties’
inclination to reach such outcomes in the
future. Certainty and predictability in the administration of a regulatory
regime is to
be encouraged, insofar as it is compatible with the Court’s
judicial function of determining for itself what penalty is appropriate.
Departure from a negotiated outcome is also capable of undermining the position
of the regulator, or the person or entity with responsibility
administration of the regulatory
accept these propositions and consider two other observations from the
Protection Act Case
to be relevant. Firstly, a proposed agreed penalty is
likely to be the product of compromise and pragmatism between the parties,
weighs in favour of the Court accepting a proposed
Secondly, the
Protection Act Case
concerned the first penalty proceeding under that
legislation, and the Court considered due regard ought be paid to the
submissions
of the Minister (responsible for administering the legislation) and
her indications as to the appropriate
whilst there is no apparent overbearing of will in respect of Gobally and Ho,
who are legally represented in this proceeding,
have admitted relevant conduct
and have verified their agreement to the proposed penalties, I conclude they are
nonetheless poorly
resourced in comparison with the Authority. Accordingly, the
Court must carefully scrutinise the evidence and ‘undertake a
assessment of all the factors going towards the appropriateness of a particular
penalty and to come to its own
conclusions.’
importance of this task is underlined by the decision in
ADMITTED CONTRAVENTIONS OF THE ACT
14 of the Act provides:
14 Licence required to advertise provision of labour
hire services
A person must not advertise or in any way hold out that the person provides, or
is willing to provide, labour hire services unless
the person is the holder of a
licence that is in force.
term ‘provide labour hire services’ is defined in ss 7 and 8 of the
Act. The definition relied on by the parties is
the general definition at s 7,
as follows:
7 Meaning of
provides labour hire
general definition
(1) A person (a provider) provides labour hire services if—
(a) in the course of conducting a business, the provider supplies one or more
individuals to another person (a
) to perform work in and as part of
a business or undertaking of the host; and
(b) the individuals are workers for the provider, within the meaning of section
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), a provider may provide labour hire
services to a host regardless of the following—
(a) whether a contract has been entered into between the provider and the host;
(b) whether the individuals supplied by the provider are supplied—
(i) directly; or
(ii) indirectly through one or more intermediaries;
(c) whether the work performed is under the control of the provider or the host.
is in turn defined in s 9 of the Act, which provides:
9 Meaning of
(1) An individual is a
, for a provider, if—
(a) an arrangement is in force between the individual and the provider under
which the provider supplies, or may supply, the individual
to one or more
other persons to perform work; and
(b) the provider is obliged to pay the individual (in whole or part) for the
performance of the work by the individual, whether directly
or indirectly
through one or more intermediaries.
(2) An individual is a
, for a provider, if an arrangement is in
force between the individual and the provider under which the provider—
(a) recruits the individual for, or places the individual with, one or more
other persons to perform work, being persons who are
obliged to pay the
individual (in whole or part) for the performance of the work by the individual,
whether directly or indirectly
through one or more intermediaries; or
(b) recruits the individual as an independent contractor for one or more other
persons to perform work, and manages the contract
performance by the independent
contractor.
(3) For the purposes of this section, an individual may be a worker for a
provider regardless of the following—
(a) whether the individual is an employee of the provider;
(b) whether a contract has been entered into between the individual and the
(c) whether the individual is an apprentice, or is under a training contract,
within the meaning of the
Education and Training Reform Act 2006
95 of the Act provides as follows:
95 Persons involved in contravening civil penalty provision
(1) A person must not -
(a) aid, abet, counsel or procure a contravention of a civil penalty provision;
(b) induce (by threats, promises or otherwise) a contravention of a civil
penalty provision; or
(c) be in any way directly or indirectly knowingly concerned in, or party to, a
contravention of a civil penalty provision; or
(d) conspire to contravene a civil penalty provision.
(2) This Act applies to a person who contravenes subsection (1) in relation to a
civil penalty provision as if the person had contravened
the provision.
and Ho admit that by each of the Visa Turis Advertisements and the Sheng
Advertisement, Gobally represented that it provides,
or is willing to provide,
labour hire services in the course of conducting its business, by supplying
workers within the meaning
of s 9 of the Act to a farming business in Mildura to
start picking grapes for that business. They admitted that by the Website
Advertisement,
from at least 28 May 2024 until at least 4 September 2024,
Gobally represented on its website that it provides, or is willing to
labour hire services, in the course of conducting its business, by supplying
workers within the meaning of s 9 of the Act
to meat worker businesses in
Stawell, Horsham and the Grampians to assist with slaughtering, boning and
admits contravening s 14 of the Act in respect of each of the
Advertisements.
contravening s 95(1)(c) of the Act in respect of each of the Advertisements, as
he was knowingly concerned in Gobally’s
contraventions.
Because of the
operation of s 95(2) of the Act, s 14 applies to Ho as if he had contravened s
am satisfied that the admitted facts establish the six contraventions of s 14 as
admitted by Gobally and the contravention of s
95(1)(c), and s 14 accordingly,
CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED PENALTIES
Principles for
determining appropriate pecuniary penalties
93(5) prescribes matters which the Court must have regard to in determining the
amount of a pecuniary penalty, as follows:
(5) For the purposes of determining the amount of a pecuniary penalty under
this section the court must have regard to –
(a) the nature and extent of the contravention; and
(b) the nature and extent of any loss or damage suffered as a result of the
contravention; and
(c) the circumstances in which the contravention took place.
Additionally,
consistent with the decisions in
Labour Hire Licensing
Authority v UNG Services Pty Ltd & Anor
Hire Licensing Authority v A L Star Express Pty
principles which apply
to the imposition of pecuniary penalties derived from other statutory schemes,
and as outlined in
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v
are applicable.
purpose of civil penalties is primarily, if not solely, the promotion of the
public interest in compliance with the Act by both
specific and general
deterrence of further
contraventions.
A civil penalty
must be fixed with a view to ensuring that it is not regarded by the contravenor
or others as an acceptable cost
For the purpose of
general deterrence, it is important to send a message that the relevant
contraventions are serious and not
acceptable.
An appropriate civil
penalty will not exceed what is reasonably necessary to achieve the deterrence
of future contraventions of a
like kind by the contravenor and
and will strike a
reasonable balance between oppressive severity and the need for
deterrence.
circumstances of the contravenor as well as the conduct involved in the
contravention may be considered, as both may bear
on the need for
deterrence.
maximum penalty is one factor in determining an appropriate penalty, in that
there must be some reasonable relationship between
the theoretical maximum and
the penalty imposed.
the maximum penalty is not to be applied
‘mechanically’.
factors which may be relevant to determining an appropriate penalty, in addition
to those specified in s 93(5), include: the
size of the contravening company and
its market power; the deliberateness of the contravention and the period over
which it extended;
whether the contravention arose out of the conduct of senior
management or a lower level; whether the contravenor has a corporate
conducive to compliance or had taken corrective action; and whether the
contravenor has cooperated with authorities responsible
for enforcement of the
Act in relation to the
contravention.
They may also
include: whether there has been any similar previous conduct by the contravenor;
whether the contravenor had exhibited
contrition; and the need to ensure
compliance with minimum standards by provision of an effective means for
investigation and enforcement.
These factors are non-exhaustive and should not be applied as a
Deterrence remains
the primary consideration,
these other factors to be ‘seen through the prism of what is necessary to
achieve deterrence.’
principles of totality, parity and course of conduct from criminal sentencing
may assist in the assessment of what is considered
reasonably necessary to
achieve deterrence.
Ultimately,
as with criminal sentencing, determination of a civil penalty is an evaluative
exercise, taking account the relevant
factors through a process of
‘instinctive
synthesis.’
turn to consider the proposed Revised Penalties in light of those principles.
The nature and extent of the contraventions
were six advertisements in total. The advertisements appeared in three online
locations. They describe labour hire services
in four locations, being farm
work/grape picking in Mildura and abattoir work in Stawell, Horsham and the
the size of the membership of the Visa Turis Facebook page in particular, I
conclude that a large audience was exposed to the
Visa Turis Advertisements.
Further, there was a considerable degree of direct engagement with the Visa
Turis Advertisements by way
of likes, comments and shares. Further again, each
of the Advertisements remained public for a lengthy period of time.
Accordingly,
whilst the advertising conduct itself was not extensive, the extent of exposure
of the Visa Turis Advertisements was
significant.
The nature and extent of any loss or damage suffered
is a mandatory consideration. However, the Authority contended that given the
nature of s 14, some contraventions may not cause
loss or damage, and this
should not lead the Court to reduce the proposed penalty or impose a nominal
, at paragraph 50, the Court stated:
The phrase ‘loss or ‘damage’ in s 93(5)(b) of the Act is not
limited to pecuniary loss or damage. The words ‘loss
or damage’ have
a broad ambit. Loss or damage under s 93(5)(b) also includes non-pecuniary forms
of damage. The words ‘nature’
and ‘extent’ in s 93(5)(b)
indicate that loss and damage is not confined to pecuniary loss or damage.
Authority initially contended that it did not know if any person suffered any
loss or damage given the early resolution of the
matter, but the Court could
infer from the degree of engagement with the Advertisements that some job
applicants lost time in applying
for work. In the Third Joint Submissions
the parties contended that in light of the objects of the Act, the phrase
‘loss or damage’ extends to the loss of protection
to the public due
to exposure to the Advertisements, and to damage to the transparency and
integrity of the labour hire industry
They contended that the
Advertisements, being the precursor to unregulated labour hire arrangements,
expose workers to potential
exploitation.
They contended
that the Authority’s investigation, enforcement and external legal costs
also constitute indirect loss or
am not satisfied that any direct loss or damage was suffered by any worker, as I
accept that no labour hire services were ultimately
provided. Nor do I consider
it open to infer that prospective workers responded to the advertisements and
thus suffered indirect
loss and damage. Any evidence of this could have and
ought to have been before the Court, irrespective of the stage at which the
matter resolved. Absent this evidence, I consider that the exposure of workers
to the harms of the unregulated industry is too remote,
even on a broad reading
of s 93(5), to constitute relevant loss or damage.
than the question of costs to the Authority, I conclude that no loss or damage
was suffered as a result of the Advertisements.
Irrespective of whether s 93(5)
is broad enough to encompass costs to the Authority, I consider those costs to
be relevant, and I
have considered this separately below.
I accept the contention that contraventions of s 14, as opposed to s 13, are by
their nature less likely to result in direct
or indirect loss and damage. It is
possible that advertising contraventions may themselves cause loss or damage,
for example time
costs associated with a recruitment process, or the cost of a
worker relocating in anticipation of work. Nonetheless, I accept that
provision of labour hire services without a licence is more likely to give rise
to identifiable loss or damage. Accordingly,
whilst this is a mandatory
consideration, I consider it is less important in the evaluative process in this
matter than other relevant
considerations, bearing in mind that deterrence is
the primary objective.
The circumstances in which the contraventions took place
consider the target audience for the advertisements, and the industries in
respect of which the labour hire services were advertised,
are relevant
circumstances.
Act has a protective purpose.
Its objects include to protect workers from being exploited by providers of
labour hire services.
confirmed by the Explanatory Memorandum which states:
The key object of this Bill is to protect vulnerable labour hire workers from
exploitation by the providers of labour hire services
Ung Services
, the Court accepted that the Act was enacted following the
Inquiry and in response to the exploitation of
Ung Services
as with this matter, the Authority had referred the Court to the following
summary of findings of the Inquiry:
The evidence provided to the Inquiry shows that there is a problem with the
presence of ‘rogue’ labour hire operators
in Victoria. While
it is difficult to be precise about the extent of this problem, rogue operators
are particularly evident in the
horticultural industry (including the picking
and packing of fresh fruit and vegetables), and the meat and cleaning
industries.
In many instances, the activities of rogue operators have led
to exploitation of vulnerable workers including underpayment of award
non-payment of superannuation, provision of sub-standard accommodation and
non-observance of statutory health and safety requirements.
This problem stems in large part from the ease of access, or absence of barriers
to entry, for persons/organisations wishing to provide
labour hire services in
this state. In addition, the problem stems from the lack of visibility of
these rogue operators, who operate
in the informal economy and outside the reach
of existing regulators.
The problem requires a regulatory solution which addresses each of these
underlying causes: as the submissions of those advocating
increased regulation
demonstrate, there is a wide range of options available. In my view, a
sector specific licensing scheme for
labour hire operators is the best of those
labour hire services referred to in the Advertisements were all related to
industries specifically identified in the Inquiry as
industries in which
‘rogue’ operators were particularly prevalent. Further, five of the
Advertisements are for the horticulture
industry. Despite a high level of
awareness of the Act in that industry, the Authority has refused or cancelled
more licenses in
that industry than any other.
again, the Advertisements were targeted at migrant workers. The parties contend
that migrant workers are known to be especially
susceptible to exploitation.
This is a matter which has been recognised, including as a ‘notorious
in civil penalty
proceedings under the
Fair Work Act 2009
and I accept it to be
Number of contraventions, maximum penalties and course of
conduct considerations
proposed penalties compared to the maximum penalties for a single contravention
and six contraventions of
respectively are as
maximum (single)
Maximum (six)
parties contended in the First Joint Submissions that it was appropriate to
treat the contraventions as a course of conduct, because
whilst each
contravention involves separate conduct and they are not inextricably
interrelated, they are closely linked. Subsequently,
in the Second Joint
Submissions, the parties emphasised that each of the contraventions involve
separate conduct and are not
inextricably linked, contending that the
course of conduct principle does
apply, however the parties had
nonetheless agreed to apply it. Further, the parties contended that the Court
must have regard to
the relationship between the maximum penalty for the six
contraventions and the proposed penalties, a relationship which, in respect
the initially proposed penalties, was described as ‘modest and
reasonable’. In the Third Joint Submissions, the parties
maintained that
the course of conduct principle does not apply. They described the relationship
between the maximum penalty for six
contraventions and the Revised Penalties as
reasonable, and neither disproportionate nor oppressive, and contended the
Revised Penalties
are reasonable even compared to the theoretical maximum for a
single contravention, given the need for general deterrence.
consider the reasonableness of the relationship between the theoretical maximum
penalty and the penalty the Court imposes is informed
by the extent to which the
conduct comprising the six contraventions is characterised as a course of
course of conduct principle was described in
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v Employsure Pty Ltd
as follows:
[O]rdinarily, separate contraventions arising from separate acts
should attract separate penalties. However, where separate acts give
separate contraventions that are inextricably interrelated, they may be regarded
as a “course of conduct” for
penalty purposes:
Competition and Consumer Commission v Yazaki
Corporation
[2018] FCAFC
(2018) 262 FCR 243
) at [234]. This avoids double punishment
for those parts of the legally distinct contraventions that involve overlap in
wrongdoing:
see, for example,
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2010] FCAFC 39
(2010) 269 ALR 1
) at [39] and [41].
Whether the contraventions should be treated as a single course of conduct is
fact specific having regard to all
of the circumstances of the case.
considered the course of conduct principle in respect of
four contraventions of
of the Act. The contraventions arose from the
provision of labour hire services to four different hosts. A different number of
were provided to each host, for different lengths of time, over
different time periods, within a three month period. The parties’
penalty was based on four separate penalties. However, the Court determined the
contraventions were a single course of conduct,
because: they were ‘the
product of an unlicensed business operation designed to make a profit’;
the status of Cameron
Workforce ‘as an unlicensed provider of labour hire
services’ was ‘[a] key element of [the] contravening conduct’;
there was ‘a significant factual overlap in the four
contraventions’; and they ‘occurred within a three month
period...’.
the current matter, the parties contended that even where the advertisements had
the same purpose or are in similar terms, an advertisement
posted on different
days or platforms in which different people saw and engaged with it constitutes
a separate contravention. In
support of this contention, the parties relied on
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Cahill
In that matter, the majority upheld the primary judge’s determination that
three contraventions relating to a threat to take
action to coerce the
employment of the same employees on a construction site should not be treated as
a course of conduct because
they involved distinct elements of time, place and
threatened activity.
The parties
further relied on
, in which Employsure misrepresented, by way
of six google advertisements, that it was affiliated with three government
The primary judge treated the six advertisements as a single course of
conduct as they were all published on the same medium and
conveyed the same
representation through the same statements or omissions, albeit with reference
to three different agencies.
Full Court disagreed and considered there were ‘at least three different
courses of conduct’,
stating at [83]:
[a]lthough the advertisements the subject of the contraventions were directed to
the same result, and had the same vice, they nonetheless
reflected separate
acts, directed at three different agencies. They covered differing time spans.
The mere coincidence that the six
Google Ads appeared on the same medium does
not reflect that Employsure engaged in a single course of conduct. Nor does the
that, viewed generically, the Google Ads all conveyed an affiliation with a
government agency. It may have been part of an ongoing
marketing or advertising
campaign or strategy, but that does not, without more, suggest it was one course
of conduct, not least because
Employsure chose to misrepresent an association
with the differing government agencies using different advertisements and over
the purposes of
of the Act, the relevant contravening conduct is
advertising. Of the three authorities considered above, the matter of
is of particular assistance. Common with this matter, in
multiple advertisements constituted the contravening conduct.
In identifying ‘at least three’ courses of conduct, the
distinguished between them based on the different government agencies identified
in each advertisement. The Court also acknowledged
that differences in timing
could be material, and that a common medium or campaign was not sufficient to
suggest a course of conduct.
a similar approach to that taken in
, I conclude that the Sheng
Advertisement contravention and the Website Advertisement contravention are
sufficiently factually distinct
that no double punishment arises from their
treatment as separate contraventions from each other and the Visa Turis
Advertisements.
They are temporally distinct from each other and the
‘advertising’ or ‘holding out’ occurred on different
platforms. Further, the jobs they advertised and the location of the work
differed from each other. Further, whilst the Sheng Advertisement
commonality with the Visa Turis Advertisements, in that it advertised farm work
in Mildura on the platform Facebook, the
advertisement was placed on a different
date to the Visa Turis Advertisements, it was placed through a different
Facebook page and
the description of the work ( ‘work in farm... for whole
years’) was different to the description of the work in the
Advertisements (‘grape picking’ to ‘start work
immediately’).
respect of the four contraventions relating to the Visa Turis Advertisements,
notwithstanding that there were four separate acts
of posting the advertisement,
I consider there was a substantial overlap in respect of the
‘advertising’ by Gobally,
and the ‘labour hire services’
it represented it was willing to provide. Whilst each advertisement was posted
on a different
date, they concurrently remained online for a common period of
several months; they were all posted to the same Facebook Page, accessible
the same general audience (accepting, as the parties contended, that different
people may have seen each of the Visa Turis Advertisements
on the days they were
posted); and they advertised the same labour hire services. Accordingly, I
consider that both the factual and
legal elements of each of these
contraventions substantially overlap, such that there is a risk of double
punishment if they are
treated separately. Accordingly, I consider the Visa
Turis Advertisements to constitute a course of conduct and an appropriate
must reflect this.
ABCC v CFMEU
the Court described the approach to be taken in respect of
contraventions comprising a course of conduct as follows:
...[T]he course of conduct principle [does not] ... permit, let alone require,
the Court to impose a single penalty in respect of
multiple contraventions of a
pecuniary penalty provision.... If the contraventions arose out of a course of
conduct, the penalties
imposed in relation to the contraventions should
generally reflect that fact, otherwise there is a risk that the respondent will
be doubly punished in respect of the relevant acts or omissions that make up the
multiple contraventions. That is not to say that
the Court can impose a
single penalty in respect of each course of conduct. Likewise, there is no doubt
that in an appropriate case
involving multiple contraventions, the Court should,
after fixing separate penalties for the contraventions, consider whether the
aggregate penalty is excessive. If the aggregate is found to be excessive,
the penalties should be adjusted so as to avoid that
outcome. ... In an
appropriate case, however, the Court may impose a single penalty for multiple
contraventions where that course
is agreed or accepted as being appropriate by
the parties.
it follows from
ABCC v CFMEU
that the theoretical maximum penalty is not
affected by applying the course of conduct principle, a comparison of the
Revised Penalties
with the cumulative theoretical maximum for six contraventions
is somewhat artificial. I consider the description of the proposed
penalties as
‘modest’ by reason of that comparison to be a mischaracterisation.
The proposed penalties are significantly
more substantial, on this measure, than
the parties contend.
it also follows from
ABCC v CFMEU
that it is permissible for the Court
to impose a single penalty in respect of multiple contraventions in
circumstances where the
parties have agreed to or accepted that this is
appropriate, such as in this
Are the proposed penalties reasonably necessary to achieve
deterrence?
contraventions were deliberate. Gobally and Ho knew that Gobally was unlicensed,
and that Gobally was prohibited from advertising
for labour hire services whilst
unlicensed. The labour hire services were advertised despite this. To my mind
this is a significant
factor which increases the importance of ensuring
penalties achieve both specific and general deterrence.
Specific Deterrence
and Ho’s admissions and co-operation have the utilitarian benefit of
saving costs, time and resources, which warrants
a reduction in
As a newly operating
company, neither Gobally or Ho has previously been found to have contravened the
Act. Gobally, when operating,
was small and without significant market power.
Now, neither Gobally nor Ho are operating in the labour hire industry. Despite
Advertisements, Gobally did not commence operations or derive income in
Victoria. Gobally’s financial position is limited,
and, including because
of this proceeding, Gobally does not intend to operate in the labour hire
industry in the future. Ho has limited
income and assets and also does not
intend to operate in the labour hire industry in the future. Ho considers the
revised proposed
penalty in respect of him to be fair and reasonable, and
Gobally has expressed its regret and ensured the conduct will not be repeated
including because of its agreement to the significant penalty. Neither Gobally
nor Ho have stated that they do not have the financial
capacity to pay the
agreed penalties.
Third Joint Submissions correctly acknowledge that these matters mean that the
objective of specific deterrence would not have
warranted the quantum of
penalties previously agreed, stating the Revised Penalties were agreed:
...as a result of the new information provided by Gobally and Ho about each of
their current activities and financial circumstances
and to ensure that the
agreed penalties continue to achieve the object of specific and general
deterrence and strike a reasonable
balance between deterrence and oppressive
Nonetheless,
this proceeding was a causative factor in Gobally ceasing operations. As such,
the prospect of the Court imposing the
initial proposed penalties has, in
effect, already achieved the object of specific deterrence, as it has brought
Ho’s exit from the industry, and the financial
consequences of that. In these circumstances, it is difficult to retrospectively
conclude that penalties lower than the Revised Penalties would have achieved the
same outcome, particularly given Gobally and Ho’s
acceptance of the
Revised Penalties and Ho’s statement that those applying to him are fair
and reasonable.
General Deterrence
the Court did in the
Ozone Protection Act
I have had regard to
the Commissioner’s views. I am persuaded by the Commissioner’s
evidence and the parties’ contentions
that the object of general
deterrence ought be a significant consideration in this matter, in light of the
function of s 14 within
the scheme of the Act. Section 14 is concerned with
conduct preceding the actual provision of labour hire services. I agree, as
that the conduct proscribed by s 14 is a ‘natural first
step’ to provision of those services unlicensed. Accordingly,
the advertising conduct of unlicensed labour hire providers is a critical part
of the scheme under the Act for improving
the transparency and integrity of the
labour hire industry, and protection of workers from
exploitation.
I accept, given
the ‘gateway’ nature of advertising contraventions, enforcement of s
14 is an important prevention strategy
for the Authority to employ, which
elevates considerations of general deterrence.
factors specific to this matter increase the importance of general deterrence.
In particular, penalties must be sufficiently
high to reflect the susceptibility
to exploitation of the target audience of the Visa Turis Advertisements, being
migrant workers.
In addition, there is a particular need for general deterrence
in light of the industries in which the labour hire services were
advertised, in
particular the horticulture industry, for reasons I have already canvassed.
final factor I have had regard to in considering the proposed penalties is that
the Authority does not seek its costs of the proceeding.
The evidence from the
Authority as to the costs incurred was imprecise, and in any event does not
reflect costs on the Magistrates’
Court Scale. However, based on this
evidence, it is apparent that a modest yet material part of the Revised
Penalties can be attributed
associated consideration is that that by reaching an early resolution of the
matter, both parties have avoided further costs. I
infer from this that a degree
of pragmatism by the parties has contributed to the proposed outcome.
Appropriate penalties
have weighed each of the above matters.
extent of the conduct was limited, four of the six contraventions comprised a
course of conduct, there was no demonstrated loss
or damage and the financial
and practical circumstances of Gobally and Ho mean the objective of specific
deterrence is limited.
I have concluded that that the Revised Penalties are nonetheless
‘an’ appropriate remedy, albeit that they are
at the high end of
what I consider reasonably necessary to achieve the deterrence objective. I have
reached this view in light of:
the deliberateness of the conduct; the size of
the audience exposed to the advertisements; the targeting of the Advertisement
migrant workers; the industries of the advertised labour hire services; the
role of s 14 in the broader scheme of the Act; the Commissioner’s
as to the importance of s 14 in achieving general deterrence from non-compliance
with the Act; the inclusion of costs in
the sums agreed; the views of Gobally
and Ho, noting that the agreement is likely to be the product of compromise and
pragmatism;
and the role the proposed penalties played in achieving specific
deterrence. In reaching this view, I have also had regard to the
Declarations
am satisfied that it is appropriate to make declarations of contravention.
contended for by the parties, the Court is empowered to make declarations by s
93(2)(b) of the Act and
Supreme Court Act 1986
declarations determine what was a live controversy prior to its resolution. The
Authority, as the relevant regulator, has a
genuine interest in obtaining the
declaratory relief. There is both utility and public interest in making the
declarations, associated
with informing and educating the public as to the
provisions of
of the Act, particularly in light of this matter being the
first proceeding in respect of contravention of
Further, the declarations
will serve to record the Court’s disapproval of deliberate
contraventions.
Form of orders
consider that the form of orders proposed by the parties requires amendment in
one respect. Proposed order 4 is that the Second
Defendant pay pecuniary
penalties totaling $17,000 for his contraventions of
of the Act.
Section 95(1)(c)
prohibits a person from being knowingly concerned in, or a
party to, a contravention of a civil remedy provision. However,
not itself a civil penalty
provides that the Act applies to a person who contravenes
in relation to
a civil penalty provision as if the person had contravened the provision.
Accordingly, it is contravention of
of the Act which gives rise to the
power to impose a penalty. I consider that the appropriate form of that order is
as follows:
The second Defendant pay pecuniary penalties totalling $17,000 for his
contraventions of
of the Act, by way of his contraventions of
the Act, pursuant to
of the Act.
[2025] VSC 185.
SOAF, [9]-[12]; Vickers
Affidavit, [5],[6], pp 5-13 and video exhibit.
Vickers Affidavit, p 8.
Ibid, [5], video exhibit.
SOAF, [13]; Vickers Affidavit,
Vickers Affidavit, [5], video
SOAF, [15(b), (c)].
Ibid, [5], [8]; Vickers
Affidavit, [8], pp 14-16.
SOAF, [7]; First Ho
Affidavit, [4]-[5].
SOAF, [6]; Vickers
Affidavit, [9], p 17; First Ho Affidavit, [6], [8]-[9]; Second Ho Affidavit,
Second Ho Affidavit,
First Ho Affidavit, [7],
[10]; Second Ho Affidavit, [11]-[12]; Third Ho Affidavit, [3]-[4]; Fourth Ho
Affidavit, [3]-[5].
Commissioner Affidavit,
Ibid, [9]-[11].
Ibid, [12]-[15].
Ibid, [5]-[6].
Ibid, [20].
(2015) 258 CLR 482
Ibid, [57]-[58], French CJ,
Kiefel, Bell, Nettle, Gordon JJ.
(citations omitted).
Ibid, [34], citing
Agreed Penalties Case,
Minister for Industry, Tourism and
Resources v Mobil Oil Australia Pty Ltd
[2004] FCAFC 72
[2004] ATPR 41-993
, 48,628-48,629,
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
118 ACSR 124
[2016] FCA 1516
Agreed Penalties Case,
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Target Australia
(2001) ATPR 41–840;
[2001] FCA 1326
Agreed Penalties Case,
[2020] FCA 1557.
Ibid, [95].
Ibid, [28], citing
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Australia and New Zealand
Banking Group Limited
[2016] FCA 1516
118 ACSR 124
Ibid, [29].
Ibid, [28], referring to
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Bupa Aged Care Australia Pty
[2020] FCA 602
- [19] and the cases
cited therein;
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Sony
Interactive Entertainment Network Europe Limited
381 ALR 531
), [53]- [57] (per
Steward J);
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Medibank
Private Limited
[2020] FCA 1030
- [15] (per Anderson J).
ASOF, [9]-[12], [14].
Ibid, [16].
Ibid, [17].
[2022] VSC 740
[2023] VSC 711
(2022) 274 CLR 450
Ibid, [9]; see also
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v TPG internet Pty Ltd
[2013] HCA 54
250 CLR 640
; Singtel Optus Pty Ltd v Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission
[2012] FCAFC 20
(2012) 287 ALR 249
, 265 [62].
Australian Building and
Construction Commissioner v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(2017) 254 FCR 68
(2017) 271 IR 321
[2017] FCAFC 113
Ibid, [46]-[47].
Ibid, [55].
Ibid, [53];
Competition and Consumer Commission v Reckitt Benckiser (Australia) Pty Ltd
(2016) 340 ALR 25; [2016] FCAFC 181, 63 [155]-[156].
Trade Practices Commission v CSR Limited
[1990] FCA 521;
(1991) ATPR 41-076
Kelly v Fitzpatrick
(2007) 166 IR 14
[2007] FCA 1080
Ibid, [18].
Fair Work Ombudsman v
Sushi Bay Pty Ltd (in liq) (No 3)
[2024] FCA 869
Reckitt Benckiser
Flight Centre Ltd v
Australian Competition and consumer Commission (No 2)
(2018) 260 FCR 68
[2018] FCAFC 53
Third Joint Submissions,
Ibid, [11].
Ibid, [14].
Ung Services,
Explanatory Memorandum,
Labour Hire Licensing Bill 2017
Ung Services
Ibid, [80];
Inquiry into the Labour Hire Industry and Insecure Work, Final Report
August 2016, 25.
Fair Work Ombudsman v
DTF World Square Pty Ltd (in liq) (No 4)
[2024] FCA 341
Ombudsman v Foot & Thai Massage Pty Ltd (in liquidation) (No
[2024] FCA 483
, [221]-[222] (under appeal);
Danaratna v Arunatilaka
[2024] FCA 1431
Act, s 94, The parties
calculated these based on the value of a penalty unit during the period 1 June
2023 to 30 June 2024, being
[2023] FCAFC 5
[2010] FCAFC 39.
(Middleton and Gordon JJ).
[14]-[16], referring to
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v
Employsure Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2021] FCAFC 157
Employsure No
Ibid, [77].
ABCC v CFMEU
[148]-[149].
Ibid, [145]-[146].
Registered Organisations
Commissioner v Australian Workers Union
[2019] FCA 1852
Ozone Protection Act
Act, s 94(2).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (662 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter