URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:43:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Chris Andrews [2025] VicLiqComm 5; (16 July 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application by Chris Andrews under
section 153(1)
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for an internal review of a
delegate’s decision to refuse to vary pre-retail licence no. 33779674 for
the premises located
at 1/12 Ash Grove, Dandenong.
Commission:
John Larkins, Chair
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair
Mr Steven Brnovic, Commissioner
Date of Decision:
16 July 2025
Date of Reasons:
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the delegate and grant the variation of pre-retail licence no. 33779674
to the conditions set out in Appendix A.
John Larkins
History of Licence No. 33779674
2018, Chris Andrews (
) applied to the Victorian Commission for
Gambling and Liquor Regulation (
) for a pre-retail licence under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
in the name of his then
company, Melbourne Wholesale Alcohol Pty Ltd (
2018 Application
the avoidance of doubt, the VCGLR was the previous liquor regulator at the time
of the 2018 Application. The current liquor regulator
is the Victorian Liquor
Commission (
Commission)
and is the decision maker involved in the
relevant Internal Review
VCGLR refused the 2018 Application. At this time Victoria Police, formally
objected to the licence being granted on the basis
that they considered Chris
Andrews was not a suitable person to hold a liquor licence.
18 January 2021, a new pre retail licence application (
2021 Application
was made for a new business, Chris Andrews Wholesale Alcohol.
Police objected to the grant of the 2021 Application which was ultimately
refused by a delegate on 24 August 2021.
an Internal Review of the delegate’s decision to refuse the 2021
Application, the then liquor regulator granted the
Applicant a pre-retail
licence no. 33779674 on 30 June 2022 for premises trading at 1/12 Ash Grove,
Dandenong (
), subject to the following
conditions:
Michael Jones is prohibited from holding any
financial interest or exercising any relevant power (whether in right of the
on behalf of any other person) in the business of the licensee,
involving the business of the supply of liquor. This condition takes
will remain whilst and as long as Chris Andrews holds this licence.
This licence authorises the supply of liquor to the holders of a packaged
liquor licence only.
This licence permits the supply of liquor to licence holders within a 30km
radius of the address for service on the face of the licence.
Application under Review (2024 Application)
27 February 2024, Martin Towey of LGS Legal, applied on behalf of the Applicant
for a variation to the pre-retail liquor licence
no. 33779674 (
This recent licence application is the matter under review.
variation application sought to remove the following conditions from the
This licence authorises the supply of liquor to the
holders of a packaged liquor licence only.
This licence permits the supply of liquor to licence holders within a 30km
radius of the address for service on the face of the licence.
2024 Application)
did not seek the removal of the condition prohibiting Michael Jones from holding
a relevant financial interest or exercising a
relevant power.
26 June 2024, a delegate requested that the Applicant provide submissions
addressing why he was seeking to remove the conditions
and what other measures
would be implemented to reduce any risk of alcohol related harm.
19 July 2024, Mr Towey submitted (in summary):
(a) the Applicant has held the Licence without any issue; and
(b) the Applicant will soon be unemployed, and wants to use the Licence to its
fullest potential on a part time basis; and
(c) there is an extremely low risk of any alcohol related harm in removing the
condition about supply given that the Licence only
permits the sale of liquor to
existing licensees in closed containers, for the purposes of resale.
23 July 2024, Victoria Police advised that they had no objection to the 2024
Application.
2024 Application was refused by a delegate on 31 March 2025 on the basis that if
granted, it would be conducive to or encourage
2025 Decision
delegate noted that removing the conditions would be equivalent to overriding
the Commission’s concern over the method
of controlling risks of alcohol
related harm.
Application for Internal Review
14 April 2025, the Applicant lodged an application for internal review for the
refusal to vary the conditions of the Licence (
Review Application
23 April 2025, the Commission informed Victoria Police of the Review
Application. On 24 April 2025, Victoria Police did not object
and advised they
had no further comments on the matter. It was clear from the police response
that the matter had been thoroughly
considered at a very senior level.
7 July 2025, the Applicant provided the following submissions to the Commission
(in summary):
(a) the applicant has held the licence for over 3 years without any issue.
(b) the applicant receives the retirement pension and seeks to work in the
packaged liquor industry for no more than 16 hours per
(c) the removal of the conditions is sought for commercial freedom to carry on a
small business during the applicant’s retirement.
(d) the risk of harm that stems from the variation is low as the licence will be
used on a part-time basis and the supply of liquor
is not made to the public,
but rather to other liquor licence holders.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
2 of part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under section
152, the decision made by the delegate in
the 2024 Decision is a reviewable
Applicant is considered an eligible person to apply for review of the 2024
Decision, by way of its Review Application, made pursuant
to section 153.
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the 2024 Decision; or
(b) sets aside the 2024 Decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the 2024 Application. In
this case, the Commission must decide whether to:
(a) grant the 2024 Application and, if so, whether to do so subject to
conditions;
(b) refuse to grant the 2024 Application.
Determination of an uncontested application
the LCR Act, an application for a licence may be contested or uncontested.
Pursuant to section 3(1), an uncontested application
is defined as:
an application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation
of a licence or BYO permit in respect of which no objection is received
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division for that
objection (or that period as extended under section
2024 Application is uncontested, as no objections were received under
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division
objection (or that period as extended under section 174).
44(4) provides that, before granting or refusing an uncontested application
under subsection (1), the Commission:
(a) may have regard to any matter the Commission considers relevant; and
(b) may make any enquiries the Commission considers appropriate.
Exercising the internal review power
172D(3) and 172U(3)(b) require the Commission, in exercising its internal review
power, to have regard to the objects of
the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines in respect of the regulation of liquor issued by the Minister.
objects of the LCR Act are set out in section 4(1) as
The objects of this Act are –
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by –
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of
liquor; and
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
26. Further, section 4(2) provides further that:
It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion,
must be exercised and
performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the
misuse and abuse of
3(1) defines ‘harm’ as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol, including
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury
or property damage.
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker;
(b) may consider further information, material or
Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in section
44(2) are relevant considerations, the determination
of an uncontested
application is ultimately to be made pursuant to sections 44(1) and 157(1) at
the discretion of the Commission,
with reference to the objects of the LCR Act.
section 49, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the grant
of an application.
Conduct of an inquiry
44(4) provides that the Commission may have regard to any matter it considers
relevant and make any enquiries it considers
appropriate. The Commission is not
required to give any person an opportunity to be heard concerning the Review
Application.
172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit
and is bound by the rules of natural
Other sections of the LCR Act relevant to this matter
to section 12, a pre-retail licence authorises the licensee to supply liquor at
any time and on any premises to other persons
who hold a liquor licence, persons
licensed to sell or supply liquor under law of another State or Territory if the
liquor supplied
is to be consumed outside of Victoria and to persons for the
purpose of exporting the liquor supplied out of Australia. A pre-retail
may be subject to any conditions determined by the Commission and specified on
the licence.
Material before the Commission
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the materials before the
delegate. The Commission also received and considered
the following
(a) The delegate’s decision dated 31 March 2025.
(b) The Review Application dated 14 April 2025.
(c) The Applicant’s CV.
(d) Applicant’s submissions dated 7 July 2025.
On-the-Papers determination of the Review Application
Commission informed the Applicant that it was possible to determine the Review
Application ‘on the papers’, without
a hearing in person. Mr Towey
confirmed on behalf of the Applicant that his client was comfortable with the
Commission determining
the matter ‘on the papers’.
Reasons for decision on review
Issues determined on review
issues in this internal review are whether there are grounds for refusing the
2024 Application and whether the application should
be refused, having regard to
the objects of the LCR Act, particularly the primary object of harm
minimisation.
application gives rise to the specific issue of whether granting the application
would be conducive to or encourage the misuse
and abuse of alcohol.
Misuse and abuse of alcohol
2024 Application did not receive any objections from the local council or
Victoria Police.
first condition sought to be removed is not considered to be conducive to or
encourage harm as the inherent feature of the pre-retail
licence is that the
licensee can only sell to another licensee. Selling to a person without a
licence would be a breach of the licence
conditions regardless of the current
second condition that is sought to be removed is supply of liquor being limited
to a 30km radius. Given the low-risk nature of
a pre-retail licence and the
limitation to only sell liquor to other licence holders, the Commission does not
consider the removal
of this condition to be conducive to or encourage harm.
Commission has noted the delegate’s decision and their concern in removing
any special conditions sought by the then liquor
regulator. The Commission
considers that both the decision of the previous liquor regulator and delegate
were appropriate given the
circumstances which applied at the time of their
consideration of the matter.
determining the Review Application, the Commission has the ability to make a new
decision and can consider new material that may
not have been available before
the delegate upon making their decision. The Commission now has before it new
material as outlined
in paragraph 34.
the date of this decision, the Applicant has held their liquor licence for over
3 years with no compliance issues. As such, the
Applicant has displayed
suitability to hold a licence which was a primary concern of the previous liquor
regulator that did not have
a history of compliance to refer to when making its
Applicant’s recent retirement now also further limits the number of hours
the Applicant may work in the packaged liquor
industry to no more than 16 hours
per week. Accordingly, the removal of the conditions is sought to allow the
Applicant commercial
freedom in the hours to which he is now restricted. At the
time of the 2024 application, the Applicant was not yet retired and able
utilise the licence on a full-time basis.
Commission considers that the risk of harm that stems from the variation is low
as the licence will be used on a part-time basis
and the supply of liquor is not
made to the public, but rather to other liquor licence holders.
to the above reasons and no adverse compliance history in relation to the
Licence, the Commission does not consider that in all
circumstances, granting of
the Review Application would be conducive to or encourage harm.
Objects of the LCR Act
Commission otherwise does not consider that there are any other grounds for
refusing the application and that the grant of the
licence would not be
inconsistent with the objects of the LCR Act, particularly, harm
minimisation.
Decision on review
on the reasons set out above, the Commission is satisfied that the variation of
the licence is appropriate in the circumstances.
preceding 48 paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Mr John
Larkins (Chair), Mr James O’Halloran (Deputy
Chair) and Mr Steven Brnovic
(Commissioner).
This licence is a pre-retail licence and authorises the licensee
to supply liquor at any time and on any premises:
(a) to a person who holds a licence under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
(b) to a person licensed to sell or supply liquor by or under a law of another
State or Territory if the liquor supplied is to be
consumed outside Victoria
(c) to a person for the purposes of exporting the liquor supplied out of
Special Conditions
Michael Jones is prohibited from holding any
financial interest or exercising any relevant power (whether in right of the
on behalf of any other person) in the business of the licensee,
involving the business of the supply of liquor. This condition takes
will remain whilst and as long as Chris Andrews holds this licence.
Trading Hours
On any day during the hours of 9am to 9pm.
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
Ibid, section 157(2) to
Ibid, section 44, 49 and
See further
Pty Ltd v Direction of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
, which confirms that
harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCRA and therefore the
primary consideration in liquor
licensing decisions (although not to the
exclusion of the other
LCR Act, section
Ibid, section 157(3).
LCR Act, section
44(2)(b)(ii).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.01 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter