URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VLPT/2005/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:33:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Alessi v Moses [2005] VLPT 18 (16 May 2005)
Alessi v Moses
[2005] VLPT 18
reference: T0100 of 2003
Name and address of applicant:
Alessi and Filippa Alessi
All Correspondence To:
Name, address, and reference of
legal practitioner:
CONCERNING A COSTS AGREEMENT APPLICATION
Tribunal by Francesco Alessi and Filippa Alessi “the applicants” for
the cancellation of a costs agreement with
Darren D. Moses “the legal
practitioner”.
REASONS OF LEGAL PROFESSION TRIBUNAL FOR DECISION GIVEN ON
16 MAY 2005
(Section 409 Legal Practice Act)
Section 1: The application to cancel a costs agreement. Page 4
Section 2: The costs agreement. Page 5
Section 3: The persons involved. Page 8
Section 4: The appointment of a receiver/manager to F & T Industries Pty
Ltd. Page 12
Section 5: Directions hearings, and rulings as to the conduct of the hearing of
the application. Page 13
Section 6: The grounds of the application. Page 25
Section 7: The defence to the application. Page 27
Section 8: The reply to the points of defence. Page 28
Section 9: Witnesses. Page 29
Section 10: The running sheets. Page 34
Section 11: The terms of engagement. Page 44
Section 12: Tax invoices. Page 73
Section 13: The repayment of Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd, including the sale of
Keys Road by Briga Pty Ltd to Tyree Pty Ltd. Page 82
Section 14: The costs of the receivership, including the loan from Tyree Pty Ltd
to Briga Pty Ltd. Page 106
Section 15: The first ground of the application, namely the allegation that the
applicants were induced to enter into the costs agreement
by the fraud and/or
misrepresentation of the legal practitioner. Page 122
Section 16: The second ground of the application, namely the allegation of
misconduct and/or unsatisfactory conduct arising out of
the sale of Keys Road by
Briga Pty Ltd to Tyree Pty Ltd. Page 123
Section 17: The third ground of the application, namely the allegation of
misconduct and/or unsatisfactory conduct arising out of
the payment of tax
invoices by the receiver/manager of F & T Industries Pty Ltd without the
knowledge of the applicants. Page
Section 18: The fourth ground of the application, namely the allegation of
misconduct and/or unsatisfactory conduct arising out of
the loan from Tyree Pty
Ltd to Briga Pty Ltd. Page 138
Section 19: The fifth ground of the application, namely the allegation of
misconduct and/or unsatisfactory conduct in procuring the
costs agreement, and
in obtaining security for costs. Page 151
Section 20: The sixth ground of the application, namely the allegation of
misconduct and/or unsatisfactory conduct in not providing
adequate advice, and
in not avoiding conflicts of interest. Page 161
Section 21: The seventh ground of the application, namely the allegation that
the costs agreement was not fair and reasonable. Page
Section 22: The eighth ground of the application, namely the allegation of
misconduct and/or unsatisfactory conduct in that the legal
practitioner charged
grossly excessive legal costs. Page 173
Section 23: The ninth ground of the application, namely the allegation that the
costs agreement is not fair and reasonable because
of the conduct of the legal
practitioner during the course of these proceedings. Page 182
Section 24 Orders. Page 185
SECTION 1: THE APPLICATION TO CANCEL A COSTS
[1.01] On 7 May
2003, Mr. Francesco Alessi and his wife Mrs. Filippa Alessi lodged an
application to the Legal Profession Tribunal
to cancel a costs agreement that
they had entered into with Mr. Darren Moses, a legal
practitioner.
[1.02] The application was made pursuant to
section 103(1)
Legal Practice Act 1996
[1.03] The application after
amendment also sought ancillary relief, namely the setting aside of tax invoices
issued by the legal
practitioner to the applicants dated 25 March 2002 and 18
June 2003, payment of the costs of the application, and any necessary
consequential
relief. The applicants did not contend that consequential relief
should include the making of an order pursuant to
section 103(3)
setting out the manner in which legal costs are to be calculated if the costs
agreement is cancelled.
THE COSTS AGREEMENT.
[2.01] It is
axiomatic that a costs agreement must be in existence before it can be
cancelled. A costs agreement must be in writing
or evidenced in writing:
section 96(2)
Legal Practice Act 1996
. A costs agreement between the
applicants and the legal practitioner, in written form, was annexed to the
application to cancel
the agreement.
costs agreement
is dated 30 July 2001, but Mr. & Mrs. Alessi alleged that the costs
agreement was signed by them on or about 10 April 2002.
applicants sought to have the Tribunal exercise jurisdiction solely in respect
of the costs agreement dated 30 July 2001,
and declined to have the Tribunal
exercise jurisdiction in relation to any oral agreement contended for by the
legal practitioner
[paragraph 2 to the general overview of the closing
submissions of the applicants].
However, in the section headed
TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT
I have dealt with variations or possible variations to
the terms of engagement, partly in writing and partly oral, which impact upon
the costs agreement dated 30 July 2001. I am not prepared to make an order
based upon the costs agreement dated 30 July 2001 without
considering the
variations or possible variations to the terms of engagement that form part of
the agreement.
[2.04] The costs agreement and any variations to it do
not stand alone, even so far as documents are concerned. There is in evidence
that purports to satisfy the requirements of
Legal Practice Act 1996
(and may do so), prepared and signed by Mr.
Moses. The statement also is dated 30 July 2001, although Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
that the statement was provided to them on 10 April 2002.
costs agreement contains the following paragraph:
“Pursuant to
Legal Practice Act 1996
information in
relation to this retainer has been provided to the Clients and the Clients
acknowledge having received such information.”
[Court book page 20.]
I regard the information set out in the statement as having been
incorporated into the costs agreement. In this respect it is significant
the manner in which
are to be calculated is set out in far greater
detail in the statement than it is in the
[2.05] There also is in evidence an
agreement between Mr.
Moses and Mr. & Mrs. Alessi dated 4 February 2002
, although Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi allege that the agreement was signed by them on or about 10 April
2002. The substance of the agreement
was that Mr. & Mrs. Alessi granted a
charge to Mr. Moses over their home at Beaumaris as collateral security for
payment of legal
costs owing to Mr. Moses. The agreement also provided that,
upon request, Mr. & Mrs. Alessi would sign further documents reasonably
required by way of security.
[2.06] There is a further
between Mr. Moses and Mr. & Mrs. Alessi dated 11 April 2002
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi agreed to grant to Mr. Moses a mortgage over their home at
Beaumaris. This agreement obviously provided
further collateral security to Mr.
[2.07] There also is a
mortgage dated 11 April 2002
whereby Mr. & Mrs. Alessi mortgaged their home at Beaumaris to Mr. Moses.
The amount secured by the mortgage is described as
“all monies due to the
mortgagee pursuant to” the costs agreement dated 30 July 2001, the
agreement dated 4 February
2002 and the agreement dated 11 April
[2.08] Finally, for present purposes, there is an
acknowledgement dated 11 April 2002
in which Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
acknowledge:
(a) that they received a copy of the memorandum of common provisions
incorporated in the mortgage, and read and understood its provisions;
(b) that they read the mortgage and understood its provisions;
(c) that Mr. Moses recommended to them that they seek independent legal advice,
and that they were given an opportunity to do so,
before signing the costs
agreement, the agreement dated 4 February 2002, the agreement dated 11 April
2002, and the mortgage.
[2.09] All of these documents play a part in
establishing the terms upon which Mr. & Mrs. Alessi engaged Mr. Moses. Many
arise out of these documents, and I will deal with those issues in due
THE PERSONS INVOLVED.
[3.01] The persons,
including corporate entities, who played a part in the events that led up to the
present proceedings include:
Francesco Alessi
, a manufacturer, is one of the applicants. Mr.
Alessi and his wife were the founders of the F&T Group of companies, and
those companies at almost all times;
Filippa Alessi
, the wife of Francesco Alessi, is the other applicant.
Mrs. Alessi played an active role in the making of decisions as to the conduct
of companies in the F&T Group, although in the end those decisions were made
largely by Mr. Alessi;
Antonella Alessi
is the daughter of Francesco Alessi and Filippa
Alessi. Antonella Alessi was employed by the F&T Group;
(d) Giuseppe Alessi, known as
Joseph Alessi
, is the son of Francesco
Alessi and Filippa Alessi. Joseph Alessi also was employed by the F&T
Sergio Arcaini
is a financial planner and superannuation consultant
who provided services to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and the F&T Group;
Arnold Bloch Liebler
is a firm of legal practitioners that acted for
Tyree Pty Ltd;
Nancy Briguglio
, a sister of Filippa Alessi, was employed by the
F&T Group as Francesco Alessi’s secretary. She played a very active
in the administration of the F&T Group;
John Weir Caines
was a financial advisor who conducted business under
Business and Legal Advisory Services
. That firm provided
services to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi;
Elizabeth Chieppo
is a legal secretary who carried out work for Mr.
, now deceased, was an insurance consultant who provided
services to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and the F&T Group;
Kevin Francis Connolly
was a valuer engaged by Mr. Alessi;
Rui de Lemos
is a legal practitioner at the firm of Mahonys, which
firm was engaged to explain documents to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi;
James Downey
was an accountant who practised under the firm name Cole
Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd
is a finance company that entered into
factoring arrangements with F & T Industries Pty Ltd;
is a convenient description to adopt when it is not
necessary to identify a particular company in the group. However, the F&T
Group included the following companies controlled by Mr. & Mrs.
F & T Industries Pty Ltd
Briga Pty Ltd
Labrod Pty Ltd
F&T Electroplaters Pty Ltd
F&T Electroplaters (Manufacturing) Pty Ltd
Fran-Filippa Investments Pty Ltd
Fran-Filippa House Pty Ltd
Adriatic Plastics Pty Ltd
Martino Giuffrida
is an Italian lawyer who acted for Mr. Alessi in
John Hondrakis
was employed by the F&T Group, and for some time
was engaged to be married to Antonella Alessi;
Howard Mortgage Group
is a mortgage manager that acted for Perpetual
Trustees Australia Ltd, which held a mortgage over a property at 74-80 Keys Road
owned by Briga Pty Ltd;
Daniel Isakow
is a legal practitioner who practises under the firm
name Isakow Solicitors. Mr. Isakow acted for Briga Pty Ltd and other companies
in the F&T Group on a few occasions;
is an Italian company. F & T Industries Pty Ltd
proposed to enter into a joint venture agreement with Jcoplastic to conduct
injection moulding business in Australia;
Robert Kingdon
, of Kingdon Lawyers, is a legal practitioner who was
engaged by Mr. Moses to provide assistance in matters being handled by Mr. Moses
on behalf of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi;
Peter Kovacs
was Mr. & Mrs. Alessi’s accountant;
David Lockwood
, of the firm of Sims Lockwood accountants, was
appointed receiver/manager of F & T Industries Pty Ltd;
Darren Douglas Moses
is the legal practitioner against whom the
present application is made. The terms of his engagement by the applicants is
heart of the application;
Ponte Earle & Harrick
is a firm of legal practitioners that acted
for Mr. Lockwood;
David John Purcell
is a New South Wales legal practitioner who acted
for Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd;
Qenos Pty Ltd
was a supplier of raw materials to F & T
Industries Pty Ltd;
is a finance company that lent money to companies in the
Scottish Pacific Business Finance Pty Ltd
is a finance company that
entered into factoring arrangements with F & T Industries Pty
Kenneth Stout
conducted business under the name Boutique Corporate
Advisory. He was engaged by Mr. Moses to provide assistance in matters being
handled by Mr. Moses on behalf of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi;
Triulzi Engineering Sri
is an Italian company that did business with
the F&T Group;
Tyree Pty Ltd
is a company associated with Mr. Moses;
was an employee of Sims Lockwood and involved in the
receivership;
of Deewood Nominees Pty Ltd was engaged by Mr. Moses to
provide assistance in matters being handled by Mr. Moses on behalf of Mr.
Mrs. Alessi.
THE APPOINTMENT OF A RECEIVER/MANAGER TO
INDUSTRIES PTY LTD.
arrangements with Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd, a finance
company. As I understand
the arrangements, suppliers to F & T Industries Pty Ltd were paid promptly
from money advanced by Exelerate
Funding Pty Ltd, and F & T Industries Pty
Ltd reimbursed Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd within 90 days of the advance.
Funding Pty Ltd held as security a debenture over the assets of F
& T Industries Pty Ltd, and also held guarantees given by Mr.
[4.02] F & T Industries Pty Ltd fell into arrears in making
reimbursements to Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd, which enabled Exelerate
Funding Pty
Ltd to appoint a receiver/manager pursuant to the debenture. On 25 June 2001
Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd appointed Mr.
David Lockwood as receiver/manager of F
& T Industries Pty Ltd. The amount owing by F & T Industries Pty Ltd to
Funding Pty Ltd at the time of Mr. Lockwood’s appointment was
[4.03] Mr. Lockwood continued to conduct the
manufacturing operations of F & T Industries Pty Ltd as receiver/manager,
but continuation
of those operations did not enable F & T Industries Pty Ltd
to meet its financial obligations to Exelerate Funding Pty
[4.04] To assist F & T Industries Pty Ltd to repay all monies
owing by it to Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd, Briga Pty Ltd sold its
property at
74-80 Keys Road Moorabbin to Tyree Pty Ltd. This sale will be dealt with in
detail in due course, but it assisted F
& T Industries Pty Ltd to pay out
Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd on or about 2 November 2001.
debenture held by Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd was assigned to Briga Pty Ltd. Mr.
Lockwood continued to act as receiver/manager,
pursuant to instructions from
Briga Pty Ltd, until F & T Industries Pty Ltd was placed into liquidation
early in 2003.
DIRECTIONS HEARINGS, AND RULINGS AS TO THE
THE HEARING OF THE
APPLICATION.
section does not need to be read in order to understand the decision upon the
application to cancel the costs agreement
[5.01] All of the
directions hearings took place before me, save that an appeal against one of my
rulings was heard by the Full Tribunal.
I will refer to the directions hearings
in detail. They are referred to in detail partly because it is likely that
costs applications
in relation to them will be made after this decision is
distributed, and partly because it is likely that the Legal Profession Tribunal
will have ceased to exist before the costs applications are heard and
determined.
[5.02] A directions hearing took place on
27 May 2003
to determine the procedure to be adopted for the future conduct of the
proceedings. Mr. Clelland of counsel appeared for the applicants
and Mr. Dixon
of counsel appeared for the legal practitioner.
Counsel for Mr. Moses
sought to have the application to cancel the costs agreement adjourned until
such time as a complaint lodged
by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi with Victorian Lawyers
RPA Limited had been dealt with by that organisation. I was informed that the
allegations were made by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi in the complaint as were
made by them in the present application.
In opposing an adjournment,
counsel for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi informed me that Mr. Moses had issued
proceedings in the Supreme Court
seeking an order for payment of legal costs
claimed to have fallen due under the costs agreement, and seeking an order for
of the Alessi family home under a mortgage given by them to secure
payment of the same legal costs. Counsel for the Alessis maintained
Supreme Court proceedings could not be determined, and the fate of the family
decided whether or not to
cancel the costs agreement.
I refused an adjournment for four reasons.
First, because Mr. & Mrs. Alessi had no control over the investigation of
the complaint,
which was a matter for Victorian Lawyers RPA Limited. Secondly,
because I saw greater urgency in determining the Supreme Court proceedings
in completing an investigation of the complaint, particularly as Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi were concerned to know whether they would
be required to vacate their
family home. Thirdly, the application to cancel the costs agreement needed to
be determined before the
Supreme Court proceedings could be determined, because
cancellation of the costs agreement would affect the claim made by Mr. Moses
the Supreme Court. Fourthly, and finally, if an investigation by Victorian
Lawyers RPA Limited led to the laying of charges of
misconduct or unsatisfactory
conduct before this Tribunal, the composition of the Tribunal to hear those
charges would be different
to the composition of the Tribunal to hear the
present application.
Orders were made for filing and service of points of
claim and points of defence. An order was made requiring the parties to agree
upon a schedule setting out the classes of documents to be discovered. An order
was made requiring filing and service of an affidavit
of documents by each
party. Orders were made requiring each party to file with the Tribunal and
serve upon the other party a list
setting out every witness to be called by that
party at the hearing, and a statement of each witness (“witness
statements”)
to constitute the evidence in chief of that witness at the
hearing. The applicants were ordered to prepare a court book, and make
available for the use of the legal practitioner and the Tribunal. The
application also was listed for hearing on 17 November
2003, on an estimate of
ten days. Finally, and significantly for future purposes, an order was made as
“13. The costs of these directions are costs in the
Application.”
[5.03] Immediately after the directions
hearing concluded on 27 May 2003, the solicitor for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi issued
directed to Mr. Daniel Isakow, a solicitor, directing Mr. Isakow to
produce to the Tribunal by 24 June 2003 the following documents:
“Each and every file and related documents pertaining to matters conducted
by you on behalf of:
Francesco Alessi
Filippa Alessi
F & T Electroplaters (Manufacturing ) Pty Ltd
Fran-Filipa Investments Pty Ltd
Labrod Pty Ltd
Fran Filipa House Pty Ltd
Briga Pty Ltd
F & T Industries Pty Ltd
F & T Electroplaters Pty Ltd
Adriatic Plastics Pty Ltd”
[I have omitted the ACN number for each
Mr. Isakow objected to production, so a directions hearing took
24 June 2003
to consider his objections. Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi's solicitor Mr. Coady appeared on their behalf, and Mr. Settle of counsel
for Mr. Isakow.
Mr. Isakow gave evidence. He said that he had
acted in three matters pursuant to instructions given by Mr. Alessi. He acted
Briga Pty Ltd in relation to the sale of real estate to Tyree Pty Ltd. He
also defended two proceedings in the Supreme Court, one
brought by Qenos Pty Ltd
seeking payment for raw materials, and the other brought under the
Instruments Act
to enforce bills of exchange that had not been honoured.
Mr. Isakow said that he had been paid for the work carried out for Briga
Ltd, and that he had been paid in part for the work carried out in the Supreme
Court proceedings. He said that he held only
two files, relating to the sale by
Briga Pty Ltd and the proceedings brought by Qenos Pty Ltd, and that he claimed
a lien over both
files. He also said that he had commenced proceedings against
Mr. Alessi in the Magistrates’ Court seeking an order for payment
unpaid legal costs of about $18,000, that the proceedings had been defended,
that he had filed an affidavit of documents, and
that the Briga file and the
Qenos file had been inspected on behalf of Mr. Alessi for the purposes of the
Magistrates’ Court
proceedings.
Mr. Coady informed me that he would
insist only upon production of what became known as “the Briga file”
Qenos file”. Mr. Coady submitted that Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi had a legitimate forensic purpose in seeking to inspect both files.
Settle submitted that Mr. & Mrs. Alessi were embarking upon a fishing
expedition, and that the Briga file and the Qenos
file were not relevant to the
application to cancel the costs agreement with Mr. Moses.
As at 24 June
2003, Mr. & Mrs. Alessi had filed the application to cancel the costs
agreement which included particulars of the
application. They also had filed
points of claim on 12 June 2003 in purported compliance with the order made by
me on 27 May 2003.
Both the particulars and the points of claim made reference
to the sale by Briga Pty Ltd, but it was common ground that neither
particulars nor the points of claim made reference to the proceedings brought by
Qenos Pty Ltd. Mr. Coady endeavoured to explain
to me at length the reasons for
seeking production of the Briga file.
I was not persuaded as to the
relevance of either the Briga file or the Qenos file in the present proceedings,
and I set aside the
subpoena. I also ordered Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to pay $3500
to Mr. Isakow as his costs of the directions hearing that took place
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi appealed to the Full Tribunal against the
order made by me on 24 June 2003. A directions hearing of the Full
took place on
11 July 2003
. His Honour Judge Dee conducted the hearing
sitting alone, pursuant to
section 165
Legal Practice Act 1996
Mr. Coady again appeared for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, and Mr. Isakow appeared in
person. His Honour suspended the operation of the
order made on 24 June 2003
pending the determination of the appeal, and ordered Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to
pay $500 to Mr. Isakow as
his costs of the hearing that took place on 11 July
The appeal was heard on
8 December 2003
. Mr. Coady appeared
on behalf of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, and Mr. Settle of counsel appeared on behalf
of Mr. Isakow. The Full Tribunal
set aside the order made by me on 24 June
2003. Mr. Isakow was ordered to produce the Briga file to the Tribunal, and Mr.
Mrs. Alessi were granted permission to inspect the file. The Full
Tribunal made the following order as to the costs of the appeal:
“4. The application made to the Full Tribunal by the applicants that Mr.
Isakow pay their costs of the appeal is referred to
the Tribunal for hearing and
determination.”
The reason for making such an order was explained
by the Full Tribunal in the following way:
“It is quite apparent the hearing of the application against solicitor
Darren Moses will canvass a number of issues and occupy
a number of days. It is
quite apparent to us that the Registrar will, at the conclusion of the hearing
before him, be in the best
position to rule upon the costs issue, particularly
as costs on an indemnity basis are sought against Mr. Isakow.
The Registrar is in the best position of all to rule on the issues of fact
relevant to the costs issue.
We have no doubt the most efficient, time saving and cost effective course for
us to adopt is to reserve the costs sought by Mr.
Coady for determination by the
Registrar.”
I confess to some embarrassment in being asked to determine, in
respect of an appeal from a decision of mine, whether Mr. Isakow should
costs of the appeal, and if so whether the costs should be calculated on an
indemnity basis. On the other hand, my knowledge
of this matter is much greater
now than it was on 24 June 2003 when I set aside the subpoena. If I had
possessed as much knowledge
on 24 June 2003 as I now possess, I would have
concluded that the Briga file was relevant to the application and required
of that file in compliance with the subpoena.
further directions hearing took place on
19 September 2003
at the request
of the applicants. The request was made in a letter dated 25 June 2003 received
by the Tribunal from Coadys, the
solicitor for the applicants. The letter
stated that Mr. Coady would be unavailable in November and in the first week of
2003 (during which period the application had been set down for
hearing), and requested a new hearing date. Mr. Moses notified the
Tribunal in
writing that he opposed the application for a new hearing date.
appeared for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, and Mr. Waller of counsel appeared for Mr.
Moses. There had been significant developments
since 27 May 2003, when the
hearing date in November had been set. Mr. Moses had issued a further tax
invoice to Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi on 18 June 2003. The invoice sought payment of
additional costs, disbursements and agency fees totalling $1,190,690.00.
& Mrs. Alessi had sought, but not received, itemised bills of costs in
relation to both tax invoices. Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
sought to amend the claim
made by them in the proceedings, and Mr. Moses sought further particulars of
their claim. Furthermore,
although there had been substantial non-compliance by
Mr. Moses with the orders made by me on 27 May 2003, his counsel put forward
reasons for non-compliance and submitted that compliance was both difficult and
time consuming.
I vacated the hearing date of 17 November 2003, and fixed
a new hearing date of 16 February 2004 on an estimate of 10 days. I granted
leave to the applicants to amend their claim, and I required Mr. Moses to
provide itemised bills of costs in relation to both tax
invoices. I also
extended the dates for compliance with various orders made by me on 27 May 2003.
So far as the costs of the directions
hearing were concerned, I made the
following order:
“13. The costs of that part of this hearing that took place on 19
September 2003 are costs in the application.”
[5.05] A further directions hearing took place on
12 December 2003
at the request of the legal practitioner. The request
was made in a letter from Mr. Moses to the Tribunal dated 12 November 2003.
request made in the letter was supported by an affidavit sworn by Mr. Moses on 9
December 2003 and an affidavit sworn by his
medical practitioner on 8 December
2003. In substance, Mr. Moses maintained that ill health and his commitment to
Federal Court
proceedings had prevented him from preparing an affidavit of
documents and the itemised bills of costs, and he sought additional
time within
which to prepare those documents.
Mr. Coady again appeared for Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi and Mr. Waller of counsel again appeared for Mr. Moses. Mr. Waller
submitted that
Mr. Moses was a sole practitioner, and that he had been unable to
devote the amount of time required to prepare the affidavit of
documents and the
bills of costs. I suggested that Mr. Moses seek assistance, and Mr. Waller
responded by saying that assistance
would cost money. I stated that I was not
satisfied that Mr. Moses had made proper efforts to prepare the required
documents, and
I refused to vacate the hearing date of 16 February 2004.
However, I extended the date for compliance with various orders, and I
detailed order requiring Mr. Moses to produce all of his discovered documents
for inspection by the applicants. So far as
the costs of the directions hearing
were concerned, I made the following order:
“8. The costs of that part of this hearing that took place on 12 December
2003 are costs in the application.”
[5.06] A further directions hearing took place on
23 January 2004
. The hearing was requested by the applicants, but the
legal practitioner then asked that a quite different issue also be dealt with
the hearing.
Mr. Coady appeared for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, and Messrs.
McInnes and Horak of counsel appeared for Mr. Moses. The applicants sought
orders for the release and forensic examination of documents held by Mr. Moses.
The application was supported by an affidavit of
Trang Thuy Tran sworn on 23
January 2004. I made an order for the release of the documents to Mr. G.L.
Storey for examination.
I record that Mr. Storey did not give evidence at any
time as to the result of his examination.
On 21 January 2004 Mr. Moses
sent a facsimile to the Tribunal asking that the hearing on 23 January 2004 also
deal with a submission
that the hearing of the application to cancel the costs
agreement take place after the completion of the Supreme Court proceedings
brought by Mr. Moses against Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, and after the completion of
the investigation that Victorian Lawyers RPA Limited
was obliged to carry out in
response to the complaint by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi about Mr. Moses. Mr. Moses
made an affidavit on 22
January 2004 in support of the submission, and Trang
Thuy Tran’s affidavit of 23 January 2004 opposed the submission. I noted
that the submission was almost identical to a submission made on behalf of Mr.
Moses on 27 May 2003, which I had rejected. I again
rejected the submission,
and gave reasons for its rejection that were more extensive than the reasons
given by me on 27 May 2003.
I extended the date by which Mr. Moses was to
provide itemised bills of costs and, so far as the costs of the directions
hearing were
concerned, I made the following order:
“12. The costs of the hearing this day be costs in the
application.”
[5.07] The hearing of the application to cancel the costs
agreement commenced on 16 February 2004, and continued on 17, 18, 19, 20,
25, 26 & 27 February 2004. Mr. N. Clelland SC appeared with Ms J. Moore for
the applicants. Mr. J. Gilmour QC appeared
with Mr. J. Manetta for the legal
practitioner.
On 25 February 2004, counsel for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
sought leave to file further amended points of claim. I gave a ruling upon
application the next morning, and allowed it in part. The amendments that were
allowed arose mainly out of the bill of costs
delivered to the applicants by Mr.
Moses shortly prior to the commencement of the hearing. I made the following
interim order on
26 February 2004
“The applicants are granted leave to file and serve the Further Amended
Points of Claim dated 24 February 2004, but effective
only as to those parts of
that document which appear under the headings “
pages 18 to 19 of that document [pages 27 to 29 of
the related document that tracks the additions and deletions in the
Points of Claim.]”
The Further Amended Points of Claim were filed on 26 February
[5.08] Counsel for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi closed their case at 4.18
pm on 26 February 2004. The only witness called by them had been
Mr. Alessi. I
granted leave for all other witness statements filed on behalf of Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi to be withdrawn.
[5.09] When the hearing resumed on 27 February
2004, counsel for Mr. Moses sought to have the hearing adjourned to a date to be
The application was opposed, and lengthy submissions were made on both
sides. I granted the application for an adjournment, and
gave detailed reasons
for doing so. I accepted that the generality of the Further Amended Points of
Claim entitled Mr. Moses to
seek further particulars. I also accepted that
counsel for Mr. Moses should not be required to open their case without having
particulars of the amendments, and without having the opportunity to
re-consider some documents in the light of the amendments.
adjournment having been granted, counsel for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi promptly
sought to withdraw the amendments that had given rise
to the adjournment, and
sought to proceed with the hearing. Senior Counsel for Mr. Moses informed me
that Mr. Moses would not object
to the withdrawal of the
amendments.
However, counsel for Mr. Moses indicated that they were not
ready to proceed. They pointed out that the hearing had been fixed by
of 19 September 2003, which recited in paragraph 11 that “The application
is listed for hearing on 16 February 2004
on an estimate of 10 days”. It
being a Friday, they informed me of their commitments in the following week, and
months. In those circumstances, I adjourned the hearing to 11 May
I made an interim order on
27 February 2004
in the following
“1. With the consent of the legal practitioner, the applicants are granted
leave to withdraw the Further Amended Points of
Claim dated 24 February 2004 and
filed on 26 February 2004.
2. The further hearing of this application is adjourned to Tuesday 11 May
Counsel for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi foreshadowed the making of a
costs application in relation to any costs thrown away as a result
adjournment.
I record that arrangements subsequently were made
administratively, in other words without the need for a hearing, to resume the
on 24 May 2004 instead of 11 May 2004.
[5.10] On 1 March 2004
the solicitor for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi wrote to the Tribunal seeking orders as
to the future conduct of the
hearing. The orders that were sought were a time
limit for the opening address of counsel for the legal practitioner, provision
of a list of the legal practitioner’s witnesses setting out the sequence
in which the witnesses would be called, a direction
that the sequence not be
changed without leave of the Tribunal, a direction that Mr. Moses be the first
witness, and directions requiring
written submissions at the conclusion of the
On 9 March 2004 Mr. Moses wrote to the Tribunal stating that
his counsel did not consent to the orders sought on behalf of Mr. &
Alessi. Mr. Moses asked that a further directions hearing be appointed to deal
with the issues that had been raised. Mr. Moses
also stated that one of his
witnesses, Dr. Bryan Found, would be absent from Australia when the hearing
resumed. He asked that Dr.
Found be permitted to give evidence on the day
appointed for a directions hearing.
A further directions hearing was
arranged for 22 April 2004.
On 21 April 2004 the solicitor for Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi wrote to the Tribunal stating that it was intended to apply to the
at the directions hearing the following day, for leave to re-open Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi’s case to hear evidence from Mr. David
The directions hearing took place on
22 April 2004
arranged. Mr. Coady appeared for the applicants and Mr. Manetta appeared for
the legal practitioner. Dr. Found gave evidence.
The applications made on
behalf of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi for further directions, and to re-open their
case, then were heard.
Mr. Coady handed up a written submission, and
sought to change his clients’ application in the manner set out in the
submission.
The effect of the changes was to seek, first, an order that the
applicants be entitled to postpone the cross-examination of any
witness called
by the legal practitioner until such time as Mr. Moses had completed his
evidence and, secondly, an order that the
opening address of counsel for the
legal practitioner not exceed the duration of the opening address of senior
counsel for the applicants.
I refused to make the orders sought, but I did
state that I would prefer to hear the evidence of Mr. Moses before I heard the
of any of his other witnesses.
The basis of the application to
re-open the applicants’ case was that the nature of Mr. Purcell’s
evidence only recently
had come to the attention of the solicitor for the
applicants. I allowed the applicants to re-open their case, and I made an order
in the following form:
“1. Leave is granted to the applicants to re-open their case to admit the
evidence of David Purcell.
2. The legal practitioner may apply to the Tribunal for leave to have the
applicant Franco Alessi recalled and further cross-examined
as to any matters
arising out of the evidence of David
[5.11] The hearing of the substantive application to cancel the
costs agreement resumed on 24 May 2004, and continued on 25, 26,
27 & 28 May
2004. Mr. Purcell gave evidence on behalf of the applicants. Mr. Moses and Mr.
Arcaini gave evidence on behalf
of the legal practitioner.
2004, a Friday, senior counsel for the legal practitioner informed me that he
had been engaged only for the period 24 to
28 May 2004, and was not available
the following week. He pointed out that the letter of 1 March 2004 from the
solicitor for the
applicants to the Tribunal, referred to above in relation to
other matters, commenced with the following paragraphs:
“We advise that Mr. Neil Clelland of Counsel will be first available after
11 May on 24 May 2004. He is available and has
allocated 1 week for cross
examination of the Legal Practitioner’s witnesses. He is confident that
he will conclude cross-examination
in that period.
Accordingly, we request that the proceedings be scheduled to commence on 24 May
for 1 week.”
The applicants wished to proceed the following week. I
acknowledged that a ruling upon an adjournment would cause dissatisfaction
inconvenience to one party or the other, but I concluded that it would be more
unfair to expect Mr. Moses to continue with the
hearing the following week with
different counsel. I adjourned the hearing to a date to be
[5.12] The hearing of the substantive application resumed on 6
July 2004, continued on 7 & 8 July and concluded on 9 July 2004.
that period evidence was given on behalf of the legal practitioner by Mr.
Hondrakis, Mr. Caines, Ms Chieppo, Mr. De Lemos,
Mr. Isakow and Mr.
I refused to allow the applicants to re-open their case to
enable Miss Briguglio to give evidence as to the manner in which a tape
recording of a meeting had been made. However, I allowed Mr. Coady to make a
statement, unsworn, as to the manner in which a recording
of the meeting had
been copied to a compact disk.
9 July 2004
I directed that
written submissions be filed and served by both parties by Friday 6 August 2004,
although I did not sign an order
to that effect. I stated that any submission
filed a few days late would not be ignored.
[5.13] On 22 July 2004 Mr.
Moses wrote to the Tribunal seeking an extension of two weeks to Friday 19
August 2004 [presumably Friday
20 August 2004 was intended] for lodging his
submission. The applicants refused to agree to an extension of time.
further directions hearing took place on
29 July 2004
. Mr. Coady
appeared for the applicants and Mr. Manetta appeared for the legal practitioner.
I granted an extension of time, applicable
to the written submissions of both
parties, and signed an order extending the date for lodging and service of final
submissions to
Friday 20 August 2004.
A further directions hearing took
16 December 2004
. Mr. Coady appeared for the applicants and Mr.
Manetta appeared for the legal practitioner. I refused to make rulings sought
the legal practitioner as to the scope of the pleadings. I accepted as
further submissions a letter from the solicitor for the applicants
Tribunal dated 7 October 2004 together with its annexures, and a submission in
reply filed by the legal practitioner on 19
November 2004.
THE GROUNDS OF THE APPLICATION.
statutory grounds upon which a costs agreement may be cancelled by the Tribunal
are set out in
section 103(1)
Legal Practice Act 1996
. There are
three statutory grounds; first, that the client was induced to enter into the
costs agreement by the fraud or misrepresentation
of the legal practitioner;
secondly, that the legal practitioner has been guilty of misconduct or
unsatisfactory conduct in relation
to the provision of legal services to which
the agreement relates; and, thirdly, that the agreement is not fair and
reasonable.
[6.02] The applicants lodged their
application
cancel the costs agreement on 7 May 2003. The application extended to all of
the statutory grounds.
[6.03] The applicants subsequently lodged
points of claim
dated 12 June 2003. The points of claim contained
slightly more detailed particulars of the grounds of the
application.
[6.04] The legal practitioner requested further and better
particulars of the points of claim.
Further and better particulars
prepared by the applicants and filed on 18 August 2003, supplementing the points
of claim to a considerable extent.
points of claim were
on 19 September 2003. The amendments referred for the first time to
the further bill of costs dated 18 June 2003, rendered after
the present
application had been lodged. The remaining amendments involved the correction
of dates and the insertion of matters
of clarification.
[6.06] On 19
September 2003 I ordered that the points of claim, as amended, and the further
and better particulars of the points
of claim be consolidated. They were filed
by the applicants in
consolidated form
on 29 September
[6.07] The application, even as subsequently amended, did not
clearly set out the grounds relied upon by the applicants. However,
it appeared
to me that the applicants, in substance, raised nine issues that were put
forward as being grounds for the cancellation
of the costs agreement. There was
a great deal of overlap within these nine grounds.
[6.08] Mention is
made elsewhere in these reasons of an order made by me on 26 February 2004
granting leave to the applicants to
file and serve further amended points of
Further amended points of claim
were filed and served, but on 27
February 2004 I made an order by consent allowing the applicants to withdraw
them. Consequently,
the further amended points of claim played no further part
in these proceedings.
THE DEFENCE TO THE APPLICATION.
legal practitioner filed
points of defence
Section 103(3)
Legal Practice Act 1996
provides that, if the Tribunal cancels a costs agreement, “it may make
such order as it thinks fit in relation to the payment
of legal costs the
subject of the cancelled agreement”.
Paragraph 1(d) of the points
of defence reads as follows:
“(d) The Applicants have failed to comply with the direction of the
Tribunal that they identify the ancillary relief sought
Section 103(3)
Legal Practice Act 1996
The only interim orders made by the Tribunal prior
to 4 July 2003 were made by me on 27 May 2003 and 24 June 2003. Those orders
not require the applicants to identify the relief sought by them pursuant to
section 103(3).
However, I did inform counsel for the
applicants on 27 May 2003
that the Tribunal normally requires applicants to inform the Tribunal
early stage of the orders that
the applicants seek under
The application after amendment did seek ancillary relief, namely
the setting aside of tax invoices issued by the legal practitioner
applicants dated 25 March 2002 and 18 June 2003, payment of the costs of the
application and any necessary consequential relief.
At no time have the
applicants sought consequential relief in the form of an order setting out the
manner in which legal costs are
to be calculated if the costs agreement is
[7.03] A request for further and better particulars of the
points of defence was filed on 29 August 2003. The
points of defence and the
further and better particulars of defence
were consolidated and filed as one
document on 20 October 2003.
THE REPLY TO THE POINTS OF
[8.01] On 19 August 2003 the applicants filed a
reply to the legal practitioner’s points of defence. The reply is a short
document that refers to several paragraphs in the applicants’ points of
claim. I am satisfied that the substance of the reply
has been incorporated
into various parts of the consolidated points of claim and further and better
particulars of the points of
claim subsequently filed by the applicants on 29
September 2003, particularly into paragraph 2.2(m) of the consolidation. I
acknowledge
that the date of return of signed documents changed from “on
or about the afternoon of 11 April 2002” in the reply to
April 2002” in the consolidation.
The substance of the reply having
been incorporated into the consolidation, no further reference will be made to
THE WITNESSES.
This section does not
need to be read in order to understand the decision upon the application to
cancel the costs agreement
[9.01] The order made by me on 27
May 2003 included a requirement that both the applicants and the legal
practitioner file and serve:
(a) a list of the witnesses that each party proposed to call at the hearing;
(b) a statement in the form of a proof of the evidence to be given as evidence
in chief by each witness (including expert witnesses)
with references where
appropriate to documents.
The date for compliance with this order was
extended, but the form of the order did not change.
[9.02] So far as the
witnesses who gave sworn evidence are concerned,
statements of evidence
had been filed and served prior to each of them giving evidence. Each witness
adopted his or her statement, sometimes with minor
amendments, and then was
cross-examined.
(On 9 July 2004 I allowed Mr. Coady, the solicitor for
the applicants, to make a statement explaining the manner in which a recording
of a meeting had been copied to a compact disk. The statement was unsworn, not
subject to cross-examination, and did not constitute
evidence in
The applicants’ witnesses:
statement of the evidence to be given by the applicant
filed on 2 February 2004. Corrigenda were produced during the course of Mr.
Alessi’s evidence on 17 February 2004. Mr.
Alessi adopted and signed the
statement as corrected, and the corrected statement and corrigenda came into
evidence as exhibit A1.
Mr. Alessi then adopted, signed and filed a
supplementary statement which came into evidence as exhibit
[9.04] When Mr. Alessi concluded his evidence on 26 February 2004,
senior counsel for the applicants stated that no further witnesses
called, and closed the applicants’ case.
[9.05] Statements of
evidence had been filed on behalf of the applicants in respect of the following
prospective witnesses
(a) Filippa Alessi, filed 2 February 2004;
(b) Nancy Briguglio, filed 2 February 2004;
(c) Antonella Alessi, filed 2 February 2004;
(d) Joseph Alessi, filed 2 February 2004;
(e) Rui de Lemos, filed 2 February 2004;
(f) Kevin Francis Connolly, filed 2 February 2004;
(g) Peter Kovac, filed 2 February 2004; and
(h) Joel Christopher Townsend, filed 9 February 2004.
The applicants’ case having been closed, none of these
prospective witnesses gave evidence on behalf of the applicants, although
Lemos gave evidence on behalf of the legal practitioner.
[9.06] As I
have mentioned elsewhere, at a subsequent directions hearing on 22 April 2004 I
granted leave to the applicants to re-open
their case to admit the evidence of
David Purcell
[9.07] On 22 April 2004, a statement of the
evidence to be given by Mr. Purcell was filed on behalf of the applicants. Mr.
gave evidence on 24 May 2004. He adopted and signed a statement of
evidence, dated it 24 May 2004, and it came into evidence as
exhibit A11.
However, he acknowledged in cross-examination that the statement he had adopted
and signed did not accord with the
statement of evidence filed on 22 April 2004.
A statement showing the amendments made to the statement filed on 22 April 2004
into evidence as exhibit A12.
[9.08] On 9 July 2004, statements of
evidence that could be given by
Douglas Annetts
were handed to me on behalf of the applicants. Their statements
concerned the copying of a recording of a meeting to a compact disk.
to accept the statements, or to allow Mr. Annetts or Ms Melaptos to give
evidence, on the basis that the applicants had
closed their case. (This was the
occasion when I allowed Mr. Coady to make his unsworn statement by way of
explanation.)
The legal practitioner’s
[9.09] A statement of the evidence to be given by the
legal practitioner
was filed on 12 February 2004. When he
commenced his evidence on 24 May 2004, Mr. Moses adopted and signed this
statement, subject
to an amendment to paragraph 34, and it came into evidence as
exhibit LP24. Mr. Moses filed a supplementary statement on 16 February
which he also adopted and signed on 24 May 2004. The supplementary statement
came into evidence as exhibit LP25. Mr. Moses
filed a second supplementary
statement on 21 May 2004, which he again adopted and signed on 24 May 2004. The
second supplementary
statement came into evidence as exhibit LP26. Mr. Moses
adopted and signed a third supplementary statement on 27 May 2004, and it
into evidence as exhibit LP27. Corrigenda to Mr. Moses’ statements came
into evidence as exhibit LP32.
[9.10] On 20 February 2004, the legal
practitioner called
Dr. Bryan James Found
to give evidence as to his
professional qualifications. He produced a copy of his curriculum vitae. I
accepted that Dr. Found is
a forensic scientist, and an expert in the field of
document examination. Dr. Found gave an undertaking to the Tribunal as to safe
custody, and as to his intended use, of a document exhibited to the
supplementary statement of Mr. Alessi, which supplementary statement
document had been received into evidence as exhibit A2. The Tribunal thereupon
released the document to Dr. Found for examination.
A statement of the
evidence to be given by Dr. Found was filed on 1 April 2004. The statement was
adopted and signed by Dr. Found
when he gave evidence on 22 April 2004, and came
into evidence as exhibit LP21.
[9.11] A statement of the evidence to be
Sergio Arcaini
was filed on 16 February 2004. It was adopted
and signed by Mr. Arcaini when he gave evidence on behalf of the legal
practitioner
on 27 May 2004, and came into evidence as exhibit LP35. A
supplementary statement was filed on 21 May 2004, and came into evidence
May 2004 as exhibit LP36.
[9.12] A statement of the evidence to be given
John Hondrakis
was filed on 13 February 2004. It was adopted and
signed by Mr. Hondrakis when he gave evidence on behalf of the legal
practitioner
on 6 July 2004, and came into evidence as exhibit LP37. A
supplementary statement was filed on 1 April 2004, and came into evidence
July 2004 as exhibit LP38.
[9.13] A statement of the evidence to be
John Weir Caines
was filed on 16 February 2004. It was adopted
and signed by Mr. Caines when he gave evidence on behalf of the legal
practitioner
on 7 July 2004, and came into evidence as exhibit LP40. A
supplementary statement was filed on 21 May 2004, and came into evidence
July 2004 as exhibit LP41.
[9.14] A statement of the evidence to be
Elizabeth Chieppo
was filed on 13 February 2004. It was adopted
by Ms. Chieppo when she gave evidence on behalf of the legal practitioner on 8
2004, and came into evidence as exhibit LP43.
[9.15] The statement
of evidence to be given by
Mr. de Lemos
, filed on behalf of the
applicants on 2 February 2004, was adopted by Mr. de Lemos when he gave evidence
on behalf of the legal practitioner
on 8 July 2004. It came into evidence as
exhibit LP44.
[9.16] A statement of the evidence to be given by
Daniel Isakow
was filed on 26 February 2004. It was adopted by Mr.
Isakow when he gave evidence on behalf of the legal practitioner on 9 July
and came into evidence as exhibit LP46.
[9.17] A statement of the
evidence to be given by
Peter Kennedy
was filed on 21 May 2004. It was
adopted and signed by Mr. Kennedy when he gave evidence on behalf of the legal
practitioner on
9 July 2004, and came into evidence as exhibit
[9.18] Statements of evidence had been filed on behalf of the
legal practitioner in respect of the following
prospective witnesses
(a) John White, filed 16 February 2004;
(b) Robert Kingdon, filed 21 May 2004;
These prospective witnesses did not give evidence.
SECTION 10:
THE RUNNING SHEETS.
Purpose of this
[10.01] Mr. Moses put into evidence what he described as
“running sheets” [exhibit LP 28]. The running sheets set out
abbreviated form the work performed by Mr. Moses on behalf of Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi and companies associated with them. The running
sheets have the
following headings, which are self explanatory:
“Date Location Attendance Parties Units
Description”
[10.02] Mr. Moses maintains that the running sheets are a
contemporaneous record that provides evidence of the work set out in the
itemised bills of costs. The evidence of Mr. Moses was that the running sheets
were typed by Ms. Chieppo from tape recordings made
by him contemporaneously
with the events that they record. According to Mr. Moses and Mr. Caines, the
running sheets were adapted
by Mr. Caines to prepare the itemised bills of costs
requested by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi. They also were relied upon by Mr. Moses
the statements adopted by him as his evidence in chief.
On the other
hand, Mr. & Mrs. Alessi maintain that the running sheets were compiled by
Mr. Moses long after the commencement of
the present proceedings, in an attempt
to verify the work set out in the itemised bills of costs, and are not a
contemporaneous record
of the events that they purport to
Evidence about the running sheets:
[10.03] I will
set out in its entirety the relevant part of a statement made by
and adopted by him when he gave evidence:
“17. I maintained a running sheet for my work on the Alessi file. I did
this for billing purposes, so that I could accurately
justify my attendances.
The system I used was this. Each day in my home, when I started work, I would
start a fresh paper on which
I would write the date. As I worked, either taking
or making calls, or reading or dictating correspondence, I would note on the
sheet in front of me, in short form, what I was doing, and the number of
6-minute time units spent on the work. For attendances
out of the office,
I’d make the same sort of notes in my pad, or I’d note down the
attendances on the sheet of paper
on my desk when I’d returned. At the
end of each day, or on the following morning if I had been working until late, I
dictate onto tape an account of my attendances for the day, based on my
notes. Once I had dictated from the notes, I would discard
the notes. Then, at
the end of each week or so, whenever the tape was substantially full and I had
other work to send to Elizabeth
Chieppo, I would send the tape to her, by
courier, to type into a running sheet.
18. I was aware that Elizabeth used a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet to keep my
running sheets for the Alessi file. I knew that because
I had told Elizabeth to
use that program. It had been recommended to me as the best format because (so
I was told) it has an automatic
totalling facility that can calculate for you a
running balance of costs or units or any other numeral. But I never saw an
or hard copy of the running sheets that Elizabeth prepared for me on
the Alessi file, at least not until quite recently. For example,
checked any of Elizabeth’s transcriptions of my tapes for the running
sheet. They were not faxed to me or emailed
19. In about September of last year, the Tribunal ordered me to produce two
itemized accounts. John Caines was aware of my practice
of dictating running
sheets using Excel. Mr Caines told me that my running sheets would need to be
converted into a Word Document
because the Excel spreadsheet would be difficult
to print out in a fashion that would be easy to read, and which would meet the
requirement to provide itemized Bills of Costs. Therefore, I
asked Elizabeth to convert the running sheet to Word. She was working
Madgwicks by this time, and told me that she didn’t have the time. I
asked Mr Caines if he could do it. He said he could,
so I asked Elizabeth to
email the Excel running sheets to him. I believe she did. I believe also that
Mr Caines converted these
spreadsheets into a Word document (see Legal
Practitioner’s Itemised Bill of Costs).
20. Document 979 is a printout of my running sheets, or so I believe. Mr Caines
has told me that it is a printout of the spreadsheets
emailed to him by
Elizabeth Chieppo at my request. I saw document 979 on Mr Caines’s
computer screen at the offices of B &
LA, late last year, while he was
preparing my itemized accounts. At least, what I saw looked like document 979;
I did not check
it. But I do not have and have never had in my possession an
electronic copy of either document 979 or Elizabeth Chieppo’s
spreadsheets.
21. In deposing to what follows, I have had regard to discovered document 979.
As I have said, I have been told by Mr Caines that
document 979 is a hard copy
printout of my running sheet for the Alessi file, sent to him as Excel
spreadsheets by Elizabeth Chieppo.
I believe that that is the case.
22. Many of the entries in document 979 have either refreshed or confirmed my
own recollection of events. As to some entries, I
have no independent
recollection. But I can say this in relation to all the entries. Assuming that
document 979 is a transcription
of the dictated running sheets that I sent to
Elizabeth Chieppo, it contains an accurate summary of the events, made by me
the events were perfectly fresh in my mind. I do not say that it
represents a complete summary of those events. It was after all
prepared for the purposes of justifying attendances, so it was only necessary
for me to summarise the main essence of
those attendances. But it is accurate
in so far as it goes.
23. In what follows, I have extracted the entries in document 979 which seem to
me particularly relevant for the issues before the
Tribunal. Where an entry
needs explanation or elaboration, either by way of context, or because of a
specific recollection that
I have in relation to the matters covered by that
entry, I have set out my additional comments following the extract.
24. As will be apparent, in my running sheets, I use people’s initials to
identify them (myself included). A table of the
people referred to, and their
initials, appears as the page headed “Legend of Names” in the Legal
Practitioner’s
Itemised Bill of
[Paragraphs 17 to 24 of exhibit
Mr. Moses said in cross-examination:
(i) that the running sheets were prepared for billing purposes;
(ii) that he dictated the running sheets into a hand held machine;
(iii) that the running sheets were not added to after they had been
(iv) that tax invoices were calculated from the hours shown in the running
(v) that he never saw the running sheets. In order to prepare a tax invoice he
asked Ms Chieppo to total the units shown in the
running sheets. Ms Chieppo
gave to him totals in hours, hours in excess of eight in one day, and hours for
weekends and public holidays;
(vi) that the number of units did not appear in the tax invoice of 25 March 2002
because Mr. Alessi did not want an itemised account;
(vii) that it was difficult to produce an itemised account from the Excel
spreadsheet;
(viii) that he provided the Excel spreadsheet to Mr. Caines in September 2003,
and Mr. Caines converted the spreadsheet to Word;
(ix) that the itemised bills of costs were prepared from the running sheets.
gave the following evidence about the running
“53. Late last year [2003], I learned that Mr Moses had to prepare
itemised bills for the Tribunal. Mr Moses told me that
he had running sheets
for the Alessi file, which were kept by his former secretary in an Excel
spreadsheet. He asked me whether
the running sheets could simply be printed out
to prepare the itemized bills. I told him that it would not be that simple, and
he would need to convert the Excel spreadsheets into a Word document.
Later, Mr Moses told me his former secretary, who was now
employed full time
elsewhere, could not help him do this and he asked me if I would be able to do
it. I agreed.
54. Mr Moses’s former secretary (Elizabeth Chieppo) emailed the running
sheets to my computer at B&LA. I converted some
of the information in the
running sheets into word format: see the Legal Practitioner’s Itemised
Bills of Costs.”
[Paragraphs 53 & 54 of exhibit LP40.]
Mr. Caines said in cross-examination:
(i) that he was asked by Mr. Moses in September 2003 to prepare itemised bills
(ii) that in accordance with instructions given by Mr. Moses he removed the
description column on the right hand side of the running
sheets and added
summaries in order to prepare the bills of costs;
(iii) that it “could have been October” when Mr. Moses provided
information about the uplifts.
The following exchange also took place during cross-examination:
“Mr. Clelland: Mr Caines, I want to suggest to you that you and Mr Moses
engaged in an exercise of working backwards from the
amounts that were in the
lump sum bills rendered by Mr Moses in...or bearing the date of 25
March 2002 and also 18
June 2003. I want to suggest to you that in
the period between September and January you and Mr Moses undertook an exercise
of justifying
by reference to units worked those amounts that had been
Mr. Caines: That suggestion is just
bloody ridiculous.
Mr. Clelland: And I also suggest that it became apparent at some stage that
without these uplift factors there was no way that the
fees of Mr Moses could be
Mr. Caines: I’m not sure what your question is.
Mr. Clelland: I am putting to you that this device of 20%, 25% and 50% was
employed because it wasn’t possible in the time
to justify on the hourly
rate the fees that Mr Moses had charged.
Mr. Caines: I think that’s madness what you’re suggesting.
Mr. Clelland: And what I suggest to you is that the delay between September and
January was as a result of you and Mr Moses making
amendments to the so called
running sheet in order to justify the fees of Mr
Mr. Caines: Well, I think your proposition is just ridiculous.”
, who carried out secretarial work for
Mr. Moses on a part time basis, gave the following evidence:
“Mr. Moses used to send dictaphone tapes to me by courier. Amongst those
tapes, from time to time, were tapes on which he
had dictated his running
sheets. His running sheets were a day to day summary of his attendances, which
he kept (so he told me)
for billing purposes. I kept the running sheets on a
Microsoft Excel spreadsheet, on my home computer, which was a second hand PC
that Mr. Moses had given me in the mid-1990s. I would update the running sheets
with the latest entries that Mr. Moses had dictated,
as and when he sent me a
[Paragraph 3 of exhibit LP43.]
Ms Chieppo said in
cross-examination:
(i) that she received tapes from Mr. Moses to add to the running sheets
“once a week, once a fortnight”;
(ii) that she did not print out the running sheets for Mr. Moses, but just left
them on her system;
(iii) that she added up the units on the running sheets when requested to do so
by Mr. Moses by using the automatic totalling function
(iv) that she worked out the number of units in excess of eight hours in one
day, and the number of units on Saturdays, Sundays and
public holidays, but did
not calculate the costs;
(v) that she has disposed of the computer upon which she saved the running
sheets, and that she did not copy its hard drive to a
disk prior to its
The credibility of Ms Chieppo:
[10.06] Ms Chieppo was hesitant and unsure in giving her evidence.
On 8 July 2004, Ms Chieppo was asked in cross-examination when
did she commence to work for Mr. Moses, and she replied “1996-1997”.
She then was asked whether she had known Mr. Moses before that date, and she
replied that she had known him 20 years ago as a secretary.
The following day
she was asked whether she was related to Mr. Moses, and she replied that her
husband and Mr. Moses’ wife
are brother and sister. She explained her
failure to disclose that relationship the previous day on the basis that there
social contact between herself and her husband and Mr. & Mrs.
Ms Chieppo was an unimpressive witness with some limits to her
credibility, but I do not discount her evidence as to the work she
performed for
The submission of the applicants:
[10.07] The
submission of the applicants
is set out in
the General Overview to the applicants’ Closing Submissions. The more
significant parts of the submission can
be summarised as follows:
(i) Mr. Alessi engaged Mr. Moses in July 2001 to deal with the receivership, but
the running sheet from its commencement on 23 July
2001 until 27 July 2001
indicates that the receivership was not a paramount consideration [paragraph 10
of general overview].
In the section of these reasons headed
THE TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT
that Mr. Alessi engaged Mr. Moses early in July 2001 to represent F & T
Industries Pty Ltd and Mr. Alessi in relation
to the receivership, and for no
other purpose. The submission infers that the running sheets for July 2001 were
not dictated in
July 2001 because, if they were, they would treat the
receivership as of paramount importance. I am unable to accept this submission
because the running sheets indicate to me that the receivership was of paramount
importance at that time. For example, the first
entry for 23 July 2001 refers
to “expression of intense desire by family to preserve business and end
receivership”,
and the entry for 26 July 2001 refers to “Further
discussion as to critical need for urgent action to save F&T from firesale
by R&M” [receiver/manager].
(ii) the existence of the running sheets was not disclosed to Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi until Mr. Moses filed his affidavit of discovery
on 9 January 2004, the
inference being that the running sheets did not exist until shortly before that
date [paragraph 44(i) of general
(iii) Mr. Moses took five months to comply with an order of the Tribunal to file
and serve itemised bills of costs, despite the fact
that the bills were based
upon the running sheets, the inference being that the running sheets did not
exist when the order was made
and required preparation before they could provide
a basis for the bills of costs [paragraph 85 of general
Particulars of the order and of a further order extending the time for
compliance appear in the section of these reasons headed
DIRECTIONS HEARINGS,
AND RULINGS AS TO THE CONDUCT OF THE HEARING OF THE APPLICATION
sufficient to say that the original order was made on 19 September 2003 and that
the itemised bills of costs were filed on
3 February 2004, a period 16 days
short of the alleged five months;
(iv) the amounts of the two itemised bills of costs are identical to the tax
invoice of 25 March 2002 and the tax invoice of 18 June
2003 respectively, the
inference being that this is an unlikely event and that the running sheets were
brought into existence after
the bills had been rendered so as to make them
accord with the bills. It was submitted that the running sheets were “a
contrivance”
[paragraph 89 of general overview].
The submission of the legal practitioner:
[10.08] The
submission of the legal practitioner
out at pages 23 to 31 of
of the legal practitioner’s Closing
Submissions. The more significant parts of the
submission can be summarised as
(i) there were good reasons for the delay on the part of Mr. Moses in preparing
itemised bills of costs. Mr. Moses was engaged in
a trial in the Federal Court
until 22 October 2003. In late October 2003 an anonymous caller telephoned Mr.
Moses and threatened
to bomb his house if he did not stop pursuing the Alessis.
In late October 2003 Mr. Moses was in a state of anxiety. Mr. Moses
was engaged
at the same time in preparing his affidavit of documents in these proceedings,
which included almost 1000 items, many
of them with attachments or comprising
bundles of documents, which affidavit was filed by him on 2 January 2004 [in
fact, the affidavit
was sworn on 2 January 2004 and filed on 9 January 2004].
The running sheets were discovered. Furthermore Mr. Caines, who converted
running sheets to Word format and prepared the itemised bills of costs, had a
personal interest in the Federal Court litigation
and was in ill health at the
time [pages 23 to 25 of
(ii) no witness was called by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to dispute any entry in the
running sheets [page 31 of
Finding as to the running sheets:
[10.09] The issue as to whether the running sheets are a
contemporaneous
record is not free from doubt, and I am not in a position
to determine issues such as whether Mr. Moses performed all of the work
to in the running sheets, or whether performance of each item of work occupied
the time in units referred to in the running
[10.10] Mr. Moses
put forward good reasons for the delay in the preparation of the itemised bills
of costs, and I am unable to conclude
that delay in their preparation resulted
from a need to prepare the running sheets.
[10.11] Furthermore, it would
be difficult to construct accurate running sheets long after most of the work
had been done. Mr. Moses
made few file notes, although documents and
confirmatory letters would have provided some contemporaneous records. Mr.
Alessi gave
evidence that Mr. Moses did not perform many items of work that Mr.
Moses claimed to have performed, mostly the sending of confirmatory
Mr. Alessi, but I am satisfied that Mr. Alessi relied heavily upon his secretary
Miss Briguglio to deal with incoming
correspondence. The accuracy of the
running sheets was not challenged by any witness other than Mr.
[10.12] In conclusion, I am satisfied by the evidence of Mr.
Moses and Ms Chieppo that the running sheets probably are a transcription
tape recordings dictated by Mr. Moses contemporaneously with the performance by
him of work referred to in the tape recordings.
In those circumstances
find that the running sheets contain a contemporaneous record of the work that
Mr. Moses claims to have performed
SECTION 11:
THE TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT.
this section:
[11.01] This section identifies the terms of the
engagement of Mr. Moses to act for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi. Terms of engagement
relevant to all of the grounds of the application that were pursued, save
for the ninth ground based upon an allegation that the
costs agreement is not
fair and reasonable because of the conduct of the legal practitioner during the
course of these proceedings.
Engagement of a legal
practitioner:
[11.02] In years gone by the engagement of a legal
practitioner, often called a retainer, was a relatively simple matter. The
did not need to be in writing, unless it sought to charge costs other
than in accordance with a statutory scale, and was governed
by the same laws
that applied to most other contracts.
The engagement of a legal
practitioner in Victoria has become more complicated in recent times,
particularly since the commencement
Legal Practice Act 1996
has become necessary in many cases for a legal practitioner to provide specific
information to a client in written form, either
before being retained or as soon
as practicable after being retained:
sections 86
. In addition, the
charging of costs
other than in accordance with a statutory scale has become
more common, and the statutory provisions
dealing with costs agreements
become more extensive:
sections 96
Identification of terms of
engagement:
Terms of engagement
may be recorded
solely in a form of engagement or retainer, or solely as part of a statement
that includes the specified information
that a legal practitioner is required to
provide to a client, or solely in a costs agreement.
[11.04] A form
engagement or retainer
should at least set out basic details, such as
the names of the client and legal practitioner, a description of the matter to
handled by the practitioner, and instructions as to how the matter is to be
handled or what outcome is sought to be achieved. The
method by which costs are
to be calculated need not be included, as costs can be assessed and recovered in
the absence of a form
of engagement or costs agreement:
section 93.
desirable that terms of engagement be signed by the client and the legal
practitioner, but the terms might merely be
evidenced in writing
letter written by a legal practitioner followed by the client’s acceptance
of work performed in accordance with the
terms set out in the
Terms of engagement also might be
, as where work
is performed by a legal practitioner, probably a practitioner who has acted
regularly for the client in the past,
and the benefit of the work is accepted by
[11.05] Information in the form of a statement, most
statement given pursuant to
of the Act, might be the
sole repository of the terms of engagement. The information would be of no use
in most cases unless it
formed part of the terms of engagement. For example, to
provide information pursuant to
section 86(1)(a)
of “details of the
of costing the legal services, billing intervals and arrangements” would
be meaningless unless
the information provided
became part of the terms of
engagement.
Where such a statement is the sole repository of the terms of
engagement, it is common for a legal practitioner to provide two copies
statement to his or her client and to request that one copy ending with an
endorsement “Please proceed on the above
basis”, or something to
that effect, be signed by the client and returned to the
practitioner.
costs agreement
might contain the only
written record of terms of engagement. In such a case, to call the agreement a
“costs agreement”
is inaccurate and might be misleading, because the
costs agreement is likely to contain many terms of engagement, not just terms
engagement as they relate to costs. Terms to the effect that costs need be paid
only in the event of a successful outcome, or
that a premium (commonly called
“an uplift”) must be paid in the event of a successful outcome, must
be included in a
costs agreement.
[11.07] To summarise, a legal
practitioner still can be retained orally. If retained in writing, one document
may be the sole repository
of the terms of engagement but it is
the terms of engagement to be recorded in several documents
. Of course, the
terms of engagement might be varied from time to time.
[11.08] The next
step is to ascertain
the terms upon which Mr. & Mrs. Alessi engaged Mr.
Moses to act on their behalf
The terms of engagement in this
The events of early July 2001:
[11.09] Mr.
David Lockwood was appointed the receiver/manager of F & T Industries Pty
Ltd on 25 June 2001. The evidence of Mr.
Alessi was that he engaged Mr. Moses
early in July 2001 to represent the interests of F & T Industries Pty Ltd in
the receivership and in respect of the indebtedness of F & T
Industries Pty Ltd to Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd. Mr. Alessi added:
“In one of these early meetings, Moses said to me that he would not expect
payment at the start of his appointment and that
he would obtain payment once we
started to recover money from people that we would sue. He told me that he
would engage his advisers
to assist him as they owed him many favours. He said
that they would not cost me anything because he had done a lot for them and
owed him a lot.” [Paragraph 36 of exhibit A1.]
In substance, the evidence of Mr. Moses was that he did not
commit himself to acting for Mr. Alessi early in July 2001 because he
to ascertain the nature of the problems confronting F & T Industries Pty
Ltd. This assertion does not sit comfortably
with the fact that Mr. Moses
rendered his first tax invoice to Mr. Alessi on 17 July 2001 for $5500 inclusive
of GST. The description
of the work the subject matter of the invoice commences
with the words “TO our professional costs of and incidental to acting
your behalf to date in connection with commercial matters
generally;”.
Mr Arcaini introduced Mr. Alessi to Mr. Moses, and was
present at the first meeting between them. Mr Arcaini described the nature
the instructions given by Mr. Alessi to Mr. Moses in the following way:
“Mr. Moses asked Mr. Alessi what type of matter it was and Mr. Alessi said
that it involved a conspiracy to take his business
off him by the receiver and
two Italian suppliers of equipment to his business who wanted to set up the same
business in Australia
themselves. The meeting lasted for approximately three
hours during which time Mr. Moses questioned Mr. Alessi extensively.”
[Paragraph 11 of exhibit LP35.]
“Mr. Alessi said that his information was that the receiver and manager
would sell the business for $2.5 million, just enough
to return the Exelerate
debt, leaving the company to be liquidated. He said he needed a lawyer who
could buy him time, so he could
collect the debtors; that he needed to keep the
receiver at arms length and prolong the receivership, and thereby force the
to the negotiating table by defeating their conspiracy.”
[Paragraph 12 of exhibit 35.]
“Mr. Alessi said that he would not compromise or negotiate, unless from a
position of strength. He said that that would only
be possible if Mr. Moses was
able to block the sale of the business.” [Paragraph 15 of exhibit
The events of late July 2001:
[11.10] The
evidence of
was that his engagement to act in relation to the
receivership took place late in July 2001, but that the work to be performed by
him was extended on 30 July 2001 to cover many other
[11.11] The evidence of Mr. Moses as to the
first meeting
that took place on 30 July 2001
, held at the office of Business & Legal
Advisory, included the following statements:
“On 30 July 2001, I discussed my terms with both Mr. and Mrs. Alessi; my
hourly rate, uplift on that rate, use of agents and
consultants, billing and so
forth. Messrs. Caines and Arcaini were present at that meeting. At Mr.
Alessi’s request, I agreed
that I would not send interim bills monthly,
but would instead bill the Alessis in lump sums, at agreed intervals. The same
I delivered a
statement and a written costs agreement to Mr. and
Mrs. Alessi, by handing them to Mr. Alessi in conference.”
25 of exhibit LP24.]
“In this meeting, I gave details of the hourly rate I would charge, namely
$325 per hour, and I discussed the proposed uplift
factor.” [Paragraph
39 of exhibit LP24.]
A running sheet compiled by Mr. Moses in relation to the same
meeting includes the following entry:
“Telephone conference call with Mrs. Alessi confirming her commitment to
save F & T “at any cost” – the
life of entire family.
Discussion as to DM costs and assistance from of [sic] agents and consultants -
initially, JC, KS and RK.
DM requested to draw on whatever other professional
services required - DM informed of need to sign costs agreement and explained
generally - if matter as large as FA stated, costs could be extremely high and
subject to uplift factor increasing hourly charge
rate. In response to DM
request for monthly accounts FA stated that cash flow would not permit but he
and wife would provide real
estate security to DM to secure costs;”
[Paragraph 38 of exhibit LP24. DM = Darren Moses, JC = John Caines, KS =
Stout, RK = Robert Kingdon,]
Mr. Moses amplified his reference to an uplift in the running
sheet in the following way:
“There is a reference to “uplift factor” in my running sheet.
I told the Alessis that if the matter proved as
large as Mr. Alessi was saying,
then I would charge a higher rate. I can’t recall giving any
quantification at that point,
for example by specifying how much higher my rate
would be. I do not believe I did that. It is the sort of thing you decide in
retrospect, once you know what the work has involved.” [Paragraph 6 of
exhibit LP26.”
When he gave evidence, Mr. Moses confirmed that Mrs. Alessi
participated in the meeting by way of a telephone conference call.
Moses asserted in cross-examination that on 30 July 2001 Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
agreed to pay an uplift. He acknowledged that
their agreement to pay was not
recorded in the running sheet for the meeting, or in a file
second meeting took place on the same day, 30 July
, at the home of Mr. Moses. Those in attendance included Mr. Moses and
Mr. Alessi, but not Mrs. Alessi. The running sheet compiled
by Mr. Moses
includes the following entry in relation to the second meeting:
“Handed over to FA
notice and costs agreement signed by DM for
review, signing and return.” [FA = Francesco
Alessi, DM = Darren
The evidence of Mr. Moses included the following paragraph in
relation to the second meeting:
notice and costs agreement referred to in my running sheet
was delivered to Mr. Alessi under cover of a letter
dated that day. The
and its attachments are document 37. In fact, Mr. Alessi neglected to return
the costs agreement to
me, signed or at all.”
[Paragraph 45 of exhibit
It was put to Mr. Moses in cross-examination that the documents
that he claimed to have delivered to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi on 30 July
were prepared after 4 February 2002, to which Mr. Moses replied
“Absolutely incorrect.”
Mr. Arcaini
attendance at both meetings on 30 July 2001. He stated, among other things:
“Mr. Moses said that from his general understanding of the matter, it
would be a long and costly matter. He said to Mr. Alessi
that he must have a
signed agreement with Mr. and Mrs. Alessi to set out the bases of his charges
and payment of his legal fees and
his outgoings for himself and the agents he
could use and that this agreement was a requirement of his Law Society.”
26 of exhibit LP35.]
“In my presence, Mr. Moses gave Mr. Alessi some documents, dealing with
the matter of his costs, and he said that the agreement
for costs would need to
be signed by both Mr. and Mrs. Alessi and returned to Mr. Moses as soon as
possible. I saw Mr. Moses hand
his letter of engagement to Mr. Alessi, although
I did not read it, and could not identify it if it was shown to me now. This
place either at B & LA or at a meeting later the same day at the home
of Mr. Moses in Camberwell;” [Paragraph 27 of
exhibit LP35.]
When cross-examined, Mr. Arcaini said that the documents were
handed to Mr. Alessi by Mr. Moses during the second meeting on 30 July
the home of Mr. Moses, and that the documents were in an
also was in attendance at the
meetings on 30 July 2001. He stated, among other things:
“I remember Mr. Moses telling Mr. Alessi his hourly rate. Either Mr.
Alessi asked Mr. Moses if he could devote himself full-time
to the job, or Mr.
Moses said to Mr. Alessi that he might need to do this; I can’t recall
which. But then Mr. Moses said if
the matter was as urgent and as complex as
Mr. Alessi had outlined then he would need to apply an uplift to his hourly rate
uplift for work on weekends, holidays and after hours. Mr. Alessi said
cost was not an issue and that they would sell or mortgage
other assets as
required ..... Mr. Alessi made it clear however that he did not have cash to
pay for fees up-front. Mr. Moses
said that he was required by his professional
body to have Mr. Alessi and Mrs. Alessi sign a costs agreement. I recall that
meeting reconvened that evening at Mr. Moses’ home office in Glyndon
Road. Mr. Moses there handed Mr. Alessi a document that
he (Mr. Moses) said was
his costs agreement, for signing and return.” [Paragraph 11 of exhibit
When cross-examined, Mr. Caines said that he recalled Mr. Moses
explaining uplifts of 50% and 20% to Mr. Alessi, but not 25%. He
also said that
the costs agreement handed to Mr. Alessi at the home of Mr. Moses comprised
“sheets of paper” rather than
a document.
also gave evidence about the two meetings on 30 July 2001. He
“I ..... deny that, on 30 July 2001, or at any time prior to April 2002,
Mr. Moses gave to me either a written statement,
termed ..... a
Statement, or a Costs Agreement, nor did he ask me to sign and return any
document relating to his appointment
as solicitor.”
[Paragraph 40 of
exhibit A1.]
“My wife Fillippa did not, in July 2001, attend any of the meetings held
at the office of Mr. Moses in Camberwell or at his
city office, nor to the best
of my knowledge did she speak to Mr. Moses on the telephone in that
period.” [Paragraph 41
of exhibit A1.]
[11.16] I turn next to the
documents said by Mr. Moses to
have been handed to Mr. Alessi on 30 July 2001
. Mr. Moses described the
documents, in evidence set out above, as document 37. That is a number they
bear, but they came into evidence
as documents bearing page numbers in the court
book, namely 26 (covering letter), 27-28 (section 86 statement) and 29-30 (costs
agreement).
[11.17] The
covering letter
is a letter from Mr.
Moses to Mr. Alessi dated 30 July 2001 and endorsed “BY HAND”. The
letter refers to the attachment
of a section 86 statement and “Three
copies of Costs Agreement
containing terms of my retainer
as agreed with
both you and Mrs. Alessi today”. [Emphasis added by me in italics.] The
letter requested that one copy of
the costs agreement be signed by Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi, dated, and returned to Mr. Moses. The letter also stated that Mr.
would not render monthly interim bills but would look for lump sum
payments at intervals to be discussed.
[11.18] The
is undated and unsigned, although Mr. Moses gave evidence that the
document placed in evidence is a file copy, and that he had signed
and dated 30
July 2001 the statement handed to Mr. Alessi. So far as the present proceedings
are concerned, the information contained
in the statement is significant in five
First, the “
” is described in the
following way:
“Various matters concerning the Clients’ business and taxation
interests both in their personal capacities and in their
capacities as Directors
and/or shareholders of Briga Pty Ltd as trustee of The Alessi Family Trust and
of numerous Corporate and
Trust entities with which they are associated
including, without limitation various court proceedings both existing and
anticipated
and/or any other matters, transaction, proceeding or dealing in
respect of which the Clients request the Legal Practitioner to perform
It is significant that the “MATTER” is not just the
matter about which Mr. & Mrs. Alessi had consulted Mr. Moses prior
July 2001, namely the appointment of a receiver/manager to F & T Industries
Pty Ltd. Instead, the statement seeks to provide
information about
“various matters” that are described in general terms, including
matters that were not existing matters
but “anticipated and/or any other
It also is significant that Briga Pty Ltd is named,
despite the fact that Briga Pty Ltd appears to have had little, if any,
involvement
in the matters discussed by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and Mr. Moses up
to and including 30 July 2001. Other companies in the F&T
Group are not
named, but simply described as “numerous Corporate and Trust
entities”. Indeed, F & T Industries Pty
Ltd is not named despite
being the main operational company in the group and the company to which the
receiver/manager had been appointed.
Mr. Moses gave evidence about the
“various court proceedings both existing and anticipated” as at 30
July 2001. He listed
13 matters said by him to fit that description. Most of
the matters in the list involved proceedings or anticipated proceedings
the Alessis or companies in the F&T Group seeking to recover monies claimed
to be owed by them [Paragraphs 1 & 2
of exhibit LP26.]. The list does not
mention Briga Pty Ltd.
Secondly, the statement informs Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi that Mr. Moses will charge
$325 per hour
, divided into units of
six minutes.
It is significant that the statement then proceeds to say
that “Additional charges may be made for secretarial and administrative
work performed by non-legal staff”, without informing Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi of the amount or hourly rate to be charged by Mr.
Moses for the work of
The statement then proceeds to deal with possible reductions
or increases in the fees to be charged by Mr. Moses. So far as
are concerned, it states:
“I may increase my fee by making additional charges where I and/or my
staff are required by the circumstances of the matter:-
* to work outside normal office hours;
* to work exclusively on the one matter for a full day or
* to use precedent documents not previously prepared by me; and/or
* to undertake work which is complex or prolix or requires a higher than usual
level of skill or urgency or involves a higher than
usual degree of
responsibility.”
It is significant that the statement does not inform Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi of the amount by which the fees may be increased, or of
hourly rate, or of a range of possible amounts.
It also is significant
that the statement implies that Mr. Moses can increase his charges without
telling Mr. & Mrs. Alessi that
“circumstances” have arisen that
justify an increase, for example, that he proposes to use a precedent that he
Thirdly, the statement informs Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
disbursements
will be charged to them “at the cost
amount” charged to Mr. Moses.
It is significant that the statement
does not inform Mr. & Mrs. Alessi that they will be consulted before
disbursements are incurred
or, more realistically, consulted before a
disbursement costing more than a set amount is incurred. In substance, Mr.
Moses informed
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi that he was entitled to incur any
disbursement that he considered to be necessary, irrespective of the amount
be incurred.
Fourthly, Mr. & Mrs. Alessi were informed that they
of increased “costs and charges” in the
following circumstances:
“I will notify you of any costs and charges which will significantly
increase the “
likely total legal costs
(including disbursements) as
soon as I become aware of it.” [Emphasis added by me in italics.]
It is significant that the amount of the “likely total
legal costs” does not appear anywhere in the statement, even as
estimate or as a range of estimates. Consequently, it might be difficult to
determine whether any particular cost or charge would
significantly
the likely total legal costs, the likely total legal costs being
unknown, and thus difficult to ascertain whether Mr. Moses was obliged
to notification.
Fifthly, the statement notifies Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
will take place in the following way:
“In the absence of arrangements to the contrary, I will render accounts
for my services and for any other charges and disbursements
on a monthly basis
until the matter has been completed. Each of these accounts should be paid
immediately upon being rendered to
It is significant that, according to Mr. Moses, the statement
was handed to Mr. Alessi at the second meeting on 30 July 2001. It
ground that the second meeting took place after Mr. Moses and Mr. Alessi had
agreed that interim bills would not be sent
at monthly intervals and that,
instead, lump sum bills would be sent at agreed intervals. The statement does
not incorporate that
[11.19] The
costs agreement
third document said by Mr. Moses to have been handed to Mr. Alessi on 30 July
2001, is undated and unsigned but it was represented
by Mr. Moses to be merely a
file copy. The covering letter states that the “documents”, meaning
three copies of the
costs agreement, had been signed by Mr. Moses before being
handed to Mr. Alessi. So far as the present proceedings are concerned,
costs agreement is significant in the same five respects as the section 86
First, the “
” is identical to the
“MATTER” set out in the section 86 statement. The two significant
points in relation to the
“MATTER”, set out above when dealing with
the section 86 statement, apply equally to the description of the matter in
costs agreement.
Secondly, the costs agreement states that Mr. Moses will
charge Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
$325 per hour plus GST
, unlike the section
86 statement which informs Mr. & Mrs. Alessi that they will be charged $325
per hour without mentioning GST.
It is significant that the costs
agreement does not divide the hourly rate into units of six minutes, unlike the
section 86 statement.
It is significant that the costs agreement does not
mention that additional charges may be made for secretarial and administrative
work performed by non-legal staff, unlike the section 86 statement.
significant that the costs agreement does not provide for possible reductions or
increases in the fees to be charged by Mr.
Moses, unlike the section 86
Thirdly, the costs agreement states that
necessary and proper” disbursements
will be incurred by Mr. Moses on
behalf of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, whereas the section 86 statement states that
disbursements will
be charged to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi “at the cost amount
charged to me”. The words “all necessary and proper”
omitted from the section 86 statement, although arguably the words are inferred
in the statement.
As with the section 86 statement, it is significant
that Mr. Moses is not obliged to consult Mr. & Mrs. Alessi before a
disbursement
is incurred or, more realistically, before a disbursement costing
more than a set amount is incurred.
Fourthly, the costs agreement does
not require Mr. Moses to
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi of any costs and
charges that will significantly increase the
likely total legal costs
unlike the section 86 statement.
Fifthly, the costs agreement states that
will take place in the following way:
“Interim bills of costs will be given from time to time at the Legal
Practitioner’s discretion and a final bill of costs
will be given at the
conclusion of the Matter. Accounts are payable immediately upon being
It is significant that interim bills are to be rendered from
time to time at the discretion of Mr. Moses
, unlike the section 86
statement which informed Mr. & Mrs. Alessi that accounts would be rendered
monthly basis
, and unlike the agreement reached between Mr. Moses
and Mr. Alessi on 30 July 2001 that lump sum bills would be rendered at
agreed intervals
It also is significant that Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi are required by the costs agreement to pay upon request “such
amounts as are
required for anticipated disbursements”. There is nothing
in the section 86 statement which informs Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
request, they must pay disbursements yet to be incurred.
[11.20] The
three documents said by Mr. Moses to have been handed to Mr. Alessi on 30 July
similar footers
commencing with the letters “ubah”,
Covering letter “ubahAlessiCosts300701”
Section 86 statement “ubahS86Information300701”
Costs agreement “ubahCostsAgree300701”
Bearing in mind that Mr. Alessi had denied that Mr. Moses handed
these documents to him on 30 July 2001, Mr. Moses was cross-examined
letters “ubah” in the footer to each document. He said that he did
not know what the letters “ubah”
were intended to mean. Mr. Moses
said that he did not know how the documents had been prepared. He said that the
footer was not
a footer commonly used by Ms Elizabeth Chieppo, who typed many of
his documents. In paragraph 11 of his statement [exhibit LP24]
Mr. Moses listed
the names of six persons, other than Ms Chieppo, who assisted him by typing
documents. He said that he had made
enquiry of all of them, but none of them
had any recollection of typing the documents or any recollection of a footer
with the letters “ubah”. Ms Chieppo gave evidence that
the letters “ubah” did not mean anything to her.
Variation of the terms of engagement on about 30 August
[11.21] Mr. Alessi maintained that the terms of engagement, so
far as the payment of legal costs was concerned, were varied on about
[11.22] In substance, Mr. Alessi gave evidence that Keys Road
was sold by Briga Pty Ltd to Tyree Pty Ltd for $2.2 M under an arrangement
whereby the conveyancing documents would show a price of $1.8 M and the
additional $400,000 would be deducted by Mr. Moses from past
and future legal
costs owing to Mr. Moses for services provided at the request of Mr. Alessi.
[Paragraph 73 of exhibit A1.]
On the other hand, Mr. Moses gave evidence
that the price was $1.8 M [Paragraph 80 of exhibit LP24], and that there was no
arrangement
requiring him to deduct $400,000 from past and future legal
The relevant evidence is set out in detail in the section headed
The Repayment of Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd, including the sale of
Keys Road by
Briga Pty Ltd to Tyree Pty Ltd.
Variation of the terms of engagement
on 1 December 2001:
[11.23] Mr. Moses alleged that the terms of
engagement as they related to the
payment of costs and disbursements were
varied on 1 December 2001
. The entry in the running sheet for 1 December
2001 includes, among other things, the following note:
“FA stated unable to make any payment at this stage - directed DM to
render account to Briga to pay from loan account owing
by F&T; agreed that
as payment is from R&M to Briga to DM, that account would be under actual
and later fully reconciled
to actual and agreed 20% time charge uplift in new
year if/when Deed approved; FA agreed to instruct R&M to meet payment when
account rendered.” [FA = Mr. Alessi; DM = Mr. Moses; R&M =
receiver/manager; Deed = Deed of Company Arrangement.]
Mr. Moses explained the alleged variation in his evidence:
“I said to Mr. Alessi, and he agreed, that I would render an estimated
account; and that this account would vary from my actual
time costs in the
following respects. First, the estimated account would be calculated at $325
per hour, with no uplifts. But my
finalised account would include uplift. And
secondly, the estimated account was not going to be for all of my time costs
(even allowing for the absence of uplift), because that would be such
a large amount that the Receiver Manager might baulk at it.
What was proposed
was that the Receiver Manager would pay the estimated account out of
F&T’s revenues by way of partial
repayment of Briga’s secured
loans to F&T.” [Paragraph 124 of exhibit LP24.]
[11.24] Pursuant to the alleged variation, Mr. Moses rendered
what is called in the “Tax Invoices” section of these reasons
“the second tax invoice”. It was addressed to Mr. Alessi in his
capacity as a director of Briga Pty Ltd. The second
tax invoice totalled
$281,028, and it is common ground that the receiver/manager paid to Mr. Moses
three instalments of $50,000 in
part payment of the invoice.
[11.25] Mr.
Alessi gave evidence that he did not receive the second tax invoice [paragraph
117 of exhibit A1]. He said that he became
aware that $50,000 had been paid by
the receiver/manager to Mr. Moses in January 2002, when his secretary Miss Nancy
Briguglio drew
his attention to the payment in a list of payments made by the
receiver/manager to creditors [paragraph 114 of exhibit A1]. The
evidence of
Mr. Alessi is that he sought an explanation from Mr. Moses:
“I rang Darren Moses and told him that Nancy had brought to my attention a
payment to him by Lockwood of $50,000 and I asked
for an explanation. He said
words to the effect,
“What I am trying to do is, while the company is
under Lockwood’s control it would be better if it came from him rather
that later on it comes from your pocket. I am going to try and get as much
money from him as I can.”
He did not say anything about having sent
an account to Lockwood.” [Paragraph 114 of exhibit A1.]
Mr. Alessi recalled the meeting on 1 December 2001 with Mr.
Moses, but in cross-examination he denied that he informed Mr. Moses at
meeting that he was unable to pay legal costs; denied that he instructed Mr.
Moses to render an account to Briga Pty Ltd; denied
that Mr. Moses informed him
that an account would be sent but not a full account; denied that Mr. Moses
informed him that the account
would not include an uplift of 20%; denied that
Mr. Moses informed him that he would be charged $325 per hour; denied that Mr.
informed him that an account for the full amount would be sent in the New
Year; denied that he told Mr. Moses that he would organise
payment of the
account by the receiver/manager; and denied that he subsequently authorised the
receiver/manager to pay money to Mr.
[11.26] If the terms of
engagement were varied on 1 December 2001, Mr. Moses was obliged by
Legal Practice Act
6 to notify Mr. & Mrs. Alessi (not
necessarily in writing) of the changes, flowing from the variation, to the
information contained
statement dated 30 July 2001. There is
no evidence that Mr. Moses notified Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to that
Variation of the terms of engagement on 3 & 4 February
[11.27] Mr. Moses alleged that the terms of engagement were
further varied on 3 & 4 February 2002 by an agreement to grant a
over Mr. & Mrs. Alessi’s home at Beaumaris.
gave evidence of a meeting at his home on 3 February 2003 during which
agreement was reached on the alleged variation:
“I told Mr. Alessi that I had real concerns about my costs, especially the
costs of my agents. ..... I said that because
of the uncertainty surrounding
the Alessi’ position, that I had to get security.” [Paragraph 131
of exhibit LP24.]
“Mr. Alessi said that this was not a problem. He said he was prepared to
give me a second mortgage over the family home at
Beaumaris. He was the one who
mentioned Beaumaris, not me.” [Paragraph 132 of exhibit LP24
“I told Mr. Alessi that I would want to take a second mortgage on the
property in due course, but that in the short term I
wanted to take a charge
over the house, so that I could lodge a caveat. Mr. Alessi said that this was
no problem.” [Paragraph
133 of exhibit LP24.]
“I said that I would also need to hear that it was no problem from Mrs.
Alessi, because she was the co-owner of the house.
Mr. Alessi and I, in Mr.
Arcaini’s presence, made a speaker phone call to Mrs. Alessi. I told Mrs.
Alessi that the time had
now come for me to take security for my costs, that we
had been talking about it for some time but the time had now come. I said
Mr. Alessi had offered me a second mortgage over Beaumaris. I said that I
didn’t necessarily need to take the mortgage
immediately, but that I did
want to put a caveat on the property to secure my costs. I asked Mrs. Alessi if
she knew what a caveat
is; she replied yes, that she and Mr. Alessi had done
this before. I asked Mrs. Alessi if she was happy with this. She said
[Paragraph 134 of exhibit LP24.]
Mr. Moses said that he had a further telephone discussion with
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi on 4 February 2002 about the caveat to secure
that on the same date he sent to them, for signature and return, an agreement to
grant a charge over the property at Beaumaris
and an associated acknowledgement.
He said that the Alessis did not return the documents. [Copies of the covering
letter, the agreement
and the acknowledgement appear at pages 395 to 400 of the
court book.]
It was put to Mr. Moses in cross-examination that the
documents that he claimed to have sent to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi on 4 February
2002 all were prepared after that date, to which Mr. Moses replied
“Absolutely incorrect.”
Mr. Arcaini
present at a meeting with Mr. Moses and Mr. Alessi early in February 2002. I am
satisfied that it was the meeting on 3 February
2002, referred to in the last
paragraph. Mr. Arcaini gave the following evidence:
“At one of the meetings which I attended in early February 2002 at the
the rapidly increasing and
high level of his fees and outgoings and his need to get security for
payment.” [Paragraph 61
of exhibit LP35.]
“I recall that a telephone call was made to Mrs. Alessi during the course
of this meeting at Moses’ request, because
Mr. Alessi offered that Mr.
Moses could take a second mortgage over the house at Beaumaris. Mrs. Alessi
agreed with this and asked
Mr. Moses to prepare the necessary documents.”
[Paragraph 62 of exhibit LP35.]
denied that he agreed to give
security to Mr. Moses early in February 2002. He gave the following
“I have no record of being present at the home-office of Mr. Moses on 3
and 4 February, however I may well have been. There
was no discussion at or
discussion of the kind alleged
by him occurred, nor did he ring and speak to my
wife at that time. He did not provide me at that time, with documentation for a
charge to secure his costs.” [Paragraph 124 of exhibit A1.]
Mr. Alessi was cross-examined at length about the alleged
discussions and the documents said to have been sent to him on 4 February
but he continued to deny that there was any such discussion and continued to
deny that he received the documents allegedly
sent by Mr.
[11.30] If the terms of engagement were varied on 3 or 4 February
2002 by an agreement to grant a charge, Mr. Moses was obliged by
Legal Practice Act 1996
to notify Mr. & Mrs. Alessi (not
necessarily in writing) of the changes caused by the agreement to the
information contained
statement dated 30 July 2001. There is
no evidence that Mr. Moses notified Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to that
Variation of the terms of engagement on 11 April
[11.31] The terms of engagement were
further varied on or
over Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi’s home at Beaumaris.
gave the following
“The Alessis had agreed in February 2002 to give me second mortgage
security over their house in Beaumaris in respect of my
costs. They gave me
that security in April 2002, by executing:
(a) a reprint of the costs agreement that I had originally handed to Mr. Alessi
on 30 July 2001;
(b) a reprint of the agreement to grant a charge over the Beaumaris property,
and its associated acknowledgement, both of which I
originally sent to the
Alessis on 4 February 2002;
(c) an agreement to mortgage the Beaumaris property, and an associated
acknowledgement; and
(d) a mortgage in respect of the Beaumaris property.” [Paragraph 190 of
exhibit LP24.]
[11.32] The documents were signed by
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi on or about 10 April 2002 [paragraphs 197 & 198 of
exhibit LP24].
The documents were dated by Mr. Moses, but with different
The reprint of the costs agreement, and a
annexed to it, were dated 30 July 2001 [paragraphs 21 & 23 of exhibit
The reprint of the agreement to grant a charge, and its associated
acknowledgement, were dated 4 February 2002 [paragraph 21 of exhibit
The agreement to grant a mortgage, and the associated
acknowledgement, were dated 11 April 2002 [paragraph 22 of exhibit LP26]. The
mortgage also was dated 11 April 2002.
Mr. Moses accepted that he
backdated some of these documents. [Paragraph 2A(k) of the consolidated points
of defence and further
and better particulars.]
He gave the following
explanation for the backdating:
“Looking at the costs agreement now, I can see that it reads as if it were
signed on 30 July 2001. Similarly, looking at the
charge agreement and
acknowledgement, I can see that they read as if they were signed on 4 February
2002. When I dated those documents,
I did not turn my mind to the fact that
this is how they might read. I dated the documents as I did,
Alessi’s consent and at his instruction,
simply to record the date on
which we had in fact reached agreement on the terms set out in those
documents.” [Paragraph
25 of exhibit LP 26.] [Emphasis added by me
in italics.]
Mr. Moses was asked in cross-examination whether Mrs. Alessi had
given him an instruction to backdate documents, and he replied in
[11.33] None of the documents draws a distinction between the
date of signing of the document and the date upon which the document
operation. However, the footers to each of the signed documents indicate that
all of them were prepared on 10 April 2002.
The respective footers read as
Costs agreement w401272CostsAgree100402 [Court book 31].
statement w411272S86Information100402 [Court book 34].
Charge agreement w411272Agreement(2)100402 [Court book 401]
Mortgage agreement w411272Agreement100402 [Court book
[11.34] The signed costs agreement [court book
31] is identical to the costs agreement [court book 29] allegedly delivered by
Moses to Mr. Alessi on 30 July 2001 (save for the footer and the fact that
it is executed by both parties and dated).
[court book 34] attached to the signed costs agreement is identical to the
statement [court book
27] allegedly delivered by Mr. Moses to Mr.
Alessi on 30 July 2001 (save for the footer).
According to Mr. Moses, the
signed costs agreement and the
statement attached to it were first
handed to Mr. Alessi on
10 April 2002 [paragraphs 197 & 198 of exhibit
LP24]. Being identical
to the documents allegedly delivered by Mr. Moses to Mr.
Alessi on 30 July 2001, they did not incorporate any of the variations in
terms of engagement that were agreed to between 30
July 2001 and 10 April
[11.35] The documents being identical, the “significant
points” to which I referred when dealing with the costs agreement
statement allegedly delivered to Mr. Alessi on 30 July 2001 apply
equally to the signed costs agreement, and the
statement attached to
it, which were first handed to Mr. Alessi on 10 April 2002.
[11.36] The
statement attached to the signed costs agreement did not inform Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi that Mr. Moses required
security, in the form
of a mortgage
over their house, for costs disbursements and agents’ fees incurred or to
be incurred by
Mr. Moses on behalf
of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi. The agreement to
grant a mortgage that was handed to Mr. Alessi at the same time did
that security
was required, although it was not signed by Mr. Moses before it
was handed to Mr. Alessi.
[11.37] The
statement attached to
the signed costs agreement, being identical to the previous statement, repeated
“It is not reasonably
practicable to estimate the total legal costs
which you will incur in respect of this matter”,
and did not contain any
of total legal costs, despite the fact that a large amount of work had
been performed between 30
July 2001 and 10 April 2002, and
despite the fact that
on 25 March 2002 (according to Mr. Moses) the third tax invoice for $806,604
been rendered by Mr. Moses
to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi.
[11.38] None of the
documents signed by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi on 10 April 2002 set out a principal
sum, a common occurrence, but
an occurrence that meant that Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi could not ascertain from the documents the amount of money about to be
by a mortgage over their home. Of course, according to Mr. Moses he had
rendered the third tax invoice for $806,604 to Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi on 25 March
2002, but the evidence of Mr. Alessi was that he did not receive the invoice
until 19 April 2002. On 12
April 2002 the agreement to grant a charge was
stamped as a mortgage, and the agreement to grant a mortgage and the mortgage
were stamped as collateral security, to secure an amount of
[11.39] The acknowledgement to the agreement to grant a
mortgage, signed by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, contains the following paragraph:
“Before we executed the Mortgage and before we executed any of the
agreements which are collectively referred to in the Mortgage
costs agreement” the Mortgagee recommended to us that we each seek
independent legal advice and we were given
the opportunity of seeking such
It was put to Mr. Moses in cross-examination that he suggested
to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi that they get legal advice, and that they
did not want
to do so, to which he replied “Absolutely
[11.40] Mr. Moses also was asked in cross-examination
whether he informed Mr. & Mrs. Alessi that the mortgage would protect their
property from other creditors, which he answered in the
gave the following evidence, most of
which differs from the evidence of Mr. Moses:
“On 10 April 2002, I went to the home office of Darren Moses .....
When I met him that afternoon, he said, in words to the effect,
you and your wife to provide me with a mortgage security over your home at 455
Beach Road, Beaumaris for the legal work
I have been performing and for security
for future work.”
..... He handed me a large brown envelope
containing a number of legal documents and said
“have these signed by
you and your wife and return to me.”
[Paragraphs 149 & 150 of
exhibit A1.]
“Further, at no time had he ever told me of what his legal costs were or
what he had paid for any out of pocket expenses, or
how much credit I still had
in relation to the $400,000 advance I had allowed with the land.”
[Paragraph 151 of exhibit
Mr. Alessi proceeded to give evidence about a telephone
discussion with Mr. Moses on 11 April 2002:
“In the course of that discussion ..... he said, in words to the effect,
that the mortgage was more to protect the interests
of Filippa and myself from
other potential creditors who may want to sue us as a result of not being
satisfied with the settlements
reached with creditors.” [Paragraph 154
of exhibit A1.]
In cross-examination Mr. Alessi said that he informed Mr. Moses
that, if the purpose of the mortgage was protection against potential
Mrs. Alessi wanted to grant a mortgage to her sister Ms Briguglio or to Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi’s Italian solicitor
Mr. Giuffrida, who they trusted,
rather than to Mr. Moses.
Mr. Alessi also gave evidence, not necessarily
in relation to the telephone discussion:
“Moses did not say anything to me regarding the amount of the mortgage or
the amount for which the agreements related. It
was just stated to be for his
costs. At that time I had no idea of costs charged or chargeable by Moses and I
had not received any
account from him, since an account received in the month of
July 2001, for about $5,500 which was paid.” [Paragraph 164
He then explained how he came to ascertain the amount claimed by
Mr. Moses as costs, and thus secured by the mortgage:
“On about 19 April, Moses gave me stamped and completed copies of the
various documents which we had signed earlier that month.
The documents given to me by Mr. Moses on or about 19 April included a letter
dated 25 March 2002 and a Tax Invoice for an amount
of $806,000. ..... I noted
that the mortgage and other documents had been stamped on the basis of an
advance of $800,000.
I had not received the letter or Tax Invoice prior to 19 April 2002. ..... The
amount was well in excess of any costs I would have
expected to be charged and
was, I believe, provided to support the mortgage and protect us from creditors.
Mr. Moses never asked
me for payment of this amount, nor for any interest
arising under the mortgages, until after his services were terminated in March
[Paragraphs 165, 167 & 168 of exhibit A1.]
[11.42] Mr. Alessi denied in cross examination that he received
the third tax invoice dated 25 March 2002 on that date.
Mr. Alessi also
denied that he received a letter addressed to him by Mr. Caines and dated 10
April 2002 [court book 638], that purports
to enclose a copy of a letter written
by Mr. Caines to the first mortgagee on the same date [court book 639] in which
sought the consent of the first mortgagee to the second mortgage to
Mr. Moses, and in which Mr. Caines confirmed to the first mortgagee
the lender is Mr. Darren Moses and the value of the loan is $800,000, to be
secured by way of second mortgage over the
abovementioned property [the property
at Beaumaris]”.
Mr. Alessi said that he returned the signed
documents to Mr. Moses on 11 April 2002. He denied that Mr. Moses dated the
in his presence. He also denied that Mr. Moses explained to him that
documents that had been reproduced would be backdated to the
dates upon which
they had first been handed to him.
In substance, Mr. Alessi continued to
maintain that, when he and Mrs. Alessi signed the mortgage documents, he did not
know the amount
of the legal costs then sought by Mr. Moses.
[11.43] Mr.
Caines gave evidence about the delivery of a tax invoice to Mr. Alessi:
“I was present when Mr. Moses delivered a tax invoice in March 2002. It
was at a meeting at the offices of B & LA. .....
Mr. Alessi, Mr. Moses and
I went into Mr. Moses’ office and Mr. Moses gave his bill to Mr. Alessi.
I remember that, because
Mr. Moses’s bill included an account of mine for
[Paragraph 41 of exhibit LP40.]
Mr. Caines acknowledged in cross-examination that the third tax
invoice issued by Mr. Moses [court book 631] did not refer to his
However, the third tax invoice does include a lump sum of $128,640 for
disbursements, preceded by a short description of
the disbursements that
includes the words “fees paid to legal, accounting and financial services
also gave evidence about his
letter of 10 April 2002 to the first mortgagee, in order to explain his
reference to a loan by Mr. Moses:
“When I wrote this, I knew that Mr. Moses was not proposing to make a loan
of $800,000. I had in mind $800,000 as the amount
of Mr. Moses’
outstanding legal costs, which the mortgage was to secure. But I did not think
it prudent, from Alessis’
perspective, for me to intimate to the Howard
Group [representing the first mortgagee] that Mr. Alessi could not pay his legal
Therefore I characterised it as a loan.” [Paragraph 2 of exhibit
Termination of the engagement:
[11.45] There does
not appear to have been any further variation, or possible variation, of the
terms of engagement until March 2003
when the services of Mr. Moses were
terminated. Mr. Moses gave evidence that his services were terminated in a
facsimile received
by him from Mr. & Mrs. Alessi on 20 March 2003 [paragraph
209 of exhibit LP24].
Findings as to the terms of
engagement:
I make the following findings in relation to the
terms of engagement:
The events of early July
[11.46] I find that Mr. Alessi engaged Mr. Moses early in July
2001 to represent the interests of F & T Industries Pty Ltd (and
Mr. Alessi’s own interests in F & T Industries Pty Ltd) in relation to
the receivership, and particularly in respect
of any sale of the business by the
receiver in order to recover the monies owed by F & T Industries Pty Ltd to
Exelerate Funding
Pty Ltd. It is implicit in this finding that Mr. Moses was
not engaged early in July 2001 for any other purpose.
The events of
late July 2001:
[11.47] I find that:
(a) Mr. Moses and Mr. Alessi agreed orally on 30 July 2001 that the work to be
performed by Mr. Moses would be extended to include
many matters seen to arise
out of the receivership;
(b) Mr. Moses and Mr. Alessi agreed orally on 30 July 2001 that Mr. Moses would
charge $325 per hour for his services;
(c) uplift factors might have been mentioned by Mr. Moses to Mr. Alessi on 30
July 2001, but not in any detail. Any mention of uplift
factors was at best
equivocal, and Mr. Alessi did not enter into an oral agreement to pay an uplift
(d) Mr. Moses and Mr. Alessi agreed orally on 30 July 2001 that Mr. Moses would
render lump sum bills at agreed intervals;
(e) a telephone call was made to Mrs. Alessi on 30 July 2001, but the complexity
of the matters discussed on 30 July 2001 was such
that Mrs. Alessi could not
have properly understood the matters discussed with her or made an informed
decision about any of those
matters during the course of the telephone call;
(f) Mr. Moses did hand to Mr. Alessi on 30 July 2001 a covering letter, a
statement signed by Mr. Moses, and an unsigned
costs agreement.
Variation of the terms of engagement on about 30 August 2001:
[11.48] I found in the section of these reasons headed
REPAYMENT OF EXELERATE FUNDING PTY LTD, INCLUDING THE SALE OF KEYS ROAD BY BRIGA
PTY LTD TO TYREE PTY LTD
that Mr. Moses did not agree with Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi to allocate
from the proceeds of sale of Keys Road
towards past or future legal costs incurred, or to be incurred, by Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi.
Variation of the terms of engagement on 1 December
[11.49] I find that:
(a) Mr. Moses did tell Mr. Alessi, prior to rendering his second tax invoice
dated 7 December 2001, that he would seek payment of
some of his costs from the
receiver/manager;
(b) Mr. Alessi did not direct Mr. Moses to render an estimated account to the
receiver/manager, calculated at $325 per hour with
no uplifts, on the basis that
a final account including uplifts subsequently would be rendered to Mr.
(c) although the second tax invoice was addressed to Mr. Alessi in his capacity
as a director of Briga Pty Ltd, it was not received
by Mr. Alessi.
Variation of the terms of engagement on 3 & 4 February 2002:
[11.50] I find that:
(a) Mr. Moses informed Mr. Alessi on 3 February 2002 that he required security
for his costs, and Mr. Alessi agreed to provide security
by way of a second
mortgage over the home of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi at Beaumaris;
(b) Mr. Moses explained to Mr. Alessi that he required only a charge at that
stage, to support the lodging of a caveat over the property;
(c) a telephone call was made to Mrs. Alessi on 3 February 2002. She was
informed that Mr. Moses sought a charge over her home to
support a caveat, and
she replied in substance that she had no objection to the granting of a charge
because caveats had been lodged
over the property in the past;
(d) on 4 February 2002 Mr. Moses sent a covering letter, an agreement to grant
a charge and an associated acknowledgement to Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi for
signature and return.
Variation of the terms of engagement on 11 April 2002:
[11.51] I find that:
(a) on or about 11 April 2002 Mr. & Mrs. Alessi provided security to Mr.
Moses for his costs by signing what was in substance
a reprint of the costs
agreement that had been handed to Mr. Alessi on 30 July 2001, what was in
substance a reprint of the agreement
to grant a charge and its associated
acknowledgement that had been sent to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi on 4 February 2002,
an agreement
to mortgage the Beaumaris property and an associated
acknowledgement, and a mortgage of the Beaumaris property;
(b) Mr. Alessi did not know the amount secured by the mortgage when he signed
it. The third tax invoice dated 25 March 2002 for
$806,604 was not received by
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi until 19 April 2002;
(c) Mr. Moses did not tell Mr. & Mrs. Alessi that the mortgage was to
protect their home from the claims of creditors other than
(d) Mr. Moses suggested to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi that they obtain legal advice
before signing the mortgage, but they did not do so;
(e) some of the documents provided by way of security were backdated by Mr.
Moses, but not with the consent or at the instruction
of Mr. Alessi.
Conclusions as to the terms of engagement:
I conclude that the terms of engagement were set out
in the documents signed by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi on or about 11 April
[11.53] The documents setting out the terms of engagement
internal inconsistencies
(i) Mr. Moses was to charge an hourly rate of $325
(section 86
statement) but
$325 per hour plus GST (costs agreement);
(ii) costs were to be charged in six minute units
(section 86
statement), a term
that did not appear in the costs agreement;
(iii) additional charges could be made for secretarial and administrative work
(section 86
statement), a term that did not appear
in the costs agreement;
(iv) Mr. Moses was obliged to notify Mr. & Mrs. Alessi of any costs that
would significantly increase
(section 86
statement),
a term that did not appear
in the costs agreement;
(v) it was possible for fees to be reduced or increased
(section 86
statement),
a term that did not appear in the costs agreement;
(vi) Mr. Moses was entitled to charge for all disbursements “at the cost
amount” charged to him
(section 86
statement),
but entitled to charge only
for “all necessary and proper” disbursements (costs agreement);
(vii) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi were obliged to pay
anticipated
disbursements
upon request
(section 86
agreement), a term that did not appear in the costs
(viii) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi were obliged to pay bills rendered on a monthly
(section 86
statement), but obliged to pay interim
bills rendered at the
discretion of Mr. Moses (costs agreement).
[11.54] The
documents setting out the terms of engagement
omitted terms that had been the
subject matter of oral agreement
between Mr. Moses and Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi, namely:
(i) Mr. Alessi and Mr. Moses agreed orally on 30 July 2001 that Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi would be obliged to pay lump sum bills rendered
at agreed intervals, but
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi were obliged by the
statement to pay bills
rendered on a monthly basis
and obliged by the costs agreement to pay interim
bills rendered at the discretion
of Mr. Moses;
(ii) Mr. Moses informed Mr. Alessi that he would seek to recover some of his
costs from the receiver/manager, a term that did not
appear in the
statement or the costs agreement.
TAX INVOICES.
[12.01] This section
contains particulars of the tax invoices rendered by Mr.
Payment without tax invoice:
[12.02] In July 2001,
Mr. Moses asked Mr. Alessi to provide a cheque for $2500 payable to Boutique
Corporate Advisory for services
provided by an agent, Mr. Stout, who had been
engaged by Mr. Moses. On 13 July 2001 Mr. Alessi provided to Mr. Moses a cheque
on the account of Briga Pty Ltd for $2500. Mr. Alessi did not receive a
tax invoice.
Tax invoices rendered by Mr.
[12.03] Mr. Moses subsequently rendered four tax invoices
that were addressed to Mr. and Mrs. Alessi, or to Mr. Alessi
[12.04] The
first tax invoice
was dated 17 July 2001, and
was addressed to Mr. Alessi. It charged costs of $5,000 plus GST of $500,
making a total of $5,500.
The tax invoice related to services provided by Mr.
Moses from the date upon which he commenced to act for Mr. Alessi until 16 July
2001. On 30 July 2001 Mr. Alessi provided to Mr. Moses a cheque drawn on the
account of Briga Pty Ltd for $5,500.
[12.05] The
was dated 7 December 2001, and was addressed to Mr. Alessi in his
capacity as a director of Briga Pty Ltd. Mr. Alessi gave evidence
invoice was not received by him. The invoice related to “various matters
touching upon the interests held by Briga
Pty Ltd in F & T Industries Pty
Ltd”. The amount of the invoice was $281,028 calculated as follows:
Costs 234,000
Disbursements 21,480
GST on costs and disbursements
The costs were claimed on a time cost basis for services
provided between July and December 2001. The invoice did not show how the
figure of $21,480 claimed for disbursements had been calculated.
invoice must have come to the attention of Mr. Lockwood, the receiver/manager of
F & T Industries Pty Ltd appointed pursuant
to a debenture then held by
Briga Pty Ltd, because it is common ground that Mr. Lockwood paid $150,000 in
respect of the invoice,
by the following instalments:
20 December 2001 50,000
11 January 2002 50,000
25 January 2002
[12.06] The
third tax invoice
was addressed to Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi. It was dated 25 March 2002, but Mr. & Mrs. Alessi maintain
that it was not received
by them until 19 April 2002. The costs charged, not
including GST or disbursements, were $741,000. The costs were claimed on a
cost basis for services provided from 30 July 2001 to 25 March 2002.
amount claimed for disbursements, not including GST, was $128,640. The tax
invoice did not show how that figure was calculated.
The tax invoice took
into account payments totalling $150,000. It is common ground that the $150,000
was paid by Mr. Lockwood, and
that it is the same $150,000 that was paid by Mr.
Lockwood in response to the second tax invoice.
The total amount of the
third tax invoice therefore was $806,604 calculated as follows:
Costs 741,000
Disbursements 128,640
GST on costs and disbursements
Less paid by receiver/manager
[12.07] The third tax
invoice relates to services provided to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi between July 2001
and 25 March 2002 “both
in your personal capacities and in your capacities
as directors and/or shareholders of ..... Briga Pty Ltd”. Consequently,
the third tax invoice appears to include charges for all of the work that had
been the subject matter of the second tax invoice.
This is consistent with the
credit given in the third tax invoice for the $150,000 paid by Mr. Lockwood in
response to the second
tax invoice.
[12.08] The
was addressed to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and dated 18 June 2003, and
therefore rendered after Mr. & Mrs. Alessi lodged their application
cancel the costs agreement. A covering letter from Mr. Moses described the
invoice as “our final Tax Invoice”. The
costs charged, not including
GST or disbursements, were $565,000. The costs were claimed on a time cost
basis for services provided
from 26 March 2002 to 19 March 2003.
amount claimed for disbursements, not including GST, was $65,280. The tax
invoice did not show how that figure was calculated.
The tax invoice also
sought reimbursement of fees paid to agents. The amount sought for
agents’ fees, which included GST, was
$497,385. The agents were described
as “Kingdon Lawyers, Business & Legal Advisory (Mr John Caines) and
Deewood Nominees
Pty Ltd (Mr David Wood)”. Neither the amount paid to
each of these agents nor the services provided by them were
The total amount of the fourth tax invoice therefore was
$1,190,693 calculated as follows:
Costs 565,000
Disbursements 65,280
GST on costs and disbursements 63,028
Agents’ fees
[12.09] All four tax
invoices describe in general terms the work performed by Mr. Moses. It is
apparent from the general description
of the work performed that most of the
work related to the operations of companies in the F&T Group, even if the
cost of the
work was properly charged to Mr. & Mrs.
Itemised bills of costs:
[12.10] Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi sought
itemised bills of costs
from Mr. Moses in relation to the
third and fourth tax invoices, but they were not provided. On 19 September 2003
I made an interim
order that required Mr. Moses to provide itemised bills of
costs by 21 November 2004. On 12 December 2003 I extended the date for
compliance to 23 January 2004.
Mr. Moses filed and served itemised bills
of costs in relation to the third and fourth tax invoices on 3 February 2004.
In relation
to each item of work he set out the date of each attendance, the
location in the case of meetings, the nature of the attendance (meeting,
telephone, letter, perusal), the persons involved, and the number of time units
applicable to each attendance. The bills of costs
are of limited use because
they do not set out particulars of the work performed during each attendance,
thus making it virtually
impossible to determine issues of the kind that
commonly arise in disputes about costs, such as whether the work was necessary,
it was a duplication of other work, and whether the work should have
been performed in a shorter period of time than the time claimed.
However, Mr.
Moses sought to overcome that deficiency by also providing on 3 February 2004
running sheets setting out details of
the work that he had
[12.11] At the end of each itemised bill of costs, Mr. Moses
set out calculations showing how he arrived at the amounts claimed as
the tax invoices. He commenced with the total number of time units (six
minutes) of work performed, multiplied by the unit
charge set out in the costs
agreement ($32.50 per unit), and then added:
25% increase
in the unit charge for all units of work performed
on a weekday which exceeded eighty units of work on that day;
secondly, a
50% increase
in the unit charge for all units of work
performed on a weekend or public holiday; and
thirdly, an
“agreed uplift factor” of 20%
on all unit
charges, as raised where applicable by the 25% and 50%
to arrive at the amount charged for costs in both itemised bills
of costs. Mr. & Mrs. Alessi contend that they did not agree
to the 25% or
50% increases, and did not agree to pay the “agreed uplift
On 20 May 2004, and thus during the course of this
hearing, Mr. Moses sent a letter to the solicitor for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi in
waived all charges in respect of his time in excess of $325 per hour
[exhibit LP23].
Claims by Mr. Moses for
disbursements:
[12.12] Mr. Moses also set out, at the end of each
bill of costs, brief particulars of the
disbursements
claimed in the tax
invoices. The disbursements claimed in the third tax invoice included
agents’ fees paid to Kingdon Lawyers
and Business & Legal Advisory, to
which were added GST on those fees. In this respect, agents’ fees were
treated differently
in the third tax invoice to the way in which they were
treated in the fourth tax invoice. In the fourth tax invoice, agents’
fees were not treated as disbursements but claimed separately and inclusive of
[12.13] As I have mentioned, the third tax invoice claimed
disbursements of $128,640. The bill of costs in relation to the third
invoice refers to disbursements of $148,640, but then gives credit for $20,000
paid by the receiver/manager on 19 February 2002
for disbursements.
Consequently, the payment of $20,000 does not require any adjustment to the
total of $806,604 claimed in the
third tax invoice.
[12.14] Similarly,
although in relation to costs rather than disbursements, the fourth tax invoice
claimed costs of $565,000. The
bill of costs in relation to the fourth tax
invoice refers to costs of $648,064, but then gives credit for $83,064 paid by
the receiver/manager
by the following instalments:
22 July 2002 24,860
2 September 2002 28,253
23 September 2002 17,451
13 November 2002
Consequently, the payment of $83,064 does not require any
adjustment to the total of $1,190,693 claimed in the fourth tax
Claim by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to an offset of
[12.15] Mr. & Mrs. Alessi maintain in the present
proceedings that Briga Pty Ltd (a member of the F&T Group) sold a property
to Tyree Pty Ltd (a company associated with Mr. Moses) for $2.2 million. Mr.
Moses maintains that the price was $1.8 million, which
is the amount actually
paid by Tyree Pty Ltd. However, Mr. & Mrs. Alessi contend that the
difference of
between these figures was the subject matter of an
agreement between themselves and Mr. Moses, whereby Mr. Moses was to apply the
$400,000 towards his legal costs rather than have Tyree Pty Ltd pay the
additional $400,000 to Briga Pty Ltd. Mr. Moses denies any
Non-payment of third and fourth tax
[12.16] Putting aside the dispute as to whether the sale
by Briga Pty Ltd to Tyree Pty Ltd involved the application of $400,000 towards
legal costs,
the third tax invoice for $806,604 and the fourth tax invoice
for $1,190,693 remain unpaid
Payments by the
receiver/manager:
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi allege that the
receiver/manager also paid the following amounts to Mr. Moses for
disbursements
7 August 2002 8,286.87
9 August 2002 8,286.87
15 August 2002 8,286.87
16 August 2002 7,560.00
9 September 2002 19,503.96
11 September 2002 8,749.12
27 September 2002 3,969.00
4 October 2002 7,536.90
10 October 2002 5,950.00
13 November 2002
[12.18] The three payments of $8286.87 are easily explained.
On 22 July 2002, Mr. Moses rendered a tax invoice directly to Mr. Lockwood
seeking reimbursement of disbursements totaling $24,860, inclusive of GST. The
invoice related to legal proceedings commenced in
Italy by Jcoplastic Spa and
Triulzi Engineering Sri against F & T Industries Pty Ltd, and to proceedings
brought in the Supreme
Court of Victoria by Mr. Lockwood to raise jurisdictional
issues in the same matter. The invoice does not set out how the figure
$24,860 was calculated but, in full satisfaction of the invoice, Mr. Moses
received three instalments of $8286.87 from Mr. Lockwood
on the dates set out in
It is possible that the $24,860 received by Mr. Moses from Mr.
Lockwood is the same $24,860 recorded in the bill of costs for the
invoice as having been received by Mr. Moses from Mr. Lockwood on 22 July 2002.
On the other hand, the dates of receipt
recorded in the list and the date of
receipt recorded in the bill of costs are a few weeks apart, and it may be
purely coincidental
that the payments both total $24,860.
[12.19] Credit
is not given in any of the tax invoices or bills of costs mentioned in this
section for any of the other amounts set
out in the list, save that the last
payment of $12,500 on 13 November 2002 probably is that same payment of $12,500
on 13 November
2002 for which credit was given in the bill of costs for the
fourth tax invoice. None of the other amounts in the list appear to
accord with
the amount of a disbursement charged to Mr. & Mrs.
[12.20] In sub-paragraphs 2.2 (f) & (g) of their
consolidated points of claim and further and better particulars, under the
Undisclosed payments of legal fees
”, Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi alleged that Mr. Moses had not accounted for payments made by Mr.
Lockwood for costs and disbursements
subsequently charged to them. The
allegation was relied upon to support the third ground of the present
application, namely that
Mr. Moses is guilty of misconduct and/or unsatisfactory
conduct by receiving payment of tax invoices from the receiver/manager without
the knowledge of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi. However, in their final submission in
these proceedings, Mr. & Mrs. Alessi stated that
they did not press that
part of their claim. In those circumstances I will not give further
consideration to the other amounts in
Findings as to tax
[12.21] In the section of these reasons headed
TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT
I found that:
(a) the second tax invoice dated 7 December 2001, although addressed to Mr.
Alessi in his capacity as a director of Briga Pty Ltd,
was not received by Mr.
(b) the third tax invoice dated 25 March 2002 was not received by Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi until 19 April 2002;
(c) Mr. Alessi did not enter into
an oral agreement to pay an uplift factor.
[12.22] In the section of
these reasons headed
THE REPAYMENT OF EXELERATE FUNDING PTY LTD, INCLUDING
THE SALE OF KEYS ROAD BY BRIGA PTY LTD TO TYREE PTY LTD
I found that Mr.
Moses did not agree with Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to allocate $400,000 from the
proceeds of sale of Keys Road towards
past or future legal costs incurred, or to
be incurred, by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi.
SECTION 13:
THE REPAYMENT OF EXELERATE FUNDING PTY LTD, INCLUDING THE SALE OF
KEYS ROAD BY BRIGA PTY LTD TO TYREE PTY
Introduction:
mentioned elsewhere, Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd held a
assets of F & T Industries Pty Ltd, and pursuant to the debenture Exelerate
Funding Pty Ltd appointed Mr. David Lockwood
receiver/manager
T Industries Pty Ltd on 25 June 2001.
[13.02] I found in the section of these reasons headed
TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT
Mr. Alessi engaged Mr. Moses
early in July
2001 to represent the interests of F & T Industries Pty Ltd (and no doubt
Mr. Alessi’s own interests in F
& T Industries Pty Ltd) in relation to
the receivership, and particularly in respect of any sale of its business by the
in order to recover monies owed by F & T Industries Pty Ltd to
Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd.
Preliminary negotiations to repay Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd:
1 August 2001
Ponte Earle Harrick, the
solicitor for Mr. Lockwood, wrote a letter to Mr. Moses that included the
following sentence:
“We advise that unless a suitable proposal is received at our office by
10.00 a.m. August 3, 2001 for the payment of the debt
owing to Exelerate then
the Receiver and Manager will take immediate steps to place an advertisement in
the Financial Review on Tuesday
August 7, 2001 calling for expressions of
interest for the purchase of the business of F & T Industries Pty.
Ltd.” [Court
book page 36.]
3 August 2001
Mr. Caines wrote a letter to Ponte Earle
Harrick, the relevant parts of which were as follows:
“I am an accountant and represent Mr. Frank Alessi and interests
associated with him.
Mr. Alessi and his interests now offer to purchase the secured debt of Exelerate
Funding Pty Ltd for an amount equal to the debt
outstanding at settlement which
is proposed to be on or before 3 November 2001. I understand that the debt is
currently in the order
of A$2.0 million.
I am aware that Mr. Alessi and his solicitor will be meeting with you and the
Receiver, Mr. David Lockwood, today to discuss the
basis of this payout.”
[Court book page 48.]
gave evidence about the
“I attended the meeting on 3 August with Mr. Moses, and there met with Mr.
Lockwood and his solicitor Mr. Earle. At that discussion
I advised Lockwood and
Earle that I believed there would be sufficient money from the sale of 79
Cochranes Road, which was then on
the market, and from receipts of pre
receivership debtor collections to pay out the Exelerate debt in instalment
payments. I don’t
recall any other details of that discussion but Mr.
Moses arranged to provide a written submission of our proposals and to meet
with Mr. Lockwood on the following Monday, 6 August.” [Paragraph 50
of exhibit A1.]
6 August 2001
Mr. Moses wrote a letter to Mr.
Lockwood that included the following proposal:
“We refer to the meeting held at your offices on 3 August 2001 .....
At the conclusion of that meeting, we indicated that we would provide by today a
written outline of settlement terms, to enable the
debt owing to Exelerate to be
paid out in full, together with all costs and expenses of the receivership to
date, thereby enabling
a termination of the receivership and an assignment of
the Exelerate charges.
We are now instructed to put forward the following terms of settlement for your
consideration which we believe you will find acceptable
from the viewpoint of
both structure and timing; viz:
1. The Exelerate debt, which we understand approximates $2M, will be discharged
by the Alessi interests through an initial payment
of $1M within 21 days of your
acceptance of these terms, with the balance outstanding to be paid within a
further 45 days from the
date of payment of that initial amount.” [Court
book page 50.]
[13.05] Mr. Alessi gave evidence that he did
not attend the
meeting arranged with Mr. Lockwood for 6 August 2001
[paragraph 52 of exhibit A1.] However, Mr. Moses gave evidence that he was
informed by Mr. Lockwood at the meeting of previous promises
and undertakings
given by Mr. Alessi to either Mr. Lockwood or Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd, and
that he responded by stating that he
was unaware of any prior undertakings. Mr.
Moses continued his evidence by saying that he also ascertained at the meeting,
for the first time, that F & T Industries Pty Ltd had a sales tax
dispute with the Australian Taxation Office in which sales
tax and penalties of
proposal by F & T Industries
Pty Ltd by saying that 21 days was too long to
pay $1M to Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd. [Paragraphs 70 & 71 of exhibit
[13.06] By a facsimile dated
7 August 2001
, Mr. David
Purcell then of Walker Insolvency Lawyers responded to the settlement proposal
put forward by Mr. Moses the previous day.
The relevant parts of the facsimile
were as follows:
“I act for Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd.
Mr. Lockwood, the receiver/manager appointed by my client, has forwarded to me
your letter dated 6 August 2001 containing a proposal
from the Alessi interests
to pay out my client’s debt and take an assignment of its securities.
There is a history to my client’s dealing with Mr. Alessi. On a number of
occasions Mr. Alessi has given assurances, verbal
and in writing, that my
client’s debt would be repaid in full. None of those assurances were met
and accordingly my client
has no interest in receiving further proposals which
involve delayed settlements and promises to pay at some future time.
My instructions are to reject your proposal and to indicate that the receiver
intends to advertise F & T’s business for
immediate sale on 14 August
2001. Accordingly, the Alessi interests need to understand that time is
essential if they have a genuine
intention to buy my client’s debt.”
[Court book pages 54 & 55.]
Mr. Alessi gave evidence that he had no recollection of
receiving a letter dated 7 August 2001, addressed to himself and his wife,
Mr. Moses maintains was sent to them by facsimile. The letter purported to
attach a copy of the facsimile received from Mr.
Purcell rejecting the offer.
The letter also expressed the disappointment of Mr. Moses at having learned that
he had not been fully
instructed by the Alessis, and suggested that it might not
be in the best interests of the Alessis to regain control of F & T
Industries Pty Ltd with a view to the continued operation of its business.
[Court book pages 52-53, and paragraph 55 & 56 of
[13.07] However, Mr. Alessi was aware of the need to pay out
Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd within a short period of time. He gave evidence
“On or about
8 August 2001
, I was told by Mr. Moses that we had to
reach an agreement to pay out Exelerate and that my wife and I were required to
meeting to be held on the next day at the office of Ponte Earle
Harrick, the solicitors for Mr. Lockwood, to discuss an agreement.
He said that
representatives of Exelerate would also be present and that the purpose of the
meeting was to reach and sign agreements
with Exelerate about the proposals for
pay out of the Exelerate debt. He asked that my wife and I attend at his city
office just
after 1pm in order to go to the meeting which had been arranged for
2pm, and that we bring company seals for executing agreements.”
[Paragraph 58 of exhibit A1.]
[13.08] The evidence of Mr. Moses to this point shows that
there were several more meetings between Mr. Moses and Mr. Alessi at which
instructions were given, and that there were many other circumstances that
needed to be taken into account [paragraphs 46 to 73 of
exhibit LP 24].
However, what I have extracted from the evidence is sufficient to show the
general trend of the negotiations to
pay out Exelerate Funding Pty
Possible sale of the business by
receiver/manager:
[13.09] The evidence of Mr. Moses shows that he
regularly raised with Mr. Alessi the possibility that Mr. Lockwood be allowed to
sell the business. The response of Mr. Alessi invariably was that he did not
want the business to be sold. [Paragraphs 46, 56,
58, 63, 66, 70 & 72 of
exhibit LP 24.] This was confirmed in general terms by the evidence of Mr.
“The Receiver continually repeated that Exelerate as his appointor and
registered debenture holder, was now demanding that
unless there was immediate
repayment of the full $2M owing to them, the Receiver was to sell the business
and assets of F&T.
Mr. Alessi and Mrs. Alessi were devastated and were
literally in tears during and after each of these meetings. Mr. Moses advised
them to again consider the alternative of a sale of F&T in order to try to
achieve the outcome which he had suggested to them
in July 2001 when he had
first met them. They were not prepared to consider any proposal which would
mean that F&T would be
sold.” [Paragraph 22 of exhibit LP 40.]
The agreement reached on 9 August
[13.10] Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, and Mr. Moses, attended the
arranged for
9 August 2001
evidence about the meeting:
“Generally, the Exelerate representatives tried to have us agree to making
repayments of debt in less time than Mr. Moses was
proposing on our behalf. It
was explained by Mr. Moses that we were expecting to be able to use the proceeds
of sale of the property
owned by F&T at 70 Cochranes Road and the proceeds
of the pre receivership debtor collections and would need to pay by instalments
over a period of two or three months.
Eventually, agreement was reached and documents prepared. The documents were
then presented for signing and my wife and I signed,
and I believe that others
signed the documents as well, although Mr. Lockwood was not present, nor was the
Exelerate manager.”
[Paragraph 62 of exhibit A1.]
I left the meeting with the understanding from the explanations given to me, and
the documents I had signed, that Briga has agreed
to purchase, and repay the
debt of F&T to Exelerate, and had agreed to mortgage land owned by it as a
guarantee that it would
make the payments on the agreed dates. It had also, as
I believed, been agreed that, when it was repaid the debt, Exelerate would
assign the debt and securities to Briga. In addition, I understood that my wife
and I had agreed to guarantee Briga’s obligations
agreements.” [Paragraph 63 of exhibit A1.]
[13.11] The evidence of
was consistent with
the evidence of Mr. Alessi. However, Mr. Moses also stated that Mr. Lockwood
agreed, in the event that all monies
owing to Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd were
paid by Briga Pty Ltd and the debenture was assigned to Briga Pty Ltd, Mr.
Lockwood would
continue as the receiver/manager of F & T Industries Pty Ltd.
[Paragraphs 74 & 75 of exhibit LP24.]
[13.12] The
reached on 9 August 2001
is in evidence [court book pages 70 to 83.]. The
agreement provided that Briga Pty Ltd would purchase the debenture from
Funding Pty Ltd, with the purchase price being payable by the
instalments
“(a) 21 days from the date of this Agreement, $1,000,000.00;
(b) 45 days from the date of this Agreement, $250,000.00;
(c) 55 days from the date of this Agreement, $250,000.00;
(d) on the Completion Date [66 days after the date of the Agreement or as the
parties may agree], the balance of the Purchase Price.”
[Court book page
The sale of Keys Road by Briga Pty Ltd to Tyree Pty
[13.13] It soon became apparent that Briga Pty Ltd would not be
able to pay the first instalment by the due date.
evidence that:
“At or about the end of August, and I believe in the week commencing
Monday 27 August 2001, I recall a discussion with Mr.
Moses at his house at 66
Glyndon Road. Arcaini was present at this meeting. Mr. Moses told me that
there had been less money collected
from debtors that had been expected and
there was going to be a default under the 9 August agreement which had required
$1 million by 30 August. By that stage a buyer had been found for
the property at 79 Cochranes Road but the contract had not been
signed, and was
not signed until 30 August, because of a delay in the purchaser confirming
finance. As a result, the proceeds of
that sale would not be available to meet
the first instalment payment.
Mr. Moses and I discussed the means by which F&T might raise the monies
needed to prevent that default. During the course of
these discussions, Mr.
Moses said, in words to the effect “To speed the process I will buy from
you the Briga land in Keys
Road”. He was referring to the land at 74-80
Keys Road in relation to which the mortgage had been given to Exelerate as part
of the 9 August agreements, and which had been the subject of the valuation by
Mr. Connolly in July.
That land was already mortgaged to the Howard Mortgage Group to secure an amount
of $1 million loaned by it to F&T, but it was
worth, in my opinion,
somewhere between $2.5 million and $2.7 million. In addition to the valuation I
had received in July, I had
also received an offer to purchase the land, in
Mr. Moses said that he believed that the land value was $2.2 million. I said
“I had an offer back in March for $2.5 million,
but because we need the
money I will let it go at $2.2 million on the basis that I could buy it back at
that price”. He said,
“$400,000 will go towards past legal costs
and the future costs”. He said “F&T will lease back the
but did not discuss any terms or conditions of lease back. He
said, “I will arrange the contract and documentation and as
everything is all ready, I will let you know when you can sign. You don’t
have to worry, I will arrange another solicitor
for you because I am your
lawyer”. He also said, “If we do this, we will be able to pay
Lockwood quicker. I will talk
to Lockwood and Exelerate, you do not have to
worry about it”. I agreed with this proposal.” [Paragraphs 70 to
exhibit A1.]
[13.14] The version of these events given by
was quite different:
“Briga could not meet the 30 August deadline for its first payment (of $1
million) under the 9 August agreement with Exelerate.
But the Alessis stated
they were determined to complete the purchase of Exelerate’s debt and
securities. Saying they were
unable to raise capital by any other means, they
pressed me to buy one of the Group’s properties, an old warehouse at Keys
Road, Moorabbin. Mr. Alessi stipulated a price of $1.8 million, conditional on
urgent settlement. I said no. They pressed me until
at length I agreed.”
[Paragraph 80 of exhibit LP24.]
Mr. Moses denied in cross-examination that he agreed with Mr.
Alessi that the purchase price would be $2.2 M, and he denied that he
allow Mr. Alessi to buy back the property for $2.2 M. Mr. Moses said that the
figure of $2.2 M was mentioned at a barbeque
at the home of Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi after the property had been purchased by Tyree Pty Ltd. Mr. Moses said
that Mr. Alessi stated
that he would buy the property back when money came
through from the Italians [the F&T Group had been involved in negotiations
with an Italian company with a view to a joint venture agreement], and Mr. Moses
responded by saying that the purchase of the property
had cost him $2.2 M.
[13.15] The version of events given by
Mr. Arcaini
more detailed:
“Mr. Alessi asked Mr. Moses, in my presence, if he could provide finance
through his legal firm. Mr. Moses said that he did
not have a mortgage
practice. I told Mr. & Mrs. Alessi that I had done everything I could but
that nobody would lend money in
such a short time. Mr. Alessi then asked Mr.
Moses if he would buy Keys Road from Briga Pty Ltd (the Alessi family company
owned it) at a price of $1.8 M. Mr. Moses said no, but Mr. Alessi
persisted and said that he knew from Mr. Cilmi [an insurance consultant
arranged insurance for the F&T Group] that Mr. Moses was a wealthy
man.” [Paragraph 38 of exhibit LP35.]
“Mr. Caines argued against this with Mr. Moses because he said that Keys
Road was virtually a derelict property fit only for
storage or redevelopment and
that there was not even a lease in force with the receiver. Mr. Alessi begged
Mr. Moses not to forsake
him. Mr. Moses said he needed time to reflect on all
of this and the meeting ended.” [Paragraph 40 of exhibit LP35.]
“The following afternoon, we all met again in Mr. Moses’ office,
including Mrs. Alessi. Mr. Moses and Mr. Alessi said
that in the morning they
had spoken with the receiver to seek another extension but to no purpose. Mr.
Moses said that he had spoken
with his accountant about his superannuation fund
trustee, Tyree Pty Ltd, buying Keys Road from Briga Pty Ltd at the figure of
M offered by Mr. Alessi. Mr. Moses said that the company could do it. I
remember Mr. Alessi saying “Thank God, you’re
saving us. We would
have nowhere to turn without you”. Mr. Alessi also thanked Mr.
Moses.” [Paragraph 42 of exhibit
“There was nothing whatever said, either at this meeting or at any other
time in my presence, about the price being set at
$1.8 M on the basis that Mr.
Moses would give the Alessis any form of credit against his fees (for $400,000
or any other amount).”
[Paragraph 44 of exhibit
Mr. Arcaini denied in cross examination that, after
the sale had taken place, he confirmed with Mr. & Mrs. Alessi that Mr. Moses
had purchased Keys Road for $2.2 M but paid only $1.8 M. Mr. Arcaini said that
he did tell Mr. & Mrs. Alessi that the purchase
of the property would have
cost Mr. Moses $2.1 M with stamp duty and costs.
Mr. Arcaini also said in
cross examination that he was involved in a discussion with Mr. Alessi and Mr.
Moses at a barbecue in October
2001 during which Mr. Moses informed Mr. Alessi
that Mr. Alessi could re-purchase the property at any time for the amount that
property had cost Mr. Moses.
had denied in
cross-examination that there was any such discussion at the
gave evidence about his attempts to
arrange additional finance for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to enable F & T
Industries Pty Ltd to
pay out Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd, but no additional
finance was arranged (paragraphs 24 to 28 of exhibit LP40.] Mr. Caines then
“Mr. Alessi and Mrs. Alessi literally begged Mr. Moses to find a purchaser
for 74-80 Keys Road, being the only property having
enough equity in it to meet
the part payment of some $700,000 which Exelerate had demanded in order to stave
off the sale of F&T.
Mr. Alessi said to Mr. Moses that Mr. Arcaini had told
him that Mr. Moses might lend the funds himself. When put to Mr. Moses,
that he could not and would not finance the property. Mr. Alessi then asked Mr.
Moses if he would buy it. I was present
throughout this extremely emotional and
traumatic meeting and not once did any suggestion or advice come from Mr. Moses
to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, for Briga Pty Ltd to sell the property to
Mr. Moses.” [Paragraph 29 of exhibit LP40.]
“When Mr. Moses finally agreed to the pleas of the Alessis, he said that
the purchaser would be Tyree Pty Ltd, which he explained
to Mr. Alessi and Mrs.
Alessi was the trustee of the superannuation fund for he and his wife and of
which they were the directors
and shareholders. In my presence, Mr. Alessi and
Mrs. Alessi said that the purchase price should be enough to make the part
to Exelerate of around $700,000. As the first mortgage of around $1 M
and associated costs would also have to be paid out, the figure
Alessi and Mrs. Alessi to Mr. Moses for purchase of the property was $1.8
M.” [Paragraph 30 of exhibit LP40.]
“There was nothing said then, or at any time in my presence, about the
value of the property in fact being $2.2 M; or about
the Alessis getting a
$400,000 credit towards fees from Mr. Moses in view of the purchase price; or
kind of option to buy the property back.”
[Paragraph 33 of exhibit LP40.]
[13.18] Evidence relevant to the amount of the purchase price
also was given by
Mr. David Purcell
, the solicitor for Exelerate Funding
Pty Ltd. File notes made by Mr. Purcell were placed into evidence [as
attachments to exhibit
A11.]. They relate to telephone discussions between Mr.
Purcell and Mr. Moses during the period 29 August 2001 to 6 September 2001.
regard most of the file notes as “jottings”, meaning that it is
difficult for someone who did not participate in the
conversations to interpret
them with confidence, although often they would assist a person who participated
in the conversations
to recall the conversations in detail. Mr. Purcell gave
the following evidence about the file notes:
“Notwithstanding reference to my file note, I do not have any independent
recall of the content of the conversation had with
Mr. Moses on 29 August.
However, it was and remains my practice, to endeavour to take accurate notes of
such conversations. I believe
the contents to be correct.
Hereafter, I refer to similar file notes of conversations held between me and
Mr. Moses in this period. I do not have any independent
recall of the contents
of the various conversations which are recorded.” [Page 3 of exhibit
It is significant that the first file note of 29 August 2001
related to a discussion that took place one day before the date upon
& T Industries Pty Ltd was obliged to pay $1 M to Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd
under the agreement of 9 August 2001. The
file note commences with the note
“They are in strife in terms of settlement tomorrow”.
file notes appear to record various proposals put forward by Mr. Moses in an
attempt to satisfy Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd. The
proposals appear to change
slightly from one discussion to the next, with consideration being given to the
proceeds of the sale of
a property in Cochranes Road, negotiations for the sale
of Keys Road, the collection of book debts, the sale and lease back of plant
equipment, the refreshing of invoices more than 90 days old with a view to
factoring the invoices, and legal action in respect
of missing stock.
most relevant note, so far as the sale price of Keys Road is concerned, is a
note of a discussion on 30 August 2001:
“Purchaser of Briga has put up –
deal that isn’t great –
1.1 million to Howards – Penalties etc
1.75k > P’s deal 2.25
but all that comes in immediately is 1.1 + 650k + 50k costs” [Howards
represented the first mortgagee.]
There are four other
entries in the file notes which appear to me to be proposals that Exelerate
Funding Pty Ltd will receive $650,000
from the sale of Keys Road, and two
entries which appear to me to be proposals that Exelerate will receive
There in one entry which indicates that Keys Road was valued at
$2.5 M, and one entry which states that “Darren Moses himself
the $2.25 million”. Mr. Purcell gave oral evidence that he understood Mr.
Moses to be acting for a purchaser at
$2.25 M, with a deposit of $700,000 to be
paid immediately to Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd. He accepted in cross-examination
giving that evidence he relied solely upon a report that he had made to
Exelerate in a letter of 5 September 2001. The letter is
in evidence [document
marked DP10 to exhibit A11.]. The relevant part of the letter reads as
“Mr. Moses discussed at length his proposal for a purchaser that he
represents to buy the property for $2.25 million with the
purchaser paying a
deposit of $700,000.00 by no later than Tuesday 11 September 2001. This deposit
would be capable of being released
to Exelerate on that day so that
Briga’s first payment of $1 million to Exelerate would be met.”
The contract for the sale of Keys Road subsequently was entered
into on 13 September 2001 [court book page 269).
[13.19] Most of the
evidence in chief of
Mr. John Hondrakis
is set out in a statement filed
with the Tribunal on 13 February 2004 and in a supplementary statement filed on
1 April 2004, both
of which were adopted by Mr. Hondrakis when he gave evidence
on 6 July 2004 [exhibits LP37 & LP38 respectively]. Neither the
nor the supplementary statement makes reference to the sale price of Keys
The statement does refer to a meeting held at the home of Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi in February 2003. Mr. Hondrakis took notes at the
[paragraphs 29 to 34 of exhibit LP37], and the notes are annexed to the
statement. They do not refer to the sale price of
Neither the
statements nor the notes refer to the making of a tape recording of the meeting.
However on 21 April 2004, after the case
put by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi had
closed, a supplementary affidavit of discovery was sworn by Mr. Alessi and filed
with the Tribunal.
It disclosed for the first time that a record had been made
of a meeting held on 4 March 2003, and that the record was stored on
. In fact, a tape recording of the meeting had been made and
transferred to the CD Roms. [The two CD Roms are in evidence as exhibit
I gave a ruling on 6 July 2004 that allowed the CD Roms to be
played to Mr. Hondrakis during cross-examination. In that ruling I
that any possible lack of evidence as to the provenance of the CD Roms would be
taken into account by me when assessing
the weight of the evidence to be given
by Mr. Hondrakis. Initially, Mr. Hondrakis was reluctant to accept that the
meeting recorded
in his notes and the meeting recorded on the CD Roms was the
same meeting, stating that he thought that there was more than one meeting
the home of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi. He accepted eventually that the meeting
recorded on the CD Roms took place on 4 March 2003,
and that his notes also
related to the meeting on 4 March 2003 “if everyone there says the meeting
was on 4 March 2003”.
Mr. Hondrakis accepted in cross-examination
that he was present at the meeting when Mr. Moses said the following words as
on the CD Roms:
“ ..... when Keys Road was purchased, I always said to you, Frank, we
went through this the other night ..... that we would
put a value of 2.2 on it
and for 2.2 you would take it back any time you wanted it.” [Transcript
of CD Roms in evidence as
exhibit A31, page 20 lines 17 to 19.]
Mr. Hondrakis also accepted in cross-examination that Mr. Moses
was “being set up” at the meeting, and that his notes
incomplete record of the meeting.
[13.20] There is in evidence a
valuation of Keys Road
prepared as at 6 July 2001 by Mr. Kevin Connolly,
a certified practising valuer. The valuation recites that it was prepared for
& T Industries Pty Ltd under instructions from Mr. Alessi.
of reference for the valuation are given as “To ascertain the current
market value for sale purposes ..... subject
to F & T Industries Pty Ltd
or associated company leasing the property ...” The valuation was based
upon an assumption
that the property would be leased for five years at a rental
of $300,000 plus GST for the first year, with annual increases of 4%.
arrived at by Mr. Connolly was $2.7 M. However, Mr. Connolly qualified his
valuation by saying that any environmental
concerns such as site contamination,
and the cost of compliance with environmental laws, had not been taken into
account. [The valuation
appears at pages 6 to 17 of the court
The engagement of Mr. Isakow to act for Briga Pty
[13.21] It is common ground that Briga Pty Ltd was a company
controlled by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi. It also is common ground that
Ltd was a company owned and controlled by Mr. Moses and his wife [paragraph 83
of exhibit LP24.].
Mr. Moses was well aware that he should not act for
Briga Pty Ltd in relation to the sale. Furthermore, instead of acting for his
own company Tyree Pty Ltd, he engaged Arnold Bloch Leibler to act for Tyree Pty
[13.22] A solicitor named Daniel Isakow acted for Briga Pty Ltd in
relation to its sale to Tyree Pty Ltd. The manner in which Mr.
engaged, and the degree to which he acted independently of Mr. Moses, are
contentious issues in these proceedings.
[13.23] There is in evidence a
letter dated 31 August 2001
from Tyree Pty Ltd to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi.
I will set out the paragraph in the letter that deals with the need for Mr.
Alessi to obtain independent legal advice, but it is important to
record that Mr. Alessi denied having received the letter [paragraph
exhibit A1]. The letter reads:
“As already explained to you by Mr. Moses, it will be necessary for you to
appoint totally independent legal advisors of your
own choice to act on behalf
of Briga Pty Ltd. Mr. Moses confirms that he cannot agree to your request that
he act as a solicitor
on behalf of Briga Pty Ltd in this transaction, due to
what could be perceived to be a conflict of interest on his part. This
arises from his control, ownership and financial interest in the
purchaser company and from his having acted and continuing to act
on behalf of
the vendor company in legal matters generally. In fact, Mr. Moses will not act
in this transaction of behalf of Tyree
Pty Ltd, which proposes to retain the
independent legal firm of Arnold Bloch Leibler.” [Court book page
gave the following evidence about the
engagement of Mr. Isakow:
”I think it was in early September that Mr. Moses rang me and said that my
wife and I had to sign documents for the sale of
Keys Road and for me to be at
the office of Mr. Isakow at 200 Queen Street, Melbourne at 4pm on the next day.
I have seen a statutory
declaration made by me in connection with the sale,
which has a date inserted of 12 September 2001. I believe this to be the date
on which my wife and I attended and the contract, transfer and Chattel Statutory
Declaration were executed on behalf of Briga.”
[Paragraph 85 of exhibit
gave evidence. He said that he was
telephoned by Mr. Alessi on 31 August 2001. He produced a file note of the
discussion that took
place, and gave evidence about the contents of the file
“Allowing for abbreviations, my file note
He asked me to act on his behalf and wife re: sale of property at Keys Road,
Moorabin. Purchaser Tyree Pty Ltd. Darren Moses company.
Darren Moses cannot
act for him. Address is 74-80 Keys Road. $1.8 million all in. Must settle up
ASAP to pay out F&T debt
in 21 days. Treat file as urgent. 10326 007.
Call on 9555 4800. Tyree’s solicitors are Arnold Bloch Leibler, Melbourne.
Also, leaseback to F&T. Receiver and Manager involved, Lockwood of Sims
Lockwood.” [Paragraph 11 of exhibit LP46.]
“There is a reference in the file note to “$1.8m all in”.
That is a reference to the purchase price. That meant,
inclusive of costs,
interest, GST, everything. The purchase price was never subsequently discussed
or revisited, as far as I can
recall. I was simply told what it was.”
[Paragraph 12 of exhibit LP46.]
“This file note of 31 August 2001 records the only instructions I received
from Mr. Alessi as to the purchase price agreed
for the transaction. Mr. Alessi
was the sole source of my instructions in relation to this file. I did not deal
with anyone else
for instructions.” [Paragraph 14 of exhibit LP46.]
was asked in cross-examination whether
he made sure that Mr. Isakow was informed of all the terms of the contract of
sale, and he
replied that he did not.
6 September
, Mr. Isakow wrote a detailed letter to Briga Pty Ltd setting out
particulars of the sale, including the price of “$1,800,000
inclusive of
any Goods and Services Tax that may be payable by the Vendor”.
gave the following evidence about the letter:
“The letter is marked for Hand Delivery. I telephoned Mr. Alessi on 6
September 2001 and told him that the letter was ready
for collection. I did so
because settlement was to take place within one week. Mr. Alessi had told me
that he was in the City every
day, and would collect the letter, which he
did.” [Paragraph 17 of exhibit LP46.]
said in cross-examination that he
did not collect the letter, and that he had not seen the letter before giving
evidence in these
proceedings.
[13.29] Copies of the main conveyancing
documents relating to the sale are in evidence:
Contract of sale [Court book pages 263 to 273.]
Transfer of land [Court book pages 258 and 259.]
Stamp duty declaration [Court book pages 254 to 256.]
Lease [Court book pages 279 to 320.]
The contract fixed
the price at 1.8 M, and provided for a lease back to Briga Pty Ltd. It did not
mention that, in addition to the
price, $400,000 was to be deducted from past
and future legal costs incurred or to be incurred with Mr. Moses. It also did
not mention
that Briga Pty Ltd was to have a right to re-purchase the
The lease was for three years, with a rental of $275,000 for
the first year. It required Briga Pty Ltd to pay a security deposit
rental and outgoings for three months [clause 3.5], and it required directors
and/or shareholders to provide guarantees
[clause 10.11].
[13.30] Mr.
Isakow wrote a letter to Briga Pty Ltd on
13 September 2001
informing it
settlement of the sale
to Tyree Pty Ltd had taken place that day
[court book page 257.]. I will set out the way in which the
proceeds of sale
of $1,808,999.93 were distributed
, according to the letter from Mr.
Repayment of first mortgage to Permanent Trustees Australia Ltd 1,010,932.92
Cost of solicitors for Permanent Trustees (KPMG Legal) 715.00
Reduction in amount owing to Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd 700,000.00
Costs of solicitor for Briga Pty Ltd (Mr. Isakow) 4,989.43
State Revenue Office 29,381.47
South East Water Ltd 1,257.00
City of Kingston 10,505.70
Business & Legal Advisory
1,808,999.93
The payment of $51,218.41 to Business & Legal
[13.31] The payment of $51,218.41 to Business & Legal
Advisory was treated as a contentious issue in these proceedings, although
is not apparent from the pleadings.
gave evidence about the
“I have no independent recollection of that payment or of receiving
instructions about it. However, as I have said, Mr. Alessi
was the sole source
of my instructions in relation to this file. The instructions for the payment
can only have come from him.”
[Paragraph 19 of exhibit LP46.]
Mr. Isakow said in cross-examination that he did not have a file
note recording an instruction from Mr. Alessi to pay $51,218.41 to
& Legal Advisory.
gave the following
“I had no prior notice of the intention to deduct this amount from the
sale proceeds. I rang Darren Moses and asked for an
explanation. He said,
“this is for the refinance on the plant and machinery”. I said,
“we are trying to raise
money to repay Exelerate. Why did you pay John
Caines?” He did not give me an explanation which satisfied me or which I
now recall. [Paragraph 86 of exhibit A1.]
cross-examination, Mr. Alessi said that he telephoned Mr. Moses rather than Mr.
Isakow because Mr. Moses had organised the sale.
Mr. Alessi said that he
questioned Mr. Moses because he believed that nothing was owing to Business
& Legal Advisory, but Mr.
Moses responded by saying “You have to
[13.33] On 13 September 2001 (the day of settlement),
Business & Legal Advisory had issued a
tax invoice addressed to Briga Pty
Ltd for $51,218.41
[court book page 260]. The invoice commenced in the
following way:
“RE: REFINANCING AND ASSET SALES
To our costs relating to refinancing and sale of company assets in order to
assist in meeting payment due to Exelerate Funding Pty
Ltd under Agreement dated
9 August 2001: ...”
The invoice was signed by Mr. Caines, who conducted his business
as a financial advisor under the name Business & Legal Advisory.
gave the following evidence about his
“When I had raised the question of my fees with Mr. Moses in the presence
of Mr. Alessi at a meeting held in early September
2001, I was asked by Mr.
Alessi to render my invoice to Briga Pty Ltd and to include a disbursement of
around $25,000 to cover fees
which he wanted me to pay to Mr. Arcaini for Mr.
Arcaini’s assistance to both Mr. Alessi and myself in the financing and
tasks which I had been undertaking. Mr. Alessi proposed that my
invoice would be paid from the surplus proceeds of 74-80 Keys Road.
my invoice ... and upon payment I paid out approximately $25,000 to Mr.
Arcaini with the full knowledge and consent
of Mr. Alessi and indeed at his
instruction.” [Paragraph 37 of exhibit LP40.]
Mr. Caines did not refer to Mr. Arcaini, or to the amount to be
paid to Mr. Arcaini, in his tax invoice for $51,218.41. In cross-examination
Mr. Caines said that Mr. Alessi gave him the figure of $51,218.41 and asked for
an account for that amount. In re-examination Mr.
Caines said that his invoice
was for $51,218.41 because that was “the only money that Mr. Alessi
gave the following evidence concerning the
“Prior to 12 January of this year [2004], I have not seen that document
and I did not authorize its payment by any one. [Paragraph
87 of exhibit
Mr. Arcaini rendered a tax invoice
addressed to
Mr. Caines and dated 6 September 2001 for $24,750 [court book page 249]. It
commenced in the following way:
“To My fees for acting as your agent in relation to F & T Industries
Pty Ltd (receiver and manager appointed); ...”
[Court book page
Mr. Arcaini accepted in cross-examination that he never acted as
agent for Mr. Caines, but said that he was asked both by Mr. Alessi
Caines to render his account to Mr. Caines. He agreed that his tax invoice for
$24,750 was paid out of the $51,218.41 received
by Business & Legal
Variations to the agreement of 9 August
[13.35] F & T Industries Pty Ltd defaulted in payment of
the instalment of $1 M that fell due on 30 August 2001 under the agreement
9 August 2001.
The agreement had been
on 6 September
to accommodate the sale by Briga Pty Ltd to Tyree Pty Ltd. The
variation agreement is in evidence [document marked DP13 to exhibit
substance of the variation was explained adequately by Mr. Moses:
“On the basis of the impending sale of Keys Road, the Alessis were able to
secure a variation of their 9 August agreement,
so that the payments were
rescheduled to:
(1) $1 million on 13 September 2001, with $700,000 of that coming direct from
the Keys Road settlement; and
(2) the balance on 14 October 2001.” [Paragraph 81 of exhibit LP24.]
The balance was not paid on 14 October 2001. What was called a
second variation agreement
” was entered into on
October 2001
. The second variation agreement extended the date for
repayment of all monies owing under the debenture to 2 November 2001. [Court
book pages 329 to 341.]
[13.36] Settlement with Exelerate Funding Pty
Ltd was arranged for
2 November 2001
attended the
settlement and gave evidence about his understanding of it:
“On the table was a large pile of documents. Mr. Moses said it was
necessary for everybody to sign the agreements to finalise
the arrangements with
Exelerate.” [Paragraph 109 of exhibit A1.]
“I was of the belief that the signing of these documents, and the payment
of money to Exelerate (subject to the outstanding
issue of the actual amount)
finally resolved all matters with Exelerate and Mr. Lockwood, in respect of the
receivership up to that
time. It was a great relief to me to have the Exelerate
debt repaid. I believed that Briga was then appointing Mr. Lockwood to
receiver manager under appointment by Briga, and the documents we were signing
was to give effect to an arrangement starting at
that time.” [Paragraph
111 of exhibit A1.]
It is likely that some aspect of the settlement remained
outstanding, as
gave evidence that “Briga’s
acquisition of Exelerate’s debt and securities was finally completed under
this variation
agreement in
December 2001
”. [Paragraph 82 of
exhibit LP24.]
Subsequent sale of Keys Road by Tyree Pty
[13.37] Tyree Pty Ltd sold the property in Keys Road in 2003.
gave evidence as to the
made on the sale:
“Therefore, taking account of transaction costs, Tyree received from RIA
[the purchaser], in May 2003, $194,000 more than it
paid to acquire Keys Road in
September 2001. That represents an increase of 10.18% over a 20-month period,
or an approximate return
of 6% per annum.” [Paragraph 13 of exhibit
Findings as to the repayment of Exelerate
Funding Pty Ltd, including the sale of Keys Road by Briga Pty Ltd to Tyree Pty
Preliminary negotiations to repay Exelerate Funding Pty
[13.38] I find that Mr. Alessi probably received the facsimile
of 7 August 2001 from Mr. Moses, and a copy of the facsimile of the
from Mr. Purcell to Mr. Moses in which Mr. Purcell, acting on behalf of
Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd, rejected the settlement
offer made by Mr. Moses.
Even if this finding is incorrect, Mr. Alessi was well aware at that time that F
& T Industries Pty
Ltd had yet to satisfy the demand by Exelerate Funding
Pty Ltd that all monies secured by the debenture be repaid.
sale of the business by receiver/manager:
[13.39] I find
(a) Mr. Moses regularly raised with Mr. Alessi the possibility that the
receiver/manager be allowed to sell the business in order
to satisfy the demand
made by Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd;
(b) the response of Mr. Alessi invariably was that he did not want the business
to be sold.
The agreement reached on 9 August 2001:
[13.40] I find that Mr. Alessi well understood that the effect
of the agreement reached on 9 August 2001 was that:
(i) Briga Pty Ltd would repay by instalments the monies owed to Exelerate
Funding Pty Ltd under the debenture;
(ii) Briga Pty Ltd would mortgage land owned by it as a form of guarantee that
it would pay the instalments;
(iii) Briga Pty Ltd would take an assignment of the debenture;
(iv) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi would guarantee the obligations of Briga Pty Ltd
under the agreement.
The sale of Keys Road by
Briga Pty Ltd to Tyree Pty Ltd:
[13.41] I find that:
(a) the negotiations that took place between Mr. Moses and Mr. Purcell mainly
comprised proposals, and possible proposals, for repayment
of the monies owing
to Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd. Different and conflicting amounts were put
forward by Mr. Moses during the negotiations
as to the value of Keys Road, the
sale price or anticipated sale price of Keys Road, and the amount that could be
paid to Exelerate
Funding Pty Ltd from the proceeds of sale. Mr. Purcell has no
recollection of the negotiations other than his “jottings”
letter of 5 September 2001 sent by him to Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd. The
“jottings” and the letter do not provide
reliable evidence as to the
actual sale price of Keys Road;
(b) the evidence of Mr. Hondrakis did not provide reliable evidence as to the
sale price of Keys Road;
(c) the qualifications made in general terms and contained in the valuation of
$2.7 M given by Mr. Connolly rendered the valuation
at best equivocal and at
worst meaningless. The valuation was of little assistance in establishing the
value of Keys Road at the
time of sale, and of no assistance in establishing the
sale price of Keys Road;
(d) Mr. Alessi offered to sell Keys Road to Mr. Moses for $1.8 M, and Mr. Moses
accepted the offer on behalf of his company Tyree
(e) the offer was made after Mr. Alessi had been unable to raise money from any
other source to enable Briga Pty Ltd to pay the instalment
of $1.0 M due to
Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd on 30 August 2001;
(f) the evidence given at this hearing did not establish that the value of Keys
Road at the time of sale was more than $1.8M;
(g) Mr. Moses did not agree with Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to allocate $400,000 from
the proceeds of sale of Keys Road towards past or
future legal costs incurred,
or to be incurred, by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi;
(h) Mr. Moses did not agree orally with Mr. Alessi that Mr. Alessi could buy
back Keys Road at any time for $2.2 M. However, there
was a discussion between
Mr. Moses and Mr. Alessi at a barbeque during which Mr. Moses made an offer to
Mr. Alessi, in substance,
that he would sell Keys Road back to Mr. Alessi for
the amount that Mr. Moses had expended upon the property. Even if that offer
was intended to create legal relations, and was not just “pub talk”,
the offer was not accepted;
(i) the tape recording subsequently made by Mr. Hondrakis established that on 4
March 2003 Mr. Moses offered to sell Keys Road back
to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi for
$2.2 M. The offer was not accepted;
(j) Mr. Alessi was most grateful that Mr. Moses had arranged for Tyree Pty Ltd
to purchase Keys Road, as it enabled Briga Pty Ltd
to use the proceeds of sale
to pay out Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd, and potentially gave Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
an opportunity to resume
full control of the business conducted by F & T
Industries Pty Ltd.
The engagement of Mr. Isakow to act for Briga Pty Ltd:
[13.42] I find that:
(a) Mr. Alessi probably received the letter of 31 August 2001 from Tyree Pty
Ltd, in which Mr. Moses informed Mr. Alessi of the need
for Mr. Alessi to obtain
independent legal advice. Even if this finding is incorrect, Mr. Alessi was
well aware of the fact that
Mr. Moses, as a director of Tyree Pty Ltd, had
conflicting interests, and well aware that independent legal advice should be
(b) Mr. Moses did not make arrangements for Mr. Isakow to act for Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi, in their capacity as directors of Briga
Pty Ltd, in relation to the
sale. However, Mr. Moses probably recommended Mr. Isakow to Mr. & Mrs.
(c) Mr. Alessi made arrangements with Mr. Isakow for Mr. Isakow to act for Briga
Pty Ltd, and all instructions given to Mr. Isakow
in relation to the sale came
from Mr. Alessi;
(d) Mr. Alessi probably collected the letter of 6 September 2001 from Mr. Isakow
to Briga Pty Ltd, which letter set out the sale
price of Keys Road as $1.8 M.
Mr. Alessi did not query the sale price with Mr. Isakow;
(e) when acting for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, Mr. Isakow acted independently of Mr.
The payment of $51,218.41 to Business & Legal Advisory:
[13.43] I find that:
(a) Mr. Alessi instructed Mr. Caines to render a tax invoice to Briga Pty Ltd
for $51,218.41 for fees owed to Mr. Caines and Mr.
(b) Mr. Alessi instructed Mr. Isakow to pay the tax invoice from the proceeds of
the sale of Keys Road.
Variation to the agreement of 9 August 2001:
[13.44] I find that:
(a) Mr. Alessi was well aware that $700,000 from the proceeds of sale of Keys
Road was to be paid to Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd as
partial consideration for
the assignment of its debenture to Briga Pty Ltd;
(b) Mr. Alessi was well aware that, upon the assignment of the debenture to
Briga Pty Ltd, Mr. Lockwood would continue to act as
the receiver/manager
appointed under the debenture.
Subsequent sale of Keys Road by Tyree Pty Ltd:
[13.45] I find that upon its resale of Keys Road, taking into
account transaction costs, Tyree Pty Ltd received $194,000 more that
acquire Keys Road.
SECTION 14 THE COSTS OF THE RECEIVERSHIP, INCLUDING THE LOAN FROM TYREE PTY
LTD TO BRIGA PTY
The continuation of
the receivership after the assignment of the debenture to Briga Pty
[14.01] As mentioned in the section of these reasons headed
THE REPAYMENT OF EXELERATE FUNDING PTY LTD, INCLUDING THE SALE OF KEYS ROAD
BY BRIGA PTY LTD TO TYREE PTY LTD
, Briga Pty Ltd (a member of the F&T
Group) paid out the debenture holder Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd. As part of that
transaction,
an assignment dated 1 November 2001 [court book pages 357 to 360]
assigned the debenture to Briga Pty Ltd in accordance with the
agreement of 9
August 2001 [court book pages 70 to 83].
Mr. Lockwood
continued as receiver/manager
of F & T Industries Pty Ltd after the
assignment. Neither the agreement of 9 August 2001 nor the assignment of 1
November 2001
contained a provision to that effect, but the evidence of Mr.
Alessi showed that he was aware that Mr. Lockwood would continue as
receiver/manager:
“In about the last week of October [2001], I had a discussion with Mr.
Moses .......
He then said that we are going to keep Lockwood longer and this will be better
for the creditors. I said, “I don’t think
we need to keep him. I
have been talking to the major creditors and they are prepared to support us. I
don’t understand why
we have to keep longer David Lockwood.” He
replied, “Frank, you have got no choice. You have to keep him. You can
get rid of him later on”. I said, words to the effect, “You know
how much these people are costing us”.
He said “I know but we have to keep him longer”. He did not say any
more and I didn’t press the issue further,
...” [Paragraph 106 of
exhibit A1.]
The evidence of Mr. Moses was slightly different:
“In late 2001, the Alessis decided that they wanted to have the Receiver
Manager stay on, as Briga’s Receiver Manager,
after they had acquired
Exelerate’s securities. In any event, however, there was no question of
the receiver being willing
to retire until he had been paid or had recovered his
fees for conducting the receivership and for his liabilities to trade
creditors.”
[Paragraph 145 of exhibit LP24.]
[14.03] The
costs incurred by the receiver/manager prior to
the assignment
also were not dealt with in the agreement or in the
assignment. Mr. Alessi gave evidence about the meeting on 2 November 2001 at
which documents relating to the assignment were signed:
“There was no reference at that meeting to Briga, or my wife and I as
guarantors, accepting any liability for the receiver’s
obligations
incurred whilst he operated as receiver manager under appointment by Exelerate;
nor had there been such a discussion
at any earlier time in which I was
involved. Mr. Moses did not then, nor had he earlier, said to me, anything to
the effect that
Mr. Lockwood had incurred liabilities while receiver manager,
which he had not paid during the course of business operations, nor
any liabilities he had incurred which were not paid out as part of the
settlement with Exelerate.” [Paragraph 110
of exhibit A1.]
“It was a great relief to me to have the Exelerate debt repaid. I
believed that Briga was then appointing Mr. Lockwood to
be receiver manager
under appointment by Briga, and the documents we were signing was to give effect
to an arrangement starting at
that time.” [Paragraph 111 of exhibit
The demand by the receiver/manager that Briga Pty Ltd
pay costs of the receivership:
following evidence:
“Several days before 21 March 2002, Darren Moses told me that Lockwood
wanted money to keep the business of F&T running.
Moses told me that if I
did not provide the money, Lockwood would close the business.
Lockwood said nothing directly to me about this requirement.” [Paragraph
134 of exhibit A1.]
This accorded with the evidence of
“In March 2002, the Receiver Manager abruptly demanded that Briga, as his
appointor, put up more money to allow him to continue
to operate F&T’s
business; failing which, he would close the business.” [Paragraph 146 of
exhibit LP24.]
No evidence was given which indicated to me that the demand was
made in writing.
The proposal that Tyree Pty Ltd lend money to Briga
Pty Ltd to pay costs of the receivership:
gave the following evidence about a proposal by Mr. Moses:
“Moses said to me that he could arrange for Tyree to provide to Briga an
advance of monies which would enable Briga to pay
Lockwood and pay out Questco.
His words were to the effect “Dave Lockwood wants more money to keep it
going .... I am prepared
to loan $800,000 and take a second mortgage on the
Again, I trusted Moses was correct in what he was saying and I agreed to take an
advance of $800,000 from his company, Tyree.”
[Paragraph 135 of exhibit
Questco Pty Ltd
was a finance company that had
lent money to companies in the F&T Group upon the security of second
mortgages over various factories
[Paragraph 134 of exhibit
[14.07] The evidence of
was rather different:
“Once again, the Alessis could not raise the necessary funds. They asked
me to get my company Tyree to lend Briga the money.
I said no. The Alessis
pleaded with me. At length, I agreed.” [Paragraph 147 of exhibit
[14.08] Mr. Moses also gave evidence that, at the time when
Tyree Pty Ltd agreed to make the loan:
“I knew very little about Briga’s financial position, or capacity to
repay. I knew that F&T owed Briga money, but
I knew nothing at all about
Briga’s liabilities. I never saw a set of accounts for Briga.”
[Paragraph 29(4) of exhibit
The arrangements for Briga Pty Ltd and Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
to be independently represented in relation to the loan:
mentioned previously, it is common ground that Briga Pty Ltd was a company
controlled by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and that
Tyree Pty Ltd was a company owned
and controlled by Mr. Moses and his wife [paragraph 83 of exhibit
gave the following evidence:
“Robert Kingdon of Kingdon Lawyers acted for Tyree, and drew the
transaction documents. I checked them. The Alessis took
independent advice on
the transaction from Mahoneys before executing the documents.” [Paragraph
148 of exhibit LP24.]
“I then told the Alessis that Kingdon Lawyers would act for Tyree, and I
confirmed that I would represent Briga, but strictly
on the condition that the
Alessis obtained an independent solicitor’s certificate in relation to the
transaction.” [Paragraph
166 of exhibit LP24.]
Mr. Rui de Lemos,
a legal practitioner employed
by Mahonys Solicitors, provided two such certificates [court book pages 558 to
562]. However, the
manner in which arrangements were made for Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi to be advised by Mr. de Lemos, and the limited nature of the briefing
given to Mr. de Lemos, are contentious issues in the present
proceedings.
gave the following evidence about
the arrangements:
“On or about 21
of March 2002 Darren Moses rang and said, in
words to the effect, “The security documents for the advance by Tyree are
I have checked them and they are in order. It will be necessary to have
another lawyer witness the signing of the documents and
I have arranged that for
you. Robert Kingdon will ring you to make a time to meet you outside the
lawyer’s office. He has
got the documents”. I said we would do
what he asked. A short time later Robert Kingdon rang me and arranged for my
and I to meet him outside an address in Collins Street, Melbourne on the
next day. Mr. Moses did not explain why it was necessary
to have another
solicitor witness the documents.” [Paragraph 136 of exhibit A1.]
also explained how the arrangements
came about:
“With Mr. Alessi, I made a speaker phone call to Mrs. Alessi. She told me
she did not trust any other solicitor, and that
she wanted me to handle the
transaction. In the end, I said that if I were to act for Briga, then that
could only be on the basis
that an independent solicitor would review the loan,
the guarantee and the other documents, and give the Alessis his independent
advice about the transaction. I recall that the Alessis said that they were not
happy about this, that it was unnecessary; but I
told them that I was not
prepared to compromise on this point. The Alessis conceded.” [Paragraph
165 of exhibit LP24.]
The execution of the loan documents in the presence of Mr. de
gave evidence about the
circumstances in which the loan documents were executed:
“The next day [22 March 2002] I went with my wife to the address Kingdon
had given me, in Collins Street. Sergio Arcaini met
us at this building. We
went into the ground floor office and sat in the waiting room. Mr. Kingdon
arrived half an hour or so after
we arrived. When he came he had a brief case
with him and he asked us to go with him to a coffee shop across Collins Street,
bit further to the west from where we were. We did so and there spoke
to Mr. Kingdon, and Sergio Arcaini. Arcaini did not say why
there.” [Paragraph 137 of exhibit A1.]
“Kingdon then pulled 3 big parcels of documents from his brief case while
we were having coffee and he said to me words to
the effect “these are the
documents. I have to take across to the lawyer for you and your wife to
sign”. He said words
to the effect “you don’t have to go
through these. Darren Moses has checked them and it is all in order”. He
said “what we will do now is I will go across and take the documents over
and you give it a quarter of an hour or so and then
you come across and ask for
the lawyer and they will introduce you”.” [Paragraph 138 of exhibit
“When we went across Arcaini came with us, but Kingdon did not come.
Arcaini went to the front counter where the receptionist
was located and asked
for the solicitor. We were directed to go up the lift and to an upper floor
where we were met by a solicitor
and taken to an office or meeting room. ....
The lawyer was young male lawyer. He spoke only in English. After he showed us
the room he said he would go and get the documents. He came back with the
parcels of documents that Kingdon had shown us in the
coffee lounge. It was a
substantial pile of documents. We then sat down with him in the room and he
said to us, that he was engaged
by our solicitor to arrange for the documents to
be signed. He asked me whether we had looked at the documents and whether we
them. I said that we had been in the coffee lounge over the road and
Robert Kingdon had taken the documents out and shown them to
us and said words
to the effect “you do not need to check these, they have been prepared by
Darren Moses and I trust my solicitor
that they are in order”.”
[Paragraph 139 of exhibit A1.]
“He asked me if we wanted to go through the documents, I said “well
my lawyer already check I believe what Robert Kingdon
told me I think we will
sign”.” [Paragraph 140 of exhibit A1.]
“Sergio Arcaini remained with us while we signed the documents at the
solicitor’s office. I do not know why Arcaini
was present. .... The
total time involved was about half an hour. After we had signed, the solicitor
kept the files. He did not
give any advice to me and my wife and he did not
give us any tax invoice for payment. He said he would return the documents to
Kingdon.” [Paragraph 146 of exhibit A1.]
[14.15] The running sheet compiled by
a telephone conference that took place shortly after the loan documents had been
“Telephone conference between DM and FA, FA & SA, who attended meeting
at Mahoneys today; confirming documents explained
fully, accepted and executed
then returned to RK - FA stated absolute waste of time - prior
documents/guarantees signed by them
over many years and never involved this
requirement;” [Paragraph 180 of exhibit LP24. DM = Mr. Moses. FA = Mr.
FA = Mrs. Alessi. SA = Mr. Arcaini. RK = Mr. Kingdon.]
Mr. Arcaini
was present when the loan documents
were signed. He gave the following evidence:
“ .... Mr. Alessi rang me and asked if I could meet him and Mrs. Alessi
at a solicitor’s office at 400 Collins Street
that same day and I asked
why. He said that because Tyree Pty Ltd was a company associated with Mr.
Moses, he had been told by Mr.
Moses that the loan documents had been prepared
by another solicitor acting on behalf of Tyree Pty Ltd, and that Mr. Moses had
that he and Mrs. Alessi must take the advice of an independent
solicitor before signing the loan documents.” [Paragraph 57
(When Mr. Alessi was cross-examined, he said that
there was no such discussion and that the attendance of Mr. Arcaini was arranged
by Mr. Moses.) Mr. Arcaini continued:
“We met with the solicitor. The solicitor conducted the session in
English. He read out and explained the loan documents,
the mortgages, company
minutes to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi. From time to time, he would ask me to confirm
that they had in fact understood
what he was saying, as the Alessis were
themselves telling him in English. On those occasions, I would repeat to them
the particular issue that the lawyer had been explaining and I would
ask them, in Italian, if they had understood what the lawyer
told them. On each
occasion, Mr. & Mrs. Alessi both replied to me (in English) that they
already understood what the lawyer
was saying. .... I did not act as an
interpreter during the session.” [Paragraph 59 of exhibit LP35.]
Mr. de Lemos
of Mahonys gave evidence about the
execution of the loan documents:
“In or about mid March 2002, I received a telephone call from a person who
identified himself to me as Robert Kingdon, a solicitor
who asked me to see his
clients Mr. & Mrs. Alessi for the purpose of giving a Solicitor’s
Certificate of due execution
of certain documents.” [Paragraph 2 of
exhibit LP44.]
“During the morning of the 21
of March 2002, 3 people came to
my office and were seen in ground floor settlement room. They introduced
themselves as Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi and Mr. Sergio Arcaini. Mr. Robert Kingdon
did not attend the meeting.” [Paragraph 4 of exhibit LP44.]
“I explained the general nature of the personal guarantees being given and
the consequences of a default by the borrower of
the principal loan obligation,
...” [Paragraph 5 of exhibit LP44.]
“The number of documents required to be executed was quite large. Mr.
Alessi said that he had spoken to his solicitor who
had assured him that he had
been through the documents and that they were in order to sign. He said he was
prepared to accept that
assurance and did not require the documents to be
explained by me. Mr. & Mrs. Alessi both acknowledged, in response to my
that they understood the effect of the documents and approved the
terms and conditions contained therein and the financial risks
involved in the
matter. In response to my request, they each acknowledged that they executed
the guarantee of their own free will,
voluntarily and without pressure from any
other person.” [Paragraph 6 of exhibit LP44.]
“I have no recollection now of any explanation being given to me as to why
the man Arcaini was present at the conference.
I have no recollection of him
participating at all in the proceedings that occurred. I am aware that he is
described as an interpreter
in the Solicitors Certificate, but there was no
translation, nor any apparent need for translation of the documents.”
9 of exhibit LP44.]
“At no stage was I told by either Mr. Kingdon or Mr. Alessi, or by any
person present at the meeting, of the existence of Mr.
Darren Moses or his
involvement in this matter.” [Paragraph 11 of exhibit LP44.]
Mr. de Lemos accepted during cross-examination that he would
have given different advice to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi if he had been informed
that Mr. Moses acted for Briga Pty Ltd and Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and was a
director of Tyree Pty Ltd, although he added that he was
briefed only to advise
as to the adequacy of the documents.
On the other hand, Mr. Alessi stated
in cross-examination that he informed Mr. de Lemos of the involvement of Mr.
Moses, although
he did not say that he informed Mr. de Lemos of the nature of
that involvement.
Details of the loan documents which are significant
in the present proceedings:
[14.18] The parties to the loan
documents included Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, Briga Pty Ltd and five other companies
in the F&T Group.
Stated simply, Briga Pty Ltd borrowed the money, Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi guaranteed repayment of the loan, and the five other companies
both guaranteed repayment of the loan and provided security by way of second
mortgages over properties owned by those companies.
[Copies of the relevant
documents appear at pages 531 to 601 of the court book.]
[14.19] I will
set out the way in which
the principal sum of $800,000 was
distributed
Repayment of second mortgage to Questco Pty Ltd 273,500.00
Costs of solicitors for Questco Pty Ltd 400.00
Costs of solicitors for first mortgagee Permanent
Trustees Australia
Costs of solicitor for Briga Pty Ltd (Mr. Moses) and solicitor for
Pty Ltd (Kingdon Lawyers) 14,631.90
Stamp duty 3,164.00
Registration fees 944.00
Bank cheques 67.50
Payment to receiver/manager of F & T Industries Pty Ltd
costs of receivership 400,000.00
Pre-payment of four months interest to Tyree Pty Ltd 42,668.00
Bond equivalent to six months interest withheld by Tyree Pty
[14.20] There is in evidence a
28 March 2002
from Mr. Moses to Mr. Alessi. The letter states
that settlement took place on 22 March 2002. It also sets out the manner in
the $800,000 was distributed, and it purports to enclose copies of almost
all of the loan documents. The letter is stamped “BY
However, Mr. Alessi gave the following evidence about the letter:
“I have never received this document from Mr. Moses, and was not aware of
its existence until after inspection of respondent’s
discovery documents
commencing on 12 January 2004. Until receiving a copy of this document, I did
not know how the funds advanced
were distributed. The document asserts that
copies of the transaction documents were provided to me as attachments to the
letter. I have never received copies of these documents from Mr.
Moses.” [Paragraph 148 of exhibit A1.]
[14.21] The
loan agreement
is dated 21 March 2002. It
provides that
interest for the first four months
of the loan is to be
deducted from the loan advance [clause 6.2(b) at page 567 of the court book].
It also provides for the withholding
from the loan advance of
interest “in the form of a bond
as additional security against any
default on the part of the Borrower to perform and observe its covenants and
obligations under
this Deed” [clause 7.1 at page 567 of the court
Mr. Alessi gave the following evidence about these
provisions:
“Mr. Moses never explained to me, and I was not aware, that $130,000 of
the advance was retained by Mr. Moses for legal costs
and for a “4 month
interest prepayment”. [Paragraph 145 of exhibit A1.]
This evidence clearly is incorrect, at least to some extent.
$130,000 was not retained by Mr. Moses for legal costs and the four
interest pre-payment. However, $121,301.90 was retained by Mr. Moses or his
company Tyree Pty Ltd for the legal costs of
Mr. Moses and Kingdon Lawyers, the
four months interest pre-payment and the six months interest bond.
two reasons for the interest deductions
. First, he said
“Briga paid Tyree 4 months’ interest in advance so that rental would
not need to come from cash flows of F&T during
its traditional off-peak
trading season.” [Paragraph 14 of exhibit LP25.]
“Compounding this uncertainty [difficulty paying interest under the
Questco second mortgage] was the fact that both Mr. Alessi
and Mr. Lockwood had
told me that F&T (and therefore Briga) would not be in a position to make
interest payments for the first
four months or so of the new loan, because
Winter was F&T’s slow season, and a period of worsened cashflow was
inevitable.”
[Paragraph 29(3) of exhibit LP 26.]
Moses gave as a second reason:
“The four-months’ interest prepayment, and the six months’
interest bond, were measures agreed so as to alleviate,
at least to some extent,
the uncommercial and unfavourable nature of the transaction from Tyree’s
perspective.” [Paragraph
30 of exhibit LP26.]
[14.22] There was no mention in the evidence of either Mr.
Arcaini or Mr. de Lemos as to whether Mr. & Mrs. Alessi were informed
interest deductions when they signed the loan documents on 21 March
[14.23] The loan agreement provided for payment of
interest at
16% per annum
or 20% per annum if not paid within seven days of falling due
[clause 6.1 at page 567 of the court book.]. Mr. Alessi gave evidence
“I was not advised by Moses that these were the interest rates applicable
to the transaction.” [Paragraph 145 of
exhibit A1.]
[14.24] There
is in evidence a
letter dated 8 March 2002
written by Tyree Pty Ltd to
Mr. Alessi, and signed by Mr. Moses in his capacity as a director of Tyree Pty
Ltd. The letter refers
to the interest prepayment and the interest bond, and
sets out the interest rates to be charged [court book pages 499 & 500].
letter purports to confirm the terms of the loan “as agreed at the meeting
held on 6 March 2002”. Mr. Alessi gave
evidence that he did not receive
the letter and that its contents are false [paragraph 133 of exhibit A1]. When
asked in cross-examination
whether he received the letter Mr. Alessi replied
“Definitely not”, but when asked a second time he replied that he
“no recollection of receiving” it.
The letter sought to
justify the interest prepayment and interest bond provisions:
“3. A four month interest prepayment approximating $40,000 will be
required to be paid to Tyree Pty Ltd by way of deduction
from the loan advance
at settlement, in order to carry F&T through the period of cash flow
shortfall which you and David Lockwood
agree will be to the end of June as per
his report to Briga Pty Ltd of 25 January 2002;
4. A six month interest bond approximating $65,000 will also be required to be
paid to Tyree Pty Ltd by way of deduction from the
loan advance at settlement,
given that F&T is in receivership; there are no formal leases in force over
the security properties;
and the Receiver and Manager has not agreed to accept
personal liability for the loan (hence his requirement for funds to come from
Briga Pty Ltd as one of his guarantors/indemnifiers under the November 2001
documents). If a default therefore occurs and/or the
first mortgagee exercises
its power of sale, the entire properties sales process could well take over six
months to finalise, during
which time Tyree Pty Ltd must be sure of its interest
being paid;”
The legal costs of Mahonys Solicitors, Kingdon Lawyers and
[14.25] On 21 March 2002
Mahonys Solicitors issued a
tax invoice for $165.00
addressed to Kingdon Lawyers [court book page 523].
Mr. de Lemos gave evidence that he rendered the invoice to Mr. Kingdon and that
it was paid by Mr. Moses [paragraphs 10 & 11 of exhibit
[14.26] On 21 March 2002
Kingdon Lawyers rendered a tax
invoice for $3,850.00
relating to “acting on behalf of Tyree Pty
Ltd” [court book pages 520 to 522]. The invoice was addressed as
“To: Mr Darren Moses
Tyree Pty Ltd
66 Glyndon Road,
CAMBERWELL VIC 3124
For payment by: Briga Pty Ltd ACN 065 455 227 (“Briga”)”
[14.27] On 22 March 2002
Mr. Moses rendered a tax invoice
for $14,631.90
to Briga Pty Ltd [court book pages 604 & 605]. The
invoice does not mention Kingdon Lawyers, or its invoice for $3,850.00, but
costs of Kingdon Lawyers were treated as part of an amount of $14,631.90
distributed at settlement as the costs of both Mr. Moses
and Kingdon
Mr. Alessi gave evidence that he did not see the invoice from
Mr. Moses prior to 12 January 2004, when it was produced for inspection
of the discovery process. [Paragraph 147 of exhibit A1.]
incurred by Tyree Pty Ltd:
[14.28] Mr. Moses gave the following
evidence of
“On 30 September 2003, the first mortgagee of the properties securing the
loan (Permanent Trustee Australia Limited), having
sold those properties,
distributed $624,150.10 to Tyree. Tyree’s shortfall on recovery of its
principal alone had been therefore
$175,819.90. As at 8 October 2003, when
Tyree made demand on the Alessis as guarantors, the total amount owing to Tyree,
of both principal, interest and costs was $243,028.72.”
[Paragraph 15 of exhibit LP25. There is an arithmetical error of
calculations.]
Mr. Moses acknowledged in cross-examination that there are
proceedings in the Supreme Court in which Tyree Pty Ltd is seeking to recover
the amount of the loss from Mr. & Mrs. Alessi pursuant to the guarantee
given by them.
Findings as to the costs of the receivership,
including the loan from Tyree Pty Ltd to Briga Pty Ltd:
demand by the receiver/manager that Briga Pty Ltd pay costs of the
receivership:
[14.29] I find that the receiver/manager demanded
money from Briga Pty Ltd, the assignee from his appointor, to allow him to
to operate the business of F & T Industries Pty Ltd.
The proposal that Tyree Pty Ltd lend money to Briga Pty Ltd
to pay costs of the receivership:
[14.30] I find that:
(a) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi were unable to raise the monies demanded by the
receiver/manager;
(b) Tyree Pty Ltd lent $800,000 to Briga Pty Ltd to enable Briga Pty Ltd to pay
an amount of money to the receiver/manager in partial
satisfaction of the
(c) Tyree Pty Ltd was a company controlled by Mr. Moses and his wife, and Mr.
Alessi was aware at all relevant times that such was
(d) Briga Pty Ltd was a company controlled by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, and Mr.
Moses was aware at all relevant times that such was
The arrangements for Briga Pty Ltd and Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
to be independently represented in relation to the loan:
[14.31] I find that:
(a) Mr. Moses acted for Briga Pty Ltd in relation to the loan;
(b) when so acting for Briga Pty Ltd, Mr. Moses continued to act generally for
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi in matters arising out of the
receivership.
In particular, Mr. Moses advised Mr. Alessi prior to the execution of the loan
documents, which included a guarantee by Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi of repayment of
the loan by Briga Pty Ltd, that the loan documents were in order.
Mr. Alessi relied upon the advice of Mr. Moses that the loan documents were in
order and not upon any advice given by Mr. de Lemos,
whose participation was
regarded by Mr. Alessi as a waste of time;
(c) Mr. Kingdon acted for Tyree Pty Ltd in relation to the loan;
(d) Mr. Kingdon made arrangements for Mr. de Lemos of Mahonys to give advice to
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi as to the effect of the loan
documents, to attend to the
execution of the loan documents, and to sign a certificate as to execution of
the documents.
The execution of the loan documents in the presence of Mr. de Lemos:
[14.32] I find that:
(a) Mr. de Lemos offered to explain the loan documents to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi,
and did so to a limited degree, but Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi declined to have the
loan documents fully explained to them on the basis that the documents already
had been explained to
them by their solicitor;
(b) Mr. de Lemos incorrectly believed that Mr. Kingdon was the solicitor for Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi;
(c) Mr. de Lemos was not aware that Mr. Moses was the solicitor for the borrower
Briga Pty Ltd, and not aware that Mr. Moses controlled
the lender Tyree Pty Ltd,
when he explained the guarantee to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi;
(d) Mr. de Lemos would have insisted upon giving a full explanation of the loan
documents to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, before signing
his certificates, if he had
known that Mr. Moses was the solicitor for the borrower Briga Pty Ltd and
controlled the lender Tyree
Details of the loan documents which are significant in the present
proceedings:
[14.33] I find that:
(a) for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to have a proper understanding of the effect of
the loan documents, bearing in mind that Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi were to guarantee
the performance of the obligations of the borrower Briga Pty Ltd under the loan
documents, it was necessary
for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to obtain independent
legal advice.
It was particularly important that Mr. & Mrs. Alessi have independent legal
advice about two special conditions in the loan documents,
(i) the provision for the deduction of the first four months interest from the
loan advance; and
(ii) the provision for the withholding from the loan advance of the equivalent
of six months interest to provide security against
any default by the borrower
Briga Pty Ltd.
The limited advice provided by Mr. de Lemos was insufficient to enable Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi to have a proper understanding of the
effect of the loan
(b) Mr. Alessi probably received the letter dated 8 March 2002 written by Tyree
Pty Ltd and signed by Mr. Moses in his capacity as
a director of Tyree Pty Ltd.
However, the information contained in the letter did not come from an
independent source.
The letter sought to justify terms imposed by the lender, particularly the
interest prepayment and the withholding of an interest
bond, rather than, for
example, indicating that these were not common provisions and suggesting that an
attempt be made to have these
provisions removed from the loan
The loss incurred by Tyree Pty
[14.34] I find that Tyree Pty Ltd failed to recover from Briga
Pty Ltd all monies owing under the loan documents. Tyree Pty Ltd
recover the amount of the deficiency from Mr. & Mrs. Alessi pursuant to the
guarantee given by them.
SECTION 15: THE FIRST GROUND OF THE APPLICATION: NAMELY THE ALLEGATION THAT
THE APPLICANTS WERE INDUCED TO ENTER INTO THE COSTS AGREEMENT
BY THE FRAUD
AND/OR MISREPRESENTATION OF THE LEGAL
PRACTITIONER
[15.01] Particulars
of the allegation are set out in paragraph 2.1 of the Consolidated Points of
Claim and Further and Better Particulars.
[15.02] The
applicants did
not pursue this allegation
[paragraph 2 of the introduction to the closing
submissions of the applicants].
SECTION 16: THE SECOND GROUND OF THE APPLICATION: NAMELY THE ALLEGATION OF
MISCONDUCT AND/OR UNSATISFACTORY CONDUCT ARISING OUT OF
THE SALE OF KEYS ROAD BY
BRIGA PTY LTD TO TYREE PTY
[16.01] The evidence that
I consider to be most relevant to this allegation is set out in the sections of
these reasons headed
THE REPAYMENT OF EXELERATE FUNDING PTY LTD, INCLUDING
THE SALE OF KEYS ROAD BY BRIGA PTY LTD TO TYREE PTY LTD
and to a lesser
THE TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT
Particulars of the
allegation:
[16.02] The allegation appears to be an allegation of
misconduct at common law
, preserved by the opening words of paragraph (a)
of the definition of “misconduct” in
section 137
Practice Act 1996
, which read as follows:
““misconduct” means-
(a) misconduct by a legal practitioner or firm in the course of engaging in
legal practice, ...”
Misconduct in the course of engaging in legal practice, often
described as misconduct at common law, has been defined consistently
years as conduct in a professional capacity which would be reasonably regarded
as disgraceful or dishonourable by professional
brethren of good repute and
competency: see
Allinson v General Council of Medical Education and
Registration
[1894] UKLawRpKQB 36
[1894] 1 QB 750
where the definition was formulated in a case
involving a medical practitioner;
Re a Solicitor: ex parte The Law
[1911] UKLawRpKQB 173
[1912] 1 KB 302
where the definition was adopted in a case involving
a solicitor;
Myers v Elman
[1940] AC 282
where the definition was
approved by the House of Lords and
Grahame v AG of Fiji
[1936] 2 All ER
where the definition was approved by the Privy Council; and
[1960] VicRp 96
[1960] VR 617
where the definition was applied in
Alternatively, the allegation could be an allegation of
misconduct arising out of a contravention of the
Legal Practice Act
or of rules made under the Act
, as to which paragraph (a)(i) of the
definition of “misconduct” in
section 137
of the Act provides as
““misconduct” means-
(a) misconduct by a legal practitioner or firm in the course of engaging in
legal practice,
(i) wilful or reckless contravention of this Act, the regulations or practice
rules that apply to the practitioner or firm or any
other Act that relates to
legal practice;”
The allegation appears to me to be based upon an alleged
conflict between the interests of Mr. Moses and the interests of Mr. &
Alessi and companies in the F&T Group, at a time when Mr. Moses acted on a
regular basis for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and for
companies in the F&T Group.
The rules that dealt with conflicting interests at the time Keys Road was sold
were rules 10 &
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules
. Rules 10 & 11 were directed mainly at factual situations where a
legal practitioner acted or intended to act for more than
one party to a
transaction. They are relevant in this matter because Mr. Moses acted for Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi in their capacity
as guarantors under the agreement dated 9
August 2001, acted generally for the vendor of Keys Road, and controlled the
company that
purchased Keys Road. The relevant parts of rule 10 at that time
“10. Conflicts of Interest
(1) Nothing in this rule shall limit or restrict any common law, equitable or
statutory duty or obligation which a regulated legal
business or a regulated
practitioner owes.
(1A) A regulated legal business and a regulated practitioner must, in the course
of engaging in legal practice, avoid conflicts of
(i) between the regulated legal
business or regulated practitioner and a client;
(ii) between two or more clients.”
Because of the generality of the relevant parts of
rule 10, I will treat this allegation of misconduct as both an allegation of
at common law and an allegation of misconduct arising out of a wilful
or reckless contravention of rule 10.
The allegation is put in the
alternative as one of
unsatisfactory conduct
, but in the light of the
view that I take about the allegation of misconduct it is not necessary for me
to consider whether Mr. Moses
is guilty of unsatisfactory
[16.03] It is
common ground
that before, during and
after the sale Mr. Moses provided legal services to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and to
companies in the F&T
It also is common ground that Briga Pty
Ltd was a company controlled by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, and that Tyree Pty Ltd
was a company
controlled by Mr. Moses and his
Particulars of this allegation of misconduct or
unsatisfactory conduct
are set out in paragraphs 2.2(a) to 2.2(eb) of the
Consolidated Points of Claim and Further and Better Particulars. These
particulars
can be summarised as follows:
(i) Mr. Moses advised Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to cause Briga Pty Ltd to sell Keys
Road to Tyree Pty Ltd, and Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
accepted that advice;
(ii) Mr. Moses advised Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to cause F & T Industries Pty
Ltd to lease Keys Road back from Tyree Pty Ltd, and
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
accepted that advice;
(iii) the true value of Keys Road was greater than the price that appeared in
the contract of sale;
(iv) in addition to the price appearing in the contract of sale, $400,000 was to
be deducted from past and future legal costs incurred
by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
with Mr. Moses, which arrangement Mr. Moses has failed to acknowledge;
(v) although it was not mentioned in the contract of sale, Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
were entitled to re-purchase Keys Road;
(vi) Mr. Moses was personally interested in, and stood to benefit from, the sale
and the lease;
(vii) Mr. Moses failed to ensure that the transaction was properly
documented;
(viii) Mr. Moses failed to ensure that Mr. & Mrs. Alessi obtained
independent professional advice;
(ix) Mr. Moses failed to account to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi for benefits that he
received from the transaction.
Defence primarily by way of denial:
[16.05] The
defence of Mr. Moses to this allegation of
misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct
is set out in paragraphs 3, 3A(a) to
3A(e) and 3A1 to 3A5 of the Consolidated Points of Defence and Further and
Better Particulars.
In substance, Mr. Moses denied every part of the allegation
in the particulars but, without limiting the denial, maintained
(i) Briga Pty Ltd offered to sell Keys Road to Tyree Pty
(ii) Mr. Lockwood, as receiver/manager of F & T Industries Pty Ltd,
expressed his intention to remain in possession of Keys Road,
and consented to F
& T Industries Pty Ltd entering into the lease from Tyree Pty Ltd;
(iii) Briga Pty Ltd, Tyree Pty Ltd and F & T Industries Pty Ltd were
separately represented by legal firms in relation to the
sale and the lease.
The submission of the applicants:
[16.06] The
submission of the applicants
in relation to
this allegation of misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct is set out in section 2
of the applicants’ Closing Submissions.
[16.07] The submission
goes beyond the pleaded particulars to the extent that it maintains [in
sub-paragraphs 30(i) and 30(k)] that
Mr. Moses had conflicting interests in
paying fees to his associates from the proceeds of sale.
substance the submission maintains that Mr. Moses, by continuing to act for Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi and for companies in
the F&T Group after conflict had
arisen between his own interests on the one hand and fiduciary obligations owed
by him to Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi and to companies in the F&T Group on the
other hand, was guilty of misconduct or unsatisfactory
[16.09] The starting point of the submission is that the
relationship of solicitor and client existed between Mr. Moses and Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi at least from 30 July 2001 until the completion of the relevant
transactions, and that the relationship of solicitor
and client also existed
between Mr. Moses and both Briga Pty Ltd and F & T Industries Pty Ltd at
least from 6 August 2001 until
March 2003. The applicants’ closing
submissions include a list of documents said to provide evidence of the
relationships.
[Pages 2 & 3 of section 2 of the
submissions.]
[16.10] The significance of the relationship of solicitor
and client is that the relationship created fiduciary obligations owed
Moses to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and to companies in the F&T Group. In
particular, it created for Mr. Moses an obligation
to avoid conflicts of
interest between himself on the one hand and Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and companies
in the F&T Group on the
other hand.
[16.11] The interests said to
conflict were the interests of Mr. Moses and his wife in Tyree Pty Ltd and the
interests of Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi in Briga Pty Ltd and F & T Industries Pty
[16.12] The conflicts said to exist were:
(i) Mr. Moses being in a position to take advantage of Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi’s desperate need for funds to allow F & T
Industries Pty Ltd to
pay out Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd;
(ii) the interest of Mr. Moses in obtaining for Tyree Pty Ltd the lowest price
for the purchase of the property in Keys Road and
the interests of Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi in obtaining for Briga Pty Ltd the highest price for the sale of the
property in Keys Road;
(iii) the interest of Mr. Moses in obtaining for Tyree Pty Ltd the most
favourable conditions for the purchase of the property and
the interests of Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi in obtaining for Briga Pty Ltd the most favourable conditions
for the sale of the property.
The most significant conditions were the alleged
right of Briga Pty Ltd to re-purchase the property from Tyree Pty Ltd, and the
alleged deduction of $400,000 from the legal costs incurred or to be incurred
with Mr. Moses by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi or by companies
(iv) the interest of Mr. Moses in obtaining for Tyree Pty Ltd the highest rent
and the most favourable conditions in the lease of
Keys Road and the interests
of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi in obtaining for F & T Industries Pty Ltd the
lowest rent and the most favourable
conditions in the lease. The most
significant conditions were the requirement of a security deposit, the
requirement of advance
payments of rental, and the requirement of a guarantee
executed by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi;
(v) the arrangements made for the giving of independent legal advice to the
parties to each transaction which, it is contended, led
in reality to a lack of
independence in the giving of advice.
[16.13] It also was
contended that breaches of fiduciary duty on the part of Mr. Moses resulted in
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and Briga
Pty Ltd not being in a position to give
informed consent
to the transactions. In particular, it was contended
that Mr. Moses omitted to ensure that independent legal advice was given to
& Mrs. Alessi, and that he allowed Briga Pty Ltd to sell Keys Road to Tyree
Pty Ltd for $1.8M when he knew that Mr. Alessi
believed the property to be worth
more than $1.8M. It was submitted that the knowledge of Mr. Moses was apparent
from his discussion
with Mr. Purcell and from comments made by Mr. Moses at the
meeting on 4 March 2003.
The submission of the legal
practitioner:
[16.14] The
submission of Mr. Moses
in relation
to this allegation of misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct is set out in his
Closing Submissions. The closing submission
came in four parts, in separate
Part 1 relating to the tender of documents;
Part 2 setting out factual contentions;
Part 3 making submissions as to the factual contentions; and
Part 4 relating to the law and its application in these proceedings.
Part 2 mainly sets out the factual contentions of Mr. Moses
alongside the factual contentions of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi concerning
issues. On 7 October 2004, the solicitor for the Alessis sent a letter to the
Tribunal that subsequently was accepted as
a further submission on their behalf
[paragraph 2 of the order made by me on 16 December 2004]. The letter
maintained that some
factual contentions set out as being contentions by Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi were not contentions made by them, or were interpretations
evidence rather than evidence, or were unfair summaries of their evidence [pages
5 & 6 of the letter]. A reply lodged by
Mr. Moses on 19 November 2004
responded by stating that Part 2 includes citations for the factual contentions
of the Alessis [paragraph
188 of the reply].
Part 3 refers to the
evidence said by Mr. Moses to support his factual contentions. Part 3 also
contains a section headed “
The illogicality of the Alessis'
”. I acknowledge that the submission made in that section relates
to other allegations of misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct,
and not just to
the present allegation. However, I will set out the parts of the section that
to my mind are the most significant
parts of the submission that the Alessis
case was illogical, up to the time that Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd was repaid in
November or December 2001 [paragraphs 1 to 27 of Part 3.]:
(i) despite the fact that for many years Phillips Fox had carried out a large
amount of legal work for Mr. Alessi and for companies
in the F&T Group, when
a receiver/manager was appointed to F & T Industries Pty Ltd Mr. Alessi
engaged Mr. Moses, whom he
had not met previously, to assist him in relation to
the receivership;
(ii) despite the absence of a prior relationship of solicitor and client, Mr.
Alessi maintains that Mr. Moses did not provide any
information as to the costs
to be charged, did not require legal costs to be paid until monies became
available, agreed to engage
other professionals with whom he was associated
without paying them, and abandoned other legal work so that he could work almost
exclusively for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi;
(iii) despite the absence of a prior relationship with Mr. Moses, and despite
the fact that Mr. Alessi had run F & T Industries
Pty Ltd for over 40 years,
Mr. Alessi maintains that he allowed Mr. Moses to take control of matters
associated with F & T Industries
Pty Ltd including the repayment of
Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd, even though Mr. Moses did not keep him informed as to
what was happening;
(iv) despite the fact that Mr. Moses was acting as his solicitor, Mr. Alessi
maintains that he accepted a proposal by Mr. Moses that
Tyree Pty Ltd (a company
associated with Mr. Moses) purchase Keys Road from Briga Pty Ltd with a lease
Pty Ltd, allowed Mr. Moses to set the sale price,
and allowed Mr. Moses to formulate the terms of sale with the result that a
for a reduction of $400,000 in present and future legal costs and a
provision giving a right to re-purchase the property were omitted
contract of sale;
(v) despite engaging Mr. Isakow to act as his solicitor in relation to the sale,
Mr. Alessi maintains that he was content to allow
Mr. Moses to provide
instructions to Mr. Isakow, and content not to read the contract before he
signed it, with the result that he
failed to appreciate that the sale price was
only $1.8M and that the provisions for a reduction in legal costs and the
granting of
a right to re-purchase the property were omitted from the
(vi) if there was an oral agreement that the sale price of Keys Road was to be
$2.2M, to be satisfied by placing a price of $1.8M
in the contract of sale and
by making arrangements for $400,000 to be deducted from legal costs charged or
to be charged by Mr. Moses,
it is illogical that Briga Pty Ltd (or Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi) would have a right to re-purchase the property for $2.2M, because
would result in a substantial loss to Tyree Pty Ltd in the form of stamp
duty, GST, legal costs and any other expenses incurred by
Tyree Pty Ltd in
relation to the transaction;
(vii) if there was an oral agreement that $400,000 be deducted from legal costs
charged or to be charged by Mr. Moses, that sum almost
certainly included a
large amount for future legal costs, and it is illogical that Mr. Alessi would
agree to pay a large amount for
future legal costs in circumstances where,
according to Mr. Alessi, Mr. Moses had stated at the outset that legal costs
be paid until monies were recovered from proposed litigation that had
not commenced.
[16.15] The
lodged by Mr. Moses
on 19 November 2004 also responded to the submission of the applicants. This
allegation is dealt with in paragraphs
107 to 136 of the reply. In substance,
the reply contends that:
(i) Mr. Alessi asked Mr. Moses to purchase Keys Road only after Briga Pty Ltd
had committed itself under the agreement of 9 August
2001 to pay $1 M to
Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd by 30 August 2001, and at a time when Briga Pty Ltd
was unable to meet that commitment;
(ii) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi were not prepared to allow the receiver/manager to
sell the business conducted by F & T Industries
Pty Ltd in order to repay
Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd;
(iii) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi had been trying to raise finance and had been trying
to sell properties in the F&T Group in order
to repay Exelerate Funding Pty
(iv) it was not part of the retainer of Mr. Moses by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to
advise them as to alternative ways of raising finance;
(v) it was not part of the retainer of Mr. Moses to advise Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
as to the terms of sale;
(vi) in any case, Mr. Moses cautioned Mr. Alessi against selling Keys Road;
(vii) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi knew of the interest of Mr. Moses in the sale;
(viii) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi had independent advice in relation to the sale from
Mr. Caines and Mr. Arcaini, and held a valuation
prepared by Mr. Connolly;
(ix) Mr. Isakow acted for Briga Pty Ltd in relation to the sale;
(x) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi signed a contract of sale and a transfer of land
showing a sale price of $1.8 M;
(xi) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi knew that Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd was unlikely to
grant an extension of time for payment, other than
for a short period. In fact,
Mr. Moses negotiated a short extension of time in order to accommodate
settlement of the sale of Keys
(xii) it was not in the best interests of Mr. Moses to purchase Keys Road, so
his interests did not conflict with the interests of
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi in
(xiii) because there were no conflicting interests, there was no need for
informed consent on the part of Mr. & Mrs.
Findings as to this allegation of
misconduct:
[16.16] I found in the section of these reasons
THE REPAYMENT OF EXELERATE FUNDING PTY LTD, INCLUDING THE SALE OF KEYS
ROAD BY BRIGA PTY LTD TO TYREE PTY LTD
(i) that Mr. Alessi offered to sell Keys Road to Mr. Moses for $1.8M, and that
Mr. Moses accepted the offer on behalf of his company
Tyree Pty Ltd;
(ii) that the offer was made after Mr. Alessi had been unable to raise money
from any other source to enable Briga Pty Ltd to pay
the instalment of $1.0M due
to Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd on 30 August 2001;
(iii) that the qualifications made in general terms and contained in the
valuation of $2.7M given by Mr. Connolly rendered the valuation
equivocal and at worst meaningless, with the result that the valuation was of
little assistance in establishing the value
of Keys Road at the time of
(iv) that evidence given at this hearing did not establish that the value of
Keys Road at the time of sale was more than $1.8M;
(v) that Mr. Alessi was most grateful that Mr. Moses had arranged for Tyree Pty
Ltd to purchase Keys Road, as it enabled Briga Pty
Ltd to use the proceeds of
sale to pay out Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd, and potentially gave Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi an opportunity to
resume full control of the business conducted by F
& T Industries Pty Ltd.
Other findings made by me in the same section of these reasons,
such as the finding that Mr. Moses did not agree to allocate $400,000
proceeds of sale towards past and future legal costs, make it unnecessary for me
to deal with several other matters raised
in the submissions.
I further find that:
(a) the fact that before, during and after the sale Mr. Moses provided legal
services to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and to companies in
the F&T Group placed
Mr. Moses in a position of conflict with Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and with
companies in the F&T Group,
particularly Briga Pty Ltd ;
(b) the fact that the vendor Briga Pty Ltd was a company controlled by Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi and the purchaser Tyree Pty Ltd was
a company controlled by Mr.
Moses and his wife placed Mr. Moses in a position of conflict with Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi and with companies
in the F&T Group, particularly Briga Pty
(c) Mr. Moses stood to benefit personally from the sale of Keys Road by Briga
Pty Ltd to Tyree Pty Ltd, the trustee of his superannuation
subsequently did benefit;
(d) Mr. Moses stood to benefit personally from the lease back of Keys Road by
Tyree Pty Ltd to F & T Industries Pty Ltd, and
subsequently did benefit;
(e) there was conflict between the interest of Mr. Moses in obtaining for Tyree
Pty Ltd the lowest price for the purchase of Keys
Road and the interests of Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi in obtaining for Briga Pty Ltd the highest price for the sale
of Keys Road. The
sale price of Keys Road was agreed to by Mr. Moses and Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi before Mr. Isakow was instructed to act for Briga Pty
accept the evidence of Mr. Isakow that he played no part in the determination of
the sale price, which evidence was as
“There is a reference in the file note to “$1.8m all in”.
That is a reference to the purchase price. That meant,
inclusive of costs,
interest, GST, everything. The purchase price was never subsequently discussed
or revisited, as far as I can
recall. I was simply told what it was.”
[Paragraph 12 of exhibit LP46.]
Neither Mr. Arcaini nor Mr. Caines were qualified or competent to give advice to
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi as to the value of Keys Road
at the time of sale, and Mr.
Moses must have been aware that such was the case. Furthermore, as I have
mentioned, the qualifications
in the valuation made by Mr. Connolly rendered the
valuation of little assistance in establishing the value of Keys Road at the
(f) there was conflict between the interest of Mr. Moses in obtaining for the
lessor Tyree Pty Ltd the highest rental and the best
terms for the lease of Keys
Road and the interests of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi in obtaining for the lessee F
& T Industries Pty
Ltd the lowest rental and the best terms for the lease of
Keys Road. I acknowledge that the receiver/manager approved of the lease
behalf of F & T Industries Pty Ltd, but the continuing aim of Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi was to extract F & T Industries Pty
Ltd from the receivership as soon
as possible and to resume full control of its business;
(g) Mr. Moses was aware that he stood in a position of conflict. He sought to
overcome the conflict by engaging Arnold Bloch Leibler
to act for Tyree Pty Ltd,
and by insisting that another legal practitioner act for Briga Pty Ltd in
relation to the sale.
[16.18] I reject the submission made
by counsel for Mr. Moses that the purchase of Keys Road was not in the best
interests of Mr.
Moses, with the result that his interests were not in conflict
with the interests of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi. I am far from satisfied
purchase was not in the best interests of Mr. Moses, but in any case the
submission is disingenuous.
I am not satisfied that Mr. Moses
is guilty of misconduct at common law
. Legal practitioners of good repute
and competency would reasonably regard the conduct of Mr. Moses as being
disgraceful or dishonourable
were it not for the fact that Mr. Moses accepted
the offer made by Mr. Alessi to sell Keys Road for $1.8 M at a time when Mr.
was unable to raise money from any other source to enable Briga Pty Ltd
to pay the instalment of $1.0 M due to Exelerate Funding
Pty Ltd on 30 August
2001, were it not for the fact that the evidence does not establish that the
value of Keys Road at the time
of sale was more than $1.8 M, and were it not for
the fact that Mr. Alessi subsequently was most grateful to Mr. Moses that the
of Keys Road enabled the debt owed to Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd to be
I find that Mr. Moses is guilty of misconduct being a
wilful or reckless contravention of rule 10 of the
Professional Conduct and
Practice Rules 2000
. He did not take proper steps to avoid obvious
conflicts of interest. He did not ensure that $1.8 M was an appropriate price
the sale of Keys Road. He negotiated the sale of Keys Road prior to the
engagement of Mr. Isakow by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi. He continued
to act for Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi and for companies in the F&T Group both at the time of
sale and subsequently. He acted for
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and for Briga Pty Ltd
when it voluntarily assumed an obligation to repay Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd,
the fact that the interests of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, the interests of
Briga Pty Ltd, the interests of F & T Industries Pty Ltd
and the interests
of Tyree Pty Ltd obviously conflicted at that time.
Legal Practice Act 1996
provides that the Tribunal
order that a costs agreement be cancelled if satisfied that the legal
practitioner is guilty of misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct
in relation to
the provision of legal services to which the agreement relates. The discretion,
of course, must be exercised judicially.
In the exercise of that discretion
I am not prepared to cancel the costs agreement
where, as here, I see Mr.
Moses as having attempted to assist Mr. & Mrs. Alessi at a time when Mr.
Alessi was unable to raise
money from any other source to enable Briga Pty Ltd
to pay the instalment of $1.0 M due to Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd on 30 August
2001 and where, as here, Mr. Alessi subsequently was most grateful to Mr. Moses
for his assistance. It is significant that I do
not see Mr. Moses as having
sought to take advantage of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi by accepting Mr.
Alessi’s offer to sell Keys
SECTION 17:
THE THIRD GROUND OF THE APPLICATION: NAMELY THE ALLEGATION OF
MISCONDUCT AND/OR UNSATISFACTORY CONDUCT ARISING OUT OF
THE PAYMENT
INVOICES BY THE RECEIVER/MANAGER OF F & T INDUSTRIES PTY LTD WITHOUT THE
KNOWLEDGE OF THE
APPLICANTS.
[17.01] Particulars
of the allegation are set out in paragraphs 2.2(f) and 2.2(g) of the
Consolidated Points of Claim and Further
Particulars.
[17.02] The
applicants did not pursue this
, except to the extent that it formed part of another allegation
[paragraph 2 of the introduction to the closing submissions of the
applicants].
SECTION 18:
THE FOURTH GROUND OF THE APPLICATION, NAMELY THE ALLEGATION OF
MISCONDUCT AND/OR UNSATISFACTORY CONDUCT ARISING OUT OF
THE LOAN FROM
LTD TO BRIGA PTY
[18.01] The evidence that
I consider to be most relevant to this allegation is set out in the sections of
these reasons headed
THE COSTS OF THE RECEIVERSHIP, INCLUDING THE LOAN FROM
TYREE PTY LTD TO BRIGA PTY LTD
and to a lesser extent
THE TERMS OF
Particulars of the allegation:
[18.02] The
allegation appears to be an allegation of
misconduct at common law
as I have mentioned is preserved by the opening words of paragraph (a) of the
definition of “misconduct” in
Legal Practice
Alternatively, the allegation could be an allegation of
misconduct as defined by paragraph (a)(i) of the definition of
“misconduct” in
section 137
, namely a wilful or
reckless contravention of the Act or of rules made under the Act
The allegation appears to me to be based mainly upon an alleged
conflict between the interests of Mr. Moses and Tyree Pty Ltd on the
and the interests of Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and Briga Pty Ltd on the other hand,
at a time when Mr. Moses acted on a regular
basis for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and
for companies in the F&T Group. To a much lesser extent, the allegation
appears to me to
be based upon an alleged conflict between the interests of Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi and Briga Pty Ltd. The relevant rules when the
loan was made
again were rules 10(1) and 10(1A) of the
Professional Conduct and Practice
which for convenience I will set out a second time:
“10. Conflicts of Interest
(1) Nothing in this rule shall limit or restrict any common law, equitable or
statutory duty or obligation which a regulated legal
business or a regulated
practitioner owes.
(1A) A regulated legal business and a regulated practitioner must, in the course
of engaging in legal practice, avoid conflicts of
(i) between the regulated legal
business or regulated practitioner and a client;
(ii) between two or more clients.”
Because of the generality of the relevant parts of
rule 10, I will treat this allegation of misconduct as both an allegation of
at common law and an allegation of misconduct arising out of a wilful
or reckless contravention of rule 10.
The allegation is put in the
alternative as one of
unsatisfactory conduct
, but in the light of the
view that I take about the allegation of misconduct it is not necessary for me
to consider whether Mr. Moses
is guilty of unsatisfactory
[18.03] It is
common ground
that before, during and
after the making of the loan agreement Mr. Moses provided legal services to Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi and to
companies in the F&T Group.
[18.04] As I
have mentioned previously, it also is common ground that Briga Pty Ltd was a
company controlled by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi,
and that Tyree Pty Ltd was a
company controlled by Mr. Moses and his wife.
Particulars of
this allegation of misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct
are set out in
paragraphs 2.2(h) to 2.2(k) of the Consolidated Points of Claim and Further and
Better Particulars. These particulars
can be summarised as follows:
(i) Mr. Moses advised Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to cause Briga Pty Ltd to borrow
$800,000 from Tyree Pty Ltd to be used to pay some of
the costs of the
receivership, and Mr. & Mrs. Alessi acted in accordance with that
(ii) Mr. Moses also advised Mr. & Mrs. Alessi as to the security that should
be provided by Briga Pty Ltd and by Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi in relation to the
(iii) Mr. Moses had a pecuniary interest in the loan and stood to benefit from
the loan, with the result that his interests conflicted
with those of Briga Pty
Ltd and Mr. & Mrs. Alessi;
(iv) Mr. Moses failed to fully inform Briga Pty Ltd and Mr. & Mrs. Alessi of
his interest in the loan;
(v) Mr. Moses failed to inform Briga Pty Ltd and Mr. & Mrs. Alessi of the
need for them to obtain independent and informed advice
in relation to the
(vi) Mr. Moses failed to provide a detailed briefing to Mr. de Lemos of Mahonys
* the fact that Mr. Moses was a director and shareholder in Tyree Pty Ltd, and
had a pecuniary interest in the loan;
* the fact that Mr. Moses was Mr. & Mrs. Alessi’s legal practitioner,
and had provided advice to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
in relation to the loan;
* the fact that Mr. Kingdon, who made arrangements for the loan documents to be
executed by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi in the presence
of Mr. de Lemos, acted for
Tyree Pty Ltd in relation to the loan; and
* the purpose and intent of the provisions in the loan documents;
(vii) Mr. Moses prepared the loan documents;
(viii) the loan documents provided for pre-payment of four months interest, and
for an interest bond, which were non-commercial provisions
and constituted
unconscionable conduct of the part of Mr. Moses.
Defence primarily by way of denial:
[18.06] The
defence of Mr. Moses to this allegation of misconduct or
unsatisfactory conduct
is set out in paragraphs 3A(f) to 3A(i) and 3A6 to
3A10 of the Consolidated Points of Defence and Further and Better Particulars.
In substance, Mr. Moses denied every part of the allegation in the particulars
but, without limiting the denial, maintained that:
(i) the receiver/manager of F & T Industries Pty Ltd demanded that Briga Pty
Ltd, as his appointor, make working capital available
to F & T Industries
Pty Ltd or he would sell F & T Industries Pty Ltd and/or call up guarantees
given by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
and by companies in the F&T Group;
(ii) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi asked Tyree Pty Ltd to lend money to Briga Pty Ltd to
enable Briga Pty Ltd to satisfy the demand of the
receiver/manager;
(iii) Tyree Pty Ltd lent $800,000 to Briga Pty Ltd, and independent legal advice
was given to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi prior to the
execution of the loan
The submission of the applicants:
[18.07] The
submission of the applicants
in relation to
this allegation of misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct is set out in section 3
of the applicants’ Closing Submissions.
[18.08] In substance the
submission maintains that Mr. Moses, by acting for Briga Pty Ltd and for Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi after conflict
had arisen between his own interests in
relation to the loan on the one hand and fiduciary obligations owed by him to
Briga Pty Ltd
and Mr. & Mrs. Alessi on the other hand, was guilty of
misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct.
[18.09] The main submissions made
in the applicants’ closing submissions were:
(i) there is no evidence that the demand made by the receiver/manager was made
in writing;
(ii) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi substantially relied upon information and advice
given to them by Mr. Moses before causing Briga Pty Ltd
to enter into the
(iii) Mr. Moses acted for and charged legal costs to Briga Pty Ltd in relation
to a loan to Briga Pty Ltd by Tyree Pty Ltd, a company
owned and controlled by
Mr. Moses and his wife;
(iv) by giving advice to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and by acting for Briga Pty Ltd,
when their interests conflicted with the interests
of Tyree Pty Ltd, Mr. Moses
was guilty of misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct;
(v) Mr. de Lemos was engaged by Mr. Kingdon, the legal practitioner acting for
the lender, to give advice to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
in their capacity as
directors and shareholders of the borrower Briga Pty Ltd, in their capacity as
directors and shareholders in
other companies in the F&T Group (which gave
guarantees and provided security for the loan), and in their personal capacity
guarantors of the loan;
(vi) Mr. de Lemos was not placed in a position to give independent advice to Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi because he was not fully briefed
by Mr. Moses;
(vii) by not ensuring that Mr. de Lemos was fully briefed as to the interests of
Mr. Moses in the transaction, Mr. Moses was guilty
of misconduct or
unsatisfactory conduct;
(viii) informed consent to the transaction by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi was not
relevant because of the nature of the interests of Mr.
Moses and because of the
fiduciary obligations owed by Mr. Moses to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, but
alternatively Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
did not give informed consent to the
transaction because Mr. Moses did not fully brief Mr. de Lemos as to the
interests of Mr. Moses
in the transaction;
(ix) in giving advice to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, Mr. Moses exercised undue
influence over Mr. & Mrs. Alessi;
(x) by not ensuring that Mrs. Alessi was given separate and adequate advice in
relation to the loan, in circumstances where it must
have been obvious to Mr.
Moses that Mrs. Alessi was potentially vulnerable to domination by Mr. Alessi,
Mr. Moses breached fiduciary
obligations owed by him to Mrs. Alessi;
(xi) by not ensuring that informed consent was given by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi,
alternatively or in combination by not avoiding the
exercise of undue influence
over Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, and alternatively or in combination by not ensuring
that Mrs. Alessi was
protected from her potential vulnerability to dominance by
Mr. Alessi, Mr. Moses was guilty of misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct.
The submission of the legal practitioner:
[18.10] The
submission of Mr. Moses
in relation to this
allegation of misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct is set out in his Closing
Submissions.
Part 2 of his closing submissions sets out the factual
contentions of Mr. Moses alongside the factual contentions of Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi concerning the same issues. Having read Part 2 carefully, I remain
satisfied that the events recorded in the Section “The
Costs Of The
Receivership, Including The Loan From Tyree Pty Ltd To Briga Pty Ltd” are
an adequate summary of the significant
factual contentions concerning the
Part 2 also contains what I regard as a submission by Mr. Moses
that “From a commercial perspective, the transaction was not
attractive to Mr. Moses,”. The submission is based upon contentions,
first, that the security provided for the loan
by way of second mortgages was
inadequate (as subsequently proved to be the case when the properties were sold
by the first mortgagee);
secondly, that Briga Pty Ltd was not in a position to
pay interest upon the loan (because F & T Industries Pty Ltd was not in
position to pay interest to Briga Pty Ltd under the debenture); and thirdly, the
loan was made when Mr. Moses knew little about
the financial position of Briga
Pty Ltd. [Paragraph 37 of Part 2.]
The section headed “
illogicality of the Alessis’ case
” in Part 3 of Mr. Moses’
closing submissions includes submissions that are relevant to the present
allegation of misconduct
or unsatisfactory conduct [paragraphs 30 to
(i) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi have not given any explanation as to how Mr. Moses
took advantage of them, or took advantage of Briga Pty
Ltd, by causing Tyree Pty
Ltd to make a loan that was not adequately secured;
(ii) by insisting that Mr. & Mrs. Alessi obtain independent legal advice in
relation to the loan documents, before they were
signed, Mr. Moses sought to
ensure that nothing was concealed from Mr. & Mrs. Alessi;
(iii) because Mr. Alessi trusted Mr. Moses, Mr. & Mrs. Alessi declined to
received detailed advice from Mr. de Lemos.
[18.11] The
lodged by Mr. Moses responded to the
submission of the applicants concerning the present allegation of misconduct or
unsatisfactory
conduct in the following ways [paragraphs 137 to 156]:
(i) Mr. Alessi asked Mr. Moses to cause Tyree Pty Ltd to make a loan to Briga
Pty Ltd at a time when Briga Pty Ltd was unable to
meet the demand of the
receiver/manager;
(ii) at the time when he agreed to make the loan, Mr. Moses insisted upon Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi obtaining independent advice before
the loans documents were
(iii) Mr. Alessi knew that Mr. Moses controlled Tyree Pty Ltd, and knew that Mr.
Moses did not want Tyree Pty Ltd to make the loan;
(iv) the Alessis were determined to proceed with the loan, as there was no
alternative source of finance;
(v) Mr. Moses was not a financial adviser, and it was not part of his retainer
by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to advise them as to alternative
(vi) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi have not established that their retainer of Mr. Moses
went beyond documenting the loan;
(vii) it was in the interests of Mr. Moses not to make the loan, with the result
that his interests did not conflict with the interests
of Mr. & Mrs.
(viii) if there was conflict between the interests of Mr. Moses and Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi, it arose out of the documentation of the
loan, which required Mr.
Moses to protect the interests of Tyree Pty Ltd;
(ix) Mr. de Lemos advised the Alessis as to the content and effect of the loan
Findings as to this allegation of
misconduct:
[18.12] I found in the section of these reasons
THE COSTS OF THE RECEIVERSHIP, INCLUDING THE LOAN FROM TYREE PTY LTD
TO BRIGA PTY LTD
(i) Mr. Moses acted for Briga Pty Ltd in relation to the loan;
(ii) when so acting for Briga Pty Ltd, Mr. Moses continued to act generally for
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi in matters arising out of the
receivership.
In particular, Mr. Moses advised Mr. Alessi prior to the execution of the loan
documents, which included a guarantee by Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi of repayment of
the loan by Briga Pty Ltd, that the loan documents were in order.
Mr. Alessi relied upon the advice of Mr. Moses that the loan documents were in
order and not upon any advice given by Mr. de Lemos,
whose participation was
regarded by Mr. Alessi as a waste of time;
(iii) Mr. Kingdon acted for Tyree Pty Ltd in relation to the loan;
(iv) Mr. Kingdon made arrangements for Mr. de Lemos of Mahonys to give advice to
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi as to the effect of the loan
documents, to attend to the
execution of the loan documents, and to sign a certificate as to execution of
the documents;
(v) Mr. de Lemos offered to explain the loan documents to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi,
and did so to a limited degree, but Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi declined to have the
loan documents fully explained to them on the basis that the documents already
had been explained to
them by their solicitor;
(vi) Mr. de Lemos incorrectly believed that Mr. Kingdon was the solicitor for
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi;
(vii) Mr. de Lemos was not aware that Mr. Moses was the solicitor for the
borrower Briga Pty Ltd, and not aware that Mr. Moses controlled
the lender Tyree
Pty Ltd, when he explained the guarantee to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi;
(viii) Mr. de Lemos would have insisted upon giving a full explanation of the
loan documents to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi, before signing
his certificates, if he
had known that Mr. Moses was the solicitor for the borrower Briga Pty Ltd and
controlled the lender Tyree
(ix) for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to have a proper understanding of the effect of
the loan documents, bearing in mind that Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi were to guarantee
the performance of the obligations of the borrower Briga Pty Ltd under the loan
documents, it was necessary
for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to obtain independent
legal advice.
It was particularly important that Mr. & Mrs. Alessi have independent legal
advice about two special conditions in the loan documents,
* the provision for the deduction of the first four months interest from the
loan advance; and
* the provision for the withholding from the loan advance of the equivalent of
six months interest to provide security against any
default by the borrower
Briga Pty Ltd.
The limited advice provided by Mr. de Lemos was insufficient to enable Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi to have a proper understanding of the
effect of the loan
I further find that
(a) it was not part of the terms of engagement of Mr. Moses that he was required
to provide advice to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi as to
alternative sources of
(b) Mr. Moses had a pecuniary interest in the loan, and stood to benefit from
the loan. I do not accept the submission made on behalf
of Mr. Moses that the
loan “was not remotely attractive to Mr. Moses”;
(c) Mr. Moses (who acted for the borrower) delegated to Mr. Kingdon (who acted
for the lender) the making of arrangements for independent
legal advice to be
given to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi (the guarantors);
(d) Mr. Moses did not ensure that independent legal advice was given to Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi.
In particular, Mr. Moses did not ensure that Mr. de Lemos was informed, prior to
giving advice to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi:
* that Mr. Moses acted for the borrower Briga Pty Ltd;
* that Mr. Moses and his wife controlled the lender Tyree Pty Ltd;
* that Mr. Moses had a pecuniary interest in the loan. In particular, he would
benefit from the pre-payment of four months interest
and from the withholding
from the loan of a security bond equivalent to six months interest;
* that Mr. Moses (not Mr. Kingdon as Mr. de Lemos came to believe) had advised
Mr. Alessi that the loan documents were in order;
* that Mr. Moses acted generally for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and for companies in
the F&T Group in relation to the receivership,
bearing in mind that the
purpose of the loan was to raise monies to enable the receiver/manager to
continue to conduct the business
of F & T Industries Pty Ltd;
* that Mr. Kingdon, although making the arrangements for advice to be given by
Mr. de Lemos to the guarantors Mr. & Mrs. Alessi,
acted for the lender who
would benefit from the guarantees in the event of default;
(e) because Mr. de Lemos was not informed of those matters by Mr. Moses (or by
his delegate Mr. Kingdon) Mr. de Lemos was not placed
in a position that enabled
him to give independent or adequate legal advice to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi.
[18.14] Bearing all of these findings in mind, I am satisfied to the required
degree that members of the legal profession of good
repute and competency would
reasonably regard the conduct of Mr. Moses to be disgraceful or dishonourable.
I find Mr. Moses guilty of misconduct at common law
. He should not have
acted for Briga Pty Ltd in respect of a loan made by Tyree Pty Ltd, a company
controlled by himself and his
wife. He should not have given advice of any kind
to Mr. Alessi, one of the guarantors. By advising Mr. Alessi that the documents
were in order, Mr. Moses meddled in the matter in a way that influenced Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi to allow Briga Pty Ltd to proceed with
the loan, and
influenced Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to guarantee repayment of the loan. The
attempt by Mr. Moses to arrange independent
legal advice for Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi, without ensuring that Mr. de Lemos was fully informed as to the
respective interests of Mr.
Moses and Mr. Kingdon, was insincere and
ineffective.
[18.15] The same findings cause me to be satisfied that Mr. Moses contravened
rules 10(1A)(i) and 10(1A)(ii) of the
Professional Conduct and Practice Rules
, and that his contravention of the rules was wilful or reckless.
Consequently,
I find Mr. Moses guilty of misconduct as defined by paragraph
(a)(i) of the definition of “misconduct” in section 137
Mr. Moses did not avoid conflicts of interest between himself and Tyree Pty Ltd
on the one hand and Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and Briga
Pty Ltd on the other hand.
Furthermore, Mr. Moses did not avoid conflicts of interest between Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi (for whom he
continued to act generally and gave advice that the
loan documents were in order) on the one hand and Briga Pty Ltd on the other
hand. The loan allowed Briga Pty Ltd to fund the receiver/manager and thus
allowed the receiver/manager to continue the operations
of F & T Industries
Pty Ltd, which is what Mr. & Mrs. Alessi wanted to happen, but Briga Pty Ltd
(like Exelerate Funding
Pty Ltd before it)
have been better advised
to sell the business conducted by F & T Industries Pty Ltd and to bring the
receivership to an end.
Section 103(1)
Legal Practice Act 1996
provides that the
order that a costs agreement be cancelled if satisfied that
the legal practitioner is guilty of misconduct. The conduct of Mr. Moses
totally inappropriate conduct on the part of a legal practitioner. His attempt
to arrange independent legal advice for Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi was insincere and
ineffective. Consequently, in the exercise of the discretion given to me by
section 103(1)
I cancel the costs agreement entered into between Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi and Mr. Moses on or about 11 April 2002, although bearing
SECTION 19:
THE FIFTH GROUND OF THE APPLICATION: NAMELY THE ALLEGATION OF
MISCONDUCT AND/OR UNSATISFACTORY CONDUCT IN PROCURING THE
COSTS AGREEMENT,
IN OBTAINING SECURITY FOR
that I consider to be most relevant to this allegation is set out
in the sections of these reasons headed
THE TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT
lesser extent
TAX INVOICES
Particulars of the
allegation:
[19.02] This allegation appears to be another allegation
misconduct at common law
The allegation also is an allegation
unsatisfactory conduct
, in reality as an alternative to the allegation
of misconduct. It probably is an allegation of unsatisfactory conduct as
by the following paragraphs of the definition of “unsatisfactory
conduct” in
section 137
Legal Practice Act 1996
““unsatisfactory conduct” means-
(a) conduct by a legal practitioner or firm in the course of engaging in legal
practice that falls short of the standard of competence
and diligence that a
member of the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent legal
practitioner or firm; or
(ab) conduct by a legal practitioner or firm in the course of engaging in legal
practice that would be regarded by a legal practitioner
or firm in good standing
as being unacceptable, including-
(i) conduct unbecoming a legal practitioner or firm;
(ii) unprofessional
Particulars of this
allegation of misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct
are set out in paragraphs
2.2(l) to 2.2(ma) of the Consolidated Points of Claim and Further and Better
Particulars. In addition
paragraphs 1 and 2.1 are made part of the allegation
by paragraph 2.2(l). These particulars can be summarised as follows:
(i) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi engaged Mr. Moses in the first week of July 2001 to
provide legal services in connection with the appointment
of a receiver/manager
to F & T Industries Pty Ltd;
(ii) Mr. Moses provided various legal services to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and to
companies in the F&T Group until March 2003;
(iii) on or about 12 April 2002 Mr. & Mrs. Alessi executed a costs agreement
between themselves and Mr. Moses, which costs agreement
bears the date 30 July
2001 and is the subject matter of the present application;
(iv) the costs agreement was signed as part of a bundle of documents, including
documents whereby Mr. & Mrs. Alessi provided
security for payment of legal
costs to Mr. Moses in the form of a charge and a mortgage over the
Alessis’ home and a statement
given pursuant to the provisions of
Legal Practice Act 1996
(v) Mr. Moses backdated the costs agreement, the charge and the
statement without the consent or the knowledge of Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi;
(vi) Mr. Moses represented to Mr. Alessi that the mortgage was to protect the
creditors, and not
only to provide security for legal costs. The representation was untrue, in
that the purpose of the mortgage
was to enable Mr. Moses to obtain security for
costs charged or to be charged by him;
(vii) Mr. Moses did not inform Mr. & Mrs. Alessi of the amount to be secured
by the mortgage prior to it being executed by them;
(viii) in the
statement, Mr. Moses represented to Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi that he would render tax invoices to them on a
monthly basis;
(ix) a tax invoice dated 25 March 2002 for $806,604 was rendered by Mr. Moses to
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi on or about 19 April 2002
on the basis that it was due and
payable. It was not rendered in accordance with the representation by Mr. Moses
that tax invoices
would be rendered on a monthly basis;
(x) the tax invoice of 25 March 2002 was not itemised. It claimed legal costs
that were grossly inflated, in that the amount claimed
exceeded the value of the
work performed by Mr. Moses. It also claimed disbursements that were grossly
excessive. It also failed
to take into account $150,000 paid to Mr. Moses by
the receiver/manager in reduction of a tax invoice dated 7 December 2001
by Mr. Moses to the receiver/manager;
(xi) the tax invoice dated 7 December 2001 was delivered by Mr. Moses to the
receiver/manager without the authority to Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi. Furthermore,
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi did not give authority to Mr. Moses to receive payments
from the receiver/manager
against that invoice.
mainly by way of denial:
[19.04] The
defence of Mr. Moses to this
allegation of misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct
is set out in paragraphs
1 to 2A6 of the Consolidated Points of Defence and Further and Better
Particulars. In substance, after
denying substantial parts of the particulars
of the allegation, and after objecting to some requests for further and better
particulars
of the defence, Mr. Moses maintained that:
(i) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi sought to engage Mr. Moses early in July 2001, and on
30 July 2001 he agreed to be retained to provide
legal services concerning the
appointment of a receiver/manager to F & T Industries Pty Ltd;
(ii) prior to accepting the retainer, Mr. Moses provided orally to Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi the information that was required to be
given to them pursuant to
Legal Practice Act 1996
(iii) upon accepting the retainer on 30 July 2001, Mr. Moses gave to Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi in written form a statement in writing
containing the information
required to be given to them pursuant to
Legal Practice Act
. The statement was handed to Mr. Alessi on 30 July
(iv) Mr. Moses provided legal services to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and to companies
associated with them from the date that he entered
into the retainer until March
(v) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and Mr. Moses entered into a costs agreement dated 30
July 2001. The agreement was handed to Mr. Alessi,
and accepted by him orally,
on 30 July 2001;
(vi) Mr. Moses spoke to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi on 3 and 4 February 2002, informed
them that they had incurred considerable legal costs,
and required them to
provide security for costs. Mr. & Mrs. Alessi responded by offering to
provide a second mortgage over their
house as security. Mr. Moses accepted
their offer, but immediately sought a charge over their interest in their home
to enable him
to lodge a caveat at that stage;
(vii) on 4 February 2002 Mr. & Mrs. Alessi agreed to charge their interest
in their home as security for legal costs. The charge
was sent by Mr. Moses to
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi by ordinary post on 4 February 2002;
(viii) on 25 March 2002 Mr. Moses rendered a tax invoice to Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi for legal costs incurred from July 2001 to 25 March
2002. The invoice
was handed by Mr. Moses to Mr. Alessi on 25 March 2002;
(ix) on or about 25 March 2002 Mr. Moses sought from Mr. & Mrs. Alessi the
second mortgage that they had agreed to provide;
(x) the mortgage was delivered to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi on 10 April 2002 with
further copies of the charge, the costs agreement and
The mortgage, the charge and the costs agreement were returned to Mr. Moses on
11 April 2002 duly signed
Mrs. Alessi;
(xi) on 11 April 2002 Mr. & Mrs. Alessi orally instructed Mr. Moses to date
the costs agreement 30 July 2001, the charge 4 February
2002 and the mortgage 11
April 2002.
The submission of the
applicants:
[19.05] The
submission of the applicants
relation to this allegation of misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct is set out
of the applicants’ Closing Submissions.
The more significant
parts of the submission can be summarised as follows:
(i) a retainer for the provision of legal services by Mr. Moses to Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi was entered into prior to 17 July 2001,
although there was no
agreement as to the amount of the costs to be charged. The retainer was limited
to issues associated with the
appointment of a receiver/manager to F & T
Industries Pty Ltd on 25 June 2001;
(ii) Mr. Moses did not explain why he rendered the tax invoice of 17 July 2001
to Mr. Alessi, in circumstances where the evidence
of Mr. Moses was that until
30 July 2001 he was attempting to identify the issues that needed to be
addressed and had not accepted
a retainer to act for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi;
(iii) Mr. Moses gave evidence that at meetings with Mr. Alessi on 30 July 2001
his role was extended beyond the provision of legal
services concerning the
appointment of a receiver/manager to F & T Industries Pty Ltd to the
provision of legal services relating
to matters, existing or anticipated,
involving Mr. & Mrs. Alessi or companies in the F&T Group. Mr. Moses
did not make a
note recording the change in his role, or record the change of
role in his running sheet, or mention the change in his confirmatory
30 July 2001 to Mr. Alessi [court book page 26]. The evidence of Mr. Arcaini
and Mr. Caines, who were present at the meetings
on 30 July 2001, did not
mention any change in Mr. Moses’ role;
(iv) neither the
statement nor the costs agreement, said by Mr. Moses
to have been handed by him to Mr. Alessi on 30 July
2001, refer to the provision
of legal services concerning the appointment of a receiver/manager to F & T
Industries Pty Ltd;
(v) Mr. Alessi gave evidence that he did not receive from Mr. Moses on 30 July
statement, a costs agreement or
the letter from Mr. Moses
dated 30 July 2001. Mr. Alessi also denied that, at the meetings on 30
2001, he discussed the costs
agreement or the terms of the retainer with Mr.
(vi) Mr. Moses did not give evidence that Mr. Alessi on 30 July 2001 evinced an
intention to be bound by the costs agreement subsequently
dated 30 July
(vii) Mr. Moses and Mr. Alessi did not make any agreement about costs on 30 July
2001. Any costs payable by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
should be a reasonable amount
calculated in accordance with
Legal Practice Act
(viii) the tax invoices rendered by Mr. Moses and dated 7 December 2001 and 25
March 2002 do not refer to legal services having been
performed pursuant to an
existing costs agreement;
(ix) no written costs agreement came into existence prior to 10 April 2002;
(x) the evidence of Mr. Moses based upon his running sheets shows that the
documents delivered by Mr. Moses to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
on or about 10 April
2002, for signature by them and return, were prepared by Mr. Kingdon [paragraphs
192, 193, 194, 197, 198 &
199 of exhibit LP24]. Mr. Kingdon would be
expected to know whether the documents were reprints of previous documents, but
not called by Mr. Moses to give evidence.
submission of the legal practitioner:
[19.06] The
submission of
in relation to this allegation of misconduct or unsatisfactory
conduct is set out in his Closing Submissions.
of his closing
submissions sets out the factual contentions of Mr. Moses alongside the factual
contentions of Mr. & Mrs.
concerning the same issues. The paragraphs
that are most relevant to the present allegation are paragraph 32
(concerning
the events of 3 & 4 February 2002 whereby according
Moses, but not according to Mr. Alessi, Mr. & Mrs. Alessi agreed
security for costs), and paragraphs 43 and
44(a) to 44(g) (concerning the events
of 10 & 11 April 2002 which led to
the execution by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi of
a second mortgage
and a charge over their home, and the execution of the costs
that is the subject matter of the present application). Having
those paragraphs carefully, I remain satisfied that the relevant
evidence is
recorded adequately in the section of these reasons
headed The Terms of
Engagement.
The following submissions in the section headed
purpose of the backdating”
of Mr. Moses’ closing
submissions are particularly relevant to the present allegation of misconduct or
unsatisfactory
[pages 56 to 58 of the closing submissions, including the
addendum to those pages]:
(i) the costs agreement was backdated to 30 July 2001, being the date upon which
agreement on costs was reached verbally between
Mr. Moses and Mr. & Mrs.
(ii) the charge was backdated to 4 February 2002, being the date upon which Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi agreed verbally to grant a charge
to Mr. Moses;
(iii) the allegations made by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi that there was no verbal
agreement as to costs reached on 30 July 2001, and no
verbal agreement to grant
a charge reached on 4 February 2002, are denied by Mr.
(iv) there is no evidence that anyone was misled by the backdating of the costs
agreement or the charge. The contention by Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi that Mr. Moses
sought by the backdating to mislead the Supreme Court in Supreme Court
proceedings is denied by Mr. Moses;
(v) neither the backdating of the costs agreement nor the backdating of the
charge had the effect of avoiding the claw back provisions
applicable in the
event of the bankruptcy of Mr. or Mrs. Alessi;
(vi) the backdating of the costs agreement alleged by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi when
they filed the present application on 7 May 2003
[paragraphs 3, 5, 6 to 8 and
24(d) of the application] was admitted in substance by Mr. Moses when he filed
his points of defence
on 4 July 2002 on the basis that the costs agreement was
handed to Mr. Alessi on 30 July 2001 and accepted by him verbally on that
[paragraphs 1C(b) & 1E(a) of the points of defence]. Mr. Moses acknowledged
that Mr. & Mrs. Alessi might say that the
backdating was obvious because the
signed costs agreement had a footer that included a date subsequent to the date
borne by the costs
agreement, but it was obvious because Mr. Moses openly
backdated the costs agreement.
Findings as to these
allegations of misconduct and/or misconduct:
[19.07] I made many
findings relevant to these allegations in the section of these reasons headed
THE TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT
. The findings are so extensive that I will not
repeat them here. I also set out in that section of these reasons my
conclusions
as to the terms of engagement. All of those conclusions are
relevant to the present allegations.
[19.08] Those parts of these
allegations that concern the terms of the costs agreement
are best dealt
with as part of the seventh ground of these present application, namely the
allegation that the costs agreement was
not fair and reasonable.
parts of these
allegations that concern uplift factors
are best dealt
with as part of the eighth ground of the application, namely the allegation that
the legal practitioner charged grossly
excessive legal costs.
am not concerned by the fact that Mr. Moses sought
security for his
, or by the manner in which he sought security.
[19.10] I am
concerned by the
backdating of some documents by Mr. Moses
. McPherson JA
Attorney-General v Bax
[1998] QCA 89
[1999] 2 Qd R 9
“... the act of falsely “backdating” documents is plainly a
serious matter. The ordinary presumption is that,
unless there is affirmative
evidence to the contrary, a document is taken to have been executed on the date
it bears. Such evidence
is often difficult to obtain particularly after a lapse
of some time from the event. The presumption is therefore one on which business
is habitually conducted and for that reason, among others, it is plainly
important to maintain its integrity so far as possible.
The date on a document
is often critical in a number of ways. In the case of insolvency, it is capable
of determining whether the
transaction recorded or given effect in the
instrument is liable to be set aside.
The spectacle of a solicitor, who was chairman of the meeting, falsely asserting
a date for the execution of an instrument is one
that is not likely to be
readily forgotten by the large number of business people who were present on
that occasion. It conveys
a very poor image of the honesty and integrity of
solicitors and so tends to bring the whole profession and its standards into
disrepute.”
Legal practitioners should insert the actual date of signing as
the date of a document, and not backdate the document. If agreement
reached that the document is to take effect from a different date, legal
practitioners should simply include a provision
to that effect in the
[19.11] Taking into account the evidence as to the backdating
of documents, and the findings that I have made as to the backdating
documents, I am not satisfied that legal practitioners of good reputation and
competency would reasonably regard the conduct of
Mr. Moses in backdating some
documents to be disgraceful or dishonourable. Although there were significant
differences in some of
the terms, the backdated documents provided written
confirmation of some of the other terms in oral agreements reached between Mr.
Moses and Mr. & Mrs. Alessi on or about the dates to which the documents
were backdated. Consequently,
I do not find Mr. Moses guilty of misconduct
at common law in relation to the backdating of
[19.12] Taking into account the same evidence and the
same findings as to the backdating of documents,
I do find Mr. Moses guilty
of unsatisfactory conduct as defined by paragraph (ab) of the definition of
“unsatisfactory conduct”
section 137
Legal Practice
, in that his conduct in backdating documents without the consent or
instruction of Mr. Alessi would be regarded by a legal practitioner
standing as being unacceptable.
Section 103(1)
of the Act provides that
the Tribunal
order that a costs agreement be cancelled if satisfied
that the legal practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory conduct.
prepared to cancel the costs agreement as a result of this finding of
unsatisfactory conduct
where, as here, I am not satisfied by the evidence of
Mr. Alessi that the backdating of documents misled either Mr. or Mrs.
SECTION 20:
THE SIXTH GROUND OF THE APPLICATION: NAMELY THE ALLEGATION OF
MISCONDUCT AND/OR UNSATISFACTORY CONDUCT IN NOT PROVIDING
ADVICE, AND
IN NOT AVOIDING CONFLICTS OF
that I consider to be most relevant to this allegation of
misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct is set out in the sections of these
THE TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT
THE REPAYMENT OF EXELERATE FUNDING PTY
LTD, INCLUDING THE SALE OF KEYS ROAD BY BRIGA PTY LTD TO TYREE PTY LTD
THE COSTS OF THE RECEIVERSHIP, INCLUDING THE LOAN FROM TYREE PTY LTD TO BRIGA
Particulars of the
allegation:
Particulars of the allegation
are set out
in paragraphs 2.2(n) to 2.2(ob) of the Consolidated Points of Claim and Further
and Better Particulars. The particulars,
as they relate to advice
be summarised as follows:
(i) during the course of his engagement, Mr. Moses was aware that Mrs. Alessi
was a person with limited command of the English language,
and limited knowledge
and understanding of commercial and corporate matters;
(ii) during the course of his engagement, Mr. Moses gave advice to Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi and to companies associated with them;
(iii) prior to procuring the execution of documents by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and
companies associated with them, Mr. Moses failed
to provide “professional,
skilful and appropriate advice” to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi or companies
associated with them;
(iv) the failure to provide professional, skilful and appropriate advice caused
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and companies associated with
them not to give informed
consent to the transactions effected by the documents;
(v) the documents concerned were:
* the contract of sale of Keys Road by Briga Pty Ltd to Tyree Pty Ltd and
associated documents (“the sale documents”);
* the assignment from Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd to Briga Pty Ltd of the
debenture granted by F & T Industries Pty Ltd, and associated
(“the assignment documents”);
* the agreement for a loan by Tyree Pty Ltd to Briga Pty Ltd and associated
documents (“the loan documents”); and
* the second mortgage by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to Mr. Moses of their home, and
associated documents (“the mortgage documents”).
(vi) Mr. Moses provided no written advice to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi or to
companies associated with them as to the “legal consequences,
benefits and
risks” associated with the documents;
(vii) the advice about the documents given by Mr. Moses to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
or to companies associated with them was “oral
and superficial”;
The particulars,
as they relate to conflicts of interest
summarized as follows:
(viii) when providing legal services, including advice, to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
and companies associated with them, Mr. Moses “failed
to avoid conflict
between the rights, interests and obligations of each of the applicants”,
in other words between Mr. &
Mrs. Alessi;
(ix) when providing legal services, including advice, to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
and companies associated with them, Mr. Moses “failed
to avoid conflict
between the rights, interests and obligations ..... of each of the applicants
with the rights, interests and
obligations of each of the related
entities”, in other words between Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and the companies
associated with
(x) Mr. Moses advised Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to negotiate with Exelerate Funding
Pty Ltd and with the receiver/manager of F &
T Industries Pty Ltd for the
assignment by Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd to Briga Pty Ltd of the debenture
granted by F & T Industries
Pty Ltd, and also to negotiate for the
receiver/manager to continue as such after the assignment;
(xi) Mr. Moses advised Briga Pty Ltd, through its directors Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi, to sell Keys Road to Tyree Pty Ltd, a company
controlled by Mr. Moses
and his wife;
(xii) Mr. Moses advised Briga Pty Ltd, through its directors Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi, to borrow money from Tyree Pty Ltd, a company
controlled by Mr. Moses
and his wife;
(xiii) Mr. Moses advised Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to grant a second mortgage over
their home to Mr. Moses as security for his legal
(xiv) in providing legal and commercial advice to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and to
companies associated with them, and to Tyree Pty Ltd,
Mr. Moses failed to
appraise Mr. & Mrs. Alessi or the companies associated with them of the
extent to which he was, or might
be, compromised in giving that advice.
Defence mainly by way of denial:
[20.03] The
defence of Mr. Moses to this allegation of
misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct
is set out in paragraphs 3 to 3A10 of
the Consolidated Points of Defence and Further and Better Particulars. Mr.
Moses denied every
part of the allegation but, without limiting the generality
of the denial, maintained in relation to the
sale of Keys Road
(i) Briga Pty Ltd offered to sell Keys Road to Tyree Pty Ltd for $1.8M so that
Briga Pty Ltd could use the proceeds of sale to take
an assignment from
Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd of the debenture granted by F & T Industries Pty
Ltd, in circumstances where the
receiver/manager of F & T Industries Pty Ltd
was threatening to sell the business of F & T Industries Pty Ltd and to call
upon the guarantees given to Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
and by companies associated with them;
(ii) the receiver/manager consented to F & T Industries Pty Ltd taking a
lease of Keys Road from Tyree Pty Ltd following the
(iii) Briga Pty Ltd and Tyree Pty Ltd were independently represented by legal
firms in relation to the sale;
(iv) Tyree Pty Ltd and F & T Industries Pty Ltd were independently
represented by legal firms in relation to the lease;
Also without limiting his denial of every part of the
allegation, Mr. Moses maintained in relation to
(v) the receiver/manager demanded that Briga Pty Ltd provide about $1M as
working capital to fund the business of F & T Industries
Pty Ltd, failing
which the receiver/manager threatened to sell the business of F & T
Industries Pty Ltd, and to call upon the
guarantees given by Mr. & Mrs.
Alessi and companies associated with them;
(vi) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi asked Tyree Pty Ltd to loan money to Briga Pty Ltd to
enable Briga Pty Ltd to satisfy the demand of the
receiver/manager;
(vii) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi received independent legal advice prior to signing
the loan documents.
The submission of the applicants:
[20.04] The
submission of the applicants
concerning this
allegation of misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct as it relates to
of Keys Road
is set out in
of the applicants’ Closing
Submissions.
The submission of the applicants concerning this
allegation of misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct as it relates to
is set out in
of the applicants’ Closing
Submissions.
Although this allegation is framed in terms of not providing
adequate advice and not avoiding conflicts of interest, the substance
submission was set out when dealing with the section of these reasons headed
“The second ground of the application,
namely the allegation of misconduct
and/or unsatisfactory conduct arising out of the sale of Keys Road by Briga Pty
Ltd to Tyree
Pty Ltd” (obviously only as to the sale of Keys Road), and
“The fourth ground of the application, namely the allegation
of misconduct
and/or unsatisfactory conduct arising out of the loan from Tyree Pty Ltd to
Briga Pty Ltd” (as to the loan).
Consequently, the substance of the
submission will not be repeated here.
The submission of the legal
practitioner:
[20.05] The
submission of Mr. Moses
in relation
to this allegation of misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct is set out in his
Closing Submissions.
of his closing
submissions mainly sets out the
factual contentions of Mr. Moses alongside the factual contentions of Mr. &
Alessi concerning
the same issues.
[20.06] So far as the
is concerned, the case put by Mr. Moses is set out in his
to the closing submission of the applicants. The substance of the
reply was set out when dealing with the section of these reasons
“The second ground of the application, namely the allegation of misconduct
and/or unsatisfactory conduct arising out
of the sale of Keys Road by Briga Pty
Ltd to Tyree Pty Ltd” and will not be repeated here.
is concerned, the case put by Mr. Moses is set out in his
to the closing submission of the applicants. The substance of the
reply was set out when dealing with the section of these reasons
“The fourth ground of the application, namely the allegation of misconduct
and/or unsatisfactory conduct arising out
of the loan from Tyree Pty Ltd to
Briga Pty Ltd” and will not be repeated here.
Findings as to
these allegations of misconduct and/or unsatisfactory
[20.07] The evidence given at this hearing was
insufficient to enable me to determine whether Mrs. Alessi was at relevant times
person with limited command of the English language, and limited knowledge and
understanding of commercial and corporate matters.
She was a party to most of
the transactions considered in these proceedings, and an active participant in
some of them, but she
did not give evidence.
[20.08] In other respects,
I regard the issues raised by this allegation to have been determined
substance by the findings made by me in the sections of these reasons
(i) The terms of engagement;
(ii) The repayment of Exelerate Funding Pty Ltd, including the sale of Keys Road
by Briga Pty Ltd to Tyree Pty Ltd;
(iii) The costs of the receivership, including the loan from Tyree Pty Ltd to
Briga Pty Ltd;
(iv) The second ground of the application, namely the allegation of misconduct
and/or unsatisfactory conduct arising out of the sale
of Keys Road by Briga Pty
Ltd to Tyree Pty Ltd;
(v) The fourth ground of the application, namely the allegation of misconduct
and/or unsatisfactory conduct arising out of the loan
from Tyree Pty Ltd to
Briga Pty Ltd;
(vi) The fifth ground of the application, namely the allegation of misconduct
and/or unsatisfactory conduct in procuring the costs
agreement, and in obtaining
security for costs.
The relevant issues having been
determined elsewhere, and the costs agreement having been cancelled on the
fourth ground of the application,
it is not necessary for me to deal any further
with this allegation.
SECTION 21:
THE SEVENTH GROUND OF THE APPLICATION: NAMELY THE ALLEGATION THAT
THE COSTS AGREEMENT IS NOT FAIR AND
REASONABLE.
that I consider to be most relevant to this ground of the
application is set out in the sections of these reasons headed
THE TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT
Particulars of the
allegation:
[21.02] Particulars of this allegation are set out in
paragraph 2.3 of the Consolidated Points of Claim and Further and Better
Particulars
in the following way:
“2. The grounds of the application
2.3 that the agreement is not fair and
reasonable.
Particulars
The Applicants rely on the particulars contained within each of the preceding
paragraphs. The agreement is not fair and reasonable
due to the surrounding
circumstances by which it was executed, being the circumstances described in the
Consolidated Points of Claim
and Further and Better
Particulars.”
The “preceding paragraphs” incorporated by paragraph
2.3 are paragraphs 1, 2.1 and 2.2.
Defence by way of denial:
[21.03] The
defence of Mr. Moses to this ground of the
application
is set out in paragraph 4 of the Consolidated Points of Defence
and Further and Better Particulars, which states succinctly that
each and every
allegation made in relation to this ground is denied.
The submission
of the applicants:
[21.04] Section 4 of the
applicants’
Closing Submissions
is directed partly at this allegation. It makes the
following submissions concerning the uplift factor:
(i) Mr. Moses did not discuss the uplift factor with Mr. & Mrs. Alessi prior
to them signing the costs agreement;
(ii) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi were not aware of the uplift factor when they signed
the costs agreement;
(iii) the uplift factor was not placed in writing or evidenced in writing,
either in the costs agreement or elsewhere;
(iv) the tax invoice rendered by Mr. Moses to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi on 25 March
2001 included an uplift of $191,207, or 26% of the
total professional fees
charged in the invoice, but the invoice did not mention the uplift factor;
(v) the tax invoice rendered by Mr. Moses to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi on 18 June
2002 included an uplift of $160,283, or 25% of the
total professional fees
charged in the invoice, but the invoice did not mention the uplift factor;
(vi) the uplift factor was not mentioned in the Consolidated Points of Defence
and Further and Better Particulars, filed by Mr. Moses
on 20 October 2003.
The submission of the legal practitioner:
[21.05] The
Closing Submissions of Mr. Moses
generally to the not fair and reasonable ground, save as to legal matters,
although much of the relevant evidence was
the subject matter of submissions by
Mr. Moses that are recorded elsewhere in these reasons. The closing submissions
contend generally
that the costs agreement was fair and reasonable [paragraph 60
of part 2], and confirm that during the course of these proceedings
waived all costs charged to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi that were calculated in
accordance with the uplift factor [paragraph
60 of part 2, and exhibit
Findings as to this ground of the
application:
[21.06] Many decisions have been given over the
years as to the meaning of the words “not fair and reasonable”,
sometimes in different contexts. In a decision of this Tribunal in
Nicholson v Behan & Speed Pty
T0333 of 1999, given on 13 July 2000 in
an application to cancel a costs agreement, I said:
“ “Fair” and “reasonable” are different concepts:
In re Stuart; Ex Parte Cathcart
[1893] UKLawRpKQB 119
[1893] 2 QB 201
@ 204-205. There is a
requirement at common law that a costs agreement between a client and his or her
solicitor be
both fair and
reasonable:
Weiss v Barker Gosling
16 Fam LR 728
, where the following passage appears @
“... there is, in my view, a requirement at common law that a costs
agreement between a solicitor and client be fair and reasonable.
Although that
expression may be a composite one, it appears generally to have been approached
in the cases on the basis that “fairness”
relates to the point of
entry into the agreement whilst “reasonableness” relates to the
terms of the agreement itself.”
The position at common law is similar to various equitable obligations owed by a
solicitor to a client, as appears from the following
Law Society
of NSW v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
“But if costs agreements of this kind are to be obtained from clients, it
is necessary that the solicitor obtaining them consider
carefully her fiduciary
and other duties, that she be conscious of the extent to which the agreements
contain provisions which put
her in a position of advantage and/or conflict of
interest, and that she take care that, by explanation, independent advice or
the client exercises an independent and informed judgment in entering
into them.”
The decision in
Re Morris Fletcher & Cross’ Bill of Costs
[1997] 2 Qd 228 is to much the same
[21.07] I made many findings relevant to this
ground of the application in the section of these reasons headed
THE TERMS OF
. The findings are so extensive that I will not repeat them
I set out in the same section of these reasons my conclusions as to
the terms of engagement. The conclusions listed what I described
inconsistencies
between the costs agreement and the section 86 statement
provided to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi when the costs agreement was
The conclusions also referred to
two terms of the engagement
that were agreed to orally but which were omitted from, or appeared in different
form in, the costs agreement
and the section 86 statement
made one finding in the section of these reasons headed
TAX INVOICES
is relevant to this ground of the application, namely that Mr. Alessi did not
enter into an oral agreement to pay an uplift
factor. The costs agreement did
not make any reference in writing to
uplift factors
, but the third and
fourth tax invoices issued by Mr. Moses included substantial uplift
[21.09] I made various findings in the sections of these
reasons that dealt with the second and fourth grounds of the present
application,
namely the grounds concerning the sale of Keys Road and the loan
from Tyree Pty Ltd to Briga Pty Ltd, as to the
relationships between Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi and companies in the F&T Group on the one hand and Mr.
Moses and Tyree Pty Ltd on
the other hand
. The findings as to those
relationships are relevant to this ground of the application.
found in the section of these reasons that dealt with the fifth ground of the
application, namely the conduct of Mr. Moses
in procuring the costs agreement
and obtaining security for costs, that the conduct of Mr. Moses in
documents, including the costs agreement
, without the consent or instruction
of Mr. Alessi would be regarded by a legal practitioner in good standing as
being unacceptable.
[21.11] The uplift factor ceased to be relevant to
this ground when I found that the applicants did not agree to pay an uplift
and the finding as to the backdating of documents is of marginal
significance when dealing with this ground. However,
I am well satisfied
that the findings and conclusions set out in the section of these reasons headed
THE TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT are sufficient
standing on their own to render the costs
agreement not fair and reasonable.
Section 103(1)
Legal Practice Act 1996
provides that the Tribunal
a costs agreement be cancelled if satisfied that the costs agreement is not fair
and reasonable. The findings upon which
my decision is based affect fundamental
terms of the costs agreement, and
I do cancel the costs agreement entered
into between Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and Mr. Moses on or about 11 April 2002,
although bearing
date 30 July 2001
SECTION 22:
THE EIGHTH GROUND OF THE APPLICATION: NAMELY THE ALLEGATION OF
MISCONDUCT AND/OR UNSATISFACTORY CONDUCT IN THAT THE LEGAL
PRACTITIONER
GROSSLY EXCESSIVE LEGAL
[22.01] The
that I consider to be most relevant to this allegation is set
out in the sections of these reasons headed
THE TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT
THE REPAYMENT OF EXELERATE FUNDING PTY LTD, INCLUDING THE SALE OF KEYS ROAD
BY BRIGA PTY LTD TO TYREE PTY LTD
Particulars of the allegation:
[22.02] The
allegation appears to be based upon paragraph (a)(v) of the definition of
section 137
Legal Practice Act
, which provides as follows:
““misconduct” means –
(a) misconduct by a legal practitioner or firm in the course of engaging in
legal practice, including –
(v) the charging of grossly excessive legal costs;”
Alternatively, the allegation could be dealt with as an
allegation of misconduct at common law. However, I will not deal with the
allegation in that way where, as here, there is legislation relating to legal
practitioners which provides in quite specific terms
that the charging of
grossly excessive legal costs constitutes misconduct.
The definition of
unsatisfactory conduct
” also appears in
section 137
Legal Practice Act 1996
. No part of the definition is directed at the
charging of excessive, let alone grossly excessive, costs. However, the
of grossly excessive legal costs might amount to unsatisfactory conduct
on the basis that it “falls short of the standard of
competence and
diligence that a member of the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably
competent legal practitioner” (paragraph
(a) of the definition), or that
the charging of grossly excessive legal costs “would be regarded by a
legal practitioner or
firm in good standing as being unacceptable”
(paragraph (ab) of the definition).
Particulars of this
are set out in paragraph 2.4 of the Consolidated Points of Claim
and Further and Better Particulars. The allegation is framed as
an allegation
that bills of costs are “grossly excessive”. It does not allege
misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct,
one of the grounds upon which a costs
agreement might be cancelled, but I will treat the allegation primarily as an
allegation of
misconduct as defined by paragraph (a)(v) of the definition of
“misconduct” in
section 137
of the Act.
Paragraph 2.4
commences by making reference to “the first and second bill of
costs”, meaning the tax invoices dated 25
March 2002 for $806,604 and 18
June 2003 for $1,190,693. However, in the section on Tax Invoices I have
described these tax invoices
as the third tax invoice and the fourth tax invoice
respectively.
[22.04] The allegation is in reality a series of
allegations:
(i) that the costs charged are grossly excessive;
(ii) that the costs charged in the third and fourth tax invoices duplicate costs
charged in the second tax invoice dated 7 December
2001 for $281,028. The
second tax invoice was addressed to Mr. Alessi in his capacity as a director of
Briga Pty Ltd, but it is
common ground that the invoice was paid as to $150,000
by the receiver/manager;
(iii) that the costs charged cannot be substantiated;
(iv) that the third and fourth tax invoices include matters other than legal
(v) that the third and fourth tax invoices include matters for which Mr. Moses
could not charge Mr. & Mrs. Alessi;
(vi) that the third tax invoice includes fictitious hours;
(vii) that the third and fourth tax invoices fail to take into account the
alleged agreement that Mr. Moses would allocate $400,000
from the sale of Keys
Road towards legal costs; and
(viii) that the third and fourth tax invoices fail to bring into account an
alleged gross profit of $700,000 made by Tyree Pty Ltd
when it resold Keys
Defence by way of denial:
[22.05] The
defence of Mr. Moses to this allegation of misconduct or unsatisfactory
is set out in paragraph 5 of the Consolidated Points of Defence and
Further and Better Particulars simply as a denial of every
allegation.
Evidence as to an appropriate amount for
[22.06] As I mentioned in the section of these reasons headed
THE RUNNING SHEETS
gave evidence that Mr. Moses did
not perform many items of work that Mr. Moses claimed to have performed, mostly
the sending of confirmatory
letters to Mr. Alessi, but I am satisfied that Mr.
Alessi relied heavily upon his secretary Miss Briguglio to deal with incoming
correspondence and that he did not see many items of incoming
correspondence.
[22.07] As mentioned in the section of these reasons
TAX INVOICES
, Mr. Moses provided itemised bill of costs in
relation to the third and fourth tax invoices, which were supplemented by
running sheets
setting out details of the work that he claimed to have
performed. Mr. Moses also gave the following evidence:
“33. Certain assertions were made in the applicants’ opening that
are not yet dealt with in my statements. I will respond
(1) It was said that my running sheets indicate that I gave very little legal
advice, but acted more as a conduit for information
It is not true that I gave very little legal advice. There were numerous
meetings, calls, letters and faxes through which I advised,
among other things,
on matters as varied as distribution agreements, taxation issues, voluntary
administration, the DOCA [Deed of
Company Arrangement], trademarks, proceedings
in Italy and Australia, machinery ownership, insolvency issues, property and
lease documents, and commercial disputes in Australia, Italy and
(2) It was said that there are relatively few entries in the running sheets for
drafting e-mails and faxes, and none to draft documents;
that most of the work
recorded seems to be perusing documents, attending meetings and telephone
It is not true that I drafted only a few faxes or e-mails, and no documents.
There are hundreds of letters, faxes and e-mails in
my discovery.
It is not true that I drafted no documents. I drafted tax office settlement
terms for the Alessis, distribution agreements for Weck
& Sons Pty Ltd, and
for Turners & Growers Pty Ltd, many affidavits for the action in Salerno,
Italy, brought by the Italians,
lease agreements for property and equipment,
trade mark dispute settlement terms, related company debt action settlement
many other documents.
Mention was made of an ASIC form, and the time I charged for completing it. One
cannot complete a form of that nature, which has
the effect of releasing a
debenture, without going back and carefully checking that the form mirrors the
details of the debenture
charge with absolute precision.
(3) It was said that there was a clear duplication of effort with Robert Kingdon
in relation to court proceedings.
That is not true. My role was to develop with the client and others the
commercial strategies in the litigation, and to collect
and collate information
from Italy and Australia necessary to enable the litigation to proceed or to be
defended (as the case may
be). But I did not duplicate Mr Kingdon’s role
or work as litigation
(4) It was said that there are no file notes of my
That is not true. My running sheets were raised from the notes that I took. In
addition, there are file notes of extensive meetings,
in my discovery. These
notes were too long to be condensed into running sheet format. They relate to
meetings throughout the period
of my retainer with the Italians and their
lawyers in Australia, with executives and former executives of Qenos, with Mr
(the Alessis’ Italian solicitor), with Mr Alessi and his staff
at F&T, and conferences with the Receiver Manager Mr Lockwood
(5) It was said that I gave no written or detailed advice.
That is not true. There were a substantial number of letters and faxes, sent to
Mr Alessi, Ms Briguglio, Mr D’Angelo and Mr
Hondrakis, as well as copies
of self-explanatory letters sent to others, but copied to those individuals, at
Mr Alessi’s
instruction.
(6) It was said that there was only ever one brief to
That is not true. Leaving aside briefs delivered by Mr Kingdon, I personally
sent briefs to Ross McCaw QC (relating to the Italian
joint-venture) and to Mr
Mark Ravech (relating to the Italian litigation). I assisted Mr Kingdon in the
preparation of extensive
briefs to Noel Magee QC, Robert Cameron and Stephen
(7) It was said that I spent no time in court
instructing.
That is correct. I did not duplicate Mr Kingdon’s role.”
[Paragraph 33 of exhibit LP26.]
Peter Kennedy
, a senior partner in the Melbourne law firm Madgwicks, did
give expert evidence on behalf of Mr. Moses as to the hourly rates charged
his firm for what he called “the mid-level market for commercial law
services”. I am satisfied that Mr. Kennedy is
a practitioner with
experience as a practitioner that is similar to the experience of Mr. Moses, and
that the evidence of Mr. Kennedy
concerned legal work of a kind similar to that
performed by Mr. Moses for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi. Mr. Kennedy said:
“Between July 2001 and March 2003, my rate was $375-395 per hour (plus
GST), depending upon the matter. Those rates were about
average for someone of
my experience in the market of the day.” [Paragraph 4 of exhibit
“In addition to solicitors’ hourly rates, the firm [Madgwicks] has
for some time charged separately, and by the hour,
for administrative services:
for example, for the time spent by solicitors’ personal assistants, in
copying, faxing, typing
and printing documents, assembling briefs, etc.
Charging an hourly rate for administration is a trend in commercial law firms
began several years ago. It is now fairly common. Madgwicks started
charging for personal assistant support in mid 2002, as I recall,
at the rate of
$80.00 per hour.” [Paragraph 5 of exhibit LP47.]
[22.09] No evidence was given by a
legal costs
. It is not essential that a costs consultant give evidence in a
case of this kind, but such evidence might have been of assistance
Furthermore, unlike most allegations of misconduct in charging grossly excessive
legal costs that come before this Tribunal,
the allegation was not dealt with by
directing attention to particular items in the bills of costs (apart from the
The submission of the
applicants:
applicants’ Closing
includes submissions concerning the uplift factor, which
submissions are set out in the section of these reasons headed “The
seventh ground of the application: the allegation that the costs agreement is
not fair and reasonable”.
a further submission
concerning the uplift factor:
“* there was no basis for calculation of the lump sum bills of March 2002
and June 2003 in reliance on a term of contract permitting
charging by reference
to an uplift fee of the kind claimed by the legal practitioner and set out in
the itemized bills of
* because there was no proper basis proven for the calculation of the
professional amounts in the invoices, the charges made must
be presumed to be
excessive and exorbitant.” [Paragraph 47 of
section 4.]
The uplift factor added $350,137 to the
professional fees charged in the tax invoices of 25 March 2002 and 18 June 2003.
of the further submission is that the costs agreement did not require
Mr. & Mrs. Alessi to pay an uplift, and the mere fact that
such a large
amount was charged as a uplift establishes that Mr. Moses charged grossly
excessive legal costs.
Of course, during the course of this hearing Mr.
Moses waived all charges attributable to the uplift factor [exhibit LP23].
that does not alter the thrust of the submission that the legal costs
by Mr. Moses were grossly excessive.
The submission of
the legal practitioner:
[22.11] The
Closing Submission of Mr.
does not deal with this ground of the application, save as to legal
issues. However, I do not doubt that Mr. Moses relies upon the
bills of costs,
the running sheets, many of the documents tendered in these proceedings, and
generally upon the evidence given in
these proceedings to establish the nature
and extent of the work performed by him for Mr. & Mrs. Alessi and companies
[22.12] The
Reply filed by Mr. Moses
response to the closing submission of the applicants contains the following
submissions:
(i) Mr. & Mrs. Alessi did not identify the hours set out in the running
sheets which they claim were not worked;
(ii) no evidence was called by Mr. & Mrs. Alessi as to prevailing hourly
rates for legal services.
Findings as to this allegation of misconduct or
unsatisfactory conduct:
[22.13] I found in the section of these
reasons headed
THE TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT
that Mr. Alessi did not agree
orally to pay an uplift in respect of legal costs. Furthermore, I am well
satisfied that there was
no basis, oral or otherwise, upon which Mr. Moses might
have come to believe that there was such an agreement.
I find that Mr.
Moses charged grossly excessive legal costs
by including in the tax invoices
of 25 March 2002 and 18 June 2003 uplifts totalling $350,137 or thereabouts, and
that he is guilty
of misconduct as defined by paragraph (a)(v) of the definition
of misconduct in
section 137
Legal Practice Act
Section 103(1)
Legal Practice Act 1996
that the Tribunal
order that a costs agreement be cancelled if
satisfied that the legal practitioner is guilty of misconduct or unsatisfactory
in relation to the provision of legal services to which the agreement
relates. I acknowledge that the discretion conferred by the
sub-section must be
exercised judicially.
In the exercise of that discretion I am not prepared
to cancel the costs agreement
where, as here, the finding of misconduct is
attributable solely to the charging of uplifts and the legal practitioner has
payment of the uplifts. Put another way, nothing would be achieved by
cancellation.
[22.14] I found in the section of these reasons headed
THE REPAYMENT OF EXELERATE FUNDING PTY LTD, INCLUDING THE SALE OF KEYS ROAD
BY BRIGA PTY LTD TO TYREE PTY LTD
that Mr. Moses did not agree with Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi to allocate
from the proceeds of sale of Keys
Road towards past or future legal costs incurred, or to be incurred, by Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi.
Consequently, the alleged agreement to that effect does not
need to be taken into account in determining whether the legal costs
Mr. Moses independently of the uplifts were grossly
[22.15] Having turned my mind to the question whether the
legal costs charged by Mr. Moses independently of the uplifts were grossly
excessive, I find myself in the position where the evidence given at this
hearing, and the documents tendered during the course of
this hearing, are
inadequate to enable me to determine that issue as a whole, or even to determine
matters of detail raised by Mr.
& Mrs. Alessi such as:
(i) whether some costs charged in the second tax invoice were duplicated in the
third and fourth invoices;
(ii) whether all of the costs
charged can be substantiated;
(iii) whether the tax invoices relate to work other than legal
(iv) whether the third and fourth tax invoices include work for which Mr. Moses
could not charge Mr. & Mrs. Alessi; and
(v) whether the third invoice includes fictitious hours, in other words charges
for work that was not done.
I find that the lack of evidence as to the legal costs
charged independently of the uplifts prevents me from determining whether the
legal costs charged by Mr. Moses independently of the uplifts were grossly
[22.16] There is a further allegation that the legal
costs charged by Mr. Moses were grossly excessive because Mr. Moses failed to
bring into account the gross profit made by Tyree Pty Ltd on the resale of Keys
Road. To my mind, the obligation of a fiduciary
to account for profits flowing
to the fiduciary as a result of a breach of trust has nothing to do with legal
costs, and therefore
nothing to do with the allegation that Mr. Moses charged
grossly excessive legal costs.
SECTION 23:
THE NINTH GROUND OF THE APPLICATION: NAMELY THE ALLEGATION THAT
THE COSTS AGREEMENT IS NOT FAIR AND REASONABLE BECAUSE
OF THE CONDUCT
LEGAL PRACTITIONER DURING THE COURSE OF THESE
PROCEEDINGS.
[23.01] Particulars
of the allegation are not set out in the Consolidated Points of Claim and
Further and Better Particulars. This
is understandable, because the allegation
concerns conduct on the part of the legal practitioner which is alleged to have
during the course of the present proceedings.
[23.02] This
allegation is first mentioned in the general overview
to the closing
submissions of the applicants:
“ ... it is submitted in this GENERAL OVERVIEW that additional matters
arising during the proceedings, to be described hereafter,
indicate misconduct
amounting to an abuse of the legal practitioner’s role and
responsibilities as a solicitor, including breach
of his duties to the Courts
and this Tribunal. This conduct, which it is submitted constitutes misconduct,
justifies cancellation
of the Costs Agreement. Whilst the conduct is not
necessarily misconduct “in relation to the provision of legal services to
which the agreement relates”, it is certainly misconduct relating to the
Costs Agreement, which conduct is unreasonable having
regard to its effect upon
the client. As such, and without more, its effect is to enable a finding that
the Costs Agreement is not
fair and reasonable within the meaning of that term
in section 103(1)(c).” [Paragraph 4 of the general overview.]
Despite several references to misconduct, which is a ground for
setting aside a costs agreement, I take this allegation to be an allegation
the costs agreement is not fair and reasonable because of that
misconduct.
[23.03] This allegation was not pleaded in a succinct
manner, but the general overview includes contentions that the following conduct
on the part of Mr. Moses occurred during the course of the present
proceedings:
(i) Mr. Moses first produced the running sheets to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi in
January 2004, eight months after the commencement of
these proceedings
[paragraphs 32 and 89 of the general overview];
(ii) Mr. Moses did not produce to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi during the course of
theses proceedings detailed invoices for significant
disbursements incurred by
him on their behalf [paragraph 34 of the general overview];
(iii) Mr. Moses failed to provide witness statements to Mr. & Mrs. Alessi by
the dates set out in orders made by the Tribunal
[paragraph 40 of the general
(iv) Mr. Moses provided itemised bill of costs during the course of the
proceedings that exactly totalled the amounts of the lump
sum bills rendered to
the Alessis [paragraph 44 (iii) of the general overview];
(v) Mr. Moses did not mention his alleged agreement with Mr. & Mrs. Alessi
to apply an uplift factor to the costs charged to
them in the third or fourth
tax invoices, which invoices were said by him to include the uplift factor; or
in his consolidated points
of defence, particularly in response to the
allegation that he charged grossly excessive legal costs [paragraphs 44(iv) and
the general overview];
(vi) Mr. Moses failed to give discovery of many relevant documents until January
2004 [paragraph 44(v) of the general overview];
(vii) false evidence was given to the Tribunal by Mr. Moses in order to seek an
extension of time for the provision of itemised accounts
[paragraphs 85 to 88 of
the general overview];
(viii) there was collusion between Mr. Moses and his witnesses [paragraph 89 of
the general overview].
[23.04] Neither the
Closing Submissions of Mr. Moses
filed by him in response to the applicants’ Closing
Submissions deal with this allegation. Of course, some of the contentions
in support of this allegation are considered in these reasons when dealing with
other allegations.
[23.05] This allegation was made after the conclusion
of the evidence given in these proceedings, and the legal practitioner was
given a proper opportunity to respond to the allegation. In those
circumstances,
I will not make any finding in relation to the allegation
As a consequence, this ground of the application to cancel the costs agreement
must be dismissed.
SECTION 24: ORDERS.
[24.01] I have decided to cancel
the costs agreement on the fourth and seventh grounds of the
application.
[24.02] Because of the imminent abolition of the Legal
Profession Tribunal, I will sign an order today in the following form:
1. The costs agreement entered into between the applicants and the legal
practitioner on or about 11 April 2002, although bearing
date 30 July 2001, is
2. The following tax invoices rendered by the legal practitioner to the
applicants are set
(a) the tax invoice dated 25 March 2002 for $806,604; and
(b) the tax invoice dated 18 June 2003 for $1,190,693.
3. The applicants or the legal practitioner may apply to the Tribunal (or to its
likely successor the Victorian Civil & Administrative
Tribunal) at any time
seeking orders as to the costs of these
proceedings.
.........................................................................................
and Member of Legal Profession Tribunal
1. Copies of this document will be provided by the Tribunal to the applicant
(client), the legal practitioner, the Legal Ombudsman,
and the legal
practitioner’s recognised professional association.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter