URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2021/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Zheng Wu at LeMoo Pty Ltd premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2021] VCGLR 23 (3 August 2021)
Decisions and
reasons for decision
In the matter of an application by LeMoo Pty Ltd under
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for internal review of a decision to
refuse to grant an application for a renewable limited licence for the business
proposing to
trade as LeMoo Pty Ltd online from a premises located at 25 Fabio
Court, Campbellfield.
Commission:
Ms Helen Versey, Deputy Chair
Mr Andrew Scott, Commissioner
Ms Danielle Huntersmith, Commissioner
Date of Decision:
3 August 2021
Date of Reasons:
3 August 2021
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the Delegate and, in substitution, grant the application for a renewable
licence subject to the conditions at Appendix A
Helen Versey
Deputy Chair
1. On 15 March 2021, LeMoo Pty Ltd (the
) applied to the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation (the
for a renewable limited licence in respect of the premises located at 25 Fabio
Court Campbellfield, (the
), trading as LeMoo Pty Ltd (the
Original Application
2. In the Original Application, the Applicant
sought to supply liquor online through a mobile application (
www.lemoo.co
. The Applicant proposed
to deliver the liquor during ordinary trading hours for a packaged liquor
3. The Applicant proposed to supply whisky, gin, vodka, scotch, brandy, rum,
tequila and spirits from countries including Australia,
PR China, Korea, Japan,
Taiwan, Russia, France, Italy, Germany, totalling 234 different
‘lines’ of liquor.
4. The Applicant proposed the following limits on the supply of liquor per
person per day: maximum 2 x slabs or beer, cider or pre-mixed
spirits, 12 x
bottles of wine, 2 x casks of wine, 2 x bottles of spirits.
5. The Original Application consisted
application for a Renewable limited licence, dated 17 February 2021;
declaration
of right to occupy 25 Fabio Court, Campbellfield, dated 15 March 2021, together
with a lease agreement for the Premises;
Licensing Questionnaire completed by director of the Applicant Lu Xin, dated
17 February 2021;
Licensing Questionnaire completed by director of the Applicant Zheng Wu, dated
17 February 2021;
Licensing Questionnaire completed by director of the Applicant Yichuan Zhou,
dated 17 February 2021;
declaration
of associates, dated 17 February 2021;
by Applicant containing further information regarding scale and scope of the
proposed licence, dated 24 March 2021;
certification
of registration of a company by the Australian Securities Investments Commission
), dated 2 November 2020;
constitution for LeMoo Pty Ltd;
Responsible
Service of Alcohol (
) certificates:
entrant training – Licensees’ First Step course certificate for
Director Zheng Wu, dated 20 February 2015; and
Program (online refresher course) valid 8 September 2020 – 8 September
line plan for Premises.
6. On 15 March 2021, in accordance with section 33(3) of the
Liquor Reform
Control Act 1998
), a copy of the Original Application
was served upon the Chief Commissioner of Victoria Police. On 30 March 2020,
Victoria Police
informed the Commission it did not object to the grant of the
Original Application.
7. On 24 March 2021, the Applicant supplied
further information to the Commission regarding the scale and scope of the
proposed supply
of liquor which included a list of 234 lines of liquor.
8. On 28 May 2021, a delegate of the Commission (the
to grant the Original Application. In the reasons for decision, the Delegate
said they were not satisfied that the scale
and scope of the supply of liquor is
limited in nature and therefore found the Original Application was not made in
accordance with
the LCR Act (
Original Decision
). The Delegate did not
consider the grant of a renewable limited licence for the scale of the proposed
use to be a responsible development
of the liquor industry and did not consider
such a grant would reflect community expectations.
Application for Internal Review
9. On 28 May 2021, the Applicant applied to the Commission for review of the
Original Decision, with a proposed reduction in the supply
of liquor (the
Review Application
). The Applicant sought to limit the supply of liquor
to spirits, wine and beer.
10. On 22 June 2021, the Commission sought further clarification from the
Applicant as to the scale and scope of the proposed supply
of liquor as well as
the membership system, delivery hours and whether the Applicant wished for the
matter to be heard by way of
a public hearing.
11. In submissions dated 23 June 2021, 20 July
2021 and 21 July 2021, the Applicant provided further detail about the proposed
and scope for the supply of liquor:
(4) x lines of wine;
(7) x lines of spirits
(6) x lines of pre-mixed drinks
(5) x lines of plum wine
(5) x lines of beer
limit per customer per day:
x 12 bottles
x 24 bottles/cans (one (1) case)
x two (2) bottles
x 12 bottles
wine x four (4) bottles
would be limited to the total maximum limit in any two categories
day delivery when ordered before 6pm.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
12. Division 2 of Part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications.
Under section 152, the decision made by the Delegate
in the Original Application
is a reviewable decision and the Applicant is an eligible person to apply for
the review of that decision.
The Review Application was made pursuant to section
153 of the LCR Act.
13. Pursuant to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with
respect to the Review Application is to make a fresh decision
or varies the reviewable decision; or
aside the reviewable decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate
14. In effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original
decision maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Original
Application. In this case, the Commission must decide whether to:
the renewable limited licence, and if so, whether to do so subject to
to grant the
application
Determination of an uncontested application
15. Under the LCR Act, an application for a renewable limited licence may be
contested or uncontested. Pursuant to section 3(1), an
uncontested application
is defined as:
an application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation of a
licence or BYO permit in respect of which no objection is received
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division for that
objection (or that period as extended under section
16. The Review Application is uncontested, as no objections were received
under Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in
that Division for that
objection (or that period as extended under section 174 of the LCR Act).
Exercising the internal review power
17. Section 9 of the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation Act 2011
) requires the Commission, in
exercising its internal review function, to have regard to the objects of the
LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines issued by the Minister under section
5 of the VCGLR Act
18. The objects of the LCR Act are set out at
section 4(1) and provide that:
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes
to, and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products;
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and
reducing risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
19. Section 4(2) of
the LCR Act further provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion,
must be exercised and
performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the
misuse and abuse of
20. In exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
consider all the information, material and evidence before the original decision
consider further information or
in respect of uncontested applications on review, have regard to any matter the
Commission considers relevant, make any enquiries
the Commission considers
appropriate but is not required to give any person an opportunity to be heard
concerning the application
21. Under section 49 of the LCR Act, the
Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the grant of an
application.
22. The Commission considers that while the grounds of refusal outlined in
section 44(2) of the LCR Act are relevant considerations,
the determination
of an uncontested application is ultimately to be made pursuant to section 44(1)
and section 157(1) at the discretion
of the Commission, with reference to the
objects of the LCR Act.
23. Section 44(2)(b) of the LCR Act empowers the Commission to refuse to
grant the Review Application on various grounds including
(a) the granting of the application would detract from or be detrimental
to the amenity of the area in which the Premises to which
the application
relates are situated; or
(b) the granting of the application would be conducive to or encourage the
misuse or abuse of alcohol.
limited licence may be a temporary limited licence or a renewable limited
licence. Pursuant to section 14(1B) of the LCR Act,
a renewable limited licence
authorises the licensee to supply liquor at the times determined by the
Commission and specified on the
licence, and it may be renewed in accordance
with the LCR Act. A limited licence may further be subject to any conditions
by the Commission and specified on the licence.
25. Section 26(1) of the LCR Act provides that the
Commission may grant a limited licence only if it is satisfied that the scale
scope of the supply of liquor the subject of the licence is limited in
Conduct of an inquiry
26. Section 34 of the VCGLR Act provides that, subject to that Act, gambling
legislation or liquor legislation, the Commission may
conduct an inquiry in any
manner it considers appropriate.
27. During the conduct of an inquiry, section 25(3) of the VCGLR Act provides
that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence,
however must comply
with the rules of natural justice.
Material before the Commission
28. On review, the Commission had before it and considered all the materials
received by the Delegate as referred to in paragraph
29. The Commission also had before it and considered additional information
and evidence including:
refusal letter, dated 28 May 2021
Original Decision, dated 1 June 2021;
Review Application, received on 28 May 2021; and
from a director of the Applicant containing further submissions in support of
the Review Application, dated 23 June 2021 and
20 July 2021 and 21
30. The Applicant agreed for the Commission to determine the matter on the
papers, therefore there was no public hearing held for
this matter.
Reason for decision on review
Issues for determination on review
31. In making its decision on review, the key issue for determination is
whether the nature of the supply of liquor as proposed by
the Applicant is
limited in scale and scope as required by section 26(1) of the LCR Act.
32. The Commission is also required to consider whether to exercise its
discretion to the grant the renewable limited licence having
regard to the
objects of the LCR Act, with particular regard to the object of harm
minimisation
Whether the proposed supply of liquor is limited in scale and
33. As referred to in
above, pursuant to
section 26(1) of the LCR Act, the Commission may only grant a renewable limited
licence if satisfied that the
scale and scope of the supply of liquor is limited
The Applicant’s submission
34. The Applicant submitted that the proposed business is an online Asian
grocery store which will also supply limited quantities
of Asian liquor
(imported by Australian companies). The Applicant proposed same-day supply of
liquor (for orders placed before 6
pm) for delivery during ordinary trading
hours for a packaged liquor licence. The Applicant proposes to operate a
membership system
where customers register and create accounts.
35. After the Original Decision, the Applicant considerably reduced the lines
of liquor proposed to be supplied – from 234 lines
to 27 lines of liquor.
The Review Application also proposed to limit the supply of liquor across
certain categories as deemed appropriate
by the Applicant for products of that
nature. Relevantly, on 20 July 2021, the Applicant clarified that its intention
to supply 12
bottles of spirits per person, per day, was on the assumption
that pre-mixed drinks and plum wine products would be included in that
The Applicant confirmed that it would be happy to limit the supply of spirits to
two (2) bottles per person per day, provided
that up to twelve (12) bottles of
pre-mixed drinks could be sold and four (4) bottles of plum wine.
36. The Applicant clarified its intention to further limit the scale and
scope of the supply of liquor by restricting patrons to purchasing
maximum limit within two categories only, per person per day.
The Commission’s view
37. The Commission finds that, since the Original Decision, the Applicant has
reduced the scale and scope of the proposed supply of
liquor to such an extent
that it is now sufficiently limited to satisfy the scale and scope requirement
in section 26(1) of the LCR
38. In particular, the Commission finds that a reduction in lines of liquor
from 234 to 27 has considerably limited the scope of the
liquor available for
supply. With respect to scale of supply, the Commission finds that the proposed
limits on the number of bottles
per person per category per day as set out in
, and an additional
limitation of up to a limit of only two categories, further limits the scale of
the supply of liquor for the
purpose of section 26(1).
39. The Commission is of the view that the
membership system does not impose any limitations on the scale and scope of the
of liquor, because any person who registers for an account would be
considered a ‘member’.
Objects of the LCR Act
40. The Commission is satisfied that the
Applicant’s process for checking the identity of customers on delivery of
will ensure that liquor is not supplied to minors. The Applicant said
that there would be an identity check on delivery and only
official forms of
identity such as a driver’s licence, passport, Keypass or proof of age
card would be accepted as evidence
of age. The Commission finds that this
process addresses harm minimisation concerns arising from the supply of packaged
liquor online.
41. Based on the specific information provided to the Commission regarding
the nature of the business including the process for ensuring
liquor is not
supplied to minors and the limitations on the volume of liquor that can be
obtained per person per day, together with
standard conditions that are imposed
on licences on this type, the Commission is of the view that this particular
Review Application
meets the objects of the LCR Act and is not likely to
contribute to any increase in harm.
Decision on review
42. The Commission
refers to the factors in paragraphs
in relation to scale and scope.
The Commission is satisfied that the Review Application meets the requirements
of section 26(1) of
the LCR Act and, in the circumstances, the Commission has
determined to set aside the decision of the Delegate and grant the Application
for a renewable limited licence the subject of the Review Application, subject
to the conditions in Appendix A.
The preceding
paragraphs are a true copy of
the Reasons for Decision of Ms Helen Versey (Deputy Chair), Ms Danielle
Huntersmith (Commissioner)
and Mr Andrew Scott (Commissioner).
This licence is a renewable limited licence and authorises the licensee to
supply packaged liquor from the licensed premises for consumption
licensed premises only when such liquor is ordered by mail, telephone, facsimile
transmission or Internet.
Restrictions on sales
The licensee must not use the above licensed premises to provide for:
shopping for liquor
browsing liquor
stocks or stores
the display of
liquor for sale
the collection
of liquor by customers.
Supply of liquor
The licensee is authorised to make available for supply the following
categories of liquor up to the maximum number of lines within
the following
categories. From this range the licensee may supply a maximum of two (2)
categories of liquor per customer per day:
wine four (4) x
spirits seven
(7) x lines
pre-mixed drinks
six (6) x lines
plum wine five
(5) x lines
beer five (5) x
In addition, the licensee will supply no more than the following limits,
per customer, per day:
wine x twelve
(12) bottles
twenty-four (24) bottles/cans
spirits x two
(2) bottles
pre-mix x twelve
(12) bottles
plum wine x four
(4) bottles.
Delivery of liquor
Liquor must be
delivered to a person aged 18 or over. The licensee must ensure that delivery
arrangements include requiring evidence
of age where appropriate.
Liquor must not
be delivered and left at unoccupied premises on the same day the order is
Liquor may only
be delivered during the following hours:
9 a.m. and 11 p.m on any day other than Sunday, Good Friday, Anzac Day or
Christmas Day.
10 a.m. and 11 p.m on Sunday.
12 noon and 11 p.m on Anzac Day.
deliveries are permitted on Christmas Day or Good
Information
to be displayed on website/s
The following notice must be prominently displayed on the licensee's
smartphone application and Internet website:
Liquor Control Reform Act
it is an offence
alcohol to a person under the age of 18 years (Penalty exceeds $17,000)
For a person
under the age of 18 years to purchase or receive liquor. (Penalty exceeds
The licensee is required to prominently display the number of this licence on
the licensee’s mobile application and website
Orders for liquor
Orders for the supply of liquor may be taken at any time on any day
Internet orders may only be taken through the following mobile application or
website(s):
mobile application
www.lemoo.co
Section 157(2) to (5) of the
LCR Act and section 25(3) of the VCGLR Act further prescribe the manner in which
the Commission is to
undertake internal reviews.
LCR Act, sections 44, 49 and
LCR Act, section 44 and
Section 9(3) and (4) VCGLR Act.
The Commission considered and was satisfied as to the matters set out in the
Decision-Making Guidelines
relating to the assessment of the cumulative impact
of licensed premises dated 7 June 2012, particularly as granting the Review
Application
with conditions would result in new licensed premises offering a
limited supply of niche alcohol. The Commission was satisfied that
Minister’s Decision-Making Guidelines, Grant of Licences for the Sale of
Packaged Liquor, 7 June 2012 is not relevant to
this Review Application.
See further
Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
, which confirms that harm minimisation is
the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act and therefore the primary
consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although not to the exclusion of
the other objects).
LCR Act, section 157(2).
LCR Act, section 157(3).
LCR Act, section 44(4).
See paragraphs
. The Commission notes in determining
this matter, it has also considered each of the other grounds set out in section
44(2) of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (53.7 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter