URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2025/679.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Goldsmith v Goldsmith [2025] VSC 679 (6 November 2025)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
TESTATORS FAMILY MAINTENANCE
IN THE MATTER
of Part IV of
Administration and Probate Act 1958
of the Estate of JOSEPH KEVIN GOLDSMITH,
MALCOLM JOHN GOLDSMITH
CARLY LOUISE GOLDSMITH (as executor of the
deceased estate of JOSEPH KEVIN GOLDSMITH)
Barrett AsJ
DATE OF HEARING
31 July 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT
6 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Goldsmith v Goldsmith
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VSC 679
ADMINISTRATION AND PROBATE –
TESTATOR’S FAMILY MAINTENANCE – Extension of time to bring
application for provision
Administration and Probate Act
(Vic) – Whether implied application for extension of time in
originating motion – Alternatively, whether plaintiff should
have leave to
amend originating motion to seek extension of time –
Green & Anor v
Ellul & Ors
[2018] SASCFC 100
considered and applied – Held: No
implied application for extension of time made by Originating Motion
–Application to
amend originating motion dismissed – Summary
judgment granted to defendant.
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Mr J Sheppard
Kotthoff Law
For the Defendant
Ms R G Morison
Steven Mark Hopper
OF CONTENTS
HIS HONOUR:
Introduction
30 April 2024, Joseph Kevin Goldsmith (‘
leaving a will dated 3 June 2021 (‘
’). Probate of
the Will was granted to the defendant on 12 July 2024, and accordingly, the
six-month period within which an
application for provision could be filed
expired on 13 January 2025. The plaintiff filed an application for provision
out-of-time
on 7 February 2025.
are two applications before the Court:
(a) The defendant’s application by summons filed on 19 May 2025 seeking
summary dismissal of the plaintiff’s Part IV
claim pursuant to
Administration and Probate Act 1958
’) or alternatively,
Civil Procedure Act
and Order 22 of
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
on the basis that it was filed
out-of-time and has no prospects of
(b) The plaintiff’s application by summons filed on 29 July 2025 seeking
to amend his Originating Motion (‘
’) to apply for an
extension of time for provision pursuant to r 36.01 of the
plaintiff relies on:
(a) affidavits of Ivor Harold Nyman affirmed on 9 July 2025 and 17 July 2025;
(b) written submissions filed on 17 July 2025.
defendant relies on:
(a) affidavits of Steven Mark Hopper affirmed on 19 May 2025 and 24 July 2025;
(b) written submissions filed on 24 June 2025 and 24 July 2025.
deceased was survived by his three adult children: the plaintiff, Paul and the
defendant. The deceased left his estate solely
to the defendant. Probate of
the Will was granted to the defendant on 12 July 2024. By operation of s 99(1)
the time for a Part IV application to be made expired on
13 January 2025.
various occasions between May 2024 and January 2025, the plaintiff and his
solicitor communicated with the defendant indicating
an awareness of the
timeframes within which an application for provision could be made and stated
that the plaintiff would make such
an application. Those communications
(a) an email on 24 May 2024 from the plaintiff to the defendant commenting on
the timeframes for an application;
(b) on about 6 November 2024, the plaintiff emailed the defendant legal advice
he had received which stated, ‘given the time
frames involved in
challenging a will, we will need to commence proceedings soon’; and
(c) the defendant submits that on 12 December 2024, ‘formal notice of [the
plaintiff’s] claim was given, noting that
an informal agreement between
the parties could not be reached, [the plaintiff] “
will and must file
proceedings in the Supreme Court of Victoria very early in the new year to
protect his position.”’
is also evidence that, in late 2024, the plaintiff and defendant were
negotiating a resolution of the plaintiff’s claims
on the estate. The
plaintiff’s solicitor produced a screenshot of a text message from the
defendant to the plaintiff received
on 7 October 2024 which states:
I promise you Malcolm, I have not and will not go back on my word ... I
didn’t ask Steven to draw up or start a deed of variation
until the last
week of September ... he was away then and he did say when he gets back (this
week) he will be drawing it up.
This text indicates that an agreement of sorts may have been reached although
details are unclear. On 16 December 2024, the defendant’s
solicitor wrote
to the plaintiff’s solicitor enquiring as to the quantum of the
plaintiff’s claim. The plaintiff’s
responded on the same day. No response was received to that email prior to
the plaintiff’s solicitors’ offices closing
on 23 December 2024 for
the Christmas break.
10 January 2025, the plaintiff’s solicitor returned to work and found that
no deed had been provided. On the same day, he
received instructions to file an
application for provision. Thereafter, he explains that he sought relevant
probate documents and
endeavoured to finalise the application. For various
administrative reasons, including unfamiliarity with relevant processes, the
application was not filed on time.
7 February 2025, the plaintiff filed an OM seeking provision from the
deceased’s estate. This application was filed out-of-time
and did not
expressly seek leave to make the application out-of-time. The plaintiff’s
solicitor explains that he was aware
that the application had been filed
out-of-time but did not realise that ‘best practice’ would have been
to seek an extension
of time in the relief sought.
the plaintiff relies on his affidavit sworn on 5 February 2025 in which he
explains the basis of his application for provision.
his affidavit affirmed on 19 May 2025, the defendant’s lawyer, Mr Steven
Hopper, deposes that this correspondence between
the defendant’s and
plaintiff’s solicitors indicates that the plaintiff’s solicitors
were well-aware of the timeframes
within which an application must be made but
failed to comply. The defendant submits that because of this knowledge, the
plaintiff’s
application for provision must be dismissed.
Estate and Distributions
inventory of assets and liabilities dated 26 June 2024 records a net value of
the estate of $1,181,961.62. The estate was comprised
(a) property at Unit 1/13 Webb Street, Seaford, Victoria worth $550,000;
(b) a bank account containing the amount of $62,490.55;
(c) a car valued at $17,000;
(d) entitlement to the estate of Edward Murphy valued at $125,000;
(e) superannuation in the amount of $263,471.07; and
(f) shares with an estimated value of $165,000.
following distributions have occurred:
(a) on 30 August 2024, the property was transferred to the defendant in her
personal capacity;
(b) in August 2024, the shares were transferred to the defendant; and
(c) in September 2024, the car was transferred to the defendant.
his affidavit affirmed on 24 July 2025, Mr Hopper, lists the amounts that were
deposited into the defendant’s solicitors’
trust account as
(a) 29 August 2024 — the sum of $63,659.89, being the proceeds of the
deceased’s bank account held with Bendigo Bank;
(b) 4 October 2024 — the sum of $130,414.29, being the value of the
deceased’s interest in the estate of the late Edward
Murphy; and
(c) 21 January 2025 — the sum of $15,501.67 of dividends from a company in
the estate. As the shares had previously been transferred
to the defendant, the
sum of the dividends belong to the defendant and not the
This made for a total of $209,575.85.
20 October 2024, legal costs amounting to $16,674.24 were paid from the trust
account to the defendant’s solicitors. On
21 May 2025, the defendant paid
Counsels’ legal costs of $2,552. On 20 September 2024, the defendant
instructed her solicitors
to pay her mother $2,599 for the reimbursement of the
deceased’s funeral costs.
following cash distributions (totalling $165,000) have been made to the
(a) 6 September 2024 — $20,000;
(b) 10 October 2024 — $15,000;
(c) 15 November 2024 — $20,000;
(d) 3 December 2024 — $10,000;
(e) 21 January 2025 — $2,000;
(f) 4 April 2025 — $2,000;
(g) 14 April 2025 — $10,000;
(h) 2 May 2025 — $6,000;
(i) 6 May 2025 — $5,000; and
(j) 15 May 2025 — $75,000.
Hopper states that currently $22,372.23 remains held in trust. However, as this
money includes share dividends of $15,501.17 on
shares already distributed to
the defendant, the amount of $6,871.06 remains available for
Mr Hopper anticipates that
the defendant will incur $30,000 (exclusive of GST) for legal costs in relation
to this proceeding.
Submissions
defendant submits that the plaintiff’s claim should be summarily dismissed
on the basis that:
(a) the plaintiff’s application was made out-of-time pursuant to s 99(1)
, and the plaintiff did not apply for an extension of
time pursuant to s 99(2) of the
(b) even if the defendant makes an application for an extension of time, the
operation of s 99(4) precludes the Court from interfering
with any distribution
made prior to the making of an application to extend. As the majority of the
estate has been distributed in
accordance with the Will, there remains a limited
pool of assets from which the Court could order provision. In these
circumstances,
if the plaintiff made an application to extend, the application
would have ‘no real prospects of success’ and ought to
be summarily
dismissed pursuant to s 63 of the
and Order 22 of the
plaintiff submits that:
(a) the OM included, by necessary implication, an application to extend time to
bring the claim;
(b) alternatively, leave should be granted to amend the OM to include an
application for an extension of time as it was omitted
in error, but was clearly
necessary; and
(c) if either of the above two submissions are successful, then the summary
dismissal application should fail as the claim has real
prospects of success.
The plaintiff submits that an amendment would operate from the date of the
original document so that distributions
made after that date would not be
precluded by s 99(4) from the estate for the purposes of a provision claim.
questions to be answered are:
(a) Does the OM include, by necessary implication, an application for leave to
file out-of-time?
(b) If not, should leave be granted to amend the OM to seek an extension of
(c) Should the plaintiff’s application be summarily dismissed?
Legislation
and Principles
90A Eligible person may apply for family provision order
(1) Subject to subsection (2), an application for a family provision order may
be made to the Court by, or on behalf of, an eligible
(2) An application under subsection (1) must be made—
(a) within the time specified in
section 99; and
(b) otherwise in accordance with this Part and the
99 Time within which application may be made
An application to the Court for a family provision order must be
made within 6 months
after the date of the grant of probate of the will or
of letters of administration, as the case may be.
(2) Despite subsection (1),
on application, the Court may extend the period
for making an application for a family provision order
if, after hearing
such of the parties affected as the Court thinks necessary, the Court considers
it appropriate to extend the period,
including in any case where the time for
making an application has already expired.
An application for extension
under subsection (2) must be made
before the final distribution of the estate.
(4) The making of an application for extension under subsection (2) and any
order of the Court in relation to the application for
extension does not disturb
or affect the distribution of any part of the estate made prior to the making of
that application.
Supreme Court (Administration and Probate) Rules 2023
Chapter III Rules
’) provide:
Chapter I of the Rules of the Supreme Court for the time being in force and the
general practice of the Court apply in relation to
a proceeding to which these
Rules apply so far as practicable except so far as is otherwise provided by
these Rules or any Act.
Chapter III Rules
do not contain any provisions relating to the content
of originating processes generally or applications for extensions of time,
therefore the General Civil Procedure Rules apply. The
5.05 Indorsement of claim on motion
An originating motion shall specify—
the relief or remedy sought and the Act, if any, under which the
claim is made;
(b) where it includes any question to be answered, the question shall be
13.02 Content of pleading
Every pleading shall—
(a) contain in a summary form a statement of all the material facts on which
the party relies, but not the evidence by which those
facts are to be proved;
(b) where any claim, defence or answer of the party arises by or under any Act,
identify the specific provision relied on; and
state specifically any relief or remedy
59.01 of the
permits the Court to grant relief not specified in the
originating process ‘on the application of the party.’ The
The Court, at any stage of a proceeding,
on the application of any party
may give such judgment or make such order as the case requires notwithstanding
that the judgment or order had not been sought in
the originating process or
other document of the party in the
proceeding.
Accordingly,
the Court has power to grant relief specifically claimed in the originating
process, or, if not claimed, then on the
application of a party.
relation to amendment, r 36.01 of the
(1) For the purpose of—
(a) determining the real question in controversy between the parties to any
proceeding; or
(b) correcting any defect or error in any proceeding; or
(c) avoiding multiplicity of proceedings—
the Court, at any stage, may
order that any document in the proceeding be amended or that any party have
leave to amend any document
proceeding.
(2) In this Order ‘document’ includes—
(a) originating process;
(b) an indorsement of claim on originating process; and
(3) An indorsement of claim or pleading may be amended under paragraph (1)
notwithstanding that the effect is to add or substitute
a cause of action
arising after the commencement of the proceeding.
(6) Notwithstanding the expiry of any relevant limitation period after the day
a proceeding is commenced, the Court may make an
order under paragraph (1) where
it is satisfied that any other party to the proceeding would not by reason of
the order be prejudiced
in the conduct of that party's claim or defence in a way
that could not be fairly met by an adjournment, an award of costs or
relation to when an application is made, r 46.02 provides:
Application by summons
(1) An application made on notice to any person shall be by summons, unless the
Court otherwise orders.
An application by summons is made when the summons is filed.
(3) An application not by summons is made when it comes on for
Court retains a general power to dispense with the requirements of the
. Rule 2.04 provides:
(1) The Court may dispense with compliance with any of the requirements of
these Rules, either before or after the occasion for
compliance arises.
the hearing had concluded, the Court requested further submissions on the case
Green v Ellul
which had not been raised at the
The defendant filed
further submissions on 24 October 2025, but the plaintiff did not file any
further submissions.
Green v Ellul
is relevant as the facts are almost
identical to the present case. The facts are as follows:
(a) On 12 January 2017, probate of Mary Ellul’s will was granted to her
(b) On 10 April 2017, the plaintiffs put the executors on notice of a potential
claim for provision against the estate. The
Inheritance (Family Provision)
Inheritance Act
’) required such an
application to be filed within six months.
(c) On 10 July 2017, the plaintiffs filed their application for provision
’10 July Summons
’). The application was filed one day
out-of-time and did not seek an extension of time. The relief sought was for
costs and ‘such further or other order as this Honourable Court
deems fit.’
(d) On 13 July 2017, the plaintiffs served the 10 July Summons on the executors.
(e) Between 14 and 26 July 2017, the executors, knowing the claim was issued
out-of-time, distributed all but $5,023.46 of the estate.
(f) On 18 September 2017, the plaintiffs filed an amended summons that expressly
included an extension of time.
following issues were raised in
Green v Ellul:
(a) Whether the 10 July Summons served on 13 July was ‘an application for
an extension of time’ within the meaning of
ss 8(4) and 8(5) of the
Inheritance Act
(b) Whether the amendment to the 10 July Summons by way of filing a second
summons on 18 September 2017 had the effect of making
the 10 July Summons an
‘application for extension of time’ within the meaning of those
provisions.
(c) Whether the 10 July Summons conveyed to the appellants that the respondents
made an application for an extension of time under
Inheritance
(d) Whether any part of the estate was distributed before any application for an
extension of time within the meaning of subs 8(5)
Inheritance
applicable legislation in
Green v Ellul
was substantially similar to the
relevant provisions under the
Chapter III Rules
. Section 8 of the
Inheritance Act
(1) Subject to this section,
an application shall not be heard by the Court
at the instance of a person claiming the benefit of this Act unless the
application
is made within six months
from the date of the grant in this
State of probate of the will, or letters of administration of the estate, of the
deceased person.
(2) The Court may, after hearing such of the persons affected as the Court
thinks necessary, extend the time for making an application
for the benefit of
(3) An extension of time granted pursuant to this section may be
(a) upon such conditions as the Court thinks fit; and
(b) whether or not the time for making an application pursuant to subsection
(1) of this section has expired.
An application for extension
of time pursuant to this section shall
be made before the final distribution of the estate.
(5) Any distribution of any part of the estate made before the application for
extension of time shall not be disturbed by reason
of that application or any
order made thereon.
(6) An application for the benefit of this Act shall be deemed to be made on
the day when the summons by which it is instituted
is served on the
administrator of the estate.
Consideration
was also given to the terms of the
Supreme Court Civil Rules 2006
Master determined that the service of the plaintiffs’ 10 July Summons on
13 July 2017 was an application for an extension
of time, notwithstanding that
relief not being expressly sought, because of the remedial purpose of the
relevant legislation and
the retrospective effect of the application to amend
the 10 July Summons filed on 18 September 2017. The executors appealed and
Full Court reversed the decision.
Stanley, with whom Kourakis CJ
and Lovell J
agreed, held:
(a) first, that the rules require an application for an extension of time to be
discrete from an application for
(b) second, an application for an extension of time must be expressly made; and
(c) third, that no implication arises that an extension of time is sought where
the originating process that does not expressly seek
an extension of
Justice Kourakis agreed with Stanley J and further held:
(a) On the proper construction of the relevant legislation (s 8(5) of the
Inheritance Act
an application for an extension of time must be
in writing. The Chief Justice observed that the
Supreme Court Civil Rules
(SA) allow for some applications to be made orally, but ‘such is
the nature of the application and its consequences on any subsequent
distributions made out of the estate, that Parliament could not have intended
applications for an extension of time, pursuant to
s 8(5), to be made
(b) An application for relief must ‘specify the relief sought.’ The
Chief Justice further held, ‘proceedings may
be amended to seek relief in
addition to, or in substitution of, the relief sought when the application is
first made. However,
an application is not one made for an extension of time
unless and until it seeks an extension of
(c) The orders sought must be apparent to the Court from the text of the orders
sought alone, and not from circumstances in which
defendant submitted that
Green v Ellul
is on all fours with this case,
and the applicable legislation is substantially similar, and I am bound to
The plaintiff did not submit that there was any relevant
difference between the legislation in
Green v Ellul
the OM include, by implication, an application for an extension of
parties disagree as to the date on which the plaintiff applied for an extension
of time. The plaintiff says it was on 7 February
2025, because the OM, even
though it did not explicitly seek an extension of time, could only have been
made with an extension of
time, therefore the leave sought was implicit in its
terms. The defendant submits it was made on 17 July 2025 when the plaintiff
filed his summons and submissions.
plaintiff relies on the decision in
Bennett v Pettitt
in support of the
proposition that ‘the filing of an originating motion connoted an
application for an extension of
In that decision,
McMillan J did not find that the relief sought in the originating motion
implicitly included an application for
an extension of time. Rather,
McMillan J noted that:
The time within which the plaintiff could make a claim for further provision
expired on 27 March 2011. The plaintiff made her application
for an extension
of time on 27 February 2012.
By originating motion dated 27 February 2012, the plaintiff sought further
provision from the estate of the deceased. A summons
seeking an extension of
time within which to issue proceedings was not filed by the plaintiff, however,
the application before me
was heard on the basis that such an application had
is not apparent from the above that McMillan J made any decision about whether
an application for provision made out-of-time ‘connotes’
application for an extension of time. The matter proceeded on an apparently
agreed basis that an application for an extension
of time would be entertained
by the Court despite it not being sought in the originating process or by
summons. That approach is
consistent with r 59.01 of the
provides some flexibility in the power of the Court to grant relief
application of a party
even when it is not sought in the originating
process, particularly where such further relief is consistent with relief
Accordingly,
the Court has power to grant relief not explicitly sought, but that does not
mean an originating process should be taken
to include, or connote, such relief,
if the necessary words are not included. If a party seeks to obtain other
relief not expressed,
then they must apply for it. The question whether that
relief is available will depend upon considerations such as whether the relief
is consistent with,
obvious aspect of,
sought and also upon questions of any prejudice that may be occasioned by
granting such relief.
do not accept that the OM filed on 7 February 2025 included an application for
an extension of time as the words are just not there.
An analogy may be drawn
with the relief that may be ordered in default of appearance. Such relief is
limited to the relief contained
in the OM. A party is limited to the relief
they claim in their originating process, or as applied for otherwise. But there
to be an application for such relief. That conclusion is consistent with
the requirements of the
and also with the rationale in
which I consider I am bound to
the plaintiff have leave to amend the OM?
next question is whether an order should be made granting the plaintiff leave to
amend his OM to include a paragraph seeking an
extension of time. What relief
is granted at this stage has significant consequences because of the operation
of s 99 of the
and the usual rule that an amendment to an
originating process will take effect from the date of the original
Court’s power to permit an amendment is contained in r 36.01 of the
which confers on the Court a discretion to allow an amendment. The
discretion must be exercised judicially, having regard to the
overarching
purpose of the
to facilitate the just, efficient, timely and
cost-effective resolution of the real issues in
Other factors to be
taken into account include: delay, any unfair prejudice caused by the amendment,
case management concerns, any
explanation for the timing of the application, and
the prospects of success in the event leave was
Rule 36.01(6) is
‘remedial and should be given a beneficial interpretation — the
widest interpretation which its language
plaintiff submits that:
(a) The amendment is required because of the inadvertent error by the
plaintiff’s solicitor in excluding the application for
an extension of
time, which was clearly intended.
(b) The application was issued promptly after the plaintiff became aware in May
2025 that the defendant wished to argue that the
proceeding had no real
prospects of success because of the absence of leave and the effect of s 99 of
(c) The amendment would permit the merits of the application for an extension,
which the plaintiff says are good, to be heard rather
than summarily
(d) If the amendment is permitted, then the application to extend time has real
prospects because:
(i) the delay was only short (25 days);
(ii) the defendant was on notice throughout December 2024 and January 2025 that
the plaintiff intended to issue an application for
(iii) there is an explanation for delay; and
(iv) the defendant has not suffered any real prejudice. The distributions made
to the defendant after 7 February 2025 were made
with the defendant’s
knowledge that the plaintiff’s application for provision had been issued.
(e) In relation to his family provision claim, the plaintiff submits he has real
prospects because:
(i) he is in a weak financial position;
(ii) he is in poor health;
(iii) he was excluded from the Will because he was not expected to survive the
deceased; and
(iv) the defendant has relative financial strength.
defendant’s submissions are essentially as follows:
(a) The amendment application should not succeed because the real controversy
concerns ‘whether or not the plaintiff filed
his application in time and
plainly he did not.’ Further, there is no ‘error’ to
(b) Contrary to the plaintiff’s submission, by email dated 27 February
2025, the defendant notified the plaintiff that he had
failed to apply for an
extension and flagged a summary judgment application. Accordingly, there was
significant and unexplained
(c) The submission that he intended to apply for an extension is contrary to the
submission that such an application is ‘implicit’
(d) The size of the estate (currently $871.06) is so small that there are no
real prospects of successfully recovering anything,
even if ordered. Even if a
back-dated amendment is permitted so that distributions after 7 February remain
available, the estate
would still be less than $100,000.
(e) The plaintiff cannot rely on his solicitor’s negligence as the sole
reason for his failure to bring the application within
time and make an
application for extension of time.
the defendant’s further submissions in relation to
Green v Ellul
the defendant submits that no application for an extension of time has been
made, whether in the OM or the summons filed on 29 July
2025. The Court
therefore has no jurisdiction to entertain a claim for provision. Any
application for an extension that may now
be made will be made after
distribution of practically all the estate, and so should be refused. That
submission does not squarely
address the point that the application is one to
amend the OM retrospectively so that distributions after the date of the OM are
not protected.
is an aspect of
Green v Ellul
that I consider determinative. Justice
Stanley held that where an application for provision is not made in time, and
prior to any
application for an extension of time to bring such a claim (which
must be specifically/expressly sought), an executor is obliged
to distribute the
estate, and a beneficiary could hold the executor to account if they failed to
do so and valid claims were subsequently
made. Justice Stanley held as
The Act permits an application for an extension of time which can be made either
before or after the expiry of the limitation period.
If the latter, it must be
made before a final distribution of the estate and any distribution made before
the application for an
extension of time cannot be disturbed. The finality of
distributions made before any application for an extension of time makes
imperative that executors be in no doubt as to whether an application for an
extension of time has, or has not, been made. The
existence or otherwise of an
application for an extension of time pursuant to s 8 is of critical importance
to executors in the discharge
of the duties of their office
If the application for the benefit of the Act is out of time, but no
application for an extension of time has been made, the executor
has a duty to
distribute. This is especially so where a distribution to a beneficiary before
an application for an extension of
time ensures that the distribution will not
be disturbed. The beneficiary is entitled to hold the executor to account if
the executor
fails to discharge that duty and the undistributed estate becomes
subject to a claim under the Act by reason of the making of an
application for
an extension of time before distribution. The fact of the making of an
application for an extension of time must
be beyond dispute. This is a cogent
consideration against the implication of an application for an extension of time
by the service
of a summons invoking the Court’s jurisdiction pursuant to
the Act in the absence of any express application for an extension
Stanley held that the obligations on executors, and entitlement of
beneficiaries, under the legislative regime are cogent
reasons against the
implication of an application for extension of time. That is not only a strong
argument undermining the merits
of any application for an extension of time that
could ultimately be made by the plaintiff in this case, but it is also a
factor in refusing leave to amend as sought. If the rationale in
Green v Ellul
is accepted, as I do, then the executors were obliged to
distribute the estate after the expiry of the six-month period, and
beneficiaries
could take action against them personally if they did not. In
such circumstances, it would be unjust to grant leave to amend, particularly
where there is a risk such amendment would operate retrospectively. To permit
such a course would potentially bring into question
the valid exercise of
obligations by executors and the valid granting of rights to beneficiaries.
Further, and even on the plaintiff’s
best case, the high water mark of the
value of the estate (on the basis that the relevant distributions are not
disturbed) is approximately
$100,000. The legal costs of the plaintiff’s
claim in that context would likely diminish that estate significantly. For
reasons, I refuse the application for leave to amend.
the plaintiff’s claim be summarily dismissed?
principles in relation to summary judgment were not in dispute. In
Building Solutions v Blanalko,
Warren CJ and Nettle JA
explained the
test for summary judgment as depending on:
... whether the respondent to the application for summary judgment has a
‘real’ as opposed to a ‘fanciful’
reached the above conclusions in relation to the first two issues, it is clear
that the plaintiff’s claim has no prospects
of success and should be
an application for an extension of time, the estate has been validly distributed
almost entirely. That being the case, there
is no prospect of a provision order
being made.
parties are to provide orders consistent with these reasons within 14 days if
they can be agreed, otherwise I will hear from the
Supreme Court (General
Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
were the applicable Rules at the time of
Affidavit of Steven Mark
Hopper affirmed on 24 July 2025, [21].
Affidavit affirmed by Steven
Mark Hopper on 24 July 2025, [22].
Administration and Probate
(emphasis added)
Supreme Court
(Administration and Probate) Rules 2023
(Vic) rr 1.05, 1.02
Chapter III Rules
Supreme Court Act 1986
Supreme Court (General
Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 5.05 (emphasis added)
Ibid r 13.02 (emphasis
Ibid r 59.01 (emphasis
Ibid r 36.01 (emphasis
Ibid r 46.02 (emphasis
Green v Ellul
SASCFC 100.
Inheritance (Family
Provision) Act 1972
(SA) s 8 (emphasis added) (‘
Inheritance
Inheritance Act
is now repealed and replaced by the
Succession Act 2023
Green v Ellul
[37]–[45]. The
Supreme Court Civil Rules 2006
(SA) is now repealed
and replaced by
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
Green v Ellul
That is not to say both may
not be sought at once, see
Green v Ellul
(n 11) [49].
Green v Ellul
Bennett v Pettit
[2012] VSC 234.
Ibid [3], [16].
See discussion in David J
Bailey, Daniel D Nguyen and Nicolas C Dour,
Civil Procedure Victoria
(LexisNexis, May 2025) [l 59.01.15], citing
Cargil v Bower
[1878] UKLawRpCh 149
(1878) 10 Ch D
Farrow Finance Co Ltd
(in liq) v Farrow Properties Pty Ltd (in liq)
[1999] 1 VR 584,
Farah Constructions v
Say-Dee Pty Ltd
(2007) 230 CLR 89
, 151–2 [135].
Willmott Forests Ltd v
Armstrong Dubois
[2016] VSC 61
, [31] (citations omitted) (‘
v Armstrong
Civil Procedure Act 2010
Carroll v Goff
[2021] VSCA 267
, [75]–[76].
Willmott v Armstrong
(n 28) [34].
Green v Ellul
[55] (emphasis added).
Lysaght Building
Solutions Pty Ltd v Blanalko Pty Ltd
[2013] VSCA 158
(2013) 42 VR 27
Haddow v Haddow
[2021] VSC 553
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (392 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter