URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICmr/2025/56.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
'FZ2' and City of Boroondara (Freedom of Information) [2025] VICmr 56; (31 March 2025)
Notice of Decision and Reasons for Decision
City of Boroondara
Decision date:
31 March 2025
Exemptions and provision considered:
Sections 30(1), 34(4)(a)(ii), 25
‘FZ2’ and City of Boroondara (Freedom of Information)
(31 March 2025)
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION – Kew Recreation Centre – roof collapse
– commissioned reports – subject to ongoing
litigation –
agency engaged in trade or commerce
All references to legislation in this document are to the
Information Act 1982
) unless otherwise stated.
Notice of Decision
I have conducted a review under section 49F of the
Agency’s decision to refuse access to documents requested by the Applicant
under the FOI Act.
On the information before me, I am satisfied Documents 1 and 2 are exempt
from release under section 30(1) and Documents 3 and 4 are
exempt from release
under section 34(4)(a)(ii). As such, my decision on the Applicant’s is the
same as the Agency and the documents
are refused in full.
Please refer to page 9 for information about review rights through the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (
My reasons for decision follow.
Penny Eastman
Public Access Deputy
Commissioner
31 March 2025
Reasons for Decision
Background to review
Applicant made a request to the Agency seeking access to certain documents.
Following clarification, the request was agreed as:
1. Any expert
report provided to, or commissioned by, Council that deals with the cause of the
collapse of the roof structure of the
Kew Recreation Centre during
construction.
2. The revised design submitted and/or final construction method proposed to
ensure a safe final structure. Drafts are not required
where there is a final
3. The most current report, or correspondence, that states the projected
total cost and time implications for the completion of the
4. The most current report, or correspondence, that states the proposed
source of funds to achieve that objective.
Agency identified seven documents falling within the terms of the
Applicant’s request and released one document in full
and denied access to
the remaining six documents in full. In denying access to the six documents, the
Agency relied on sections 30(1)
and 34(4)(a)(ii). The Agency’s decision
letter sets out the reasons for its decision.
Agency published information on its website regarding the substantive issue
subject of the request, as follows:
On Monday 24 February 2025,
there were steps taken in the 2 separate proceedings relating to the collapse of
the steel roof structure
at the centre in October 2022.
The first was a filing hearing initiated by the Victorian Building Authority
(VBA). The VBA filed several charges against ADCO Group
and a director within
the company. This was a largely administrative hearing and is the first step in
the VBA’s prosecution
of the charges which it has issued. You can read
more about the VBA's charges in the VBA's media release.
The second was a committal mention in the charges which have been brought by
WorkSafe Victoria against ADCO Group and Colab Building
Tech Pty Ltd. Yesterday
the committal mention was administratively adjourned. The committal mention has
now been listed for hearing
on Monday 19 May 2025. You can read more about the
WorkSafe Victoria charges in WorkSafe Victoria’s media release.
Our focus is on delivering this important facility for our community safely
and as soon as possible. While the prosecutions continue,
we can't comment
further on the cause and responsibilities for the collapse, but we will keep our
community informed about progress
on site. For more information about the
redevelopment and to stay up to date, visit our Kew Recreation Centre
redevelopment page.
Review application
Applicant sought review by the Information Commissioner under section 49A(1) of
the Agency’s decision to refuse access to
Documents 1 to 4. The Applicant
did not request review of Documents 5 to 7.
have examined a copy of the documents subject to review.
Applicant and the Agency were invited to make a written submission under section
49H(2) in relation to the review.
have considered relevant communications and submissions received from the
undertaking my review, I have had regard to the object of the FOI Act, which is
to create a general right of access to information
in the possession of the
Government or other public bodies, limited only by exceptions and exemptions
necessary to protect essential
public interests, privacy and business
note Parliament’s intention the FOI Act must be interpreted so as to
further the object of the Act and any discretions conferred
by the Act must be
exercised, as far as possible, so as to facilitate and promote the disclosure of
information in a timely manner
and at the lowest reasonable cost.
Review of exemptions
Section 30(1) – Internal working documents
more information about section 30 see the FOI
Guidelines.
30(1) exempts documents that contain opinion, advice or recommendation, or
consultation or deliberation, where disclosure
would be contrary to the public
interest. A document is not exempt simply because it is an internal working
be exempt under section 30(1), three conditions must be satisfied:
(a) the document or information is matter in the nature of:
(i) opinion, advice or recommendation prepared by an agency officer or a
Minister; or
(ii) consultation or deliberation that has taken place between agency officers
or Ministers; and
(b) the matter was created during the deliberative process of an agency,
Minister, or the government’s functions; and
(c) disclosure of the matter would be contrary to the public interest.
are four circumstances where section 30(1) does not apply:
(a) documents required to be made available for inspection and purchase under
(b) purely factual information;
(c) certain documents relating to adjudicative functions;
(d) documents more than 10 years old.
term ‘officer’ is defined in section 5(1). It includes independent
contractors, consultants and legal advisers engaged
by an agency to carry out
work or provide
documents contain opinion, advice or recommendation, or consultation or
deliberation?
Agency applied section 30(1) to exempt Documents 1 and 2. Documents 1 and 2 are
reports commissioned by the Agency to report on
the collapse of the roof at Kew
Recreation Centre.
this case, a consultant or contractor is considered an agency officer for the
purposes of the FOI Act.
am satisfied the information is opinion, advice or the recommendation prepared
by an agency officer.
Was the matter created during the
deliberative process of an agency, Minister, or the government’s
I am satisfied the information was created during the deliberative processes of
the Agency, being responding to an event
at an Agency
Would disclosure of the documents be contrary to the
public interest?
deciding whether disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public
interest, I have given weight to the following relevant
(a) the right of every person to gain access to documents under the Act;
(b) the sensitivity of the issues involved and the broader context of how the
documents were created;
(c) the stage of a decision or policy development at the time the communications
(d) whether disclosure of the documents would be likely to inhibit
communications between agency officers that are essential for
the agency to make
an informed and well-considered decision or for those officers to properly
participate in a process of the agency’s
functions (such as an audit or
investigation, regulatory or law enforcement function);
(e) whether disclosure of the documents would give merely a part explanation,
rather than a complete explanation, for the taking
of a particular decision or
the outcome of a process, but only where the agency would not otherwise be able
to explain upon disclosure
of the documents;
(f) the impact of disclosing documents in draft form, including disclosure not
clearly or accurately representing a final decision
by an agency or Minister;
(g) the likelihood that disclosure would inhibit the independence of officers,
including their ability to conduct proper research
and make detailed
submissions;
(h) the public interest in the community being better informed about an
agency’s deliberative, consultative and decision-making
(i) the public interest in government transparency and accountability by
enabling scrutiny or criticism of decisions and the decision-making
process and
building the community’s trust in government and its decision-making
(j) whether there is controversy or impropriety around the decision or the
decision-making process.
its decision letter, the Agency advised disclosure would be contrary to the
public interest as the documents contain commercial
information and disclosure
would ‘prejudice council’s position in commercial negotiations if
prematurely released’.
also note the part of the information published by the Agency stating that
‘While the prosecutions continue, we can't comment
further on the cause
and responsibilities for the collapse...’.
summary, the Applicant submits:
(a) they are concerned about the secrecy of any investigation undertaken
regarding the event;
(b) the public release of all material is important to ensure that the mistakes
in the initial design are not repeated;
(c) disclosure is in the public interest;
(d) embarrassment is not a valid reason to withhold the documents;
(e) the public good in disclosure outweighs any disadvantage to the parties
(f) if necessary information can be redacted from the documents.
have decided it would be contrary to the public interest to disclose the
information in the documents for the following reasons:
(a) I note the small amount of publicly available information currently
available about the roof collapse, and the recent laying
of charges to parties
involved in the matter.
(b) In these circumstances I consider the documents to be sensitive. I also
consider the documents remain current due to the ongoing
nature of legal matters
arising from the event.
(c) While I do not know if the applicant has any intention of disseminating the
documents, I consider the further disclosure of the
documents at this stage has
the potential to disrupt legal proceedings on foot.
(d) I agree with the Agency’s statement that it would be inappropriate to
provide further information about the cause and responsibilities
of the event
while litigation continues.
(e) Given the legal matters on foot, I also consider disclosure could affect
both WorkSafe’s and the Victorian Building Authority’s
involvement in the matter.
advised by the Agency, should the legal matters arising from this issue be
resolved, the documents may become less sensitive and
therefore may be available
in the future.
I agree with the Applicant that the public interest generally weighs in favour
of disclosure of government held information,
in circumstances where complex
legal matters are yet to be resolved, and each party to those matters seek to
protect their interests
(including the Agency in carefully managing public
expenditure) the public interest weighs against disclosure under the FOI Act at
am therefore satisfied Documents 1 and 2 are exempt, in full, under section
Section 34 – Documents relating to trade secrets
more information about section 34 see the FOI
Guidelines.
34(4)(a)(ii) – Information that would expose the Agency unreasonably to
disadvantage
document is exempt under section 34(4)(a)(ii) if:
(a) the agency is engaged in trade or commerce;
(b) the document contains information of a business, commercial or financial
nature; and
(c) disclosure of the document would be likely to expose the agency unreasonably
to disadvantage.
Is the Agency engaged in trade and commerce?
Agency applied section 34(4)(a)(ii) to Documents 3 and 4.
or commerce activities must ‘of their nature, bear a trading or commercial
character’.
an agency is engaged in trade or commerce depends on the facts and circumstances
of each case.
It requires clear
evidence that the agency is doing more than delivering government services or
Agency advises that it is engaged in trade or commerce in relation to the
documents subject to this review. The Kew Recreation
Centre provides leisure
services, including gym and fitness classes that compete with other such
privately run facilities. The construction
process is part of the competitive
process, given the cost of building the facility is part of its commercial
accept the Agency is engaged in trade or commerce in this particular
Do the documents contain information of a business,
commercial or financial nature?
I accept that the documents contain information of a business nature, being
reports relating to its provision of a leisure
disclosure be likely to expose the Agency unreasonably to disadvantage?
and courts describe ‘disadvantage’ in terms of the business,
commercial or financial implications of disclosure.
In particular, whether
disclosure is likely to:
(a) reduce an agency’s capacity to compete in a competitive market
for buying and selling goods
(b) reduce an agency’s capacity to negotiate future commercial
(c) strengthen the bargaining position of entities the agency negotiates
with, at the expense of
the agency competing for marketplace
(d) expose the rates that an agency is prepared to accept for various
services – and if so, the
likely impact on the agency’s
operations.
disadvantage would be unreasonable involves the consideration of all
circumstances, including factors both in favour of, and
against disclosure, such
(a) the nature of the information;
(b) whether there is any public interest in disclosure or
nondisclosure;
(c) the circumstances in which the information was obtained or
(d) whether the information has any current relevance; and
(e) the identity of the applicant and the likely motives of the
word ‘unreasonably’ should be seen in the context of the balancing
process between competing factors of the interest
in maintaining confidentiality
and the interest in public accountability and transparency on the part of the
government, its departments
and agencies, and entities that provide government
have decided it would expose the Agency unreasonably to disadvantage for the
following reasons:
(a) I am satisfied that disclosure, at this point in time, would impact the
ability of the Agency to compete in the delivery of leisure
services, in that
disclosure may financially harm the Agency and inhibit its ability to complete
the centre.
(b) As described above, I do not consider disclosure is in the public
(c) Given the circumstances, I consider the documents were provided to the
Agency with the expectation they would remain confidential.
(d) Also as described above, I consider the documents remain sensitive at this
point in time.
(e) While I acknowledge the reason the Applicant seeks the documents, and that
they are not commercial competitors, I consider the
above factors weigh strongly
against disclosure.
am therefore satisfied Documents 3 and 4 are exempt under section
34(4)(a)(ii).
Section 25 – Deletion of exempt or
irrelevant information
25 requires an agency to grant access to an edited copy of a document where it
is practicable to delete exempt or irrelevant
information and the applicant
agrees to receiving such a copy.
whether it is ‘practicable’ to delete exempt or irrelevant
information requires an agency or Minister to consider:
(a) the effort involved in making the deletions from a resources point of
(b) the effectiveness of those deletions – that is, whether the edited
document still has meaning.
the Applicant advised they would accept the documents with information redacted
from them, I have carefully considered whether
exempt information could be
deleted from the documents. In my view, it is not practicable for the Agency to
delete exempt information
from the documents given the technical aspects of the
reports and the likelihood they will be thoroughly interrogated. In my view,
all exempt material was deleted from the documents they would become meaningless
or at least remove the information the Applicant
is specifically
the information before me, I am satisfied Documents 1 and 2 are exempt under
section 30(1) and Documents 3 and 4 are exempt from
release under section
34(4)(a)(ii).
I am satisfied it is not practicable to provide the Applicant with an edited
copy of the documents with exempt information deleted
in accordance with section
25, access is refused in full.
Timeframe for the Applicant to
seek a review of my decision
the Applicant to this review is not satisfied with my decision, they are
entitled to apply to VCAT for it to be
Applicant may apply to VCAT for a review up to 60 days from the date they are
given this Notice of Decision.
Information
Alternatively, VCAT may be contacted by email at
admin@vcat.vic.gov.au or by
telephone on 1300 018 228.
Agency is required to notify the Information Commissioner in writing as soon as
practicable if the Applicant applies to VCAT for
a review of my
a review application is made to VCAT, my decision will be subject to any VCAT
determination.
https://www.boroondara.vic.gov.au/your-council/news-and-media/boroondara-news/update-worksafe-and-victorian-building-authoritys-prosecution.
https://ovic.vic.gov.au/freedom-of-information/foi-guidelines/section-30/.
Graze v Commissioner of State Revenue
[2013] VCAT 869
Mees v University of
[2009] VCAT 782
https://ovic.vic.gov.au/freedom-of-information/foi-guidelines/section-30/#disclosure-would-be-contrary-to-the-public-interest.
https://ovic.vic.gov.au/freedom-of-information/foi-guidelines/section-34/
Gibson v Latrobe City
[2008] VCAT 1340
Concrete Constructions (NSW) Pty Ltd v Nelson
[1990] HCA 17
(1990) 169 CLR 594
Stewart v Department of
Tourism, Sport and the Commonwealth Games
[2003] VCAT 45
Binnie v Department of
Industry, Technology & Resources
(1986) 1 VAR 345
Department of Transport
[2022] VCAT 721
Save Albert Park
Inc v Australian Grand Prix Corporation
[2008] VCAT 168
Fitzherbert v
Department of Health and Human Services
[2019] VCAT 201
Asher v Department
of innovation, Industry and Regional Development
[2005] VCAT 2702
Mickelburough v
Victoria Police
[2009] VCAT 2786
The Herald and Weekly
Times Pty Limited v The Office of the Premier (General)
[2012] VCAT
Honeywood v
Department of Human Services
[2006] VCAT 2048
Victoria Police FOI Division (Review and Regulation)
[2013] VCAT 1267
[140], [155];
Re Hutchinson and Department of Human
(1997) 12 VAR
Section 50(3FA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (304 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter