URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2012/325.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kordister Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing & Anor [2012] VSCA 325 (19 December 2012)
SUPREME COURT
OF VICTORIA
COURT OF APPEAL
S APCI 2011 0087
KORDISTER PTY LTD
DIRECTOR OF LIQUOR LICENSING
THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF POLICE
Respondents
WARREN CJ, TATE and OSBORN JJA
DATE OF HEARING
21 June 2012
DATE OF JUDGMENT
19 December 2012
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2012] VSCA 325
JUDGMENT APPEALED FROM
Director of Liquor Licensing v Kordister Pty Ltd & Anor
VSC 207 (Bell
APPEAL ON QUESTION OF LAW – Refusal by Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal to reduce the hours of a 24-hour bottle shop
packaged liquor for off-premises consumption – Whether decision was wrong
at law – Interpretation of
Liquor Control Reform Act
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION – Whether object of harm
minimisation is the primary purpose of the Act – Circumstances where
minimisation principle requires decision-maker to determine that a
licensee’s extended trading hours is a direct cause
of the harm to be
minimised – Distinction between general evidence, locality evidence and
evidence of specific incidents –
Black and Cooke v Liquor Licensing
[2000] VCAT 459
Nardi v Director of Liquor Licensing
considered –
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – Relevant considerations
– Whether Tribunal failed to give ‘full consideration’ to
Panel’s recommendation –
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – No evidence – Tribunal
expressed opinion that decrease in sales would impact viability of business
viability of liquor industry – Whether Tribunal can make findings about
the general impact of a decision upon a business
or industry with no evidence or
material before it – Whether findings were critical to the
Tribunal’s ultimate decision
to refuse the application for variation
Victorian Civil and Administrative Act 1998,
Appearances:
For the Applicant
Mr C J Canavan QC with
Mr J D Pizer
Bazzani Scully Brand
For the Respondents
Mr P J Hanks QC with
Mr C J Horan
Victorian Government Solicitors Office
1 We have had the considerable advantage of reading the reasons of Tate JA
in draft. We agree with her Honour as to the appropriate
disposition of this
appeal. We arrive at that conclusion in significant part for the same reasons
as her Honour. Nevertheless,
our path of reasoning and intermediate conclusions
are in some respects different.
2 The background to this appeal and the
course of the proceedings below are comprehensively set out in
Tate JA’s reasons and
it is unnecessary to repeat them in full.
3 In summary, in May 2009 a licensing inspector applied to the first
respondent (‘the Director’) on behalf of the second
(‘the Chief Commissioner’), to vary the trading hours of a packaged
liquor licence held by the applicant (‘Kordister’).
The application
sought to restrict the 24 hour trading hours of Kordister’s bottle
shop at the Exford Hotel by requiring it
to close at 11:00pm.
licensing panel (‘the Panel’) was appointed pursuant to the
provisions of the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
(‘the Act’) then in
force and recommended that the application be accepted. The Director accepted
this recommendation
and granted the application.
5 Kordister then applied
to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (‘the Tribunal’)
for review of the Director’s
decision. After a five day hearing, the
Tribunal ordered that the Director’s decision be set aside.
18 May 2011, a judge of the Trial Division allowed an appeal by the
respondents on questions of law, set aside the Tribunal’s
remitted Kordister’s application for review of the Director’s
decision for reconsideration by the Tribunal.
7 In the proceeding before
the judge, the respondents alleged that the Tribunal made three errors of
(a) It asked itself the wrong question and failed to have regard to
relevant considerations under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
, including by
its failure to give due and proper regard to the harm minimisation objects of
(b) It failed to give ‘full consideration’ as required
by the Act to the recommendation of the Liquor Licensing Panel
that had been
appointed to make recommendations to the Director in respect of the proposed
variation to the Hotel’s liquor
(c) It made findings of fact
for which there was no evidence.
8 The judge held that the Tribunal had
erred in each of the manners alleged.
9 The issues on appeal now are:
(a) whether the judge erred in concluding that the Tribunal did not properly
consider or evaluate whether ending late-night trading
at the Hotel’s
bottle shop would contribute to the minimisation of harm arising from the misuse
and abuse of alcohol;
(b) whether the judge erred in inferring that the
Tribunal failed to give full consideration to the Panel’s recommendation;
(c) whether the judge erred in concluding that the Tribunal's failure to
give full consideration to the Panel’s recommendation
was a vitiating
(d) whether the judge erred in concluding that it was not open to the
Tribunal to make findings of fact in relation to the damage
that the variation
to the licence would have on the profitability and viability of the Exford Hotel
and other liquor outlets in Victoria;
(e) whether the judge erred in
finding that the Tribunal’s making of those findings played a vitiating
role in the Tribunal’s
relevant statutory framework
10 Section 4 of the Act provides:
(1) The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor and licensed
hospitality industries.
(2) It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion,
Act must be exercised and
performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the
misuse and abuse of alcohol.
11 The Tribunal exercised the powers of the Director upon review and was
explicitly required by s 4(2) to have regard to these objects
exercise of its discretion.
12 The notion of harm minimisation referred to
s 4(1)(a) is defined inclusively. We respectfully agree with the judge
that the essence
of the ordinary meaning of the
concept of harm
minimisation has come to be understood in the following way:
Harm minimisation is a concept which has been central to the National Drug
Strategic Plan (1993-1997) which guided the development
and implementation of
alcohol and drug policies across Australia through the 1990s. The concept was
defined as an approach that
aims to reduce the adverse health, social and
economic consequences of alcohol and other drugs by minimising or limiting the
and hazards of drug use for both the community and the individual without
necessarily eliminating use ... The approach includes preventing
anticipated
harm and reducing actual harm.
13 Thus, in the context of intravenous drug use, the provision of containers for
sharps, needle exchanges, and safe injecting rooms
may all be regarded as
measures reflecting a policy of harm minimisation. Harm minimisation is
directed to the practical reduction
of harm resulting from the consequences of
alcohol and other substance misuse. It is not a synonym for a form of
prohibition. Rather,
it responds to the reality that prohibition has proved,
and continues to prove, a very blunt and ineffective tool for the control
use of addictive substances and their consequences.
14 In turn, as the
Tribunal has held, the general concept of harm minimisation does not mean that
every application for a liquor licence
nor would it, of itself, justify every application for a variation of licence
which reduces trading hours.
15 As Ipp J has put it in considering the
harm minimisation object contained in the Western Australia liquor licensing
legislation,
the relevant object is:
to ‘minimise’ harm or ill-health, not to
prevent harm or ill-health absolutely. The word ‘minimise’ is
with the need to weigh and balance all the relevant
considerations.
16 In turn, s 4(1)(a) both contemplates mechanisms by which harm may be
minimised (s 4(1)(a)(i) and (iii)), and states relevant objectives
(s 4(1)(a) (ii) and (iv)). It is significant for present purposes to note
that the objectives are stated in very broad terms. They
relate in the first
place to ‘the amenity of community life’, which to our minds is
necessarily a broader concept than
‘the amenity of the area’, a
concept utilised elsewhere in the Act. They also relate to the impact of risky
of alcohol on the ‘community’, a concept which is broad
enough to encompass the community of Victoria.
17 On the other hand, the
objectives recognise that the manner of supply and consumption of liquor may
positively contribute to the
amenity of community life and may encourage a
culture of responsible consumption of alcohol. It follows that the notion of
minimisation is not simply one of limiting the supply of alcohol. Rather,
it is concerned with regulating supply of alcohol so as
to ensure, as far as
practicable, net community benefit.
18 In turn, sub-ss 4(1)(b) and (c)
state objects which may favour the grant or maintenance of a liquor licence.
Section 4(1)(b) recognises
the legitimacy of community expectations
relating to a diversity of licence facilities and s 4(1)(c) recognises the
legitimacy of
the liquor industry. Ultimately, the Tribunal was required to
balance each of the objects and arrive at an appropriate synthesis
particular circumstances of the case by the way of a discretionary judgment.
19 Section 4(2) emphasises that in making the relevant discretionary
judgment the decision maker must have due regard to harm minimisation
risks associated with the misuse and abuse of alcohol. For the reasons
explained by Tate JA, we accept that the text, context
and purpose of
s 4(2) lead to the conclusion that harm minimisation is a fundamental
principle of the Act and can properly be regarded
as ‘the primary
regulatory object of the Act and therefore the primary consideration in liquor
licensing decisions’,
as the judge
20 So to say, however, does not detract from the potential complexity of the
concept of harm minimisation. In particular, as we have
s 4(1)(a)(ii) and (iv) explicitly recognise that the supply of liquor in an
appropriate way may positively contribute to the
amenity of community life and
the encouraging of a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol.
does the primacy of the concept of harm minimisation make irrelevant the other
express objects of the Act, including, in particular,
the development of a
diversity of licensed facilities reflecting community expectations.
notions of amenity found in s 4(1)(a)(ii) and of reduction of risky
drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community found
in s 4(1)(a)(iv)
are further reflected in more specific provisions of the Act. Thus,
s 44(2)(b) of the Act provided at the relevant
date that the Director may
refuse to grant an uncontested application for a liquor licence on grounds which
(i) that the granting of the application would detract from or be
detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the premises to
application relates are situated; and
(ii) that the granting of the
application would be conducive to or encourage the misuse or abuse of alcohol.
23 In turn, at the relevant date, the Director might refuse to grant a
contested application on the same grounds pursuant to s 47(2).
24 Section 38 also granted rights to any person to object to the grant,
variation or relocation of a licence, on the ground that the
grant, variation or
relocation would detract from, or be detrimental to, the ‘amenity of the
area in which the licensed premises
or proposed licensed premises are
situated’. In addition, any person may object on the ground that
‘the grant variation
or relocation would be conducive to or encourage the
misuse or abuse of alcohol.’ Specific rights to object on the same basis
were granted to local councils by s 40 and to licence inspectors by
s 41. It follows that the Act contemplates that the Director
will, in an
appropriate case, specifically consider these factors in having regard to harm
minimisation and the risks associated
with the misuse and abuse of alcohol in
accordance with s 4.
25 A question raised before the judge was whether
s 44(2)(b)(i) and (ii) could apply in the present case because the terms of
subsection refer to the refusal and not the grant of an application on the
grounds referred to.
26 It seems to us that the better view is that the
criteria are concerned with grounds for refusal and not
but they conveniently identify considerations which give effect to the harm
minimisation objects to which the Director was obliged
to have regard pursuant
to s 4. Moreover, it is upon these factors that the parties joined issue
before the Tribunal.
27 The concept of amenity of an area is elaborated by
the definition contained in s 3A:
(1) For the purposes of this Act, the amenity of an
area is the quality that the area has of being pleasant and agreeable.
(2) Factors that may be taken into account in determining whether the grant,
variation or relocation of a licence would detract from
or be detrimental to the
amenity of an area include—
(a) the presence or absence of parking facilities;
(b) traffic movement and density;
(c) noise levels;
(d) the possibility of nuisance or vandalism;
(e) the harmony and coherence of the environment;
(f) any other prescribed matters.
(3) Nothing in subsection (2) is intended to limit the definition of
28 The Act further deals with the concept of amenity of an area by way of the
imposition of mandatory licence conditions. By s 11(3),
a packaged liquor
licence is subject to among other things:
(aad) a condition that the licensee comply with the
code of conduct (if any) determined by the Minister under sub-section (5)
force from time to time; and
(a) the condition set out in section 16 (compliance with planning scheme);
(b) if the licence authorises the licensee to supply liquor outside ordinary
trading hours, the conditions set out in
section 17(1).
29 Section 17(1) provides:
(1) Subject to subsection (2), it is a condition of
every licence that authorises the supply of liquor outside ordinary trading
that the licensee does not cause or permit undue detriment to the amenity
of the area to arise out of or in connection with the use
of the premises to
which the licence relates during or immediately after the hours outside ordinary
trading hours to which it relates.
30 It follows that, in considering whether to grant or vary a licence, the
decision maker will ordinarily consider whether the s
17(1) condition will
be adequate to prevent detriment to the amenity of the area. The potential
impact of the supply of liquor during
the hours in question must be considered
within the framework of relevant licence conditions. Compliance with any
relevant code
of conduct and with conditions in any relevant planning scheme
might also bear upon the management and regulation of relevant amenity
The evidentiary issues in the present
31 As the Tribunal correctly recognised, its task was not a disciplinary one.
It also accepted the further submission of counsel
for the Director
There is no requirement to prove that the licensee has
committed any breach of the provisions of the Act, any criminal offence or
engaged in any wrongdoing. The only question which needs to be determined by
the decision maker is whether the grant of the application
would be consistent
with the objects of the Act and would strike an appropriate balance between the
need to minimise harm arising
from the misuse and abuse of alcohol and the
interests in developing a diversity of licensed facilities reflecting the
expectations.
32 As the judge twice stated in his
issue on the appeal before him was whether the Tribunal went beyond merely
stating to actually address this question.
33 The enquiry the Tribunal
was required to make was essentially a prospective one directed to a predictive
conclusion. The question
was ultimately whether future trading hours should be
varied and not whether past trading hours had resulted in adverse impacts.
historical evidence might form a satisfactory predictive basis upon which to
answer the ultimate question in some cases but
in others it might not. The
respondent’s case was in part put expressly on the basis that change had
occurred and was continuing
to occur in the context within which the bottle shop
opened. Accordingly, the Tribunal had to assess the respondent’s case
on the basis that the bottle shop operated within a static context, but rather
within one which was subject to change and to
changing understanding.
34 Further, as the Tribunal constituted by Judge Bowman recognised in
Nardi v Director of Liquor
because the concept of harm minimisation is itself anticipatory there may be
cases in which a conservative approach should be
In this context, a conservative
approach may mean a precautionary approach leading to the conclusion that if an
appreciable risk
of harm is identified, harm minimisation favours avoiding such
potential risk unless it can be positively justified.
35 As Tate JA
explains, the respondent’s case before the Tribunal was put at three
levels. The first level comprised evidence
in support of the proposition that
there were frequent incidents of antisocial conduct and alcohol misuse directly
or indirectly
connected with the sale of packaged alcohol from the bottle shop
after 11:00pm. The respondent’s opening written submission
contention as follows:
is submitted that the weight of the evidence in this case will support the
conclusion that a significant proportion of the packaged
liquor which is sold at
the Hotel bottle shop after 11:00pm will be ultimately consumed in circumstances
(i) likely to contribute to harm and to the misuse and abuse of alcohol;
(ii) likely to impact adversely on the amenity of the area in and around the
(iii) likely to contribute to anti-social and undesirable behaviour.
10. The Applicant's case relies heavily upon two propositions namely:
(a) that a reduction in trading hours will adversely impact upon the economic
viability of the Hotel; and
(b) that it cannot be blamed for incidences of anti-social or harmful conduct
which may result from the sale of alcohol from the
Exford Bottleshop after
tribunal will need to assess the evidence in support of these propositions. But
even if the first proposition is established,
it does not follow that the
individual, commercial interests of the applicant must take precedence over the
interests of the community.
A licence to sell alcohol is a privilege; not a
right. The Act allows for licences to be modified and amended in response to
circumstances, or to respond to or reflect the needs of the wider
community. This is such a case.
to the second point, the position of the Director is that issue as to who is to
blame for the consequences of the misuse of alcohol,
sold at late night from the
Exford bottleshop, ought not be determinative of this application.
Director accepts that evidence will be lead that will seek to demonstrate that
the Applicant has sought to minimise impacts on
the community and to mitigate
the harm that late-night trading causes. To this extent, it may be open to the
Tribunal to conclude
that the Applicant has done its best.
even if this is the case, if the evidence also demonstrates that there are
frequent incidents of anti-social conduct, harmful
behaviour (particularly by
young people) and the abuse of alcohol,
which are directly or indirectly
connected with the sale of alcohol from the Hotel after 11:00pm, this provides
justification to vary
36 The Tribunal rejected this aspect of the respondent’s case. It
accepted Kordister’s submission that only nine of
the incidents which had
occurred in a two year surveillance period could conceivably justify ending
late night trading at the bottle
shop. Of those incidents, the Tribunal found
those which were said to be linked to the operation of the bottle shop did not
to be very serious. It held that, despite the extensive period of
surveillance, only minor breaches of the law had been established
and it found
the hotel was ‘taking its responsibility as a liquor supplier very
seriously and had done almost all that could
be expected of it.’
37 The second level at which the respondent’s case was put related to
probable impact upon the general misuse of alcohol in
the locality of the hotel.
It sought to identify the context in which more general evidence (to which we
shall next turn) should
be applied and the probable harm which would result from
continued late night sales of packaged liquor in that context. The
respondent’s
opening written submission put this contention as
Hotel is situated in an undesirable location for 24 hour packaged liquor
trading. This is because it is located in an
(i) which is used heavily by pedestrians;
(ii) which attracts significant numbers of young people;
(iii) where there is a significant concentration of late-night drinking venues;
(iv) where there are many opportunities for street drinking to occur (and where
surveillance is difficult due to the number of laneways,
alleys and secluded
Director will invite the tribunal to find on the evidence that a significant
amount of the packaged liquor sold from the Exford
Hotel after 11:00pm at night
is either being misused, or is likely to have adverse impacts on the community.
In this respect, ‘significant’
does not mean a majority or even a
substantial minority of liquor sold. Rather it means such an amount that has
anti-social impacts.
is true that anti-social impacts will need to be weighed against convenience to
the public. But we will invite the finding that
there are very moderate
benefits in terms of convenience to customers.
38 The Tribunal’s reasons for decision did not expressly reject the
Director’s submissions that anti-social behaviour
was occurring in the
streets near the hotel. Rather, the Tribunal found that there was ‘little
or nothing to link the conduct
of the bottle shop’ to such behaviour, save
perhaps for street drinking. It found that the behaviour was more likely to be
caused by the many other licensed premises and nightclubs which were nearby. It
further took the view that if a definite causal
connection could not be
established between the operation of the bottle shop and such behaviour, it
could not provide a proper basis
for variation of the licence.
39 The third
level at which the respondent’s case was put related to the general
relationship between the availability of alcohol
and social harm. The
respondent’s opening written submission put this contention as
Director intends to lead evidence that will establish that the majority of
alcohol related harm in central Melbourne occurs between
11:00pm and 3:00am.
Director intends to lead evidence that the level of social harm caused by the
misuse and abuse of alcohol is significant and that
this has led to significant
increases in:
(i) hospital admissions;
(ii) domestic violence; and
(iii) street violence.
Director will invite the tribunal to draw the inference that one of the factors
that influences, and encourages, high levels of
alcohol consumption is
availability. The Director will invite the tribunal to draw the inference that
packaged liquor, which is
bought in the central city after 11:00pm at night, is
significantly more likely to cause harm than packaged liquor bought and consumed
at other hours.
evidence will support a finding that it is more probable that packaged liquor
bought after 11:00pm is bought (or, more commonly,
consumed) by intoxicated
people, or people likely to become intoxicated, or underage persons.
40 The Tribunal found such evidence to be of difficult relevance and that it
should be treated with considerable caution.
41 The case put to the
Tribunal on behalf of the respondents was a significantly more sophisticated
case than that articulated by
the licensing inspector in the written reasons he
gave for his initial decision. Those reasons focussed principally upon amenity
impacts caused in a direct sense by incidents arising out of the supply of
packaged liquor by the bottle shop.
In making my decision, I
formed the view that the evidence provided by Victoria Police in support of this
application demonstrated
that incidents had occurred on or around the premises
late at night and more particularly early in the morning which had contributed
to the detriment of amenity. In addition, patrons who were intoxicated had been
supplied or had been involved in incidents in or
around the premises.
The continued operation of a poorly run 24 hour bottle shop is inconsistent with
the objectives of the Act particularly the objective
of harm minimisation by
means of providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of
42 It may fairly be said that Kordister effectively challenged and substantially
answered the case relating to the first level of
evidence. Nevertheless, the
respondents were entitled to put their case on the further bases articulated by
them. In our view,
the judge was correct to conclude that the Tribunal did not
respond adequately to this further case and to the combined effect of
evidence put forward on behalf of the respondents.
43 For the reasons
explained by Tate JA, each of the three levels of evidence which she
identifies, and to which we have referred,
was potentially relevant to the
application of the concept of harm minimisation to the application in issue.
44 In turn, the judge was correct to conclude that the Tribunal misconceived
and impermissibly narrowed the frame of reference bearing
on the case before it.
Further, and more particularly, the Tribunal was wrong to exclude evidence
sought to be called by the respondents
in support of the second level of
45 As Tate JA explains, while a case directed to proof of
specific incidents as supporting a licence variation must necessarily establish
a causal nexus between the operation of a bottle shop and the occurrence of the
incidents, it does not follow that evidence cannot
be called as to the nature of
the local context within which a bottle shop operates and as to general
connections between the conditions
of the supply of alcohol and social harm
falling to be considered in that context. We agree with her Honour that, so far
locality evidence is concerned, it may be sufficient to show that it
demonstrates that the object of harm minimisation would not
be well-served by
permitting 24 hour trading of packaged liquor.
46 It is convenient to
further address the critical evidentiary issues in the order in which the judge
did so. His Honour dealt first
with the manner in which the Tribunal approached
the relevance of the general evidence before it.
47 The respondent called
evidence from Pier de Carlo. Mr de Carlo is the Director of Policy,
Planning and Strategy, Mental Health
and Drug Division, Department of Health.
He gave evidence of government policy and the efforts that have been made to
reduce community
problems resulting from the consumption of alcohol.
is also a particular issue with packaged liquor licences, where customers can
purchase alcohol to consume off premises. Such
sales account for approximately
75% of all alcohol consumed, and contribute significantly to alcohol-related
harms across the population,
such as chronic alcohol-related illness and drink
48 Mr de Carlo produced a policy document entitled ‘Restoring
the Balance – Victoria’s Alcohol Action Plan 2008-2013’.
also produced a report by The Allen Consulting Group entitled ‘Alcohol
– related harm and the operation of licensed
premises.’ As the
Tribunal noted this report concluded in part:
The results of this analysis must be interpreted
carefully. The results do not suggest that the alcohol-related harm associated
packaged liquor licensees is low; rather, that the alcohol-related harm
that occurs in or near premises with a Packaged Liquor Licence
is low. The
actual harm may occur some distance away from these premises and is not able to
be linked back to the licensee using
currently available
49 Mr de Carlo further produced a report by Marsden Jacob Associates
‘Identifying a framework for packaged liquor retailing’.
Mr de Carlo concluded, as the Tribunal noted, that:
In terms of packaged liquor outlets, it has been found
by research sponsored by the World Health Organization that there is strong
evidence linking the reduction of hours or days when alcohol can be purchased to
significant reductions in overall harm. A report
by Marsden Jacob Consultants
discussed findings that restricting hours of trading for packaged liquor outlets
are likely to have
the greatest impact on persons who do not keep a ready supply
50 The Tribunal addressed the submissions of the parties with respect to this
evidence and ultimately concluded as follows:
The authorities make it clear that it is difficult to
place generalised reports - such as the Allen Report and the Marsden Jacob
Report - in a position where they can be relevant to site specific
situations such as the Exford. Further, Mr de Carlo’s evidence
go so far as to be site specific in relation to the Exford
51 We agree with the judge that the Tribunal misread the effect of prior
Tribunal decisions. It also discounted impermissibly the
potential relevance of
Mr de Carlo’s evidence. The prior decisions of the Tribunal did
not state that in applying the concept
of harm minimisation it is always
necessary to determine by site specific evidence whether a licensee was or would
be individually
responsible for harm arising from the misuse or abuse of
those decisions reject the relevance of general evidence relating to risky
drinking and associated problems of harm to the
52 In particular, in Black
and Cooke v Liquor Licensing
Kellam J and Angell M held, when considering an application for a
packaged liquor licence at a supermarket, that it was necessary
to determine
whether the licence would be contrary to the object of harm minimisation in the
sense of whether ‘the object of
harm minimisation stands out as being
poorly served by reason of particular local, social, demographic and geographic
circumstances’.
That approach involved evaluation of general evidence led
before the Tribunal concerning the nature of potential alcohol misuse
possible social impacts and its application to the local context.
53 Likewise, in Nardi v Director of Liquor
which the Tribunal specifically referred,
and upon which it relied in this context, Judge Bowman again had to
consider an application for a packaged liquor licence at a supermarket.
Honour heard general evidence relating to the consequences of probable increased
consumption of alcohol and alcohol abuse.
He was not persuaded that this
general evidence should be determinative in that case and held that it should be
evaluated in the
light of evidence as to the relevant local context. The
Tribunal in the present case was however wrong to find: ‘His Honour
it clear that the expert evidence in relation to harm minimisation needs to be
treated with considerable care.’
turn the Tribunal was wrong to adopt this approach.
54 The next issue
related to the Tribunal’s treatment of evidence concerning the locality of
the bottle shop and the amenity
of the area. The Director’s case was in
part that because the bottle shop was the only one trading late at night in the
CBD, a reduction in the supply of liquor would contribute to the
minimisation of harm.
55 The harm in issue was constituted by the misuse of
alcohol and anti-social behaviour generally in the locality, which, as
JA shows, was both the subject of evidence and an issue in respect of
which the Tribunal improperly excluded further evidence.
56 The Tribunal
took the view that it was necessary to demonstrate that the supply of liquor
from the bottle shop was causally connected
to the anti-social behaviour in
issue before it could be a relevant consideration.
57 We agree with the
judge that this was not necessarily so. The evidence as to existing problems in
the locality provided a context
in which conclusions might be drawn from the
general evidence as to the potential contribution of a reduction in trading
harm minimisation.
it was necessary to consider whether anti-social behaviour was being caused by
people leaving other establishments, the question
for the tribunal was whether
ending late-night trading at the bottle shop, being the only one so trading in
the Melbourne CBD, would
contribute to minimising harm which, on the evidence,
was actually or likely occurring. That question was not fully addressed by
finding that the harm was not ‘linked to the conduct of the bottle
shop’ ... or could not be blamed on the hotel.
The question was, if
people could not buy alcohol late at night from the bottle shop, how likely and
to what degree was it that
the anti-social behaviour would diminish and what
contribution would that make to minimising harm? The conclusion in that regard
then had to be balanced with the benefits that late-night trading brought to the
58 Counsel for Kordister submitted to this Court that if no causal nexus was
established between the bottle shop and anti-social
behaviour in the locality
then it must be open to the Tribunal to find as a fact that it was not satisfied
harm minimisation would
be furthered by limiting the bottle shop’s hours
of trade. The difficulty with this submission is that the case for the
respondents
is not that there is no logical pathway of reasoning in the
Tribunal’s decision or that its ultimate conclusion was not open
evidence but rather that the Tribunal did not respond properly or at all to the
way the case for the respondents was put by
reference to general and locality
evidence. Further, the Tribunal discounted as necessarily lacking probative
force evidence which
did not crystallise in a direct causal link between the
bottle shop and anti-social behaviour when such evidence was properly regarded
as being contextually relevant to the Tribunal’s decision.
Honour also took the view that the Tribunal erred in its view of the
significance of evidence of on-street
As Kordister’s counsel submitted, this issue ventured into merits review
and it is unnecessary for present purposes to resolve
60 The judge next
pointed to the Tribunal’s treatment of the High Court decision in CAL No
14 Pty Ltd v Motor Accidents Insurance
indicative of a fault or blame based approach to the matter before it, rather
than one centred on the concept of harm minimisation.
Again, we agree with his
Honour. CAL was concerned with a widow’s claim in tort against the
proprietor of a hotel which sold
alcohol to a drunken patron who subsequently
died as a result of negligent driving. The Tribunal quoted the following
relevant to responsibility for alcohol use:
It is not against the law to drink, and to some degree it is thought in most
societies – certainly our society – that
on balance and subject to
legislative controls public drinking, at least for those with a taste for that
pastime, is beneficial.
As Holmes J, writing amidst the evils of the
Prohibition era, said : ‘Wine has been thought good for man from the time
the Apostles until recent years’. Almost all societies reveal a
propensity to resort to alcohol or some other disinhibiting
substance for
purposes of relaxation. Now some drinkers are afflicted by the disease of
alcoholism, some have other health problems
which alcohol caused or exacerbates,
and some behave badly after drinking. But it is a matter of personal decision
and individual
responsibility how each particular drinker deals with these
difficulties and dangers. Balancing the pleasures of drinking with the
importance of minimising the harm that may flow to a drinker is also a matter of
personal decision and individual responsibility.
It is a matter more fairly to
be placed on the drinker than the seller of
61 The Tribunal went on to observe:
In my view, it is quite wrong to blame the purveyor of
alcohol when the alcohol that is purveyed is misused by the ultimate consumer.
It may be different if the seller was able to find out or knew that the alcohol
was going to be misused. In this situation, there
is little or no evidence that
the applicant was aware that any alcohol purchased from its bottleshop would be
misused by the
62 This line of reasoning is not consistent with the concept of harm
minimisation, which seeks to address the issue of alcohol misuse
and abuse from
the point of net community impacts. Notions of individual fault from the law of
torts could not assist in the resolution
of the issues before the Tribunal.
63 Lastly, the judge took the view that the Tribunal erred in the way it
utilised the reasons given for the original grant of the
extended hours licence
in 1997. With respect to his Honour, it seems to us that this was an
evidentiary matter going essentially
to a question of merits rather than law.
64 It follows, however, from the matters we have canvassed above that the
judge was correct to conclude the Tribunal’s decision
should be set aside
because the Tribunal misdirected itself as to the concept of harm minimisation
and in consequence misapprehended
the relevance of material aspects of the
evidence before it.
Panel’s recommendation
65 At the relevant time, the Director was required by s 45 of the Act to
refer a contested application to an independent Panel for
consideration and
report. In turn, the Panel was required to give the applicant and any objector
a reasonable opportunity to be
heard and to report its findings to the Director.
In its report, the Panel was required to make a recommendation as to whether or
not the application should be granted and to make any other recommendations it
thought fit concerning the application. The report
was also required to contain
reasons for the recommendations. Section 47(1) of the Act
(1) Subject to Division 3, the Director must grant or
refuse to grant a contested application
after giving full consideration to
the recommendations of the Panel under section
66 The Tribunal recorded the Panel’s recommendations in its decision.
making her decision to reduce the trading hours of the bottleshop, the Director
took into account the decision of the Panel who
was appointed to make
recommendations to the Director. The Panel recommended that the application of
Inspector Duthie to reduce
the trading hours of the bottleshop at the Exford be
accepted. That is, that the bottleshop should shut at 11:00pm each evening.
coming to that decision, the Panel considered the amenity of the area and the
benefit of service. In relation to the street
amenity, at paragraph 41 of the
Panel decision, the Panel stated as follows:
... the Panel considers that it is still reasonable that people should be able
to congregate or pass through this area without the
risk of being subject to
people drinking liquor in the street (in contravention of a local law enacted by
the City of Melbourne)
or violent, threatening or anti-social behaviour that may
result from such consumption. While such behaviour and amenity impacts
be solely or directly related to the operation of the subject premises during
the hours in contention, its presence and operation,
particularly the late
night/early morning hours, arguably do have the potential to contribute to a
noticeable reduction in the amenity
and safety of nearby street areas. This
reduction in amenity is supported by the list of incidents submitted by the
applicant recorded
in a 21 day period earlier this
should be noted that it would appear that the incidents referred to by the Panel
as taking place ‘in a 21 day period’
should in fact read
‘in a 2 year period’.
balancing the benefits and detriments to the community by the bottleshop trading
after 11:00pm, the Panel stated as follows :
While the Panel recognises that the proposed premises would offer some benefits
for consumers, it considers that those benefits should
not be realised at the
expense of what may be unacceptable adverse physical and other impacts on the
amenity of particular areas
or members of the community.
The Panel considers that existing and potential disbenefits on amenity for the
wider community of extended hours of the subject premises
outweigh the benefits
of the continued extended trading hours. The Panel notes the objector’s
contention that a large proportion
of the bottle shop takings occur in the hours
between 11pm and 7am. However, the Panel considers that any adverse economic
on the licensee should be considered through the prism of consistency
with the objects of the Act and the wider disbenefits of the
abuse and misuse of
alcohol that may be assisted by the current trading hours of the Exford
67 We are not satisfied that it can be inferred the Tribunal failed to give full
consideration to the recommendations of the Panel.
The issues raised by the
Panel were the subject of evidence and elaboration by the parties before the
68 There is no satisfactory reason for concluding that the
Tribunal disregarded the Panel’s recommendation, given that the terms
that recommendation and the reasons given for it were integrally relevant to the
debate between the parties. The recommendations
of the Panel were, however,
distanced from the Tribunal first by the decision of the Director, who gave
somewhat different reasons
for her decision than those of the Panel and secondly
by the evidence called on behalf of the respondents at the hearing before the
Tribunal which articulated and evidenced the basis for the same conclusions as
those reached by the Panel in a more developed and
detailed way.
view, the Tribunal’s error was not that it failed to consider the
recommendations of the Panel to which it referred,
but that it failed to
apprehend the relevance of the respondent’s case as a whole in respect of
the issue of harm minimisation.
economic issue
70 We agree with Tate JA with respect to the Tribunal’s conclusions
relating to the economic consequences of the proposed variation.
summary, the judge was correct to conclude that the Tribunal arrived at
conclusions upon the economic consequences of variation
of the licence which
were simply not open to
72 There are some additional observations. The Tribunal found that cutting
late night trading would have ‘a serious effect
on the economic
viability’ of the bottle
Justice Bell held that there was no evidence to support that finding
because the bottle shop failed to produce books of account
but only gave
turnover figures.
73 Kordister led
evidence from Dr Chau and Mr Brooker. Dr Chau is a member of the
Chau family, who are the Kordister’s shareholders.
Because of the elderly
state of his parents, he has taken a role in looking after the hotel.
Mr Brooker is the hotel manager.
The evidence of both of them was that
approximately 60 per cent of the turnover from the entire premises came from the
bottle shop
and that 50 to 60 per cent of the bottle shop takings were
taken after midnight. The witnesses said that if the bottle shop was
close at 11:00pm, it would have a serious effect on the viability of the
also evidence that the bottle shop charges premium prices for its liquor, far in
excess of the prices that would be charged
by a liquor shop trading in suburban
74 Kordister also led
evidence from Mr Hart, who said in his witness statement:
40.1 I am a qualified account and I am a registered
[sic] with Australian Society of Certified Practicing Accountants. I have
partial accounts relating to the business and have found that the bottle
shop has its highest levels of trading between midnight
40.2 The Bottle shop represents 60% of the turnover of the business. To lose
the late night income from the bottle shop will make
the business marginally
viable. The owners have informed me that a cut back on the bottle shop hours
will lead to a loss of jobs
and possibly the closure of the
75 Of course, the Tribunal was not bound by the rules of evidence.
Tribunal also held that reducing the trading hours in this case may damage
financial viability of other liquor outlets. Justice
Bell held that there
was no evidence for this
77 The Tribunal’s reasoning was as follows:
Clearly, a hotel without a liquor licence would be worth far less than a similar
hotel with a liquor licence. By the same token,
a bottleshop or supermarket
with a licence would be worth considerably more than a similar premise without a
licence. It necessarily
follows that if the profit that is earned from a
business is decreased by the removal of a liquor licence then, the value of that
business will be decreased. That will, in turn, have an effect on the ability
of proprietors of such a business to renew finance
commitments or obtain finance
in future. It would not be surprising that if s 29 was used to restrict the
hours of business of licensed
premises generally, the value of the business
being conducted on those premises would be decreased. Even the possibility of a
application such as this being made, would make it far more difficult for
any operator or prospective operator of a licensed premises
to obtain finance or
to obtain finance at the level at which they could be obtained at the moment.
Put in another way, lenders would
be ‘scared off’.
necessarily follows that if the scenario, which I have outlined above, were to
happen, there could be serious effects on the liquor
industry in Victoria. Many
liquor purveyors, who are providing a positive benefit to their communities, may
be forced out of business
or the viability of their business would be reduced to
such an extent that the facilities which they provide the public would also
was told that this was only the second application made by the Police in
relation to restriction of a licence pursuant to s 29 of
the Act. The other
application was settled before it was heard. Therefore, it is likely that if
the applicant was to fail in this
application, prospective lenders would make
obtaining finance for liquor businesses more difficult and more restrictive and,
result, the amenities provided by purveyors of liquor may be
78 Justice Bell held that ‘there was no evidence about the businesses
of other liquor licensees, or about their ability to
obtain finance. There was
no evidence about the effect which varying a licence of a particular licensee
would have on the viability,
profitability or value of the businesses of other
licensees. There was no evidence about the financial arrangements which were
in the industry and how varying the hotel’s licence might affect
those arrangements. There was no evidence about how other
licensees and their
financiers might respond to such a
variation.’
79 It might be thought that commonsense would support the approach of the
Tribunal. Yet, matters such as the risk to other licences,
profitability,
borrowing capacity and business valuations are necessarily relevant and
inherently individualistic topics, often requiring
expert or specialist
evidence. This is particularly so in the context of a legislative regime
devoted to social harm minimisation.
Furthermore, the Director, before the
Tribunal, put the capacity of Kordister to rely on the evidence it elicited as
to profit matters
squarely in issue.
Conclusion and disposition
80 We agree with Tate JA that the grounds of appeal to this Court which
relate to the harm minimisation and economic evidence issues
should be rejected.
On the other hand, we take the view that the grounds relating to the failure to
consider the Panel’s recommendation
are made out.
81 We would grant
leave to appeal given the public importance of the issues raised by the appeal.
82 We would allow the appeal in part, but we agree with Tate JA as to
the disposition of this matter.
83 For the reasons we have explained, the
order of the judge setting aside the decision of the Tribunal should remain of
and effect.
84 We are of the view, however, that the order of
the judge remitting the matter to the Tribunal (differently constituted) for
reconsideration
according to law, should be set aside. We are also of the view
that an order should be made for the permanent stay of the decision
Director of Liquor Licensing, dated 3 September 2009, granting the application
made by Inspector Duthie dated 25 May 2009,
pursuant to
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
, for a variation to the existing trading hours
for consumption off the licensed premises of the Exford hotel, without prejudice
the right of Inspector Duthie or the Chief Commissioner of Police to make
such fresh application as is seen fit. We also consider
that there should be a
permanent stay of the application made by Inspector Duthie dated 25 May 2009,
pursuant to
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
, for a variation to
the existing trading hours for consumption off the licensed premises of the
Exford hotel.
85 Since the commencement of the application for variation, the
Act has been materially amended, the continuing history of the operation
bottle shop has
necessarily progressed, the local context of the bottle shop’s
operations has changed, community expectations may be thought
to have altered,
and both relevant research and government policy have, in all probability,
progressed. The convenient course is
for the respondents to consider whether a
fresh application for variation should be made in the light of current
circumstances.
Counsel for the respondents did not seek to dissuade the Court
from the view that this course may be appropriate when this possibility
raised with them during the course of argument.
86 This proceeding raises the question of whether the decision made by the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (‘the
Tribunal’) to
refuse to reduce the hours of a 24-hour bottle shop selling packaged liquor for
off-premises consumption was
wrong at law. The judge of the trial division of
the Supreme Court held that the decision was wrong at law, principally because
the Tribunal misconstrued its statutory function and the primacy to be given to
the object of harm minimisation. In my view, he
was correct to so hold.
Introduction
87 The applicant, Kordister Pty Ltd, (‘Kordister’), holds a licence
to sell liquor from the Exford Hotel bottle shop
(‘the bottle shop’)
for off-premises consumption on a 24-hour basis in Melbourne’s Central
Business District.
It is the only bottle shop with a 24-hour licence in the Melbourne CBD.
88 On 25 May 2009 an application was made by a liquor licensing inspector,
Inspector Duthie, under the
Liquor Control Reform Act
Act’), to vary the bottle shop’s licence so as to reduce its trading
hours to the period from 7:00am to 11:00pm.
Kordister objected to the
application and the matter was referred to a
Liquor Licensing Panel (‘the Panel’), which recommended to the
first respondent, the Director of Liquor Licensing (‘the
Director’),
that the variation be granted.
The Director granted the
application.
The Tribunal, on a
review of the Director’s decision, set aside the variation of the licence,
with the effect that the 24-hour
sale of liquor from the bottle shop could
On an appeal by the
Director to the trial division of the Supreme
the judge held that the
orders of the Tribunal should be set aside and remitted the matter to the
Tribunal (differently constituted)
for its reconsideration according to
89 Kordister now applies for leave to appeal the judgment and orders of the
hearing of the application for leave to appeal was heard at the same time as the
The application to reduce the bottle shop’s trading
90 The Exford Hotel (‘the hotel’) is located on the corner of Little
Bourke Street and Russell Street, in the heart of
Chinatown and the Melbourne
CBD. It has operated for over 100 years. Kordister has held a liquor licence
in respect of the hotel
for about 25 years. The hotel is comprised of a 60-bed
back-packers hostel, an historic pub, and the bottle shop. The bottle shop
located at ground level facing the intersection.
91 The hotel has been
described in these
The Hotel is a relatively modest sized premises. It provides a bottleshop on
the corner of Russell and Little Bourke Streets. There
is also a main bar
behind the bottleshop that is accessible via a separate entrance from the
bottleshop. On the second floor is
a lounge which is now mainly utilised as a
function room and sometimes as a casual lounge on busier evenings. The second
has a dedicated smoking balcony. The third and fourth floors
are utilised as residential accommodation, with approximately 35 rooms.
Hotel also has a downstairs cellar which is used for storage and as an office
and common room. This area is not accessible
92 The bottle shop is located in an area with high levels of both pedestrian and
motor vehicle traffic throughout much of the day
and night, close to a
‘Hungry Jacks’ take-away fast food outlet, an amusement arcade, two
car parks, and nightclubs including
at least one, the Billboard nightclub, which
remains open throughout the night until 7:00am.
93 In May 1997 Kordister was
granted extended trading hours with respect to the hotel and the bottle shop,
for the consumption of
liquor both on and off the licensed premises, between
7:00am and 7:00am the following day, with exceptions for restricted hours on
Sundays, Good Friday and Anzac Day. That grant had been made under the
Control Act
(‘the 1987 Act’), a predecessor to the Act. At the core of the 1987
Act was the promotion of economic and social growth
in Victoria by encouraging
the development of the liquor, hospitality and related
industries.
The objects of the 1987 Act
did not include harm minimisation.
94 As a result of concern about late night drinking on the street and
anti-social behaviour arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol,
Duthie issued a warning notice to the hotel on 29 April 2009. The warning
notice contained a list of 18 incidents that
occurred in the immediate vicinity
of the hotel over the period of 25 March 2008 to 14 April 2009 that had
attracted police attention,
as well as other matters relating to the operation
of the hotel and the bottle shop.
95 Inspector Duthie also relied on these 18
incidents in his application to the Director made on 25 May 2009 for variation
of Kordister’s
bottle shop licence. The incidents included allegations of
attacks on crowd controllers after persons had been refused entry to
shop; the purchase of alcohol in breach of the restrictions on trading hours on
Anzac Day; and intoxicated persons entering
the bottle shop and purchasing
liquor. These incidents were more fully explored before the Tribunal. Before
the Panel, Inspector
Duthie spoke of people who were already intoxicated seeking
to buy more liquor from the bottle
The operation of the licensed premises trading to 7 a.m. attracts patrons from
other city venues that have ceased trading. The number
of incidents where
intoxicated persons and drunken persons have been involved is indicative of a
premises that is operating poorly.
The issues are compounded with a bottle shop
that operates until 7:00 a.m. and attracts patrons from other venues who wish to
consuming alcohol. These patrons who have been consuming liquor for a
period of time attempt to purchase more liquor and if refused
entry become
frustrated and aggressive.
96 Inspector Duthie also spoke of the effects of patrons of the bottle shop
consuming liquor in the street. He described a practice
‘pre-loading’ whereby people buy liquor from the bottle shop, drink
it quickly in the street or elsewhere before
queuing to obtain admission to
nearby nightclubs (or while queuing) to avoid having to buy more expensive
drinks at those clubs.
It was argued that, as a result of drinking quickly,
those persons cause problems in the street and in other licensed premises.
other bottle shop in the CBD that is licensed to sell liquor after midnight is
only open until 3:00am. Four other premises
in inner Melbourne sell packaged
liquor after midnight but not in the
97 Kordister
submitted before the Panel that the bottle shop provides a unique service in the
Melbourne CBD and it would be detrimental
to the amenity of the area to reduce
98 The term ‘amenity’ is defined in s 3A of the Act broadly and
not exhaustively as follows:
(1) For the purposes of
this Act, the amenity of an area is the quality that the area has of being
pleasant and agreeable.
(2) Factors that may be taken into account in determining whether the grant,
variation or relocation of a licence would detract
from or be detrimental to the
amenity of an area include-
(a) the presence or absence of parking facilities;
(b) traffic movement and density;
(c) noise levels;
(d) the possibility of nuisance or vandalism;
(e) the harmony and coherence of the environment;
(f) any other prescribed matters.
(3) Nothing in subsection (2) is intended to limit the definition of
99 Kordister emphasised that the bottle shop is located in a commercial/retail
precinct in which there are many premises associated
with the liquor and
hospitality industry and there is limited residential accommodation in the area.
There had been no complaints
100 Kordister also submitted before the Panel, and repeated this
submission before the Tribunal, the Supreme Court, and on appeal,
that it was
necessary to find a causal link between the extended opening hours of the bottle
shop and any detriment to the amenity
of the area if that detriment was to be
relied on to support a reduction in trading
Disorderly conduct
caused by the respondent
is a relevant consideration,
however conduct by persons who are in this section of the CBD during the
relevant periods is not, per
se, the responsibility of the respondent. There
must be a nexus between the conduct complained of and the operation of the
101 The Panel rejected Kordister’s submission on the need for a causal
link, preferring to adopt a more general approach based
on the notion of
‘a potential to contribute’. It made no findings on each of the
incidents relied on by Inspector Duthie.
With respect to street amenity,
the Panel said
The Panel acknowledges that the amenity of the street environs during the
operation of the subject bottle shop between 11 pm and
7 am may be different
(such as greater levels of noise associated with people congregating in the
street) to that experienced in
the same area during day time hours or in other
parts of the CBD or suburbs where there are few if any licensed premises.
the panel considers that it is still reasonable that people should be
able to congregate or pass through this area without the risk
of being subject
to people drinking liquor in the street (in contravention of a local law enacted
by the City of Melbourne) or violent,
threatening or anti-social behaviour that
may result from such consumption.
While such behaviour may not be solely or
directly related to the operation of the subject premises during the hours in
contention,
its presence and operation, particularly in the late night/early
morning hours, arguably do have the potential to contribute to a
reduction in the amenity and safety of nearby street areas.
This reduction
in amenity is supported by a list of incidents submitted by the applicant
recorded in a 21 day period earlier this
102 It is common ground that the reference to the incidents recorded as having
occurred in a ’21 day period’ was a mistake
and that the reference
was rather to the incidents alleged to have occurred between 25 March 2008 and
14 April 2009.
103 The Panel was not convinced that there was a strong
community demand to purchase packaged alcohol between 11:00pm and 7:00am and
ultimately concluded that the reduction in trading hours ‘has the
potential to reduce alcohol-related incidents in the vicinity
of the subject
premises ... without substantial adverse impact on those consumers who currently
wish to purchase alcohol between
11:00pm and 7:00am in the Melbourne
104 The Director, in accepting the Panel’s recommendation to grant the
application for
concluded that this was to ‘ensure that detriment to the amenity of the
area in which the premises are located is mitigated
and that it would assist in
reducing the misuse and abuse of
105 The Director based
his view upon: (1) the evidence of the incidents from Victoria Police ‘on
or around the premises late
at night and more particularly early in the morning
which had contributed to the detriment of
addition to the fact that ‘patrons who were intoxicated had been supplied
or had been involved in incidents in or around
and (2) the inconsistency
of a ‘poorly run 24 hour bottle
with the objectives of the Act
‘particularly the objective of harm minimisation by means of providing
adequate controls over
the supply and consumption of
106 To understand the
force of the Director’s reliance on the harm minimisation object of the
Act it is necessary to understand
the legislative history of the Act and the
statutory scheme.
The legislative history
107 The 1987 Act, under which Kordister was granted extended trading hours, was
introduced to replace the
Liquor Control Act
(‘the 1968 Act’). In the context of a concern by the then State
Government that the 1968 Act was overly regulatory,
difficult to interpret and
not conducive to a vibrant and dynamic metropolitan lifestyle, it commissioned
Dr Nieuwenhuysen to review
the 1968 Act. The Nieuwenhuysen Report heralded in a
‘shift of emphasis away from regulation of the industry to other means
countering alcohol abuse’.
reflected in the objects of the 1987 Act, which
The object of this Act is to respond to community interest by –
(a) promoting economic and social growth in Victoria by encouraging the proper
development of the liquor, hospitality and related
industries; and
(b) facilitating the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting consumer demand; and
(c) providing adequate controls over the sale, disposal and consumption of
liquor; and
(d) contributing to the effective co-ordination of the efforts of government
and non-government agencies in the prevention and control
of alcohol abuse and
108 The 1987 Act made liquor licences easier to obtain, and saw the regulatory
burden on licensees eased. A new Liquor Licensing
Commission was established
and the 1987 Act was intended to bring a European-style food and drinking
culture to Melbourne and Victoria,
with a relaxation on the regulation of
trading hours, food service, and limitations formerly applicable to ownership of
109 In the following years Melbourne and Victoria’s liquor
industry grew substantially. In October 1998, Dr Napthine, the then
for Youth and Community Services, noted that there were over 9000 licensed
premises and over 2050 BYO establishments throughout
It was apparent to the community that the increase in the availability of liquor
had the unwanted consequence of increasing the ‘level
of underage
drinking, violent and criminal behaviour as a consequence of drunkenness,
drink-driving as well as having an adverse
effect on the amenity of communities
in proximity to the licensed
As a result the Act was
introduced, with Minister Napthine stating that ‘[m]inimisation of harm
resulting from the sale and
supply of liquor is to be the principal purpose of
the [A]ct’.
110 The concept
of harm minimisation has been summarised in the following
Harm minimisation is a concept which has been central to the
National Drug Strategic Plan (1993-1997) which guided the development
and implementation of alcohol and drug policies across Australia through the
1990s. The concept was defined as an approach that
aims to reduce the adverse
health, social and economic consequences of alcohol and other drugs by
minimising or limiting the harms
and hazards of drug use for both the community
and the individual without necessarily eliminating use ... The approach includes
anticipated harm and reducing actual
111 The Act created the position of Director of Liquor Licensing and established
function, described above, of making recommendations to the Director on whether
specific licences should be granted, revoked,
or varied. The Act also allowed
for objections to be made by members of the general
112 The Act has been amended
several times. The Liquor Control Reform (Packaged Liquor Licences) Act
2002 Amending Act’) had as its aim the balancing of the principle of harm
minimisation against the promotion of
competition in the industry, together with
greater opportunity for community participation in the licensing
Mr Brumby, the then Minister for
State and Regional Development, in his Second Reading Speech,
The [B]ill provides for greater community involvement and scrutiny in liquor
licence applications and minimises the potential for
abuse and misuse of alcohol
within the community. The new arrangements deliver significant benefits to
small liquor retailers and
ensure that Victorians continue to enjoy a
competitive, but fair, liquor
113 In 2006 the Act was amended by the Liquor Control Reform (Amendment) Act
2006 Amending Act’). Mr Rob Hulls, the then Attorney-General, in
delivering the Second Reading Speech, said it
‘will promote amenity and
community safety in and around licensed premises, thereby enhancing the
reputation of the liquor
industry for the benefit of all
Victorians’.
The 2006 Amending Act
increased the powers of the Director, including conferring on the Director the
power to make, vary, or revoke,
late hour entry declarations (declarations that
patrons are not permitted to enter certain licensed premises during certain
for an area or locality. Patrons
could thus be prohibited from entering or re-entering licensed venues after a
specified time.
It also allowed the Director to set prescribed minimum
standards for surveillance equipment in licensed
114 The reforms were designed
to reduce anti-social behaviour, such as public drunkenness, property damage,
vandalism, and violence
in and around licensed premises, while balancing the
community’s need for safety against the licensees’ commercial
They sought to address the problems associated with underage
drinking by enhancing the powers available to Victoria Police and increasing
substantially the penalties for supplying alcohol to underage
115 Further amendments were passed in 2007 by the Liquor Control
Reform Amendment Act
(‘the 2007 Amending Act’) aimed at reducing the level of violence,
and promoting community safety, in and around licensed
premises by giving police
the power to ban persons suspected of committing certain specified offences from
entertainment precincts
for up to 24 hours and conferring on courts the power to
make exclusion orders for a period of up to one
116 The 2007 Amending Act also
conferred upon the Director the power to make a temporary late hour
declaration,
allowing the Director to bypass the notification requirements to licensees if
certain conditions were met, if he or she believed
on reasonable grounds that:
(1) alcohol-related harm or disorder had occurred in the area or locality to
which the order was to
apply; and (2) the declaration was reasonably likely to
be an effective means of reducing or preventing the occurrence of
alcohol-related
violence or disorder in the area or locality. It also granted
senior police members the power to suspend immediately a licensee’s
licence for up to 24- hours in prescribed
circumstances.
117 In 2009, the Liquor
Control Reform Amendment (Enforcement) Act
(‘the first 2009 Amending Act’) and the Liquor Control Reform
Amendment (Licensing) Act 2009
second 2009 Amending Act’) were
118 The first 2009 Amending Act
was introduced against the background of a Ministerial Taskforce on Alcohol and
Public Safety established
by the Premier reflecting a national concern about
alcohol abuse considered as part of the Council of Australian Governments (COAG)
process. The result of the Taskforce was the Restoring the Balance:
Victoria’s Alcohol Action Plan 2008-2013 (‘Victorian
Alcohol Action
Victorian Alcohol Action Plan gave particular emphasis to the impact of
alcohol-fuelled violence and anti-social behaviour on
public safety and treated
as a significant issue the sale of liquor late at night for off-premises
consumption.
119 The powers introduced by the first 2009 Amending Act
included a power conferred on the Director to suspend a licensee’s
for a period of up to five days if the Director believed on reasonable
grounds that the licensee had engaged in conduct that
would constitute grounds
for an application to the Tribunal to conduct an inquiry into the licensee and
there was a danger that a
person may suffer substantial harm, loss or damage in
consequence of the licensee’s conduct unless the licence was
Director’s ability to prosecute licensees for allowing drunken or
disorderly persons on licensed premises was strengthened
by requiring that the
licensee show both that: (1) it did not know that drunk or disorderly persons
were on the premises; and (2)
it had taken reasonable steps to prevent such
persons from being on the premises, rather than being required to satisfy only
limb, as before.
120 The powers of
the Director to inquire into activities regulated by the Act were
first 2009 Amending Act also ‘augment[ed] the director’s
investigatory role by enabling the director to undertake
a broad-based inquiry
into any matter relevant to the operation of the [A]ct, including an inquiry
into the activities regulated
by the [A]ct or in any area or locality of the
This power was to enable the
Director to address particular areas or hotspots that required additional
conditions to be placed on
licensees to protect community safety.
reforms introduced by the second 2009 Amending Act included a risk-based liquor
licensing system, whereby high-risk licensees,
such as nightclubs, were to pay a
greater share of the cost of regulating the
factors that might be used when determining an appropriate licensing fee were
increased to reward those licensees with a good
compliance history, the Director
being able to consider the nature and scale of the venue’s activities, the
the number of patrons, the trading hours, the previous conduct of
the licensee and its history of compliance, and other factors consistent
the objects of the Act.
122 The second
2009 Amending Act sought to promote a responsible drinking culture and was
directed at ‘reducing risky drinking
These reforms followed a report by the Allen Consulting Group, commissioned by
the State Government to estimate the social costs
of alcohol-related harm,
which recommended that operating hours be treated as a factor to be taken into
account within a risk-based
framework of licensing. It was anticipated that the
reforms, including the introduction of a late-night licence, would allow the
Government further to explore ‘the extent that packaged liquor outlets
contribute to alcohol-fuelled violence and further costs
to the community such
as long term health costs’.
his Second Reading Speech, Minister Robinson explained the evolution of the
liquor industry in Victoria over twenty
The liquor industry has dramatically changed in the last 20 years. In the 1980s
the Nieuwenhuysen report recommended increasing
competition in the liquor
industry. The vision of Melbourne was for an entirely new system to encourage
growth in European café-style
In 2009, we are a city of small bars and restaurants attracting tourists from
all over the world. Our chefs are world class and
our wine is internationally
recognised. What we did not account for at the time of the Nieuwenhuysen report
was the increase in
large nightclub and bars that accompanied the liberalisation
of liquor laws.
Recently we have seen community outrage over horrific incidents of late-night
violence in and around licensed venues. The Brumby
government is taking action
to recast the liquor licensing system to ensure that bars and nightclubs that
are open late and have
large numbers of patrons contribute more to the cost of
stronger regulation and enforcement of the liquor industry necessary to help
reduce alcohol-related violence and contribute to a safer community. We are
doing this without penalising the sophisticated food
and café culture
that has emerged in Melbourne by recognising that these venues present less risk
to the community.
124 With respect to alcohol-related harm, the second 2009 Amending Act evinced
two principal concerns; the increased risk of harm
associated with late
night trading effect and the risks associated with having a poor compliance
history. The Minister set out the
impetus for the amendments as
The evidence shows that the later a venue trades, the more risk of
alcohol-related harm. It also shows that a licensee’s compliance
is an indicator of future behaviour. Licensees with a good compliance history
are generally regarded as lower risk than
licensees with a poor compliance
history. The risk factors incorporated into the model reflect the evidence and
were consistently
identified by stakeholders during consultation — how
late a venue trades and if it is caught serving intoxicated persons or
allowing drunken or disorderly persons or minors on a licensed premises, that
is, its compliance history.
Late opening hours and poor compliance history have been shown to increase the
risk of alcohol-related harm, thus they were included
as risk factors in the
Additionally, there is concern in the community regarding the contribution of
packaged liquor outlets to alcohol-related harm. More
than three-quarters of
alcohol sales are from packaged liquor outlets. Outlets that have extended
trading hours are more likely
to be associated with greater alcohol-related harm
resulting from pre-loading, unsupervised and under-age
consumption.
125 Most significantly, it was the second 2009 Amending Act that reinforced the
object of harm minimisation. Section 1 of the second
2009 Amending Act
The main purposes of this
(a) to amend the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
(i) to strengthen the objects of that Act in relation to harm minimisation and
the responsible consumption of alcohol.
126 It achieved this purpose by amending the objects of the Act to include the
encouragement of the responsible consumption of alcohol
and the reduction of the
impact of risky drinking of alcohol on the community, and a declaratory
intention that every power under
the Act was to be performed with due regard to
harm minimisation. These amendments are reflected in s 4(1)(a)(iv) and s 4(2)
the Act respectively, so that, at the relevant time of the review by the
Tribunal of the application for variation of the trading
hours licence for the
(1) The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor and licensed
hospitality industries.
(2) It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion,
Act must be exercised and
performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the
misuse and abuse of alcohol.
127 The Minister spoke of the importance of each of the amendments to s
[I]n order to better support the aims of the Victorian alcohol action plan, the
new risk-based fee model, and to reflect the community’s
expectations, we
have clearly underscored that the harm minimisation object of the [A]ct extends
to encouraging a culture of responsible
consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community.
The [B]ill further reinforces the harm minimisation objects of the [A]ct by
providing that it is the intention of Parliament that
every power, authority,
discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or imposed by the [A]ct shall be
exercised and performed with
due regard to harm minimisation and the risks
associated with the misuse and abuse of alcohol.
This amendment is intended
to reinforce the priority of harm minimisation in the [A]ct and to strengthen
the way in which the objects
of the act are applied
128 It is apparent from a comparison between the objects of 1987
under which the bottle shop had been granted extended trading hours, and the
amended objects of the Act,
that a shift
had occurred from the promotion of a liberalised, self regulated system
introduced following the Nieuwenhuysen report,
to an increasingly regulated,
tightly controlled industry with a strong focus on harm minimisation and the
protection of the community
from alcohol-related violence and disorder.
Relevantly, the new risk-based licensing system reflected an understanding of
the contribution
to alcohol-related violence and disorder made by late night
trading and packaged outlets for off-premises consumption.
The Tribunal’s decision to allow the 24-hour trading
129 The proceeding before the Tribunal was neither disciplinary nor punitive in
it was an exercise by the Tribunal of its review
over the Director’s
decision to grant a variation. The Tribunal characterised the nature of the
proceeding, brought under
s 29(1) of the Act, in the following
There is no requirement to prove that the licensee has committed any breach of
the provisions of the Act, any criminal offence or
engaged in any wrongdoing.
The only question which needs to be determined by the decision maker is whether
the grant of the application
would be consistent with the objects of the Act and
would strike an appropriate balance between the need to minimise harm arising
from the misuse and abuse of alcohol and the interests in developing a diversity
of licensed facilities reflecting the community
expectations.
130 The Director adduced evidence of government policy and the efforts that had
been made to reduce problems of alcohol in the community
and improve the general
amenity of the relevant area. Mr Pier de
general evidence about the Victorian Alcohol Action Plan, the social harms
related to alcohol, and the general linkage between
operating hours, packaged
liquor and social harm, noting that sales from packaged liquor premises
accounted for about 75 per cent
of all alcohol consumed, ‘contribut[ing]
significantly to alcohol-related harms across the population, such as chronic
alcohol-related
illness and drink
He also gave
statistical evidence from the Victorian Population Health Survey about the
increased rate of persons consuming alcohol
at least weekly at risky or high
risk levels that would result in short term harm, and the increased rate of
hospital-caused admission
and presentations to emergency departments, including
in major urban trauma hospitals.
131 The Director and the Chief
Commissioner of Police (who was joined as a party to the proceeding) also
alleged that in the vicinity
of the bottle shop there
street violence, domestic violence, hospital admissions, vandalism and property
damage, theft, public drinking, groups of people
congregating and arguing in the
streets and vomiting and urinating in public
132 More specifically, it was alleged that there were about 50 incidents of
anti-social conduct, harmful behaviour (particularly
by young people) and the
abuse of alcohol that were directly or indirectly connected to the sale of
alcohol from the hotel after
11.00pm. The Tribunal took these incidents as its
principal focus. The incidents were summarised as follows:
alcohol in the street by patrons of the hotel and others, such behaviour being
prohibited by Melbourne City Council local
purchases of liquor to intoxicated persons or under age persons. That is,
somebody who is entitled to purchase liquor purchasing
it from the bottle shop
and then either selling or giving it to people who are not entitled to purchase
it because they are either
intoxicated or under age.
Occasions where
the bottle shop served allegedly intoxicated persons.
Some incorrect
entries in the crowd controller’s register or insufficient entries.
restrictions as a result of a lock-out declared by the Director.
alcohol at the wrong time on Anzac Day.
Alleged assaults
by security staff.
Unruly queuing
on the footpath outside the hotel; and
Fighting outside
133 The Director and the Chief Commissioner called 21 witnesses who gave
evidence of these incidents arising from the two-year surveillance
operation by
Victoria police. Kordister submitted, and the Tribunal found, that only about
30 of the 50 alleged incidents related
to the bottle shop, and that only nine of
those incidents could conceivably justify a variation in trading hours of the
bottle shop.
Those nine incidents involved:
(1) 25 April 2008 – Large crowds
drinking in the street, some of whom had purchased alcohol from the bottle shop
but no complaint
made and no investigation undertaken;
(2) 25 April 2008
– The sale of alcohol after 1pm on Anzac
due to a misunderstanding in relation to the licence condition;
(3) 25 July
2008 – A breach of the lock-out due to a miscommunication between the
police and the hotel whereby staff at the
bottle shop believed that its
operation was not caught by the lockout;
(4) 14 September 2008 – The
blocking of the footpath by a queue which had since been rectified by bollards
and crowd control;
(5) 14 December 2008 – Supply to an intoxicated
person but the infringement notice was withdrawn with an acknowledgement that
the hotel had a defence;
(6) 21 December 2008 – Crowd controller
register not complete, the register being the responsibility of a security
and not the hotel;
(7) 30 October 2009 – Alleged secondary
supply to minor but no evidence that the person was under 18 and the
investigator’s
notes recorded that he believed the recipient was
(8) 30 October 2009 – Patrons ejected but not by reason of being
intoxicated, rather, because they were consuming alcohol purchased
(9) 14 November 2009 – The bottle shop queue blocked
street (briefly).
134 The Tribunal found that the nine incidents were not
‘very serious’, as very few of the incidents resulted in
infringement
notices being issued and a number of them related to breaches of
It considered that the low number of incidents recorded by the police relating
directly to the bottle shop over the two-year period
of police surveillance was
indicative of how seriously Kordister was taking its obligations under the
For a hotel that has been kept under extensive surveillance for a period of
almost two years, and there were only minor breaches
of the law by that
establishment, it would appear to me that the hotel is taking its
responsibilities as a liquor supplier very seriously
and has done almost all
that could be expected of it in only serving customers that were entitled to be
served and warning those
customers about other breaches of the local laws that
they should not breach.
135 The Tribunal rejected the submission advanced by the Director that the
bottle shop had caused anti-social behaviour on the basis
that there was
‘little or nothing to
operation of the bottle shop and the behaviours complained of,
‘perhaps save and except for street
the responsibility for
which was most likely attributable to the larger nightclubs and bars surrounding
the bottle shop, ‘where
people stay until the early hours of the morning
and leave the nightclub in a drunken
136 The Tribunal
considered that much of the evidence about the abuse of alcohol in the locality
surrounding the bottle shop was irrelevant.
This is apparent from a ruling the
Tribunal gave to exclude the evidence of one Constable Sharp in relation to an
alleged incident
of a man having been punched by a security guard as he
attempted to gain re-entry to the bar at the hotel. The ruling of the Tribunal
was to the following effect:
The [Director] has sought
to rely on a statement of Emma Sharp ... [which] refers to an incident that
occurred in the vicinity of
the subject premises on 25 March 2008, between
The proceeding before me relates to whether the bottle shop from the
hotel should shut at 11 pm, or be allowed to remain open at
the hours that it
has at the moment ... The matter that Constable Sharp refers to seems to be
purely a matter arising out of the
operation of consumption of liquor on
premises from the hotel, or from another place. There is no mention of the
bottle shop at
all. Mr Morris QC, who appears for [the Director] and the joined
party, says the environments are important in deciding whether
the bottle shop
should remain open after 11 pm.
In my view, this statement does not assist whatsoever in whether the bottle shop
should remain open at 11 at all.
It is a statement that has nothing to do
with the bottle shop
, and there is nothing in the statement to suggest that
the bottle shop would create a problem, or not create a problem, or this would
have an effect on those using the bottle shop, whether or not it was to remain
open. I understand that those going in and out of
the bottle shop may be
inconvenienced by something happening on the footpath, but, in my view, that
does not take the matter any
further. Under those circumstances, I rule that
this statement is irrelevant to the question before me.
137 As a result of that ruling and in the light of further objections or
foreshadowed objections by Kordister on similar grounds,
the Director and the
Chief Commissioner did not seek to call four additional police witnesses
all of whose statements recorded drunk
and disorderedly behaviour (encompassing
assaults and a brawl) in the locality of the bottle shop, including the hotel.
138 The Tribunal considered that it had not been established that liquor
purchased from the bottle shop was used for the vice of pre-loading
and that the
object of maintaining a diversity of licensed facilities would not be
facilitated if the variation was
While it is clear that people may consume alcohol in the street after the same
is purchased from the ... bottle shop, it is far from
clear that the purchase of
such alcohol is used for the purpose of what ... [is] described as pre-loading,
side-loading
back-loading.
Drinking in
the street does not necessarily amount to harmful effects of alcohol or even
detriment to the community. At its highest,
it is a breach of a local law.
It is clear that Melbourne does have many visitors, and it is important for
those visitors to be served with packaged alcohol at
times when they may require
it. Otherwise, Melbourne may be at risk of losing its reputation of a vibrant
international city.
139 The Tribunal accepted that Parliament had legislated to prevent alcohol
misuse and abuse and referred to a policy statement published
Government Gazette:
The grant of a liquor licence that allows for the provision of packaged liquor
from licensed premises on a 24 hour basis is contrary
to the aim of minimisation
of harm from the misuse and abuse of alcohol and contrary to the aim of ensuring
the amenity of community
That the grant of a licence that allows for the provision of packaged liquor
from licensed premises on hours that are greater than
ordinary trading hours as
defined in s 3 of the Act should only be granted by the Director of Liquor
Licensing if exceptional circumstances
can be demonstrated by an applicant, and
that in all of the circumstances that the extended hours for a packaged liquor
license should
not extend past 12 midnight.
This policy statement does not affect any licence that has been granted and
is operational as at the date of the
140 The Tribunal placed great weight on the intention manifest in the policy
statement that it not affect licences already granted
while acknowledging that
this did not exempt the bottle shop from the strictures of the
In my view, that last sentence quoted in relation to the policy must be given
effect in this situation. That is not to say that
the new provisions of the Act
do not apply; they clearly do and they also must be given consideration in any
balancing exercise
done in relation to this application.
141 Relying upon CAL No 14 Pty Ltd v Motor Accidents Insurance
Tribunal endorsed the view of the High Court
balancing the pleasures of drinking with the importance of minimising the harm
that may flow to a drinker is also a matter of personal
decision and individual
responsibility. It is a matter more fairly to be placed on the drinker than the
seller of drink.
142 Ultimately, the Tribunal was not satisfied that, on the evidence, with
respect to the balance between the object of harm minimisation
and diversity of
amenities, the answer lay in favour of the grant of the variation. As the
In my view, it is quite wrong to blame the purveyor of alcohol when the alcohol
that is purveyed is misused by the ultimate consumer.
It may be different if
the seller was able to find out or knew that the alcohol was going to be
misused. In this situation,
there is little or no evidence that the
applicant was aware that any alcohol purchased from its bottleshop would be
misused by the
. Further, in reference to the ... concern about
pre-loading, it is likely that people who intend to go to the larger nightclubs
in the city of Melbourne would already be at those clubs by 11:00 pm or 12:00
midnight. There was evidence given that there were
a number of bottleshops in
Melbourne that sold liquor until midnight. Thus, in those circumstances, it is
difficult to see how limiting
[Kordister’s] bottleshop trading hours to
11:00pm would, in any way, assist the situation in regard to reducing the
of pre-loading. While the concept of side-loading and back-loading
were mentioned,
there was little evidence to show the extent of that practice
in relation to this bottleshop
. At this point, I accept that late closing
of the bottleshop (up to 7:00am) is more beneficial to the amenity of the area
harm that occurs from its extended hours.
143 With respect to the economic impact that might flow from a reduction in
trading hours, the Tribunal concluded that the bottle
shop represented a large
source of profit for Kordister, and a reduction in its operating hours would
have a serious effect on its
profitability. About 60 per cent of the
hotel’s turnover came from the bottle shop, and between 50 to 60 per cent
of the bottle
shop’s takings occurred
after midnight.
144 The Tribunal considered that affirming the decision of the Director to
grant the variation could reduce the viability and value
not only of the hotel
but of other premises making up the liquor industry in
Clearly, a hotel without a liquor licence would be worth far less than a similar
hotel with a liquor license. By the same token,
a bottleshop or supermarket
with a licence would be worth considerably more than a similar premise without a
licence. It necessarily
follows that if the profit that is earned from a
business is decreased by the removal of a liquor licence then, the value of that
business will be decreased. That will, in turn have an effect on the ability of
proprietors of such a business to renew finance
commitments or obtain finance in
the future. It would not be surprising that if s 29 was used to restrict the
hours of business
of licensed premises generally, the value of the business
being conducted on those premises would be decreased. Even the possibility
s 29 application such as this being made, would make it far more difficult for
any operator or prospective operator of a licensed
premises to obtain finance or
to obtain finance at the level at which they could be obtained at the moment.
Put in another way,
lenders would be ‘scared off’.
It necessarily follows that if the scenario, which I have outlined above, were
to happen, there could be serious effects on the liquor
industry in Victoria.
Many liquor purveyors, who are providing a positive benefit to their communities
may be forced out of business
or the viability of their business would be
reduced to such an extent that the facilities which they provide the public
be reduced.
145 The Tribunal found that a reduction in the trading hours of the bottle shop
‘could have a serious effect on the amenity
of liquor outlets in
To use the words of s 4(1)(b), it would detrimentally affect the facilitation of
‘the development of a diversity of licensed
facilities reflecting
community expectations’. It would also have an effect on the objects of
referred to in s 4(1)(c) in
that it would detrimentally contribute to the
responsible development of the liquor and licensed hospitality industries.
I find that to refuse [Kordister’s] application would have a serious
detrimental effect on the economic viability not only
of the applicant but of
many other liquor outlets in Victoria.
146 The Tribunal concluded, on the basis of its findings in respect of both
social impact and economic impact, that the bottle shop
should be permitted to
continue trading on a 24-hour licence.
The appeal to the trial division of the
Supreme Court
147 The appeal by the Director to the Supreme Court was brought, by leave,
pursuant to s 148 of the VCAT Act, with respect to two
questions of law. Both
questions of law starkly raised the issue of whether the application for the
reduction of the bottle shop’s
trading hours ought be decided by
determining whether the bottle shop was responsible for causing anti-social
behaviour or whether
it was sufficient that the desired reduction would advance
the broader objects of the Act, most especially harm minimisation.
first question of law concerned the proper interpretation of the objects
provisions in s 4(1) and s 4(2) of the
and the issue of whether a contested application under s 29 of the Act to vary a
licence was to be guided by:
(1) a consideration of the objects identified in
s 4(1), having regard to the local, social, demographic and geographic
circumstances
of the licensed premises; and
(2) due regard to the matters
identified in s 4(2), namely, harm minimisation and the risks associated with
the misuse and abuse of
rather than by a consideration of whether
the supply of liquor from the licensed premises was or would be a direct cause
of incidents
involving the misuse and abuse of alcohol and whether the licensee
was responsible or to blame for any such incidents. The Director
contended that
the Tribunal had erred by misconstruing and misapplying s 4(1) and s 4(2) of the
Act and by asking, or asking only,
whether harm arising from the misuse and
abuse of alcohol was directly and causally linked to the supply of liquor from
149 The second, related, question of law was whether the
Tribunal erred in the exercise of its review jurisdiction by:
(1) limiting
the relevant alcohol-harm and risks to those that were directly and causally
linked to Kordister’s supply of packaged
liquor from its licensed premises
after 11:00pm and for which Kordister was responsible or to blame;
(2) failing to address the question whether the objects identified in s
4(1) and the matters identified in s 4(2) would be advanced
by a reduction in
the hours during which packaged liquor could be supplied for off-premises
consumption, including in the area in
which the bottle ship is
150 Included within this question was the allegation that the
Tribunal had failed to give ‘full consideration’ to the
recommendations of the Panel. The requirement that ‘full
consideration’ be given to the recommendations of the Panel
was imposed
under s 47(1) of the
The Director also alleged that the Tribunal made findings of fact, for which
there was no evidence, about the economic viability
and profitability of the
hotel and the serious detrimental impact the variation would have on the
profitability and viability of
other liquor outlets in Victoria.
judge concluded that the Tribunal had erred in each of the three respects for
which the Director contended, namely, (1) failing
in the performance of its
statutory function of determining whether ending late night trading at the
bottle shop would contribute
to minimising harm arising from the use and abuse
of alcohol, and in doing so failing properly to construe and apply the harm
minimisation
objects in s 4(1) and s 4(2) of the Act; (2) failing fully to
consider the recommendations of the Panel; and, (3) without evidence,
findings of fact about the economic impact of the variation on the hotel and the
liquor industry throughout Victoria.
152 The judge emphasised that the
primary consideration in the determination of variation applications is the
objects provision in
s 4(1), especially the harm minimisation object in s
4(1)(a), and that the declaration provision in s 4(2) ‘puts the matter
He undertook an extensive survey of the legislative history of the Act and with
respect to the object of harm minimisation; he not
only emphasised its
but also the broad range of
social, economic and cultural considerations that it
encompassed:
Contributing to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol is
a broad regulatory object which was included in the
Control Reform Act
as it was enacted in 1998 and has been strengthened
by subsequent amendments since. When making liquor licensing decisions,
harm minimisation is the primary consideration
, although not the
only consideration. The application of that object requires a range of social,
economic and cultural factors to
be taken into account, which must then be
weighed in the balance with the positive benefits which are brought to the
community by
the liquor industry, as reflected in the other objects.
Under the legislation, harm minimisation encompasses harm to the health and
wellbeing of individuals, families and communities, as
well as social, cultural
and economic harm and harm to neighbourhood and street amenity. It encompasses
harm to our personal safety
and our freedom to move in the streets without
hindrance, disturbance or molestation. It has preventative, protective and
aspects. By so applying the object, Parliament expects the liquor
licensing decision-making process to be fully informed by all
the costs and
benefits, and not dominated by economic considerations, as the previous
legislation was seen to permit.
153 He considered that the Tribunal had failed to appreciate the relevance of
the general evidence adduced by the Director, including
the evidence of Mr de
Carlo, to the harm minimisation object with respect to violence and anti-social
behaviour in the community
and the Melbourne CBD arising from the misuse and
considered this to be an error of law.
154 The judge acknowledged that general evidence about the misuse and abuse
of alcohol is unlikely to be the sole determinant of an
application for the
reduction of trading hours but that, nevertheless, it can be relevant on its
own. In referring to Black and
Cooke v Liquor Licensing
recognised that it was there understood that if general evidence of harm
minimisation could be relied on as a sole determinant,
‘few licences of
any description, other then for consumption of alcohol in cafes and restaurants
[would] ever be granted in
He explained this by
The proposition which the tribunal [in
Black and Cooke
] was here stating
was that, by reason of the new harm minimisation objects, all applications for a
liquor licence were not liable
to be defeated on the basis of general evidence
alone, not that such evidence was irrelevant.
For general evidence, on its own, can be relevant to decision-making under the
[Act]. The question is, how relevant is such evidence
and what importance it
should be afforded in the given case. That depends on the tribunal’s
evaluative judgment about the
harm which is occurring or likely to occur and the
nature of the apprehended harm. Another way of expressing the tribunal’s
conclusion in
Black and Cooke
is that, depending on the circumstances,
general evidence which has no connection with the specific premises or location
may provide
such weak evidence of harm or likelihood of harm that it does not
weigh heavily in the balance with the other objects.
155 He considered, however, that ‘much evidence about harm minimisation
will be general and expert in
drawing on the disciplines of epidemiology and sociology and may ‘not
necessarily be evidence relating directly to the particular
neighbourhood or locality
although it may be
particularly important if it is so related.
156 He observed that it would be
wrong to read Black and Cooke as always requiring evidence of the responsibility
a licensee has for
the harm caused. To do so would be to confuse the
disciplinary processes under Part 6 of the Act with the regulatory processes
Part 2. Rather, he held that Black and Cooke should be read as
appropriately acknowledging that regulatory decisions require the
determination
of ‘whether granting an application would be “contrary to the object
of harm minimisation” in the
sense of whether “the object of harm
minimisation stands out as being poorly served by reason of particular local,
demographic and geographic
circumstances”‘.
What his Honour was referring to, in drawing on the emphasis placed in Black and
Cooke upon ‘particular local, social, demographic
and geographic
circumstances’,
might be described
as site-specific
‘locality evidence’.
He considered that general evidence of alcohol-related social harm might be
especially important when it can be connected, by other
evidence, to the local,
social, demographic and geographic circumstances of a relevant licensed
157 Of what might be
called the ‘locality evidence’ here, he
[T]here was uncontradicted evidence of ‘street violence, domestic
violence, hospital admissions, vandalism and property damage,
theft, public
drinking, groups of people congregating and arguing in the streets and vomiting
and urinating in public places’,
to use the tribunal’s description,
in the Melbourne CBD. That was evidence of serious harm, and detriment to
amenity, arising
from the misuse and abuse of alcohol. As I read the reasons
for decision of the tribunal, it did not reject this evidence.
158 At the hearing of the appeal, Kordister denied that the locality evidence
described by the judge was
uncontradicted.
159 The judge held that the evidence of street violence and abuse of
alcohol, in this case, should have ‘allow[ed] the [T]ribunal
to determine
whether harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol is occurring or
likely, the degree of that likelihood and
the nature and magnitude of the
160 He also acknowledged the importance of site-specific evidence when
analysing Nardi v Director of Liquor
There Judge Bowman held that there was a risk that if general evidence of
alcohol-related social harm alone was relied upon, this
might produce a
virtually automatic negative result in every case of an application for a liquor
licence; that is, it might prove
too much. Judge Bowman
An attack was made upon the usefulness or applicability of the research material
upon which Mr Munro [a Director of the Community
Alcohol Action Network] based
his evidence to the present case. However, the real problem with his evidence
as a principal supporting
plank of the Nardis’ case [objecting to the
transfer and relocation of a packaged licence] seems to me to be that, to
it basically must establish that increased availability leads to
increased consumption which leads to increased harm. If this proposition
correct, and were taken to its logical conclusion, no further licences should be
granted in this state because so to do would
be conducive to or encourage the
misuse or abuse of alcohol.
161 The conclusion that no new licences would ever be granted can be avoided,
Judge Bowman concluded, by ensuring that general evidence
is considered in the
light of ‘the particular circumstances, sites and
Thus, whilst the general observations and findings of Mr Munro, based on
research are worth noting, it is the particular circumstances,
premises that should be dealt with in their specific context. Those particular
details and specific contexts should then
be examined so as to see whether the
order in relation to that licence would detract from or be detrimental to the
amenity of the
area, or would be conducive to or encourage the misuse or abuse
of alcohol.
162 The judge recognised that Nardi demonstrated that ‘general evidence
needed to be considered with the site-specific
He considered this to be consistent with Black and Cooke and with the terms of
the Act. Furthermore, the judge acknowledged that
the Act did not authorise the
refusal of every application for a liquor licence on the basis of general harm
minimisation evidence
for that ‘would be a perversion of the regulatory
scheme ... The purpose of [the Act] is regulation not
prohibition’.
163 He considered
that the Tribunal here approached the site-specific evidence on which the
Director relied, the evidence of the incidents
and the anti-social behaviour
which occurred in the streets near the bottle shop, in an overly narrow
When considering the specific evidence, the tribunal focussed on whether the
hotel was to blame for the violence and anti-social
behaviour which had occurred
nearby. It found the hotel had complied with its licence conditions and it
would be wrong to hold the
hotel responsible for misuse and abuse of alcohol by
the ultimate consumer.
In my view that narrow approach was also an error of law
compliance by the licensee is a relevant consideration, the question to be asked
always is whether the licensing decision
will contribute to minimising harm
arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol. The positive benefits arising
from the liquor industry,
which are reflected in other objects in the
legislation, must be weighed in the balance with minimising that harm.
through the particular premises may not be to blame
for misuse and abuse of
alcohol which has occurred or will be likely, a decision to vary a licence can
be made because, when so balanced,
it would positively contribute to minimising
164 Importantly, the judge considered that site-specific evidence did not
require attribution of responsibility. He expressly eschewed
the need to
identify any causal connection or link between a licensed premises and misuse or
abuse of alcohol before a reduction
in trading hours would be warranted under
In this case, what the tribunal was required to do, and did not do, was to make
an evaluative judgment about the contribution which
ending late-night trading at
the bottle shop would make to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse
of alcohol. That required
the tribunal to consider the degree and nature of the
harm that was occurring or likely,
from whatever cause
, and how, if at
ending that trading would contribute to minimising that harm, even if
the bottle shop was not responsible for it
165 It follows from this broad approach to the evidence of anti-social behaviour
in the Melbourne CBD, and especially in the streets
around the bottle shop, that
a reduction in the trading hours of the bottle shop might be justified if that
reduction would contribute
to minimising harm even if the sale of alcohol after
11:00pm from the bottle shop did not directly cause that harm, given the
‘undesirable’
location of the bottle shop for the sale of packaged liquor, in the context of
the bottle shop’s ‘local, social, demographic
and geographic
circumstances’.
Reducing the
availability of alcohol in the area after 11:00pm for off-premises consumption
could be thought sufficient to contribute
to a reduction in anti-social
behaviour and violence in the area although no causal link could be established
with the bottle shop.
166 The broad approach to harm minimisation adopted by
the judge left open many questions, explored on the appeal, as to how an
could be drawn that reducing the trading hours of the bottle shop
would contribute to minimising harm when there was no causal relationship
established between the bottle shop and that harm. If the bottle shop was not
responsible for the harm, might a reduction in its
trading hours have no impact
on the anti-social behaviour? What exactly was to be addressed by site-specific
evidence and how important
was it? What would differentiate the bottle shop
from any other liquor outlet in the area if its extended trading hours did not
cause the late-night misuse and abuse of alcohol? Was differentiation
167 With respect to the question before him of whether the
Tribunal had given full consideration to the Panel’s recommendations,
judge emphasised the importance of the inquiry undertaken by the Panel and
pointed to the participatory nature of such an inquiry,
an opportunity being
extended to interested parties to take part, including the licensee, community
objectors, local councils and
the police. He concluded that the Tribunal had
given insufficient consideration to the recommendation of the
In the present case, the panel conducted a public inquiry and provided a
detailed report. Applying the correct approach to the application
of the harm
minimisation object, it recommended in favour of varying the hotel’s
licence to end late-night trading at the bottle
shop. In its reasons for
decision, the tribunal referred to this recommendation and the reasons for it.
The tribunal did not otherwise
refer to the panel. It did not explain why it
was adopting an approach, and making a decision, which was different to the
In my view, that did not represent full consideration of the recommendation of
the panel. Full consideration requires positive engagement
panel’s recommendation and the reasoning behind it. More is required than
treating the recommendation and its reasoning
as a background or historical
consideration. In this respect also the tribunal committed an error of law.
168 He also upheld the no evidence
concluded that the Director was correct in his submission that the Tribunal had
evidence only of turnover
and the high
prices charged for late-night drinks, and not of the profitability of the bottle
shop. He also concluded that the inferences
drawn in relation to the impact on
the liquor industry throughout Victoria were made without a factual basis. He
[T]he tribunal made findings that ending late-night trading at the bottle shop
would damage the profitability and viability of the
hotel and other liquor
outlets in Victoria. In doing so, it relied on evidence that the bottle shop was
able to charge premium prices
for late-night liquor sales. The tribunal did not
examine the books of account, and had no evidence of the profitability, of the
hotel or other licensed premises. It follows, in my view, that the tribunal had
no evidence on which to make those findings, by
inference or otherwise. Evidence
of the late-night turnover of a bottle shop at premium prices is not evidence of
the overall profitability
of the business, much less its viability, or that of
other liquor outlets. Making the findings was an error of law.
169 He set aside the orders of the Tribunal and remitted Kordister’s
application for review of the Director’s decision
to a differently
constituted tribunal for reconsideration according to law.
The appeal to the Court of Appeal
170 Kordister challenged the judge’s conclusion on each of the three
errors he found made out, the construction and application
of the principles of
harm minimisation, the failure to give full consideration to the Panel’s
recommendations and the findings
of fact made by the Tribunal based on no
Grounds of Appeal
171 The grounds of appeal on which
Kordister relied are:
Harm minimisation (Grounds 1 and 2)
1. The learned
judge erred in concluding that the Tribunal did not properly consider or
evaluate whether ending late-night trading
at the bottle shop would contribute
to the minimisation of harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol, in
that it failed to
(a) the degree and nature of the harm that was
occurring, or was likely to occur; and
(b) how likely it was that ending
late-night trading at the bottle shop would contribute to minimising that harm,
and to what degree
it would do so.
2. The learned judge erred in failing to
conclude that the Tribunal did properly consider or evaluate whether ending
late-night trading
at the bottle shop would contribute to the minimisation of
harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol, in that:
(a) it considered
and made findings about the degree and nature of the harm that was occurring
(and hence was likely to continue to
occur); and
(b) it made a finding that
the harm was more likely to have been caused by other establishments, and a
finding that the late closing
of the bottle shop was more beneficial to the
amenity of the area than any harm that occurs from its extended hours, and
considered whether reducing the trading hours of the bottle shop was
likely to contribute to minimising the harm caused by the misuse
and abuse of
The recommendation of the Panel (Grounds 3-6)
3. The learned
judge erred in concluding that the Tribunal failed to give full consideration to
the recommendation of the Panel.
4. The learned judge erred in failing to
conclude that it would not be appropriate to infer that the Tribunal failed to
consideration to the Panel’s recommendation, in circumstances
(a) the Tribunal set out that recommendation and extracted parts of
the Panel’s reasons for that recommendation in its reasons;
(b) that recommendation was reflected in the alternative case put by the
Director, and the Tribunal gave full consideration to that
concluded that the Tribunal failed to give full consideration to the
panel’s recommendation, the learned judge erred
in concluding that that
failure was a vitiating error.
6. Having concluded that the Tribunal failed
to give full consideration to the Panel’s recommendation, the learned
judge erred
in failing to conclude that that failure did not vitiate the
Tribunal’s decision because the Tribunal was required to (and
its decision by reference to the evidence and other material before it, most of
which was not placed before the Panel.
The findings of fact (Grounds
7. The learned judge erred in concluding that it was not open to the
Tribunal to make findings of fact that ending late-night trading
at the bottle
shop would damage the profitability and viability of the hotel and other liquor
outlets in Victoria.
8. The learned judge erred in failing to conclude that
the Tribunal was entitled to make those findings relying upon its own extensive
expertise in the area.
9. Having concluded that the Tribunal erred in making
those findings of fact, the learned judge erred in concluding that that error
played a vitiating role in the Tribunal’s decision because it devoted a
lot of time to the economic impact issue and because
it had invited the parties
to make submissions on the subject.
10. Having concluded that the tribunal
erred in making those findings of fact, the learned judge erred in failing to
conclude that
that error was not a vitiating one because the Tribunal had
already expressed its conclusion that the late closing of the bottle
more beneficial to the amenity of the area than any harm that occurs from its
extended hours.
172 I will deal with the grounds in the manner in which
Kordister grouped them.
Harm minimisation and the requirement for a
causal link
Harm minimisation
173 At the hearing of the appeal, Kordister
directly challenged the primacy attributed to the object of harm minimisation by
Much emphasis was placed on the issue of whether the object of harm
minimisation was ‘the’ primary purpose of the Act,
‘a’ primary
174 Kordister argued that the judge erred by finding that harm minimisation
was the ‘fulcrum on which the regulatory scheme
It accepted that an elementary reading of the objects of the Act revealed that
harm minimisation was a mandatory consideration,
but denied that it was the
primary or dominant object of the Act. Kordister submitted that harm
minimisation should not be elevated
to a higher position, or given greater
weight, than any of the other objects of the Act within s 4(1), such as
facilitating a diversity
of licensed premises. It argued that the Tribunal
stated the correct test, namely, whether the grant of the variation
strike an appropriate balance between the need to minimise
harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol and the interests in
developing a diversity of licensed facilities reflecting the community
expectations’.
Furthermore, it
argued that the Tribunal applied the correct test by identifying the harm
arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol
and considering whether ending
late-night trading at the bottle shop would contribute to minimising that harm,
finding that the social
harm in the vicinity was more likely to have been caused
by other establishments
and that it was
difficult to see how reducing the bottle shop’s trading hours would lessen
the practice known as
‘pre-loading’.
It was open
to the Tribunal to find that ending late-night trading at the bottle shop would
not contribute to minimising harm.
175 In response, the Director contended that the judge correctly held that
the Tribunal failed to apply the proper approach by erroneously
focusing on
whether Kordister was responsible for incidents involving the misuse or abuse of
alcohol and other anti-social conduct
rather than understanding the primacy and
breadth of the concept of harm minimisation and applying that concept in the
light of the
regulatory objects of the Act. The Director submitted that the
judge was correct to hold that the Tribunal had failed to take into
relevant considerations, especially the general empirical evidence referred to
by Mr de Carlo about the risks of alcohol-related
harm associated with
late-night packaged liquor outlets, and the site-specific evidence of street
drinking and violence in the vicinity
of the bottle shop.
176 The Director
further submitted that the finding by the Tribunal, that anti-social behaviour
in the area was more likely to be
linked to larger nightclubs, illustrates that
it asked itself the wrong question because it demonstrates that the Tribunal was
focusing on whether Kordister was directly responsible for that
behaviour when it should have been examining the impact of the bottle
shop’s extended trading hours, taking into account its ‘particular
local, social, demographic and geographical
circumstances’
by reference to the objects set out in s 4 of the Act. The Tribunal had failed
to appreciate that the power to vary the trading
hours of licensed premises on a
contested application is a broad regulatory power that is not limited to
variation ‘for cause’
or by reason of any non-compliant or unlawful
behaviour. As the judge correctly recognised, the inquiry should not have been
to whether the late-night supply of packaged liquor from the bottle
shop was a direct cause of specific incidents of anti-social
177 The starting point for a resolution of these issues must be the
construction of s 4(1) and s 4(2), read in
the light of the statutory scheme.
178 An objects provision of the type found in s 4(1), which sets out an
array of multiple objects, is commonplace. It is reproduced
convenience:
(1) The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor and licensed
hospitality industries.
179 Little if any weight can be placed on the order in which the three objects
appear. The primacy of harm minimisation over the
other objects cannot sensibly
depend on its identification as the first of many objects.
180 However,
reading s 4(1) in context requires that appropriate recognition be given to the
declaratory statement in s 4(2):
It is the intention of
Parliament that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty
conferred or imposed by this Act
must be exercised and performed with due regard
to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the misuse and abuse of
181 Section 4(2) plainly has the effect of singling out one of the three objects
for special consideration of some kind. The contest
between Kordister and the
Director on appeal was whether the declaratory statement was a pronouncement of
the primacy of the object
of harm minimisation or merely a statement of the
object’s intended general application to functions exercised pursuant to
182 The objects clause of the 1968 Act included a provision
designed to ensure that its objects guided the exercise of every power
under that Act. Immediately following its specific objects in s
... and this Act shall accordingly receive such fair large and liberal
construction and interpretation as will best ensure the attainment
of the object
of this Act and every power authority discretion jurisdiction and duty conferred
or imposed by this Act shall be exercised
and performed so as by design and
intent actively to promote and achieve the objects
183 No declaratory statement of this form appeared in the 1987 Act nor in the
Act until s 4(2) was inserted in
184 In R v Liquor Control Commission; ex parte Woolworths (Vic)
applicant was refused the grant of a retail bottled liquor licence on
considerations arising from the objects of the 1968 Act
despite objections only
having been made under s 55 of the 1968 Act which dealt with the suitability of
persons as licensees or the
suitability of premises. Gowans J, delivering the
judgment of the Court,
held that it was
permissible by the then Liquor Control Commission to take into account the
objects specified in s 3 in refusing
the application. He
[I]t is established law that where a discretion is granted by a statute, the
implication is that the grant is made for the purposes
of the Act and the
discretion is intended to be exercised for the purposes of the Act. But in this
case it is not left to principle
to spell that out
because there is contained
in s 3 an explicit statement
of the objects of the Act
and mandatory
requirements as to the manner of consideration and interpretation of the Act,
and as to the manner of exercising any
discretion, and these cannot be given
effect without paying regard to the matters set out in s 3(c)
... For these
reasons the main contention of the applicant, that the Commission was not
entitled to consider matters falling outside
the purview of s 55, and outside
the specific prohibitions and requirements contained in the Act, cannot be
185 This construction supports Kordister’s submission that a declaration
of the kind found in s 4(2) is intended to provide
an explicit statement of the
‘mandatory’
requirements as to the manner of consideration and interpretation of the Act,
and the manner of exercising any discretion, to reinforce
the general
application of the objects and purposes of the Act. However, the difference
between s 3 of the 1968 Act and s 4(2) of
the Act is that s 4(2) selects only
one of the objects of the Act (namely, harm minimisation and the misuse and
abuse of alcohol)
from the three objects set out in s 4(1) and declares
that selected object to be of sufficient importance to warrant the explicit
statement that it has general operation. That is, the singling out of the
specific object of harm minimisation to govern the manner
of exercising every
power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty and function under the Act
is, in the context of multiple
objects, a declaration of the primacy of that
186 A somewhat similar declaratory statement is included in the
Mental Health Act 1986
which provides that its objects include, in s 4(1)(a),
‘to provide for the care, treatment and protection of mentally ill people
who do not or cannot consent to that care, treatment or protection’.
Section 4(2) reads:
It is the intention of Parliament that the provisions
of this Act are to be interpreted and that every function, power, authority,
discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or imposed by this Act is to be
exercised or performed so that—
(a) people with a mental disorder are given the best possible care and treatment
appropriate to their needs in the least possible
restrictive environment and
least possible intrusive manner consistent with the effective giving of that
care and treatment; and
(b) in providing for the care and treatment of people with a mental disorder and
the protection of members of the public any restriction
upon the liberty of
patients and other people with a mental disorder and any interference with their
rights, privacy, dignity and
self-respect are kept to the minimum necessary in
the circumstances.
187 Section 4(2) of the
Mental Health Act
does not select any of the objects in
s 4(1) as of particular importance but rather specifies an additional two
objects in (a) and
(b). The Court of Appeal in Kirkland-Veenstra v
the objects in sub-s (1) of s 4, relating to the provision of treatment, were to
be balanced with the objects in sub-s
(2), concerning the liberty, rights and
dignity of a person with a mental
In the High Court, French CJ
described the principle of treatment by means of the ‘least restrictive
alternative’ in
s 4(2)(b) as ‘the fundamental
Mental Health
. Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ held that the
Mental Health Act
reinforced the importance of the value of autonomy as expressed in both (a) and
(b) of s 4(2):
[T]he central premises for the
Mental Health Act
are that its provisions
are directed to ‘the care, treatment and protection of mentally ill people
who do not or cannot consent
to that care, treatment or protection’ [in s
4(1)(a)] and that ‘every function, power, authority, discretion,
and duty conferred or imposed by [that] Act is to be exercised or
performed’ so that those suffering a mental disorder are
given the best
possible care and treatment in the ‘least possible intrusive manner’
and so that restrictions on liberty
and interference with rights, privacy,
dignity and self-respect are kept ‘to the minimum necessary in the
circumstances’
[in s 4(2)]. That is, the
Mental Health Act
reinforces the importance of that value of personal autonomy which must inform
the development of the common law.
188 In my view, the singling out of the object of harm minimisation in the
context of an explicit statement of how the Act must be
interpreted and applied,
in s 4(2), reveals that harm minimisation is a fundamental principle of the Act
and reinforces its importance
as a value which informs and guides the whole of
the Act. Combined with the legislative history that I have described, including
the extrinsic materials set out, in my opinion the judge was correct to conclude
that the object of harm minimisation is ‘the
primary regulatory object of
the Act and therefore the primary consideration in liquor licensing
decisions’.
This is not to say, and the judge did not so suggest, that it is to be taken
into account, or given such weight, to the exclusion
of the other
Requirement for a causal
189 The more difficult question is whether, in deciding an application
for a variation to reduce trading hours, applying the harm
minimisation
principle requires the decision-maker to determine whether the operation of the
premises with extended trading hours
is a direct cause of the harm to be
190 It is in this context that the character of a variation
application as non-punitive is especially important. As mentioned above,
not the case that an application for a reduction in trading hours made under s
29 of the Act is brought for reasons of non-compliance
or as a means of
correcting the conduct of the licensee. It can be brought as part of broader
regulatory action. The predominant
focus by an applicant upon a series of
specific incidents, as relied upon by Inspector Duthie, is likely to confuse.
Such a focus
is also likely to obscure the question of whether it is necessary
to establish a causal connection between the harm complained of
and the licensed
191 Both Black and Cooke and Nardi make plain that while a
decision-maker should take into account any general evidence adduced about
use and misuse of alcohol, a significant factor in determining how important the
general evidence of harm minimisation is to
a particular application is whether
the general evidence has a connection with, or is reinforced by, the particular
local, social,
demographic and geographic circumstances of the relevant
premises; the ‘locality evidence’. In my opinion, it is the
determination of whether the object of harm minimisation is ‘poorly served
by reason of particular local, social, demographic
and geographic
circumstances’
that provides a proper factual foundation for deciding whether, in the
circumstances of the case, the object of harm minimisation
will be advanced. By
reference to such locality evidence a decision-maker can avoid the object of
harm minimisation resulting in
an invariably negative answer to the issuing of
further licences and an invariably positive answer to any application for
of trading hours. As these consequences of ‘proving too
much’ were clearly not what was intended under the Act, as acknowledged
Black and Cooke,
site-specific locality evidence
is of considerable importance.
192 There must also be a connection between
the licensed premises and the locality evidence. But that connection need not
It is rather a matter for those applying to reduce trading hours to
prove that, for one reason or another, the particular local,
social, demographic
and geographic circumstances surrounding the premises are conducive to the
misuse of alcohol. The judge was
correct, in my view, in concluding that, as
far as locality evidence is concerned, it is not necessary to establish that the
of licensed premises in issue caused, or was responsible for, the
anti-social behaviour. As far as locality evidence is concerned,
sufficient to show that it demonstrates that the object of harm minimisation
‘would not be well served’ by granting
a licence for packaged liquor
in that locality or, relevantly, by refusing to reduce the trading hours of a
24-hour licence for packaged
193 The point can be made by example.
It may be that when an extended trading hours licence was granted to premises,
alcohol was
not otherwise available in the surrounding area. If, over time,
multiple licences have been granted and an applicant can establish,
on the basis
of demographics and the like, that the local area attracts anti-social
behaviour, that locality evidence can support
a reduction in the trading hours
of the premises as part of regulatory action. It can do so on the basis that
the extended operating
hours of the premises contributes to the additional
availability of alcohol in the area. The additional availability of alcohol
an area where alcohol is regularly abused in itself supports an inference that
it would promote the object of harm minimisation
for extended trading hours to
be reduced. With respect to locality evidence, it is not a matter of strict
attribution of harm.
194 Locality evidence can be relied upon to support a
reduction in trading hours without the need to establish a causal nexus because
of the need to recognise that licensed premises are not to be considered in
isolation from the social and cultural environment that
they inhabit. Licensed
premises are not to be treated, for the purpose of regulation, as isolated from
each other or as entities
around which strict boundaries can be drawn separated
from their respective social milieu.
195 By contrast, in my opinion, a
causal nexus must be established if reliance is placed upon specific incidents
concerning the operation
of licensed premises. If an applicant seeks a
reduction of extended trading hours on the basis of site-specific incidents
the operation of the premises, for example, sales from the premises
to intoxicated persons or assaults occurring between patrons
after being
ejected, then, in my view, there must be a causal connection established between
the harm complained of and the operation
of the premises. For the evidence to
warrant being given due weight by the decision-maker, there must be evidence
which links the
particular unruly behaviour to the relevant premises. Where
there is no locality evidence, evidence of specific incidents will be
considerable importance. Conversely, in some circumstances, the locality
evidence may have such probative value that there is
no need for reliance upon
specific incidents. Where there is both locality evidence, and evidence of
specific incidents, the exact
weight to be given to each category of evidence
will no doubt turn on the particular circumstances of each case.
196 On this
approach, it is apparent that, in addition to general evidence, of a
statistical, sociological or epidemiological kind,
there is a distinction
between two types of site-specific evidence: (1) locality evidence and (2)
specific incident evidence. The
distinction between the two is of considerable
importance because the former does not require an applicant to establish a
connection between the social harm and the specific premises, while the
latter does. Some of the locality evidence (for example,
congregation of
unruly crowds, drinking on the street, assaults and violence, however caused)
may be of the same character as the
specific incidents alleged, but if that
evidence is sought to be relied upon as relating particularly to the relevant
premises, and
thus as attracting the weight that such evidence will bear, rather
than as locality evidence, the premises must be shown to be responsible
harm caused.
197 In my opinion, the judge was correct to infer that the
inquiry required in relation to a variation application is a broad one;
should encompass social and cultural factors that do not depend upon attributing
direct responsibility for the harm to the licensee.
Where general evidence is
adduced of the misuse and abuse of alcohol, based upon such disciplines as
epidemiology and sociology,
and locality evidence is also relied upon, it would
be inconsistent with the Act for the inquiry to take as its predominant focus
series of specific incidents, as occurred here. But, with great respect to the
judge, I consider that he was wrong not to recognise
that, although evidence of
the misuse of alcohol in the context of local, social, demographic and
geographic circumstances surrounding
the premises does not require a causal
connection to be established between the premises and the surrounding social
harm, any evidence
adduced of specific incidents relied on as reflecting the
manner in which the premises operates, does depend upon the demonstration
causal nexus. However, this error was not material to the judge’s
conclusion that the Tribunal misconstrued its statutory
function and failed to
apply the correct test.
The errors in the Tribunal’s approach
198 As I have sought to explain above, the legislative history and the
increasing emphasis upon the regulatory object of harm minimisation
reveals that
the Parliamentary intent was for decision-makers to give primacy to harm
minimisation in any balancing exercise. This
the Tribunal did not do. In my
opinion, the focus of the Tribunal upon the specific incidents, and the findings
it made with respect
to each of those incidents, obscured its capacity to
evaluate the evidence about the locality of the bottle shop, its geographical
position at the corner of Little Bourke Street and Russell Street, and the
social and demographic evidence of groups of people congregating
and arguing in
the streets, street violence, domestic violence, vandalism and property damage,
theft, public drinking, and urinating
in public places. That is, not only did
the Tribunal fail to appreciate the general evidence, for example, that given by
Mr de Carlo,
but it also failed to appreciate the locality evidence which, given
its nature, was of considerable importance.
199 An example of the
Tribunal’s failure to take into account the locality evidence is the
Tribunal’s exclusion of the
statement of Constable Sharp, which recorded
an incident of assault, on the ground that it was concerned only with the
environment
surrounding the bottle shop and therefore had ‘nothing to do
with the bottle
By treating allegations of violence and alcohol abuse as relevant if and only if
they could be causally attributed to the bottle
shop, the Tribunal failed to
recognise that their probative value (if established) lay in what they revealed
demographic and geographic circumstances surrounding
the premises, the very circumstances identified as of considerable importance
Black and Cooke and Nardi.
200 The Tribunal was unable to see that its
observations about people staying in nightclubs until the early hours of the
morning and
leaving them in a drunken state likely to engage in anti-social
behaviour on the surrounding streets was pertinent to the Director’s
application despite the bottle shop not being causally responsible for that
behaviour. The fact that the nightclubs opened until
late and patrons left them
drunk should have been treated as relevant to the question of whether packaged
liquor should be made available
in that vicinity for off-premises consumption
throughout the night, rather than, as it was, treated as irrelevant to that
The observations the Tribunal made about the opening hours of the
nightclubs, and the behaviour of their patrons, should have been
tested against
the proposition that the object of harm minimisation would be advanced if the
bottle shop was not licensed to sell
packaged liquor throughout the night in the
vicinity of a late-night club from which drunken patrons regularly spill out
streets. Instead, the Tribunal wrongly treated the observations it
made about the nightclubs as irrelevant to the object of harm
minimisation
because of its conclusions about the absence of any causal link of the
anti-social behaviour to the bottle shop. In
doing so, the Tribunal failed
properly to apply the balancing test required under the Act, and, in particular,
failed properly to
comply with the declaratory statement under s 4(2) that the
exercise of its functions must be performed with due regard to harm minimisation
and the risks associated with the misuse and abuse of alcohol. The judge was
correct in identifying that the Tribunal had erred
in these respects.
the hearing of the appeal, Kordister submitted that the judge was wrong to infer
from his reading of the Tribunal’s evidence
that there was uncontradicted
evidence of anti-social behaviour in the streets surrounding the bottle shop, or
that the Tribunal
accepted that evidence (while treating it as irrelevant). In
particular, Kordister argued that the allegations of vomiting or urinating
the streets were not established, either because the evidence relied on was
retracted or because it was acknowledged to have been
exaggerated. In response,
the Director relied upon the evidence of Leading Senior Constable John Bourke
whose statement included
the following:
September, 2008, ... [a]t 12:45 am I attended in Waratah
Place at the rear of the Exford Hotel due to some persons smashing stubbies
urinating in the laneway. ...
[I] found no adverse issues or persons misbehaving until we approached Little
Bourke Street at the rear of the Exford Hotel. At
this location the Exford
Hotel has windows that can be opened onto Waratah Place. There was a group of
youths outside the windows
drinking stubbies, some were sitting in the lane and
some were standing. Near this group there was smashed glass stubbies and damp
wet spots consistent with persons urinating. The glass from the stubbies was
the same as the brand the persons were drinking. At
the time I observed a male
jump out of the window of the Exford Hotel Lounge area into the laneway, he
began mixing with this group.
I believe the group had been there for some time
due to the broken glass and the amount of urination, and the way these persons
were behaving, yelling and behaving in an unruly manner.
... it was clear ... that the group were also using the Exford Hotel and moving
in and out of the Hotel via the laneway without being
challenged by staff
or Management.
... I observed the Exford Hotel bottle shop also having a detrimental impact as
the patron line ran out towards the traffic lights
which blocked pedestrians
walking north/south along Russell Street and persons walking west on
Little Bourke Street. Police requested
the Management to implement
controls to insure further undue detriment was not caused by the bottle shop
patrons blocking the footpath
and patrons jumping out of the Venue’s
202 A penalty notice was issued for breach of amenity in relation to the bar and
paid. Kordister submitted in its Closing Address
before the Tribunal that the
penalty notice was not justified and it was paid ‘in the interest of good
police relations’.
The notice referred to patrons of the hotel entering
and exiting by a rear window together with an amenity issue for the rear lane
and did not include the queuing incident relating to the bottle shop.
203 In Kordister’s Closing Address before the Tribunal it also claimed
that the Chief Commissioner, in her submissions before
the Tribunal, had
embellished a statement of another police officer, Sergeant Tharle, by
‘adding in urine and vomit’.
It is true that the statement of
Sergeant Tharle does not refer to either urinating or
however, the statement of Constable Bourke does refer to urinating but not to
vomiting. Furthermore, in cross-examination, while
Constable Bourke
acknowledged that the penalty notice did not relate to the operation of the
bottle shop and conceded that, since
he had made the statement, security had
been introduced to realign patrons to the bottle shop with the wall of the hotel
crowding on the footpath, he did not retract any part of his statement
and there was no cross-examination about the assertions made
in Constable
Bourke’s statement that he had observed signs of urination.
the exception of the Director’s reliance on vomiting in the streets in the
environment around the bottle shop, there
was ample evidence before the Tribunal
of anti-social behaviour in the locality of the bottle shop including street
public drinking
including pre-loading
and side-loading after 11 pm;
people congregating in the street
including arguments in the street;
property damage and vandalism;
and the evidence of Constable
Bourke with respect to public urinating in the vicinity of the bottle shop.
205 This evidence was tested under cross-examination before the Tribunal for
the purpose of establishing either that it was not proved
or it was not relevant
to the operation of the bottle shop. In this sense, it was not entirely
accurate for the judge to describe
this evidence as ‘uncontradicted
evidence’ because this might suggest that Kordister never sought to attack
the factual
foundation of the locality evidence, which it clearly did. This
gave rise to a difficulty in the appeal because, given the failure
Tribunal properly to appreciate the primacy of harm minimisation as an object of
the Act; the failure properly to apply the
balancing test between the need to
minimise harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol and the interests in
developing a diversity
of licensed facilities reflecting the community
expectations; the failure to appreciate the general evidence; and the erroneous
rejection of the evidence about the environment and locality of the bottle shop
as largely irrelevant; it follows that the Tribunal
failed to make the
necessary findings about the prevalence of anti-social behaviour in the locality
of the bottle shop. As explained
above, those findings need not have involved
any conclusion about whether there was a causal relationship between the bottle
and the anti-social behaviour in the locality of the bottle shop, but there
was a need for findings about whether that behaviour
had occurred. This is
relevant to the ultimate disposition of the appeal.
206 However, I consider
that the judge was correct to conclude that the Tribunal had misconstrued its
statutory function and failed
to give the object of harm minimisation under the
Act the primacy it required. I consider that grounds 1 and 2 of the appeal
be rejected.
(2) Consideration of the Panel’s
recommendations
207 Kordister submitted that the Tribunal did not err by
failing to give ‘full consideration’ to the Panel’s
recommendation
because it set out the recommendation of the Panel and extracted
part of the Panel’s reasons. The obligation under s 47(1)
of the Act is
to give full consideration to the recommendation of the Panel but this does not
require that the recommendation be
accepted or, it was argued, that reasons be
produced which in their terms reveal that the decision-maker gave that
recommendation
‘proper, genuine and realistic consideration upon the
The Tribunal gave full consideration to whether the trading hours should be
reduced and this was what lay at the heart of the case
before the Panel and
before the Tribunal.
208 The Director responded by submitting that the
Tribunal had to do more than simply mention the Panel’s report and
recommendation;
it was not enough to give them ‘cursory attention only in
order to put them to one
It was necessary, as the judge recognised, for the Tribunal actively to engage
with the recommendation and evaluate it.
The Tribunal’s failure to do so was argued to be manifest from its failure
to explain why it disagreed with the Panel’s
recommendation or why it
adopted a different and narrower approach to deciding the application. The fact
that it addressed itself
to the same question as that posed for the Panel,
namely, whether the trading hours of the bottle shop should be reduced, does not
itself demonstrate that it gave full consideration to the Panel’s
recommendation on that question. I agree.
209 Early in its reasons, the
Tribunal described the nature of the Panel’s recommendation and extracted
some statements made
by the Panel but it does so as no more than part of the
background to the hearing before the Tribunal. At no further point in its
reasons is any mention made of the Panel or the approach it took or any
explanation as to why that approach was flawed. It is unnecessary
whether the obligation to give ‘full consideration’ under the Act is
tantamount to the requirement to proper,
genuine and realistic consideration
upon the merits because here the Tribunal’s consideration of the
Panel’s recommendation
was little more than token.
210 Moreover, the
Tribunal’s error in failing to give full consideration to the
Panel’s recommendation vitiated its decision
either because the obligation
under s 47(1) was a condition precedent to the valid exercise of power such
that the failure to comply
with it amounted to jurisdictional error, or because
that failure otherwise detracted from its determination. Indeed, the failure
the Tribunal actively to engage with, or evaluate, the Panel’s
recommendation clearly contributed to the Tribunal’s
misconstruction of
its statutory functions under the Act and the role that harm minimisation was
intended to play in the exercise
of those functions.
211 In my view, grounds
3, 4, 5 and 6 should be rejected.
(3) Findings of fact - no evidence
212 The Tribunal was not bound by the rules of
and it may inform itself on any matter it thinks
Kordister submitted that the
Tribunal was here entitled to rely upon its own very considerable expertise in
liquor licensing to
make findings of fact that ending late-night trading at the
bottle shop would damage the profitability and viability of the hotel
liquor outlets in Victoria, especially in a context in which it gave the parties
a reasonable opportunity to be heard on
the question. It also relied upon a
letter of Kordister’s accountant which was before the Tribunal that
expressed the opinion
that a 60 per cent decrease in sales from the bottle shop
would have a devastating impact upon the viability of the business, as
evidence given by a former police officer, Edward Hart, to the effect that to
lose the late night income from the bottle
shop would make the ‘business
marginally viable’.
213 The Director submitted that having
considerable expertise in liquor licensing did not confer on the Tribunal the
relevant expertise
to make the findings it did. The relevant expertise required
would have been knowledge of the economic viability and profitability
hotel, of which it had no specific knowledge, the findings it made being based
solely on evidence about the turnover of the
hotel and not about its
profitability, or more generally its economic viability. Furthermore, it took
no steps to inform itself
of a reduction in the trading hours of the bottle shop not being based on any
evidence or material before it. Such findings went
well beyond the
Tribunal’s expertise.
214 The Tribunal made reference to the
material Kordister relied upon with respect to the profitability of the bottle
shop. However,
it did so by dismissing that evidence as incomplete without the
books of account,
The [Director] and joined party correctly stated that if [Kordister] was to rely
on this type of economic evidence, the accounts
of the hotel should have been
produced and they were not.
215 Following the dismissal of the accountancy evidence, the Tribunal sought to
arrive at the conclusions it did on the basis of
its own expertise. In my view,
the Director is correct to submit that findings about the viability of a
business, or, more particularly,
findings about the general impact of a decision
upon an industry are not to be made by an administrative tribunal in the absence
of any evidence or material before it. The authorisation under statute for a
tribunal to inform itself as it thinks fit is not an
invitation for a tribunal
to speculate in the absence of any proper factual material before
216 Kordister argued that, even if the Tribunal erred in basing its
findings of economic impact upon no evidence, those issues were
considered after
the Tribunal had already stated that the late closing of the bottle shop was
more beneficial to the amenity of the
area than any harm that occurred from its
and thus the findings were not critical to the Tribunal’s ultimate
decision to refuse the application.
217 However, the Tribunal made it clear
that its ultimate decision was reached ‘taking into account all the
matters that I have
referred to
and those matters expressly included the economic impact of the decision.
Indeed, the Tribunal appeared to make separate preliminary
findings, the first
on social impact where it said, after analysing the incidents and Government
At this point
, I accept that late closing of the bottleshop (up to 7:00
am) is more beneficial to the amenity of the area than any harm that occurs
its extended hours.
218 After analysing the economic impact of a reduction in trading hours on the
profitability and economic viability of the hotel
and the liquor industry, the
Tribunal made a second preliminary finding,
Taking these matters into account
, I find that to refuse the
applicant’s application [to review the decision of the Director] would
have a serious detrimental
effect on the economic viability not only of the
applicant but of many other liquor outlets in Victoria.
219 Those two preliminary findings were then taken into account as part of
on which the Tribunal’s decision rested.
220 I consider that it would
be wholly artificial to conclude that the Tribunal had already made its
determination to reject the proposed
reduction before it embarked upon the
economic analysis. That analysis being flawed, by reason of having been based
upon no evidence,
the error vitiated the ultimate decision of the Tribunal.
221 I consider that grounds 7, 8, 9 and 10 should be rejected.
Conclusion and
Disposition
222 The judge was correct to conclude that the Tribunal failed to appreciate the
primacy of the object of harm minimisation under
the Act and, as a consequence,
it failed to apply correctly the test of whether the grant of the application
for reduction of trading
hours of the bottle shop would be consistent with the
objects of the Act and would strike an appropriate balance between the need
minimise harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol and the interests in
developing a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting the community
expectations.
223 The judge was also correct to conclude that the Tribunal
failed to appreciate the general evidence (including the statistical
irrelevant the important evidence relating to the
local, social, demographic and
geographic circumstances of the bottle shop, when that evidence required
assessment and
evaluation.
judge did not err in concluding that the relevance of the general evidence, and
the locality evidence, did not depend upon
there being established a causal
connection or ‘link’ between the bottle shop and the anti-social
behaviour in the locality.
It was not a matter of determining if the bottle
shop was responsible for all the harm arising from the anti-social behaviour in
its locality. As the judge recognised, for evidence of locality to assume some
significance it would be sufficient to find that
a reduction in the extended
trading hours of the bottle shop would advance the object of harm minimisation,
for example, by decreasing
the availability of alcohol throughout the night in
an environment in which people who are intoxicated (perhaps from drinking at
nightclubs) congregate and drink on the street and sometimes engage in street
violence, assaults, property damage, vandalism,
225 However, I
consider that the judge was wrong to conclude that an evaluation of the specific
incidents did not depend upon a causal
connection to the bottle shop being
established. In my view, before evidence of specific incidents reflecting on
the operation of
the bottle shop could be given due weight, it was necessary for
a finding to be made that the bottle shop was a material cause of
the particular
socially offensive behaviour.
226 In my view, the judge was correct, however,
to find that the Tribunal did not give full consideration to the Panel’s
recommendation,
as it was required to do, and this vitiated its decision.
Moreover, he was also correct to conclude that the Tribunal made findings
respect to the economic impact of the decision that were based upon no evidence
or material before it.
227 I consider that the application for leave to
appeal brought by Kordister should be granted.
228 I would dismiss the
229 However, it is now three and a half years since the application
was brought and much of the information upon which it was based
will be stale.
The delay in the resolution of this matter together with the somewhat difficult
legal path it has had in a protracted
and multi-stage process confirm in my mind
that while the order of the judge setting aside the decision of the
should remain of full force and effect, I consider that the order of the judge
remitting the matter to the Tribunal (differently
constituted) for
reconsideration according to law,
be set aside. I consider that the circumstances here would justify the grant of
a permanent stay of the decision of the Director,
dated 3 September 2009,
granting the application made by Inspector Duthie dated 25 May 2009, pursuant to
s 29(1)(b) of the Act, for
a variation to the existing trading hours for
consumption off the licensed premises of the
I also consider that the
circumstances justify a permanent stay of the application made by Inspector
Duthie dated 25 May 2009.
230 The failure of the Tribunal to make any
findings in relation to the anti-social behaviour (however caused) that made up
the locality
evidence reinforces me in the view that, if necessary, a fresh
application would be preferable to what would be in effect the re-commencement
of a hearing that had led only to partial findings and had adopted a focus that
was inconsistent with the Act. In those circumstances,
a reconvened hearing set
against the background of erroneous rulings and uncertain findings could be
unfair to Kordister and serve
little public interest.
231 The Chief
Commissioner or a licensing inspector is at liberty to bring a fresh application
under s 29(1) of the Act. If either
of them was to do so, the evidence to be
relied upon could include the high-level general evidence about alcohol abuse as
locality evidence about the currently prevailing local, social,
demographic, and geographic circumstances of the bottle shop, as
well as any
evidence of particular incidents of anti-social behaviour for which the bottle
shop was directly responsible. The application
should be determined in
accordance with law and, most particularly, in accordance with the primary
purpose under the Act, namely,
that the Act is to contribute to minimising harm
arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol, together with an understanding
in the exercise of every power and function conferred under the Act, due
regard is to be paid to harm minimisation and the risks
associated with the
misuse and abuse of alcohol.
Director of Liquor
Licensing v Kordister Pty Ltd
[2011] VSC 207
(‘Reasons’), [119],
quoting from evidence given by Dr Roche in
Avery v Director of Liquor
Licensing Victoria
[2001] VCAT 2455
Black and Cooke v Liquor
Licensing Victoria
[2000] VCAT 459
Avery v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2001] VCAT 2455
Nardi v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2005] VCAT 323.
Executive Director of
Health v Lily Creek International Pty Ltd
[2000] WASCA 258
(2000) 22 WAR 510
Reasons, [173].
Contrary to the view of
Bell J, [102], but nothing turns on this point.
See also s 11A(5)
relating to late night licences.
Reasons, [75] and [85].
[2005] VCAT 323.
Emphasis added.
Kordister Pty Ltd v
Director of Liquor Licensing
[2010] VCAT 277
(‘Tribunal’s
Reasons’), [3].
Reasons, [117].
Reasons, [118].
[2000] VCAT 459.
[2005] VCAT 323.
Tribunal’s Reasons,
Tribunal’s Reasons,
Reasons, [197].
Reasons, [198]-[199].
(2009) 239 CLR 390
, [54] (Gummow,
Heydon and Crennan JJ).
Tribunal’s Reasons,
Emphasis added.
Tribunal’s Reasons,
S v Crimes Compensation
[1998] 1 VR 83
ISPT Pty Ltd v Melbourne City Council
[2008] VSCA 180
(2008) 20 VR 447.
Tribunal’s Reasons,
Reasons, [252].
Tribunal’s Reasons,
Tribunal’s Reasons,
Reasons, [263].
Licence No 31905376, with
the exceptions of Sundays, Good Friday and Anzac Day where more limited trading
hours applied.
Act No 94 of 1998. The
application was made under s 29(1)(b) in Part 2 of the Act.
The Panel’s
recommendation to the Director to grant the variation was made on 24 August
The Director’s
decision was made on 3 September 2009. Reasons were given on 23 September 2009.
Kordister Pty Ltd v
Director of Liquor Licensing
[2010] VCAT 277 (Mr
Davis) (the
‘Tribunal’s reasons’). The orders were made on 9 March 2010.
It had previously granted a stay of
the Director’s decision on 11 December
The appeal was brought
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(‘the VCAT Act’): See
Director of Liquor Licensing v
Kordister Pty Ltd
[2011] VSC 207
(‘Reasons’).
The judgment and orders
were made on 18 May 2011.
Leave is required pursuant
Supreme Court Act 1986
For convenience, I refer
below to the application for leave to appeal together with the appeal as simply
‘the appeal’.
See the Tribunal’s
reasons, [13] referring to a witness statement of Mr Brooker.
Act No 97 of 1987.
Section 5 (a) of the 1987
Act as at 1 July 1997.
The objects of the 1987 Act
are set out below at [
Liquor Licensing Panel:
Report and Recommendations to the Director of Liquor Licensing (24 August
2009) (‘Panel’s reasons’),
Tribunal’s reasons,
[27]; Reasons, [73].
By reference to s 38 of the
Act. It was also argued that it would be contrary to the objects of the Act
under s 4(1)(a) and (b)
in that the positive benefit to the amenity of community
life resulting from the provision of the service would be lost.
Panel’s reasons, [37]
recording submissions made by Kordister, (original emphasis).
Ibid [41] (emphasis added).
to s 44(2)(b)(i) and (ii) of the Act, applicable to contested applications by
reason of s 47(2), which included the following
(b) in any case-
(i) that the granting of the application would detract from or be detrimental
to the amenity of the area in which the premises
to which the application
relates are situated;
(ii) that the granting of the application would be conducive to or encourage
the misuse or abuse of alcohol;
Application for a Variation of a General Licence: Statement of Reasons (23
September 2009) (‘Director’s reasons’)
Act No 7695.
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 29 April 1987, 1588 (Robert Fordham, Minister
for Industry, Technology and Resources).
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 8 October 1998, 452 (Dr Denis Napthine,
Minister for Youth and Community Services).
Reasons, [119], quoting
from evidence given by Dr Roche in
Avery v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2001] VCAT 2455
While there is a permanent
pool of members of the Panel (the term of each member not exceeding five years),
the Chairperson determines
which members are required for a hearing: See Part 9,
Division 2 of the Act.
Under s 42(a) of the Act
the Director may refuse to accept an objection (made under s 38) if the person
is not affected by the application.
Act No 39 of 2002. By 2002
the Act had already been amended by the
Liquor Control Reform (Amendment) Act
(Act No 21 of 2001) and the
Liquor Control Reform (Prohibited
Products) Act 2001
(Act No 88 of 2001), and various other miscellaneous
amendments had been made.
It was introduced in
response to the Australia-wide national competition policy legislative review
undertaken in 1998. It also
introduced, for the first time, a non-exhaustive
concept of ‘amenity’. See the 2002 Amending Act, s3A. On the
of ‘amenity’, see [
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 16 May 2002, 1652.
Act No 8 of 2006. The Act
was also amended in 2004 by the
Liquor Control Reform (Underage Drinking
and Enhanced Enforcement) Act 2004
(Act No 92 of 2004).
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 16 November 2005, 2195.
Section 58B of the Act.
Licensees can object to a late-hour declaration made by the Director, and the
Director must give the licensee
reasonable time to prepare written or oral
submissions. A late hour declaration does not come into effect until after the
has received submissions from the licensee, within a reasonable time,
and considered any submissions made by the licensee. See
s 58D(4)(a) and
s 58D(4)(b) of the Act.
Section 18B of the Act.
Act No 73 of 2007.
Sections 148B and s 148I of
the Act respectively. See Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative
Assembly, 1 November 2007, 3821-2 (Mr Tony Robinson, Minister for Consumer
Affairs). The duration of a banning notice
was extended to up to 72 hours by
Act No 18 of 2010:
Justice Legislation Amendment (Victims of Crime
Assistance and Other Matters) Act 2010.
Section 58CA of the Act.
Section 96A of the Act.
Act No 8 of 2009.
Act No 59 of 2009.
There was also a third Act
passed in 2009 which amended the Act, the
Liquor Control Reform Amendment
(Party Buses) Act 2009
(Act No 88 of 2009).
Section 96B of the Act.
108(5)(a) and (b) amended by Act No 8 of 2009 s 16. Victoria,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 4 December 2008, 5004 (Mr Tony Robinson,
Minister for Consumer Affairs).
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 4 December 2008, 5004 (Mr Tony Robinson,
Minister for Consumer Affairs).
Section 180(4) of the
Section 180(5) of the Act.
There was scope for fees to be waived, for example, for small business owners
and not-for-profit clubs.
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 12 August 2009, 2657 (Mr Tony Robinson,
Minister for Consumer Affairs).
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 12 August 2009, 2656 (Tony Robinson, Minister
for Consumer Affairs).
The second 2009 Amending
Act was passed in 2009 and these amendments came into force on 1 January 2010:
See Tribunal’s reasons,
[22]. The hearing took place on 22-25 February,
and 1 March 2010, the decision being made and orders published on 9 March
An additional object has since been added to s 4(1) by the
Control Reform Amendment Act 2010
(Act No 57 of 2010) namely, (d)
to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit entertainment. Act
No 71 of 2011 has
also amended s 4(1)(c) to include live music industries.
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 12 August 2009, 2657 (Tony Robinson, Minister
for Consumer Affairs) (emphasis added).
Set out at [
Set out in [
It was not brought pursuant
to Part 6 of the Act (Inquiries and Disciplinary Provisions).
Pursuant to s 40(b) of
the VCAT Act and s 87(1) of the Act.
Under its ‘review’
and is entitled to
substitute its own decision for the decision under review:
see the VCAT Act,
s 51(1)(a) and s 51(2)(d). The jurisdiction is aimed
at making the correct decision on the basis of the materials placed before it
independently of the decision of the original decision-maker. This accounts for
the evidence adduced before the Tribunal of specific
incidents that occurred
after May 2009 when the application for variation was made. It is not an
error-based jurisdiction. The
law is applied as at the time the Tribunal
exercises its review jurisdiction: see Reasons, [54].
reasons, [29], accepting the characterisation of the Director.
Mr de Carlo is the
Director of Policy, Planning and Strategy, Mental Health and Drug Division,
Department of Health.
reasons, [33].
reasons, [41].
It appears that the
licensed premises incident report of Sergeant Tharle may have been dated 26
April 2008.
reasons, [57].
reasons, [55]-[56].
Side-loading is leaving
a nightclub temporarily to consume alcohol in the street to avoid the high
prices charged in a nightclub:
see Reasons, [88].
Back-loading is leaving
a nightclub permanently to consume alcohol in the street to avoid the
nightclub’s high prices: see
Reasons, [88].
Government Gazette No S294 (27 October 2006); Tribunal’s reasons, [62]
(emphasis added).
reasons, [64].
(2009) 239 CLR 390.
While the case arose in the context of liability in tort, the Tribunal
considered that its sentiments with respect to the responsibility
of the drinker
rather than the seller for misuse of alcohol were applicable to a licensing
Ibid 414 [54].
reasons, [65] (emphasis added).
reasons, [66]. The bottle shop was able to charge a premium for its alcohol
after midnight given its market advantage.
reasons, [75]-[76].
Ibid [78], [80].
These are set out at [
The Tribunal had
purported to determine its review of the variation application by reference to s
4(1) and s 4(2) of the Act and ignored
s 47(2) and s 44(2) which the judge
found to be ‘technically incorrect’ but he found that in the
circumstances of this
case ‘it did not produce any actual error’
because the legislative scheme made it plain that the objects provisions in
4(1) and s 4(2) were the primary considerations: see Reasons, [103]. Section
47(2) relevantly provided that the ‘Director
may refuse to grant a
contested application on any of the grounds set out in s 44(2)’. Section
44(2) provided, inter alia,
that the ‘Director may refuse to grant an
uncontested application on any of the following grounds – ... (b) in any
– (i) that the granting of the application would detract from or be
detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the premises
to which the
application relates are situated; (ii) that the granting of the application
would be conducive to or encourage the
misuse or abuse of alcohol’.
At the relevant time s
47(1) of the Act provided that ‘the Director must grant or refuse to grant
a contested application
after giving full consideration to the recommendations
of the Panel’. In reviewing the decision of the Director, the Tribunal
fell under the same obligation: see Reasons, [227].
Reasons, [103].
The judge noted that the
primacy of the object of harm minimisation was also reinforced by its inclusion
within the grounds on the
basis of which a person can make an objection to an
application under s 38(1A) which provided: ‘any person may object to the
grant, variation or relocation of a packaged liquor licence or late night
(packaged liquor) licence on the ground that the grant,
variation or relocation
would be conducive to or encourage the misuse or abuse of alcohol’:
Reasons, [36].
Reasons, [270]-[271]
(emphasis added).
Ibid [273].
Ibid [273].
[2000] VCAT 459
Black and Cooke
’. The tribunal was there reviewing a
decision of the Director to grant a packaged liquor licence to an IGA
Supermarket.
Reasons, [114]-[115].
Ibid [186].
Ibid [186].
Reasons, [117]. The
respective quoted phrases are from
Black and Cooke,
Black and Cooke
This assumes some
importance in the issues canvassed on the appeal. In
Black and Cooke
tribunal held that the argument that the grant of a packaged licence to the IGA
supermarket would be contrary to the object of
harm minimisation was ‘not
substantiated in terms of geographic positioning of the supermarket or by any
other site specific
evidence or evidence other than that of a general
nature’ (15).
Reasons, [186].
Ibid [194], see also
[82] where the same opinion is expressed and the observation made that what the
Tribunal did was not to reject
the evidence but to find ‘that there was
“little or nothing to link the conduct of the bottle shop” to these
This also assumes
importance in the discussion below, [
Reasons, [273].
[2005] VCAT 323
’). The tribunal there granted the transfer and
relocation of a packaged liquor licence and the grant of a new packaged liquor
Ibid [19]. See also
Reasons, [132].
Ibid [185]. See also
Executive Director of Health v Lily Creek International Pty Ltd
[2000] WASCA 258
, 515 (Ipp J, with whom Owen and Miller JJ agreed).
Reasons, [274]-[275]
(emphasis added). See also [197].
Ibid [276] (emphasis
Ibid [150], his Honour
referring to the submissions of the Director before the Tribunal.
Ibid [117], referring to
Black and Cooke,
Ibid [278]-[279].
Applying the test drawn,
inter alia, from
S v Crimes Compensation Tribunal
[1998] 1 VR 83
where Phillips JA said that making a finding of fact would ordinarily give rise
to an error of law only if ‘it is shown
that the fact-finding tribunal
arrived at a finding that was simply not open to it’; that is, as Batt J
Roads Corporation v Dacakis
[1995] VicRp 70
[1995] 2 VR 508
, 520 that a finding
of fact is open to challenge as an error of law but only if ‘there is no
probative evidence to support
See above [
Ibid [280].
He also ordered that the
remitted matter be decided in accordance ‘with the hearing of further
evidence (if any)’.
The Director queried the
coherence of having multiple ‘primary’ purposes, the importance of
the primacy of a purpose
being that it was the only one such purpose.
Reasons, [173], his
Honour went on to say: ‘Marking a point of regulatory difference from the
previous legislation, contributing
to the minimisation of that harm was made the
primary regulatory object and therefore the primary consideration in liquor
decisions. The significance of that step must not be overlooked in
administrating the legislation’.
reasons, [29]. See also [75].
The Director argued that
the Tribunal did not in terms make a finding that ending late-night trading at
the bottle shop would
contribute to minimising alcohol-related harm.
However, it is plain enough that this is what the Tribunal found, at least in
sense that any contribution the reduction in trading hours might make to
harm minimisation would not override the detriment to the
amenity of the area
resulting from the diminution in the diversity of licensed facilities that the
reduction would bring.
Reasons, [117].
Black and Cooke
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384, 408.
Project Blue Sky v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355, 381 [69].
The objects clause of s
3 provided: ’The object of this Act is to ensure in the interest of the
public generally— (a)
that there is an orderly and continuous improvement
in and development of facilities and arrangements for the supply of
accommodation
meals and liquor to the public; (b) that all persons concerned in
the supply of accommodation meals and liquor shall be of good
character and have
the training skill and capacities necessary to provide an orderly and proper
service; and (c) that the provision
for the orderly and economic development and
improvement of that supply should also promote the interest of the businesses of
persons concerned in that supply and advance the security and stability of
By s 5(3) of Act No 59
of 2009. See [
[1972] VicRp 58
[1972] VR 514.
Winneke CJ, Smith and
[1972] VicRp 58
[1972] VR 514
(emphasis added).
Although the use of the
term ‘mandatory’ is somewhat outmoded, it serves as a convenient
shorthand in the circumstances:
Project Blue Sky v Australian Broadcasting
(1998) 194 CLR 355, 390 [93].
[2008] VSCA 32
(2008) 23 VR 1.
Ibid 15 [57] (Warren CJ,
with whom Maxwell P agreed, Chernov JA dissenting). See also
Antunovic v
[2010] VSC 377
(2010) 30 VR 355
, 388 [152]-[153], 389 [157] (Bell J).
Kirkland-Veenstra
[2009] HCA 15
(2009) 237 CLR 215
, 231-2 [32].
Ibid 250-1 [98]
(citations omitted). See also s 4(2) of the
Guardianship and Administration
cast in somewhat similar terms to s 4(2) of the Act and
State Trustees Ltd
[2006] VSC 444
(2006) 25 VAR 402
Edwards v Edwards
(1994) 17 Fam LR 584.
Reasons, [173].
Lodhi v The
(2007) 179 A Crim R 470, 481-483 [19]-[39].
Black and Cooke
[2005] VCAT 323
Reasons, [185].
The ruling of the
Tribunal is set out above, [
Sergeant Tharle’s
statement of 25 April 2008 is principally concerned with patrons of the bottle
shop opening the liquor as
soon as they left, his observations of people who
were intoxicated within the immediate vicinity of the hotel and his observations
of many empty cans and bottles of alcohol lying in gutters, footpaths and
doorways particularly in Little Bourke Street. An additional
statement of
his observations of 26 April 2008 recorded his observations of people who were
intoxicated in the immediate area drinking
from open liquor cans or bottles.
The Director relied upon
the evidence of: Sergeant Murray Trudel; Senior Constable Castles-McKeown;
Sergeant Ian Earle; Constable
David Brockway; Senior Constable Susan Franklin;
Constable Joel King, and Senior Constable Lisa Bolton.
The Director relied upon
the evidence of: Constable David Malloch; Senior Constable Arthur Markridis;
Constable Josh Coombs; Sergeant
Brian Ward; A/Senior Sergeant Russell Tharle;
Detective Sergeant Russell Anderson and Sergeant Bruce Rigoni.
The Director relied upon
the evidence of: RACV Inspectors Neil Woolley; Cheryl McInerney; and Darren
Smith, and Sergeant Brian
The Director relied upon
the evidence of: RACV Inspector Neil Wooley; Sergeant Murray Trudel; Sergeant
Brian Ward; and Sergeant
The Director relied upon
the evidence of: Sergeant Murray Trudel.
The Director relied upon
the evidence of: Sergeant Brian Ward; A/Senior Sergeant Russell Tharle;
Senior Constable Lisa Bolton.
The Director relied upon
the evidence of: RACV Inspector Darren Smith; Senior Constable Lisa Bolton.
O’Connor (No 3)
[2010] FCA 691
(2010) 187 FCR 495
, 596-8, [396]-[397].
Telstra Corporation
Limited v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2008] FCA 1758
(2008) 176 FCR 153
181-2 [106]-[107].
Reasons, [238].
VCAT Act, s 98(1)(b).
VCAT Act, s 98(1)(c).
reasons, [67].
reasons, [65].
Ibid [65] (emphasis
The judge’s reading
of the Tribunal’s decision was that it accepted the uncontradicted
locality evidence but considered
it to be irrelevant because no causal
connection could be established. I consider that the Tribunal did not accept
the locality
evidence and that it is not accurate to describe it as
‘uncontradicted’.
Paragraph 2 of his
Honour’s orders dated 18 May 2011.
Paragraph 3 of his
Honour’s orders dated 18 May 2011.
Walton v Gardiner
(1993) 177 CLR 378, 392-6.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (648 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter