URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VDBT/1997/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:29:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Metricon v Burnell [1997] VDBT 24 (7 August 1997)
THE DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(DOMESTIC BUILDING CONTRACTS AND TRIBUNAL ACT 1995)
- DETERMINATION -
METRICON HOMES PTY LTD
MR ROBERT & MRS JANICE BURNELL
MR ROBERT & MRS JANICE BURNELL
HOUSING GUARANTEE FUND LTD.
(A.C.N. 006 258 233)
FIRST CROSS
METRICON HOMES PTY LTD
SECOND CROSS
PRESIDING MEMBER:
HIS HONOUR JUDGE DAVEY
FORM OF APPLICATION:
ORIGINAL APPLICATION
APPEARANCES:
MR. OLIVER AND MR. SCHWARZ BOTH OF COUNSEL FOR THE
MR BURNELL ON BEHALF OF HIMSELF AND MRS. BURNELL
MR LAIRD AND MS VOLPINS BOTH OF COUNSEL ON BEHALF OF HGFL
DATE(S) OF HEARING:
21 NOV 96, 10 DEC 96, 5 MAY 1997 AND 16 JUNE 1997
TO 21 JUNE 1997
DATE OF DETERMINATION:
7 AUGUST 1997
I MAKE THE FOLLOWING DETERMINATION:
1. The Respondent pay to the Applicant the sum of $21,147.27 (being
$21,086.32 less the amount awarded on the cross-application of
$3,880) and
interest of $3940.95.
2. The proceeding on the cross-application against the HGFL is dismissed.
3. The Cross-Applicants to pay the costs of HGFL such costs to be assessed on
Scale D of the County Court Scale. Failing agreement
the costs will be fixed by
the Tribunal.
4. The costs of the Applicant/Cross-Respondent and the
Respondent/Cross-Applicant are reserved to a date to be fixed.
JUDGE DAVEY
CHAIRPERSON
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
THE DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(DOMESTIC BUILDING CONTRACTS AND TRIBUNAL ACT 1995)
- DETERMINATION -
METRICON HOMES PTY LTD
MR ROBERT & MRS JANICE BURNELL
MR ROBERT & MRS JANICE BURNELL
HOUSING GUARANTEE FUND LTD.
(A.C.N. 006 258 233)
FIRST CROSS
METRICON HOMES PTY LTD
SECOND CROSS
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
INTRODUCTION
On 12 September 1995 Metricon Homes (the Builder) entered into a MBA Housing
Contract with Mr and Mrs Burnell to build a house at
No. 1. Primrose
Crescent, East Brighton ("the house") for the sum of $127,720.00. The
Builder is a project home Builder and the
house was its "Tiffany Victorian"
model with several variations which increased its basic advertised cost from
$102,400.00 to $127,720.00.
The contract included a schedule setting out the
variations from the standard plans and specifications. Clause 23 of the general
conditions of the contract provided that upon practical completion of the works
the Builder shall be entitled to receive "the unpaid
balance of the contract
price together with any other monies which are payable under this contract.
On 26 June 1996 Metricon Homes Pty Ltd ("the Builder") commenced a claim
against Mr & Mrs Burnell for a sum of $20,744.32 being
Builder’s final claim dated 14 March 1996 and interest on that claim.
After several directions hearings and that proceeding
having been set down for
hearing the Owners commenced a cross-application by an application filed on 5
December 1996 claiming the
sum of $25,942 for defective work as well as making
some unquantified more global claims alleging defective and poor workmanship
relation to the brickwork and the slab. Because of the considerable delay by
the Owners in lodging the cross-application effectively
the Builder’s
claim for the balance of the contract sum was heard before the cross-application
over several of days in December
and January 1997. The cross-application for
defective or incomplete work was heard over 5 days in June 1997. Unfortunately
delay in lodging the cross-application by the Owners has resulted not only
in an overall delay in the completion of the hearing but
it has also increased
the cost of these proceedings to the parties.
THE BUILDER’S CLAIM
I heard evidence in relation to the Builder’s claim on 23 January
1997 when Mr Oliver was representing the Builder. Mr Burnell
challenge the arithmetic of the Builder’s claim however he gave evidence
and produced a receipt dated 13 May 1996 for
an amount of $20,842 which he
claimed was a receipt for the balance of the money owing. The detail on the
receipt stated "Fixing
Payment No. 1" I do not accept that this payment was or
indeed was thought by Mr Burnell to be the final payment on the contract
and I am satisfied on Mrs Anderson’s evidence that there is a balance
owing on the contract of $20,744.32. In addition when
it became apparent that
the Owners had a substantial cross-application I permitted the Builder to amend
its claim to include an amount
of $342 in relation to the windows which the
Builder had had delivered to the site but found the windows were the incorrect
. I am satisfied on the evidence that the manufacturers of the windows
would have allowed a credit for those windows if they had
been promptly
returned. In the circumstances the conduct of Mr Burnell in removing the
windows from the site without authority to
do so has caused the loss of $342.00
to the Builder. I am also satisfied that the Builder is entitled under the
contract to claim
interest at 20% per annum on any outstanding balance. At the
conclusion of the last hearing, I queried Mr Schwarz of Counsel who
then appearing for the Builder as to whether or not the interest rate of 20
percentum per annum might not be so large as to constitute
a penalty. After
having given the matter due consideration I am satisfied that although the
interest rate is a high rate it does
not in the circumstances constitute a
penalty. I am satisfied that the rate of interest represents a reasonable
assessment of damages
in circumstances where the likely loss is difficult to
calculate. (see
Rabophone Facilites Ltd v Blank
(1966) 1ULR 1428 at
1447) Before the Builder is entitled to a judgment for this sum it is necessary
however to take into account
the cross-application insofar as it constitutes a
set-off. In fact the whole of the cross-application relates to a claim for
rectification
of allegedly defective work and accordingly the amount of the
cross-application should be treated as a set-off. (see for example
Galantoss Pty Ltd v McIntyre
(1974) ACTR 107.)
Accordingly the quantum
including any interest to which the Builder is entitled can only be determined
after the cross-application
has been determined.
THE DATE FOR CALCULATION OF INTEREST
The Builder has submitted that the date for the calculation of interest
should be seven days after a written request is made by the
Builder. However
having regard to my assessment of the cost of rectification of defective work I
propose to use the date upon which
the Owners occupied the house, that is 14
June 1996 as the appropriate date for the calculation of interest.
THE CROSS-APPLICATION
The cross-application was heard in the week commencing 16 June 1997 over five
days. As I have already noted the cross-application
seeks $25,942 but during
the course of the hearing it became apparent that there were three items which
were also being claimed by
the Owners for a sum greatly in excess of the
original claim. Those items are referred to in a spread-sheet prepared by
a building consultant engaged by the Owners as follows:-
1. Windows not installed to the nearest brick course as specified.
2. Brickwork - general poor standard. It was claimed that the whole of the
brickwork should be demolished and rebuilt.
3. Cracking in the concrete floor slab which was alleged by Mr Burnell
to be so serious that the slab needed to be demolished and
None of the above items were accurately costed by the Owners. Mr Merlo
estimated a cost of $130,000 if the slab had to be replaced.
If only the
brickwork was required to be rebuilt he estimated the cost at $30,000 to
$40,000. If I allowed either of these items
this proceeding would need to be
adjourned to another date to enable evidence of a more accurate costing to be
Although the Builder only became aware that the Owners intended to pursue
these claims at an extremely late stage of the hearing Mr
Schwarz agreed on
behalf of the Builder to proceed with the hearing without any adjournment.
EXPERT WITNESSES
The majority of the issues in the cross-application were the subject of
expert evidence. Initially I gave directions for the appointment
of an expert
pursuant to s94 of the Act to carry out an inspection in the presence of all
parties and make a report to the Tribunal
and the parties. Mr Van
Ravenstein was so appointed and ultimately carried out two inspections one on
the 17 September 1996 and
the other on 6 February 1997. He prepared two reports
dated 19 September 1996 and 7 March 1997 respectively. The first inspection
carried out in the presence of the Builder but Mr Burnell was unable to be
present. The second inspection was only able to be
carried out in the presence
of the Owners and their representative Mr Merlo. Unfortunately this has
meant that in relation to some
aspects of the defects claim Mr Van
Ravenstein was not in a position to give full consideration to the respective
positions of the
parties or to consider some relevant documentary material.
In addition to the reports from Mr Van Ravenstein the Owners called
three expert witnesses. Mr John Merlo, an engineer and building
consultant, Mr Thomas McNeally an architect and building consultant
specialising in masonry and Mr Donald Hunt a paving and slab
specialist.
Other than Mr Hunt, who was a late witness, each of them presented a
written report or reports. In addition HGFL called
Mr K. Ryde an
experienced building inspector and the Builder called a building consultant
Mr Brian Gallagher.
Mr Merlo, a civil engineer gave evidence on behalf of the Owners. I
have treated his evidence with some caution as he gave me the
impression of
having become too closely identified with his client’s cause. In addition
some of his cost estimates did not
appear to be based on anything other than
informed guesswork. As noted elsewhere a spreadsheet prepared by him formed the
particulars of defective work.
Mr McNeally is a qualified architect and is clearly well qualified to
give evidence on the brickwork and he has over a number of years
been concerned
with standards relating to masonry. I found his evidence of assistance, however
for reasons I shall set out hereafter,
I agree with Mr Schwarz’s
submission that he was academic in his approach to the brickwork and in my view
failed to apply a
realistic standard for acceptable brickwork quality in the
context of this home. I was impressed by Mr Ryde, who was called by HGFL,
who by reason of long experience is well qualified to assess the quality of
brickwork. I also thought that Mr Gallagher gave balanced
evidence on the extent of the defects and was prepared to make a number of
concessions in the Owners’ favour.
THE CONCRETE SLAB
It was contended by Mr Burnell that the slab was defective and
structurally unsound and he claimed that is should be demolished and
Mr Merlo provided some evidence in support of this contention and expressed
the view that the slab may be structurally unsound
as it appeared to have not
been properly compacted when it was poured. However he conceded that he was
not an expert in this area
and that he had taken no core samples so that the
strength of the slab could be tested. He disagreed with the proposition that
the cracks in the slab were only due to shrinkage. Based on information he
obtained from Mr Burnell he was critical of the fact
that a mechanical
vibrator had not been used during pouring. He said the failure to use such
equipment may lead to excessive voids
and honeycombing in the slab and some
honeycombing with a resultant loss in the strength of the slab. He conceded
that there was
no evident slab movement but he thought that some cracks, that he
had not measured, appeared to have widened. He rated the cracking
as moderate.
He estimated the cost of replacement of the slab which would of course involve
the demolition and rebuilding of the
whole house at approximately $130,000.
Mr McNeally was called by Mr Burnell and gave evidence as an expert in
masonry and brickwork.
He said he did not have experience at looking at
concrete slabs and did not express an opinion on it. However Mr Ronald
called by Mr Burnell, was a building and residential paving
expert and he gave evidence that he had inspected the property and considered
that the cracking in the slab was the result of random shrinkage and was not a
matter of serious concern. He described the severity
of the cracking as coming
within categories 1 and 2 that is mild to moderate. He thought that the fact
that the slab was a stiffened
raft slab had contributed to the cracking as it
increased the potential for concrete shrinkage. Although both Mr Merlo and
Mr McNeally
are qualified to give expert evidence in specific areas neither
claimed to be experts in concrete paving or slabs. The only acceptable
in that regard came from Mr Hunt who did not consider that there was any
structural inadequacy in the slab that would justify
its demolition. In
addition no testing of the slab had been conducted to assess whether or not the
strength of the slab had been
adversely affected. In these circumstances no
evidence was led by the Owners that could justify the claim that the slab was
structurally
unsound. Accordingly the claim in relation to the slab must
DEMOLITION AND REBUILDING OF THE BRICKWORK
Mr Merlo gave evidence that in his opinion the defects in the brickwork
were so severe that it all should be pulled down and rebuilt
as it would be too
difficult to match the mortar of any repaired brickwork with the existing
mortar. In his second report of 14
February 1997 he stated "generally the
brickwork throughout the house is of a poor standard." He referred to incorrect
quoin details
and unacceptable movement joints and noted that this could be
detrimental to future resale value. In his report of 6 December 1996
asserted that some areas of brickwork are clearly out of plumb and the perps
generally vary substantially from 3.5 mm to 16.5
mm. However neither of his
reports make a recommendation that the condition of the brickwork justified
pulling it all down. When
cross-examined as to his reason for this apparently
significant omission he said that the reports had been prepared to assist
Burnell to negotiate a settlement and he considered that recommending in
his reports the pulling down of all the brickwork would
have precluded any
successful negotiations. However I note that at the date of the second report
there had already been a hearing
of the Builder’s claim against the
Burnells which took place in early December of 1996. Accordingly by the time of
report Mr Merlo must have been well aware that a negotiated
settlement was highly unlikely. In addition Mr Merlo conceded he
an expert on brickwork and that was why he had recommended to
Mr Burnell that he engage Mr McNeally. Mr McNeally expressed the
that the bricks were a good quality pressed brick. He criticised the
quality of the brickwork in a number of respects. In particular
he criticised
the number of unfilled purp joints. He noted that the corners of the dwelling
were built in a bond and queried whether
or not the straight joints had been
properly tied with metal ties. He was also critical of the quoining at the
front of the dwelling.
He measured the width of sample mortar joints and
concluded that they fell just outside the tolerances specified in the Australian
Building Code. He considered that it was an unsatisfactory job and because of
the problems in matching old brickwork with the new
bricks it would be better if
the whole of the brickwork was pulled down and rebuilt. He acknowledged in
cross examination that he
did not consider the terms of the contract or
specification when reaching this conclusion or consider the fact that the
Builder was
a project Builder or the cost per square for construction. He also
acknowledged that in any brick veneer one would expect to find
sections of
brickwork that do not comply with the code and also, that tolerances in
brickwork is a contentious issue. In addition
during the course of being
cross-examined by Mr Schwarz he acknowledged that he was not able to answer
whether or not it was reasonable
to demolish all the brickwork.
The above evidence may be contrasted with the evidence given by Mr Ryde
and Mr Gallagher. Mr Ryde was called by HGFL to give evidence
respect to the brick quoining at the front of the house. He considered that it
was generally of good quality. He thought the
quality of the brickwork overall
was of fair average quality probably on a higher level. He thought that the
brickwork on the subject
property is a bit sharper and a bit tidier that the
display home of the Builder at Aspendale. Mr Gallagher who is a most
experienced
building consultant was called on behalf of the Builder. He
prepared a report of 26 March 1997 and a further short report of 18
1997. Mr Gallagher expressed the view that the brickwork was of fair and
average standard and not inferior to the standard
of the display home. Subject
to a number of concessions that Mr Gallagher made in evidence, that I will
he was of the view that the brickwork was of a
reasonable standard. He expressed the view that the standard of brickwork
to be assessed against the standard of the display home and the fact that
the house was not an architect designed house but a project
inevitably led to some compromises. Accordingly it appeared to be his view that
the standard for assessing the
work should be set having regard to the cost per
square, the fact that there was no architectural supervision and the standard of
the display home. I observe that in the bundle of documents submitted by the
Owners dated 5 May 1997 are included a document entitled
minutes of meeting held
on February 6 1997 at 1 Primrose Crescent, East Brighton. Those minutes were
apparently prepared by Mr
Merlo. Under the heading of discussion topics is
the item "discussions re acceptable quality: equivalent to display home?
tradesmenlike?"
Under the heading "Discussions re acceptable Quality" appeared
"Equivalent to display home? Tradesmenlike?"
Two expert reports were made by Mr Van Ravenstein who was appointed by
the Tribunal pursuant to s94 of the Act and whose reports are
dated 17 September
1996 and 6 February 1997 respectively. In his first report Mr Van
Ravenstein considered a number of complaints
concerning the brickwork including
mismatched quoining, control joints, the failure to install the window heads on
the southern wall,
overhanging bricks on the northern side bay window. In that
report although he identifies minor defects which I shall deal with
specific items, he makes no suggestion that the overall standard of the
brickwork was so unsatisfactory that it warrants
pulling down and rebuilding.
Item 14 of the report of 7 March 1997 deals specifically with defective
brickwork and in particular
the long vertical mitre joint to the bay window. An
allowance for $1500 was provided for that brickwork to be removed and relaid
that the purpend gaps are consistently 10 mm. Apart from a further reference to
the quoining which I shall deal with separately
there is no suggestion in this
report that the whole of the brickwork should be demolished and rebuilt.
The contract which was a standard form MBA Housing contract provides in
clause 1. of the general conditions:-
"The Builder shall in a workmanlike manner and subject to these conditions
execute and complete the works."
The question arises is what does the term "workmanlike manner" mean in the
context of this contract. Is the meaning to be decided
by some objective
standard or should it to be interpreted by references to the surrounding
circumstances. Clearly work that may
be considered "workmanlike" in the
context of one contract may not be so considered in another. It seems to me
that question of
standard must be determined with reference to circumstances
surrounding the entry into this contract. (see for example
(1971) IWLR 1381,
Codelfa Constructions Pty Ltd v State Rail
Authority NSW
[1982] HCA 24
149 CLR 337)
The term "workmanlike manner" is sometimes used
as an expression analogous to an obligation to carry out the work with "proper
and care" (see
Young v Martin Ltd v McManus Childs Ltd
at 469) I have not been referred to any authorities dealing with the
question of whether the contract price is a relevant circumstance.
The case of
Cotton v Wallis
1955 3 ALL.E.R. 373 (CA)
did consider an analogous
question. In that case an owner counter claimed against an architect who was
suing for his fees. The
question was whether the architect in the circumstances
of that case had been negligent in passing certain work which it was conceded
was not of the highest quality.
Hodson LJ said at page 377 "The question remains what is the standard that
has to be applied. Here I think is the crux of the case,
because Counsel for
the building owner eventually conceded that one could not leave out of the
account altogether the price at which
the work was to be done. The home was not
a very expensive one. Even taking into account in giving proper weight to the
and the specification .... I cannot see that the learned Judge was
wrong in taking the view that there must be some tolerance (to
use his word) in
building down to a price."
At p379 Morris LJ said "It seems to me only natural that, if one house is
being built at a great expense, and another at a very moderate
price, different
quality in the work would be expected. Of course, everything must depend on the
exact contract made. If someone
contracts to give the best possible workmanship
for the lowest possible price the contract must be carried out."
In this case I am satisfied that the standard set by the expression
"workmanlike manner" relates to the standard set by the display
Builder and the standard of workmanship that would normally be expected in such
a project home. In all the circumstances
I prefer the opinion of
Mr Gallagher and Mr Ryde to that of Mr Merlo and Mr McNeally
on this question. I am satisfied that although
it is clear there are some
defects in the brickwork, the defects are not of such a nature as would warrant
the demolition of the
whole of the brickwork and its rebuilding.
Mr McNeally also relied upon the Australian Standard Masonry Code
(AS3700-1988) which
was the applicable standard at that time. I am satisfied
that that standard does not purport to set cosmetic standards for masonry
but is rather concerned with ensuring minimum structural standards. Although
Mr McNeally suggested that the quality of the
brickwork may have affected
the strength of the structure I am not satisfied on the evidence that the
strength of the structure has
been materially weakened by the standard of
brickwork. Accordingly I am of the view that the Owners have failed to satisfy
the whole of the brickwork should be demolished and rebuilt.
I now turn to consider each of the alleged defects which are set out in the
spreadsheet prepared by Mr Merlo.
Items 1 & 2 Upstairs bathroom - silicone seal shower screen $10
remove grout at bath/tile interface $40
These items are conceded by the Builder.
Item 3 Roof rafter spacing incorrect specifications calls for 600 mm
Mr Merlo in his report of 6 December 1996 states that the roof rafters
towards the west/rear of the house were at 600 mm centres whereas
spacing towards the front of the house are at 1200 mm centres.
It is claimed that all roof rafters should be at 600 mm centres.
Mr Merlo estimates the cost of rectification at $4500. Mrs Anderson,
the Builder’s Administration Manager gave evidence that when the final
drawings were prepared for the Council they specified
cement roof tiles.
However when the clients completed colour selection they chose a colourbond roof
rather than the cement roof
tiles. She raised a variation confirming the change
to a colourbond roof. It was common ground between the parties’
experts that when cement tiles are used 600 mm centres are required
however as colourbond is a much lighter material 1200 mm centres
are adequate.
There was in fact no suggestion that 1200 mm centres would cause any structural
problem or breached any building regulations.
I note that the building
agreement was signed on 12 September 1995 whereas the variation noting the
change from cement tiles to
colourbond roofing is dated 11 November 1995 which
supports Mrs Anderson’s evidence that originally cement tiles were
to be used. In all the circumstances I do not consider that this claim is
justified. In addition on the evidence of Mr Begg it
is clear that the
cost of colourbond roofing is greater than a cement tile roof and accordingly
there was no saving to the Builder
resulting from the variation.
Items 4 & 5 Repaint ceiling and cornices after replacing with 13 mm
plaster attached to rafters at 600 mm centres - estimated
cost $6600.
The issues raised by this claim is whether or not the contract required the
Owners to use 13 mm plaster or only 10 mm plaster. In
support of the
Owners’ contention Mr Merlo produced a standard combined Housing
Industry Association/Master Builders Association
specification which provides
that plaster board is to be 10 mm thick where joists are centered at 450 mm and
13 mm when centered
at 600 mm. However this specification is not the contract
specification. The contract specification provides for 10 mm plaster
be fixed to the underside of the ceiling joists. Accordingly in my view it is
clear the Builder did not have an obligation
to use 13 mm thick plaster
board. I accept the opinion of Mr Van Ravenstein as set out in his report
that 600 mm spacing for the
ceiling joists complies with the required building
specifications and the ceiling has been constructed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s
recommendations. Accordingly the claims in respect of
these items must fail.
Item 6 Quoin brickwork detail around windows on the east facade.
This complaint occupied a considerable amount of evidence. Mrs Anderson
gave evidence of several discussions she had with Mr Burnell
this question and she also explained several documents which were produced by
the Builder. Unfortunately at this hearing
Mr Burnell chose not to give
evidence and so I have no sworn evidence of his version of those events.
Mrs Anderson gave evidence
that there was nothing in the contract as to the
design of the brick quoining and the question of quoining was not raised by
until 12 February 1996. At that time she said the brickwork at
the top right hand side of the east frontage was almost completed.
In fact the
material includes a fax from Mrs Anderson to Mr Burnell of 12 February
1996 seeking confirmation that the quoining around
the front windows "will be
symmetrical" Mr Burnell sent two faxes both dated 13 February 1996 which
stated that some of the brickwork
was unacceptable. One of the faxes had a
sketch referring specifically to the "quoining - front right hand window (lower
and requiring an extension of the cream brick beyond the window line by
only half a brick and not a full brick. As a consequence
of this the Builder
issued a variation dated 16 February 1996 to do this at a cost of $682.
Eventually the Owners agreed to pay
half the cost and the Builder pay the other
half. That work was carried out and the Owners paid $341 for the variation.
Mrs Anderson
said there was no variation requesting identical quoining
between all windows and the dispute referred to in the facsimile of
February 1996 related to the two most northerly windows and not the
whole frontage. There was no complaint made about bay window
Subsequently Mr Burnell also wanted to reposition the top bay windows which
are located on the southern side of the east
frontage. This request was refused
by the Builder and this and other matters were discussed between Mr Burnell
and Mrs Anderson
after the issue of the Certificate of Practical Completion
on 29 March 1996. A list of items was prepared by Mrs Anderson which
Mr Burnell wanted rectified. Mrs Anderson gave evidence that the list
was signed by Mr Burnell on 4 April 1996 after she had made
endorsements after each item stating in effect whether after a discussion
between herself and Mr Burnell it had been agreed to be
rectified or not.
After item 29 in the list which reads - "quoining upper storey - lower storey"
appears the words "accepted as
is". In absence of any evidence from
Mr Burnell to contradict Mrs Anderson’s evidence as to the state
of the list when he
signed the list I have no hesitation in accepting her
evidence. I have heard the various experts express their views as to the
of the quoining which ranges from unsatisfactory to quite satisfactory
and I have also had the opportunity to view both the subject
house and the
display home. I have reached the conclusion that the quoining, although not
identical as between upper and lower windows
is symmetrical as between windows
of the same level and is as substantially symmetrical as the quoining in the
display home. I do
not accept in any event that the Owners had a contractual
right to insist that the quoining of each of the windows be identical to
the other windows. In the event that the Owners desired to insist on the
quoining for each window being identical then I
believe that would have
constituted a variation to the contract. I accept that by varying the ceiling
heights and or the window
sizes it may have been possible to adjust the brick
courses so that the upper and lower windows could have had identical brick
In addition even if it is considered a building defect, which I do
not accept, the nature of the quoining defect is of a relative
minor cosmetic
nature and would not warrant in my view the very substantial cost of
rectification. In all the circumstances I do
no propose to allow anything for
Item 7 Rectify cracked mortar problem - bay windows $600.
As Mr Gallagher said in his evidence straight joints have been provided
to the front bay windows which he said is not a particularly
satisfactory method
of joining brickwork. He observed that the bricks are joined with wire ties and
he expressed the view that it
is an unstable type of joint and as a result the
mortar is prone to cracking. It is his view that the only solution would have
to use squint bricks so that they could be bonded at the joint. In his
opinion it is not possible to have a straight joint with
a uniform width and no
cracking. I prefer Mr Gallagher’s opinion on this question to that of
Mr Merlo and Mr McNeally. Accordingly
this item is not allowed.
Item 8 Replace four metres of brick on edge - dwarf brickwork
This claim refers to bricks that have been laid on edge below the south
sliding door to the rumpus room at the base of the perimeter
wall near the north
eastern corner. There were also a number of bricks laid on edge on the north
side of the front wall. These
bricks are at or slightly below the present
ground level. It is not claimed that they create any structural problem rather
the appearance of these bricks that give rise to the complaint as they are
clearly not laid stretcher bond. I heard evidence that
the practice of using
bricks on edge is relatively common where there are slight variations in the
slab rebate. It is clear that
insofar as they create a visual problem the
establishment of a garden or paving in that area would result in the bricks
longer visible. Mr Van Ravenstein in his report of 17 September
1996 observed that there were some bricks on edge along a small
part of the
south, east and north sides of the building and these sections are either below
ground and would not normally be seen.
He did not consider the laying of bricks
on edge a defect in the circumstances. In my view his opinion which is shared
by Mr Gallagher
represents a sensible and common sense view. In my opinion
the complaint about bricks on edge is not a compensable defect and it
Item 9 Fill front verandah timber beams/timber interface $10.
This item has been conceded by the Builder.
Item 10 Install two metre galvanized shelf angle $250.
This item refers to the brickwork on the south portion of the front wall of
the house under the bay windows. It is clear that there
is an overhang by some
of the bricks to the extent of around 25 and up to 30 percent of their width and
accordingly a resulting lack
of support. Mr Van Ravenstein in his first
report suggested using a hot dipped galvanized steel angle bolted to the slab
provide support. Mr Merlo in his report agreed with that
suggestion and estimated that it would cost $250. This was also shared
Mr Gallagher in his initial report. Mr Hunt however found that
suggestion unacceptable and he proposed the removal of all the
brickwork around
the bay window and the demolition and repouring that portion of the slab and
beam and then rebuilding the brickwork
and tying the new slab section back into
the existing slab. His concern was that because the slab had not been
mechanically compacted
it was possible that the slab and edge beam may be under
strength. The bolting of a shelf angle by placing additional stress on
might lead to the failure of the slab at a later point in time. He also made an
alternative suggestion of using epoxy injection
under high pressure into any
cracks and voids in the slab so as to increase its strength and then bolting a
stainless steel shelf
angle onto the edge beam to support the overhanging
brickwork. Mr Hunt provided no estimate as to the cost of either of his
methods of rectification and nor was he confident that the injection
of epoxy under high pressure would work. On the other hand,
Mr Gallagher in his report agreed with the use of a hot dipped galvanized
shelf angle, he put forward an alternative suggestion
when giving his evidence.
Both he and Mr Merlo agreed the bolting of a galvanized shelf angle to the
edge beam would be a band-aid
suggestion. Mr Hunt further contended that a
galvanized shelf angle would in any event be prone to rust over time.
Mr Gallagher
in the course of his evidence suggested that the problem of
supporting the overhanging bricks without running the risks of the slab
could be better solved by underpinning the area of the bay windows and building
on the underpinning another edge beam directly
underneath the overhanging bricks
and abutting the existing edge beam. He made the point that on his observation
there seemed to
be reasonable compaction of the slab, a view with which
Mr Van Ravenstein agreed, but conceded without core testing it was not
to assess the strength of the slab. As I understood his proposal it
would involve several underpinning pads being constructed and
the process would
involve the removal and the replacement of a small number of bricks in the wall
underneath the bay windows. He
expressed the view that this technique in
principle was sound but it would be necessary to obtain engineering computations
it could be carried out he estimated the total cost of the underpinning
at $1750 including the costs of retaining an engineer.
Gallagher’s proposal seemed a far more sensible proposal than the
effective demolition of the front section of the slab and
a significant part of
the brick wall. It would provide permanent rectification of the problem and
alleviate any fear of a failure
of the slab in the future. Accordingly I
propose to allow $1750 for this item.
Item 11 Install additional front step
In respect to the front step Mrs Anderson gave evidence that
Mr Burnell had informed the Supervisor that he intended to pave the front
path. On the basis of that advice the step had been left at a height which
allowed for a paved path to be constructed at a later
point in time. This would
result in the height of the ground level being increased and would eliminate the
need for a further step.
It is common ground between the parties that unless
the ground is built up two steps would be required. Mrs Anderson said in
evidence that if the Builder had been requested it would have installed two
steps. Mrs Anderson was not cross examined on that evidence
been given no reason to reject her evidence in that regard. Accordingly this
claim is disallowed.
Items 12 & 13
These items which relate to complaints about leaking sliding doors at the
rear of the premises have been withdrawn by the Owners.
Item 14 Relocate sewer boundary trap away from doorway $1000.
The sewerage inspection point is located just west of the double door on the
rear of the south wall. It was pointed out that the
contract provides for
connection to existing services that is to the service connections which had
been provided for the previous
house on the block. Mrs Anderson explained
in her evidence that if the connection point for the sewerage was to be
relocated it
would constitute a variation for which the Builder would charge the
cost plus a 15 percent margin. She said that she had a discussion
Mr Burnell concerning changing the location. She said that Mr Burnell
was not prepared to pay extra for the cost of resiting
the house or
alternatively the relocation of the sewerage point. Exhibit B8 in the Metricon
lever arch folder is a facsimile from
Mr Burnell to the Builder which
requested an initial relocation of the house on the site so as to enable a car
to be parked on the
southern side. Mrs Anderson said she had a discussion
with Mr Burnell when he made the request to bring the house forward on the
site from 9.2 metres to 6.5 metres from the front so as to enable a future
carport to be accommodated. By a facsimile dated 11 October
Builder forwarded to Mr Burnell a revised site plan which had the effect of
locating the inspection point for the sewerage
close to the side of the house.
Mr Gavin Rosa was called by the Builder. He was the drainage and sewerage
sub-contracter employed
by the Builder. He explained that the only way the
boundary trap could be moved would be to ask South-Eastern Water to locate a
sewerage pit further down the block. He also said there were alternatives to
tidy up the boundary trap. Currently it has a
removable cover some 300 mm in
diameter. It could be replaced by a smaller brass cover of about 100 mm in
diameter and it could
then be made flush with the top of the ground assuming
that concrete paving was laid in the area. He said the cost of this would
$100 to $120. Mr Merlo in his report allowed the sum of $1000 to relocate
the sewer boundary trap away from the doorway. According
to Mr Rosa it
would cost approximately $3000 to have the boundary trap moved. This
substantial discrepancy in the estimates of the
cost of carrying out the work
leads me to believe that many of Mr Merlo’s costs of rectification
may well be merely informed
guesses. In the circumstances I am of the view that
an allowance of $120 should be made to allow for a neater and smaller brass
fitting to be installed. I do not think that having regard to the evidence of
the Builder that the Builder was under any obligation
to relocate the sewerage
pit further down the block free of charge. However I am of the view that if the
inspection point is to
be located so close to the side entrance it should be as
inconspicuous as possible.
Item 15 Construct steps on a brickwork base $1000
Mr Merlo gave evidence that he considered the concrete steps which had
been placed beneath each of the rear doors were not properly
installed and
should have been laid on a brickwork base. Mrs Anderson when asked about
the steps said she did not know who placed
the steps and conceded that they had
not been permanently installed.
The reason given for this was that the Builder did not know what landscaping
treatment was proposed by the Owners. Mr Gallagher commented
on the step
at the rear double doors on the south side and suggested that it may well be
better to elevate the ground level by paving
the area so that no steps would be
required at all. I am not satisfied that there was any contractual obligation
to provide a brickwork
base for the steps. However it seems to be reasonable to
make some allowance for the permanent installation of these steps. Mr
Ravenstein in his report made an allowance of $200 which in my view is a
reasonable allowance in the circumstances.
Item 16 Remove unsightly control joint - $1,200.
The control joint on the southern wall was criticised by both Mr Merlo
and Mr McNeally. The joint had not been built into the wall
rather it had
been cut into the wall. Mrs Anderson gave evidence as to this matter.
She said that it was an oversight by the bricklayer
as a control joint should
have been built in at that location. The Builder then received advice from the
Engineer that a control
joint was required. Mr Burnell did not want a
control joint in the wall. As it was required by the engineer the Builder was
to install it. When Mr Burnell did not respond to a letter asking
whether he wanted the brickwork pulled down or rebuilt or to have
the control
joint cut in the wall the Builder went ahead and cut the joint. In those
circumstances the Owners cannot now turn around
and ask for the brickwork to be
demolished and rebuilt with a control joint at the Builder’s cost.
Both Mr Van Ravenstein and Mr Gallagher regarded the control joint,
although not particularly tidy, as acceptable. A relevant factor
may be that
the control joint is located on the south wall facing against a side fence. In
any event in my view in all the circumstances
there would now be no
justification in demolishing that part of the brickwork and rebuilding it with a
control joint.
Accordingly I have not allowed anything for the demolition and rebuilding of
that section of brickwork.
Item 17 Windows not installed to nearest brick course as specified.
This was one of the items in respect of which Mr Merlo in his
spreadsheet made no estimate of the cost of rectification. Because
the windows did not coincide with the brickcourse on the south side of the
building a timber or masonite infill was used
to close off the gap. Mr Van
Ravenstein refers to the windows for the kitchen laundry and shower rooms.
Because the top of the
windows did not coincide precisely with the brickcourse a
timber or masonite infill was used to close off the gap. The display home
exhibited a similar problem on one wall. Mr Merlo who frankly admits he is
not a brick expert, was very critical of this deficiency.
Mr Merlo said
specified in the drawings. Mr McNeally
was also critical of the windows on
the south wall. He said he would expect in the event of the brickwork being
demolished that
there would be an adjustment of brick locations to fit within
the brick width. Mrs Anderson said that when she had discussions with
Mr Burnell on the 4 April 1996 concerning the window head infills she and
Mr Burnell agreed to disagree. Mr Gallagher’s view
was that it
was a design problem and not a question of workmanship. He said it reflects the
problems of a volume builder because
room sizes are determined first and this
can cause problems with brick panels. As he noted any rectification would
involve a substantial
cost as it would involve changing the position of the
windows which would affect the interior of the rooms as well. His response
this situation is that you get what you pay for. He thought that the house at
the cost $4,200 per square was of an adequate standard
and generally not
inferior to the display home. The question is whether or not the work has been
performed in a workmanlike way
in the context of this contract. Mr Van
Ravenstein noted that the south side windows and laundry door unit height
dimensions differ
from the front window height dimensions and thus do not
correspond to the brickwork gauge. In this respect the Builder has fitted
infill panels to make up the difference in height. It would appear that the
provisions of the contract in regard to the nearest
corresponding brickcourse
had been complied with. He did not consider that there was any defect. In my
view no defect has been
established. Accordingly this item is not allowed.
Item 18 Replace four metres of bricks on edge under sliding door.
I have already dealt with this item. (see Item 8)
Item 19 Replace all control joint sealants $300. This item is conceded by
the Builder.
Item 20 Seal all windows/brickwork interfaces (including bottom sills)
Mr Merlo thought this was necessary because he could not see any wind
moulds around the window frames. Mr McNeally seemed to have
problem. Mr Van Ravenstein’s comments which I accept are as
"The timber windows installed in the building are manufactured by Big J,
which incorporate the wind moulds along the side of the window.
The caulking or
sealing between the wind mole and the brickwork to achieve a weather-tight joint
is only required where it is necessary.
The applicable standard is AS2147-1978
which does not require caulking or sealant between the windmould and the
brickwork."
Mr Gallagher shared the same view. No evidence was led suggesting any
water penetration and the house has been constructed for some
12 months. In the
circumstances I am not satisfied that there is any defect in the insulation of
the windows.
In the circumstances I do not propose to allow this item.
Item 21 Brickwork - poor standard. (see page 7.)
This item has already been dealt with to some extent in the early part of
these reasons. However there was particular criticism of
the brickwork relating
to the brick pier at the rear of the premises. I accept the evidence of
Mr Gallagher and Mr Ryde that generally
the brickwork was of a fair
average standard and not inferior to the display home. I have also of course
had the opportunity of
viewing the display home myself. Mr Merlo on his
own admission is not an expert on brickwork. Mr McNeally who is an expert
on brickwork
appeared to assess the brickwork on a very high almost abstract
standard and on his own admission made no allowance for the type
whether a project house or otherwise or the cost per square. In cross
examination although adhering to his view that the
standard brickwork was
generally unsatisfactory, he was unable to say whether or not it was reasonable
to demolish the whole of the
brickwork. He also conceded that save for his
criticisms of the quoining the other defects were only visible on close
examination.
I am of the view that in making his assessment he was applying a
standard much higher than the owner was entitled to expect in
the circumstances.
Mr Gallagher conceded that an allowance of $750 should be made for the
rebuilding of one brick pier and general
tidying up work around the windows on
the southern wall. He calculated that figure on the basis of two men for one
day. I believe
on the evidence that it is a realistic estimate. I also accept
that with care there should be no difficulty in matching the new
mortar with the
existing. I note that Mr Van Ravenstein in his second report changed his
view to some extent in relation to the
brick quoining details. He considered
the brickwork surrounding the front windows to the upper storey (right hand
side) and lower
storey of the bay windows should be removed and relaid so that a
half cream brick is projecting past the side window face. In my
Mr Van Ravenstein misinterpreted the contract and the variation requested
by Mr Burnell in relation to the quoining. He did
not at the time have the
opportunity to speak to any of the representatives from the Builder or view all
the documents. Accordingly
I do not accept the conclusion he came to that there
was at least by implication a contractual right to have all the quoining around
all the windows identical. I allow $750 for this item.
For the reasons set out above I allow $750 for poor brickwork.
Item 22 This item was accepted by the Builder that it is responsible for
levelling the south west corner of the block and an allowance
of $250 needs to
be made for this item.
Item 23 Repair damaged front fence. The fence is alleged to have been
damaged by a Gas and Fuel employee. However it appears the
the Builder has
accepted responsibility for it and I allow $250.
Item 24 Windows
The Builder concedes an obligation to clean up windows and an allowance of
$200 should be made for this item.
SUMMARY OF CLAIMS ALLOWED
Item 1. $10
Item 2. $40
Item 9. $10
Item 10. $1750
Item 14. $120
Item 16. $200
Item 19. $300
Item 21. $750
Item 22. $250
Item 23. $250
Item 24. $200
In my view the appropriate way to deal with the cross application is to set
it off against the Builder’s claim. Accordingly
the Builder is entitled
to recover from the Owners $20,744.32 plus $342 for windows that were removed
from the site by the Owners
less the sum of $3880. I have calculated interest
at 20% per annum on the net balance from the 14 April 1997 when the Owners went
into possession.
JUDGE DAVEY
CHAIRPERSON
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
g:\detch96\0321A-96.doc
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (83.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter