URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICmr/2025/80.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
'GB9' and Victorian Infrastructure Delivery Authority (Freedom of Information) [2025] VICmr 80; (24 June 2025)
Notice of Decision and Reasons for Decision
Victorian Infrastructure Delivery Authority
Decision date:
24 June 2025
Exemptions and provision considered:
Sections 28(1)(b), 28(1)(c), 30(1), 34(1)(b), 25
'GB9' and Victorian Infrastructure Delivery Authority
(Freedom of
Information)
[2025] VICmr 80
(24 June 2025)
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION – Melton train line – Melton Line Upgrade
Project – Melton Corridor Capacity Improvement
– Western Rail Plan
– environmental impact – sustainability – threatened
ecological communities, flora and
fauna – factual information –
public interest considerations
All references to legislation in this document are to the
Information Act 1982
) unless otherwise stated.
Notice of Decision
I have conducted a review under section 49F of the
Agency’s fresh decision to refuse access to documents requested by the
under the FOI Act.
My decision on the Applicant’s differs from the Agency’s decision
and more information is to be released.
The Schedule of Documents in
sets out my decision in
relation to each document.
Please refer to page 13 for information about review rights through the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (
My reasons for decision follow.
Penny Eastman
Public Access Deputy
Commissioner
24 June 2025
Reasons for Decision
Background to review
Applicant made a request to the Agency seeking access to the following
A copy of all reviews, reports, analysis and documents
relating to the environmental impact of increasing capacity to nine train cars
on the Melton line.
Where a discrete document does not exist, yet the information requested could
be generated in the form of a report, I request the
production of a document
pursuant to
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Please note that personal information of non-executive staff, such as names
and addresses, is not required. Accordingly, documents
can be edited to redact
such information.
Agency identified 30 documents falling within the terms of the Applicant’s
request and refused access to them in full under
section 30(1).
Agency’s decision letter sets out the reasons for its
Review application
Applicant sought review by the Information Commissioner, under
section 49A(1)
of the Agency’s decision to refuse access to Documents 3, 9, 12, 18, 20
permits an agency to make a fresh decision on an FOI request during a
review. On [date], the Agency made a fresh decision in relation
to the documents
subject to review. This is within the required 28 days under
Agency decided Documents 3, 9, 12 and 20 were out of scope of the review, and
that Document 18 is exempt under
and Document 23 is exempt under
sections 28(1)(b)
Applicant did not agree with the Agency’s fresh decision in relation to
Documents 3, 9, 12, 20 and 23. The Applicant does
not seek review of the
decision to exempt Document 18.
required by
section 49MA(2)
, I proceeded with my review of the fresh
have examined a copy of the documents subject to review.
Applicant and the Agency were invited to make a written submission under
in relation to the review.
have considered relevant communications and submissions received from the
undertaking my review, I have had regard to the object of the FOI Act, which is
to create a general right of access to information
in the possession of the
Government or other public bodies, limited only by exceptions and exemptions
necessary to protect essential
public interests, privacy and business
note Parliament’s intention the FOI Act must be interpreted so as to
further the object of the Act and any discretions conferred
by the Act must be
exercised, as far as possible, so as to facilitate and promote the disclosure of
information in a timely manner
and at the lowest reasonable cost.
Review of exemptions
Section 25 – Deletion of irrelevant information
I must determine whether Documents 3, 9, 12 and 20 are out of scope of the
request. The Agency initially determined those
documents in scope, and then
decided, in its fresh decision, that they were out of scope.
information is information which is clearly outside the scope, or beyond the
terms of the applicant’s request.
its submission, the Agency acknowledged the confusion caused by initially
identifying documents in scope only to later determine
they were not. This was
attributed to changes in Agency personnel.
decide if a document falls within the request, I must consider:
(a) The overall context in which the request is made, and appreciate that an
applicant cannot necessarily be expected to have an
intimate knowledge of the
subject matter of the documents they seek or the inner workings of
government.
(b) That in many instances, an applicant will not know the types of documents or
information held by an agency or Minister, or how
to describe the documents they
seek. This requires an agency and Minister to refrain from taking an artificial
or strained interpretation
of the words used in a request, and to interpret the
request beneficially when considering whether information is or is not
irrelevant.
(c) The object of the FOI Act is to extend, as far as possible, the right of the
community to access government information limited
only to necessary exceptions
and exemptions, and that the FOI Act is to be interpreted to further that
office provided an initial view to the Agency that Documents 3, 9 and 12 are in
scope of the request, whereas we agreed that Document
20 is out of scope as it
relates to a heritage rather than an environmental assessment.
response, the Agency maintained its view that Documents 3, 9 and 12 are out of
scope of the request. In summary, the Agency advises
that the three documents
relate to the Melton Corridor Capacity Improvement (
) which was a
component of the Western Rail Plan (
). The assessments undertaken in
Documents 3, 9 and 12 were not in relation to the Melton Line Upgrade Project
). The Agency argues that due to the age of the documents
(late [year]), and the timing of the request, being just after the announcement
of the Project, that the Applicant was specifically requesting documents
relating to the Project rather than any earlier documents
that fell within the
project was announced on [date] and the Applicant made their request [around a
month later].
their request for review of the fresh decision, the Applicant advised they
thought the Agency was incorrect in relation to the
terms of their request, and
that determining the documents irrelevant is not in line with the objectives of
the FOI Act.
have bolded the text that I consider I must closely examine to determine scope
in this matter as follows:
A copy of all reviews, reports, analysis
and documents relating to the
environmental impact
capacity to nine train cars on the
Melton line
Applicant’s request does not refer to a specific project.
documents are titled:
(a) Document 3 – Melton Corridor Capacity
Improvement, ‘MCCI ecology existing conditions assessment’, dated
(b) Document 9 – Melton Corridor Capacity Improvement,
‘Sustainability Management Plan Design Package – revision
(c) Document 12 – Melton Corridor Capacity Improvement, ‘Greenhouse
Gas Footprint register revision A’, [date].
the documents have been exempted in full, I note that, Documents 3 and 9 refer
to increasing capacity to nine train cars on
the Melton line, and contain some
form of environmental analysis.
acknowledge the timeframes referred to by the Agency; however, I consider the
documents fall within the terms of the request in
the spirit in which I am
required to interpret the FOI Act described above.
12 does not refer to increasing the capacity to nine trains on the Melton Line,
rather it refers only to the Melton Corridor
Capacity Improvement project. As
this is distinct from the Applicant’s request, I have decided it is not
relevant to the request.
20 does not relate to the environment, rather it refers to heritage. It is
therefore not relevant to the request.
I have decided Documents 3 and 9 fall within the terms of the request I have
considered whether they are exempt under section 30(1)
as set out below.
However, firstly I will examine whether Document 23 is exempt under sections
28(1)(b) or 28(1)(c).
Section 28(1) – Cabinet
more information about section 28 see the FOI
Guidelines.
28 is intended to ensure the Cabinet process remains confidential.
28(7)(a) defines ‘Cabinet’ as including a committee or sub-committee
of Cabinet.
28(1) does not apply to:
(a) a document that is more than 10 years old;
(b) a document that contains purely statistical, technical, or scientific
material, unless it would disclose any deliberation or
decision of Cabinet;
(c) a document by which a decision of the Cabinet was officially published.
Section 28(1)(b) – Document prepared for purpose of submission
for consideration by the Cabinet
28(1)(b) provides a document is exempt if it has been prepared by a Minister, or
on behalf of a Minister, or by an agency,
for the purpose of submitting it to
the Cabinet for the Cabinet’s consideration.
document must have been created for the sole, substantial or dominant purpose of
submission to the Cabinet for its
consideration.
there is more than one purpose of a document’s creation, it can be useful
to ask whether the document would have been created
but for the purpose of
submission for consideration by the
If the document would have
been created in any event, this may indicate the purpose of the document’s
creation was not for submission
for consideration by the
Consideration
by the Cabinet
document must be prepared for consideration by the Cabinet, not merely for the
purpose of placing it before the
‘Consideration’
means ‘a step in a deliberative
For example, a
matter which is likely to be discussed at a meeting of the Cabinet, or a matter
on which an actual decision of the
Cabinet must be
document ‘for information’ or voluminous ‘raw
information’ and ‘primary documents’ are not likely
directly considered in the Cabinet regardless of whether they are attached to a
Cabinet submission.
preliminary or preparatory document used to prepare a Cabinet submission, such
as a brief from one department to another to assist
in preparing a submission,
is not a document prepared for the purpose of submission to the Cabinet for the
Cabinet to consider.
a summary or executive summary of a report is submitted for consideration by the
Cabinet, both the summary and full report can
report prepared by an external consultant can be ‘prepared by an
agency’ and can be captured even if the consultant
did not know the
document would go to the Cabinet when
agency’s purpose in commissioning the external consultant to prepare the
document that is relevant.
the Cabinet specifically asks for a document to be prepared, the document will
be exempt from release.
its submission, in part, the Agency advised the document:
commissioned to inform advice in relation to Planning and Environment
requirements to be addressed in the Project Business
Case which, as stated
above, was itself required to be prepared in order to seek Cabinet’s
approval and release of the funding
necessary for the delivery of the
The complete document was also included in the supplementary reports register
in support of the Business Case, to be made available
upon request...
Agency also argues that
Stretton v Major Transport Infrastructure
supports the application of sections 28(1)(b) and 28(1)(c) to the document.
that decision, the member accepted sworn evidence that the document was prepared
with the intention of being submitted to Cabinet
as an annexure to a business
case, despite the fact that it did not end up being annexed to that business
case. Rather, some of the
research or information that appeared in the document
subject to review was included in the business case (though not quoted in the
business case directly). In my view the member determined the document exempt
under section 28(1)(b) due to the evidence regarding
the reason for the document
being prepared, rather than what it was used for following its creation.
Agency was provided with my initial view that section 28(1)(b) did not apply to
the document. In response, the Agency reiterated
its reliance on Stretton, and
also referred me to
Donnellan v Linking Melbourne Authority
which I have considered.
the information currently before me, I do not have sufficient information to
make the determination that Document 23 was prepared
for the purpose of
submission to Cabinet.
is because, unlike the decisions cited by the Agency, I do not have evidence
before me that the Agency officers that prepared
the document considered they
were preparing it for submission to Cabinet. Rather, the Agency describes the
document as one that was
prepared to ‘inform’ a business case, and
it was the business case that was prepared for submission to Cabinet for its
consideration.
have also considered that the content of the document refers to its creation as
part of a ‘proposed’ project, therefore
confirming its preparatory
status. I also note that elements of the project did ultimately happen, and I do
not consider the contents
of the document to be speculative or contentious.
my view, in this case, to consider such a preparatory document subject to
section 28(1)(b) would allow for its application to a
broad range of documents
prepared by government agencies prior to the preparation of a business case not
intended by the exemption
or intended by the objects of the FOI Act.
23 therefore does not squarely fall within the terms of section 28(1)(b) and it
is not exempt.
Section 28(1)(c) – A copy, draft or
extract from a Cabinet document
28(1)(c) exempts a document that is a copy or draft of, or contains extracts
from, a document referred to in sections 28(1)(a),
28(1)(b) or 28(1)(ba).
Agency claims the document is exempt under section 28(1)(c) because it is draft
of a document referred to in section 28(1)(b).
As I have decided section
28(1)(b) does not apply, section 28(1)(c) also does not
Section 30(1) – Internal working
Agency exempted Documents 3, 9 and 23 under section 30(1).
more information about section 30 see the FOI
Guidelines.
30(1) exempts documents that contain opinion, advice or recommendation, or
consultation or deliberation, where disclosure
would be contrary to the public
interest. A document is not exempt simply because it is an internal working
be exempt under section 30(1), three conditions must be satisfied:
(a) the document or information is matter in the nature of:
(i) opinion, advice or recommendation prepared by an agency officer or a
Minister; or
(ii) consultation or deliberation that has taken place between agency officers
or Ministers; and
(b) the matter was created during the deliberative process of an agency,
Minister, or the government’s functions; and
(c) disclosure of the matter would be contrary to the public interest.
is defined in section 5(1). It includes independent contractors, consultants and
legal advisers engaged by an agency to carry out
work or provide
Purely factual information – section
30(1) does not apply to purely factual
information.
information is information without any opinion or inference – it is
information that is objectively the same for any
individual.
examples of factual information include:
(a) statistics, data, times, or dates;
(b) backgrounds,
summaries or
chronologies of events. For example, recounting of facts as seen by individuals
during an investigation,
development of a policy, or file notes informing or recounting past events such
as a conversation with a
Information of this
nature does not cease to be factual simply because there might be some future
debate about its accuracy;
(c) actual financial expenditure, as opposed to financial advice based on
estimates and assumptions.
deliberative information is intertwined with factual information and cannot be
separated, that intertwined information is exempt
where its disclosure is
contrary to the public interest.
an agency or Minister must critically examine the information to ensure that the
intertwined information is truly inseparable.
In many instances it will be
practicable to sever the deliberative information from the factual information
by redacting a document.
Do the documents contain opinion, advice
or recommendation, or consultation or deliberation?
consider a substantial amount of information in the three documents to be purely
factual and therefore not exempt under section
30(1). However, I am also
satisfied the documents contain the opinion, advice and recommendations of
Agency officers.
Was the matter created during the deliberative
process of an agency, Minister, or the government’s functions?
am satisfied information in the documents (that is not purely factual) was
created during the deliberative processes of the Agency,
being documents
prepared to support transport infrastructure upgrades.
disclosure of the documents be contrary to the public interest?
deciding whether disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public
interest, I have given weight to the following relevant
(a) the right of every person to gain access to documents under the FOI Act;
(b) the sensitivity of the issues involved and the broader context of how the
documents were created;
(c) the stage of a decision or policy development at the time the communications
(d) whether disclosure of the documents would be likely to inhibit
communications between agency officers that are essential for
the agency to make
an informed and well-considered decision or for those officers to properly
participate in a process of the agency’s
functions (such as an audit or
investigation, regulatory or law enforcement function);
(e) whether disclosure of the documents would give merely a part explanation,
rather than a complete explanation, for the taking
of a particular decision or
the outcome of a process, but only where the agency would not otherwise be able
to explain upon disclosure
of the documents;
(f) the impact of disclosing documents in draft form, including disclosure not
clearly or accurately representing a final decision
by an agency or Minister;
(g) the likelihood that disclosure would inhibit the independence of officers,
including their ability to conduct proper research
and make detailed
submissions;
(h) the public interest in the community being better informed about an
agency’s deliberative, consultative and decision-making
(i) the public interest in government transparency and accountability by
enabling scrutiny or criticism of decisions and the decision-making
process and
building the community’s trust in government and its decision-making
(j) whether there is controversy or impropriety around the decision or the
decision-making process.
relation to this matter, I have also considered the following additional
(a) The draft nature of a document and whether a final version is available are
both relevant considerations. However, a document
will not be exempt under
section 30(1) only because it is in draft form, regardless of whether a final
document exists.
(b) The public interest factor that disclosure would ‘inhibit frankness
and candour’ can only be relied upon in very
limited situations and must
be supported by detailed evidence and reasoning as to why disclosure would be
contrary to the public
It takes more
than a mere assertion that an agency officer would be inhibited from providing
frank and candid advice to exempt a
document under section 30(1).
(c) An agency should also keep in mind the professional obligations to provide
robust and frank advice under the Code of Conduct
for Public Sector
(Responsiveness,
Integrity, Impartiality, Accountability and Leadership). The Code of Conduct
requires agency officers to maintain
accurate and reliable records, and to make
these records available when required. These obligations help to ensure that
‘implement government policy in an open and transparent
summary, the Agency submits disclosure would be contrary to the public interest
(a) the documents are preliminary;
(b) the precedent set in
Peter Ryan MP v Melbourne
applies in relation to
the technical aspects of the documents;
(c) the scope of the project works as described in the documents is no longer
considered accurate by the Agency and has been superseded
information;
(d) it is beyond the remit of the Agency to provide additional information to
explain differing information between the documents;
(e) disclosure would inhibit frankness and candour of Agency officers.
Agency also submits:
Projects such as the one subject to the FOI
request have significant impact on the lives of numerous Victorians. It is
that all options for proposed major infrastructure projects be
considered and explored to ensure a thorough and robust decision-making
is undertaken. If sensitive and preliminary information were to be released to
the public, then decision makers would be
reluctant to discuss and analyse
certain sensitive matters, for fear of unjustified public scrutiny, which would
weaken or undermine
the decision-making process. A decision making process that
is not thorough or robust, devoid of discussing or analysing preliminary
sensitive information, would ultimately be to the detriment of the public
note in its second submission, the Agency maintains its view that the documents
are exempt under section 30(1), as well as noting
that Document 23 is a draft
document for which a final version exists.
Agency, in maintaining its section 30(1) claims against the release of Document
3, also stated that it discloses sensitive and
confidential information about
the presence and location of protected matters under the
Environment
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
(Cth) including the
location of threatened ecological communities, flora and fauna.
Agency consulted with two business undertakings in accordance with
section 34(3)
in relation to the potential release of these documents. Both raised similar
concerns with one business undertaking specifically
advised against parts of
Document 3 being publicly released due to such sensitivities around that
information which is not publicly
am not satisfied disclosure of the documents would be contrary to the public
interest for the following reasons:
(a) The documents appear to be at or near their final versions. There is no
information before me that Document 23 departs significantly
from its final
version, or which parts of this document would, following the completion of the
final version, now be incorrect.
(b) While the documents may provide advice preliminary to a final government
decision, there is no information before me that they
are inaccurate or would be
misleading. Rather, they represent the view of the Agency at the time of their
creation. In my view, members
of the community are capable of understanding that
such projects are subject to change over time.
(c) I do not consider the documents are overly technical. Rather they explain
environmental assessments of nature and wildlife in
the context of legislative
requirements.
(d) While I note that environmental assessments can be sensitive is some
contexts, I do not consider the documents subject to this
review contain
sensitive information.
(e) Rather, the areas subject to the assessments for the most part would be
observable by the public.
(f) In any case, I consider the public interest to weigh heavily in favour of
disclosure of such assessments where their impact could
affect ongoing land
(g) I do not consider disclosure would inhibit the provision of similar advice
in the future, where agency officers, or contracted
service providers, are
required to provide accurate and robust advice to government.
have also carefully considered the additional concerns raised by the Agency (and
relevant business undertakings) as per the Agency’s
second submission
endangered flora and fauna. While I
agree that a small amount of information in
Document 3 is more sensitive, I am not satisfied disclosure would have an impact
survival or maintenance of the flora and fauna so described.
is because I do not consider the reasons for the Applicant’s request
reflect any indication they are seeking the documents
so as to destroy or have
any impact on those flora and fauna, and even though under the FOI Act I cannot
place any restrictions on
the further dissemination of such information I
consider the likelihood of such an impact to be very low.
also note that in other circumstances the location and status of endangered
species is well known.
am therefore satisfied the documents are not exempt under section
Section 34(1)(b) – Business, commercial or
financial information of an undertaking
document or information is exempt under section 34(1)(b) if three conditions are
(a) the document or information was acquired from a business, commercial, or
financial undertaking; and
(b) the information relates to matters of a business, commercial or financial
nature; and
(c) disclosure of the information is likely to expose the undertaking
unreasonably to disadvantage (based on matters listed in section
34(2) and any
other relevant
not applied by the Agency in its fresh decision, the Agency later advised that
it considered section 34(1)(b) would need to
be considered given the documents
contain the business, commercial or financial information of third parties.
deciding whether disclosure would expose an undertaking unreasonably to
disadvantage, an agency or Minister, if reasonably practicable,
must consult
with the business undertaking from which it acquired information.
reference to section 34(1)(b) specifically, both the consulted business
undertakings confirmed that they did not object to the
disclosure of the
documents on the basis that release of their business, commercial or financial
information would expose them to
unreasonable disadvantage but did object to the
disclosure of their staff’s personal affairs information, which the Agency
understands the Applicant has agreed to exclude from the scope of the FOI
request. Therefore, the Agency submits that this information,
where present in
the documents, should be deleted in accordance with section 25.
completeness, I therefore confirm section 34(1)(b) does not apply to the
Section 25 – Deletion of exempt or irrelevant
information
Applicant does not seek personal affairs information of non-executive Agency
officers. I note the persons named in the documents
are Agency officers for the
purposes of section 30(1). I have therefore concluded the Applicant is not
seeking this information.
I do not consider any of the named people to be at
executive level.
all names, emails addresses and any other contact details are irrelevant to the
have considered the effect of deleting this irrelevant information from the
documents. In my view, it is practicable for the Agency
to do this, because it
would not require substantial time and effort, and the edited documents would
retain meaning.
the information before me, I am not satisfied the documents are exempt under
sections 28(1)(b), 28(1)(c), 30(1) or 34(1)(b).
3, 9 and 23 are to be released in part with irrelevant information deleted in
accordance with section 25.
Timeframe to seek a review of my
either party to this review are not satisfied with my decision, they are
entitled to apply to VCAT for it to be
Applicant may apply to VCAT for a review up to 60 days from the date they are
given this Notice of Decision.
Agency may apply to VCAT for a review up to 14 days from the date it is given
this Notice of Decision.
Information
Alternatively, VCAT may be contacted by email at
admin@vcat.vic.gov.au or by
telephone on 1300 018 228.
Agency is required to notify the Information Commissioner in writing as soon as
practicable if either party applies to VCAT for
a review of my
this decision takes effect
decision does not take effect until the Agency’s 14 day review period
expires. If a review application is made to VCAT, my
decision will be subject to
determination.
Document No.
Date of document
Document Description
No. of pages
Agency Fresh Decision
OVIC Decision
OVIC Comments
Melton Corridor Capacity Improvement Rail Projects Victoria
Ecology Existing Conditions Assessment
Irrelevant – out of scope of the terms of the
Applicant’s request
Release in part
The document is to be released with irrelevant information
deleted in accordance with section 25.
The document is in scope of the request for the reasons described
Given the Agency applied section 30(1) to the document in its original
decision, I have also considered whether section 30(1) applies.
For the reasons described above, I do not consider section 30(1) applies to
the document.
As the Applicant is not seeking the personal affairs information in the
document, it is irrelevant under section 25.
Melton Corridor Capacity Improvement Rail Projects Victoria
-Sustainability Management Plan Design Package – Revision B
Irrelevant – out of scope of the terms of the
Applicant’s request
Release in part
The document is to be released with irrelevant information
deleted in accordance with section 25.
See comments for Document 3.
Melton Corridor Capacity Improvement Rail Projects Victoria
Greenhouse Gas Footprint Register Revision A
Irrelevant – out of scope of the terms of the
Applicant’s request
Refuse in full
The document is out of scope of the request for the reasons described
Melton Line Upgrade Level Crossing Removal Project
-Historical Desktop Assessment and Advice
Irrelevant – out of scope of the terms of the
Applicant’s request
Refuse in full
The document is out of scope of the request for the reasons described
Level Crossing Removal Project. Melton Line Upgrade Project
Business Case 000 Multiple sites Ecological Desktop Assessment Revision
Refused in full
Sections 28(1)(b), 28(1)(c), 30(1)
Release in part
The document is to be released with irrelevant information
deleted in accordance with section 25.
The document is not exempt under sections 28(1)(b), 28(1)(c) or 30(1) for
the reasons described above.
See comments for Document 3 regarding
section 25.
See comments of Deputy
President Lambrick in Country
Fire Authority v Rennie
(Review and
Regulation)
[2021] VCAT 492
, [74]. See also
AU8 and Major Transport
Infrastructure Authority (Freedom of Information)
[2019] VICmr
https://ovic.vic.gov.au/freedom-of-information/foi-guidelines/section-28/.
Mildenhall v Department of Premier and Cabinet
, 290 approved by
Ryan v Department of Infrastructure
[2004] VCAT
Herald & Weekly Times v Victorian Curriculum &
Assessment Authority
[2004] VCAT 924
Department of Treasury
and Finance v Dalla-Riva
[2007] VSCA 11
Davis v Major
Transport Infrastructure Authority
[2020] VCAT 965
v Department of Infrastructure
[2004] VCAT 2346
, [34]-[36];
v Major Transport Infrastructure Authority
[2020] VCAT 965
v Department of Premier Cabinet
[2002] VCAT 497
v Department of Infrastructure
[2004] VCAT 2346
, [36]–[40];
v Department of Premier Cabinet
[2002] VCAT 497
of Infrastructure v Asher
[2007] VSCA 272
, [37], [40],
v Department of Premier Cabinet
[2002] VCAT 497
, [28]-[29];
Owned Enterprise for Irrigation Modernisation in Northern Victoria v Manners
[2010] VSC 516
v Department of Sustainability and Environment
[2006] VCAT 1228
v Department of Premier and Cabinet
[2008] VCAT 450
v Department of Innovation, Industry and Regional Development
[2004] VCAT
v Department of Sustainability and Environment
[2006] VCAT 1228
[2022] VCAT
(Review and Regulation)
[2014] VCAT 1027.
https://ovic.vic.gov.au/freedom-of-information/foi-guidelines/section-30/.
Graze v Commissioner of State Revenue
[2013] VCAT 869
See example,
University of Melbourne
[2009] VCAT 782
See example,
v Department of Education and Training
[2022] VCAT 302
See example,
v Department of Education and Training
[2005] VCAT 2263
See example,
v Monash University
[2005] VCAT 2509
v Victoria Police
[2005] VCAT 962
v Department of Human Services [2002] VCAT 1768
v University of Melbourne
[2009] VCAT 782
https://ovic.vic.gov.au/freedom-of-information/foi-guidelines/section-30/#disclosure-would-be-contrary-to-the-public-interest.
See example where this ground was upheld in
v Department of Education and Training
[2021] VCAT 1244
https://www.vpsc.vic.gov.au/ethics-behaviours-culture/codes-of-conduct/code-of-conduct-for-victorian-public-sector-employees/.
Code of Conduct for Victorian Public Sector Employees, section 8:
“Demonstrating
Accountability”.
[2009] VCAT 2079.
The Applicant in section 50(1)(b) and the Agency in section
Sections 50(3F) and
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (371 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter