URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/70.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:47:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Smith v Harris [1996] VicRp 70; [1996] 2 VR 335 (8 March 1996)
SMITH v HARRIS
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA
6 February, 08 March 1996
This is, for the most part, a defamation proceeding brought by the plaintiff, the Honourable Ian Winton Smith, formerly Minister
for Finance and a member of Cabinet in the government of the State of Victoria against the first-named defendant, Cheryl Maxine Harris,
a woman with whom he allegedly had a relationship and who was employed by the State of Victoria as a member of his staff. It seems
that this relationship came to an end in circumstances of some acrimony, and on 30 May 1995 she commenced a proceeding against him
in the Magistrates' Court of Victoria at Melbourne. For this purpose she employed the services of the second to ninth defendants,
members of the firm of solicitors, Slater and Gordon. Following the commencement of that proceeding, the subject matter of the hostility
between Mr Smith and Ms Harris received a great deal of publicity as a result of which on 11 August 1995 Mr Smith commenced this
proceeding.
One of the defamatory publications alleged by Mr Smith is that referred to in para7 of the statement of claim. This paragraph is
in the following terms: On 30 May 1995 in Victoria Slater and Gordon acting on behalf of Harris and with her authority published
or caused to be published a copy of the Complaint to the Herald and Weekly Times Ltd and other members of the news media ("the publication
of the Complaint"). A copy of the complaint is annexed to the statement of claim as Annexure "A". In her defence Ms Harris alleges
that the publication was protected by
Wrongs Act 1958
and privileged at law as a faithful and accurate report of the Magistrates' Court proceeding. Her plea in para11 is in the following
terms: In further answer to para7, para8 and para9, insofar as and to the extent that it may be found that the Complaint was published
by or on behalf of or with the authority of the First Defendant of and concerning the Plaintiff and to be defamatory of him (which
is denied), such publication amounted to the publication of a faithful and accurate report of the Magistrates' Court Proceeding and
was privileged as such by reason of
Wrongs Act 1958
(Victoria) and at law.
For reasons which I set out in my judgment of 1 December 1995 I refused to strike out this defence. I did, however, accede to the
application of the plaintiff made by summons filed on 2 November 1995 to order that the issue raised by these pleas be determined
as a preliminary question. My order was in these terms:
(a) the following question be tried and determined before all other questions in this proceeding: - "Whether the matters alleged in
para7 of the Statement of Claim and para11 of the Harris Defence, if true, will as a matter of law give rise to qualified privilege
at common law for a report of a Court proceeding, or a Defence pursuant to the
Wrongs Act 1958
(b) the question be determined on the following facts only, which facts are assumed only for the purposes of the trial of the preliminary
issue to have been proved:
(i) On 30 May 1995 Slater and Gordon on behalf of Ms Harris and with her authority filed in the Magistrates' Court of Victoria at
Melbourne a complaint against the Plaintiff;
(ii) the complaint is wholly in writing and is the document Annexure A to the Statement of Claim and to this order;
(iii) the complaint comprises words which are of and concerning the Plaintiff and are defamatory of him;
(iv) On 30 May 1995 after filing the complaint Slater and Gordon on behalf of Ms Harris and with her authority published a copy of
the complaint to the Herald and Weekly Times Ltd and other members of the news media;
In the course of argument before me a fifth assumed fact was agreed between the parties:
(v) At the time of the publication referred to in para(iv) no step had been taken in the Magistrates' Court proceeding other than
the filing of the complaint.
It was common ground before me that the publication of a fair and accurate report of a proceeding in the Magistrates' Court is entitled
to qualified privileged at common law and that a faithful and accurate report of such proceedings is protected by
Wrongs Act 1958
. This section is in the following terms: No action or presentment shall be maintainable against any person for publishing a faithful
and accurate report of proceedings in any court of justice, or other legally constituted court or in any inquest under the
Coroners Act 1958
or investigation under the
Coroners Act 1985
: Provided always that it shall not be lawful to publish any matter of an obscene or blasphemous nature nor any proceedings in any
court which are not concluded and which the judge magistrate coroner or other presiding officer may pronounce it improper to publish
at their then stage.
No point before me was taken that there is any relevant distinction between a "fair and accurate" report and a "faithful and accurate"
report. On the facts assumed, Slater and Gordon on behalf of Ms Harris published a true copy of the complaint in its entirety to
the news media on 30 May 1995 after the complaint had been filed in the Magistrates' Court. The question for determination may therefore
be shortly stated. Is the publication of the content of a complaint simply filed in the Magistrates' Court a report of a court proceeding
within the meaning of the common law rule or
The trial of this proceeding will take place in due course. The plaintiff has opted for trial by jury. It is therefore necessary
to underline that I express no views on issues between the parties other than the legal issue which is now before me. The facts agreed
for present purposes include a fact that the words are defamatory of the plaintiff, a fact which is in issue at trial. Furthermore,
my discussion of the arguments presented on the preliminary question must assume that no other defence has been established. Other
defences are in fact raised in the pleadings. As will appear, in order to test the submission, I must see how the privilege would
operate in extreme circumstances. These are all matters which may not arise in this proceeding or matters which are in contest. Nothing
which follows, therefore, should be taken as an indication of how these disputed issues might ultimately be resolved. -
Not surprisingly, counsel for Ms Harris put as his primary submission that the publication in question was immune by reason of the
The acceptance of this submission would entitle him to present an argument that the publication is entitled to a type of immunity
which has been traditionally called absolute privilege. It was submitted that the expression "proceedings in any court of justice"
includes each and every step taken in such a proceeding including the initiating document, in this case the complaint with the particulars
of claim included. Against this, it was put on behalf of the plaintiff that the section protects only the reports of proceedings
in open court and, second, that the proceeding before this court is not an "action" so that the section in any event cannot apply
has a very long history. It first appeared as s5 of the Slander and Libel Act 1847 of the colony of New South Wales (11 Vic No 13)
in these terms:
(5) And be it enacted That no action indictment or information shall be maintainable against any newspaper or other publication for
a faithful and accurate report of any judicial proceedings the same not being of a preliminary nature Provided always that it shall
not be lawful for any newspaper or other periodical publication to publish any matter of an obscene or blasphemous nature nor any
judicial proceedings which may not be concluded and which the presiding Judge may pronounce it improper to publish at their then
stage. Following separation, the colony of Victoria passed the Libel Law Act 1856 (19 Vic No 4) which included the following s2:
II. That no action or information shall be maintainable against any person for publishing a faithful and accurate report of proceedings
in any court of justice court of petty sessions inquiry before a coroner or other legally constituted court Provided always that
it shall not be lawful to publish any matter of an obscene or blasphemous nature nor any proceedings in any court which may not be
concluded and which the judge magistrate coroner or other presiding officer may pronounce it improper to publish at their then stage.
This section became s3 in the Wrongs Act 1865 and thereafter it was included without substantial change in the successive consolidations
of 1890, 1915, 1929 and 1958. Four subsequent amendments have been made concerning the word "information" in the opening phrase and
concerning the courts or tribunals, reports of whose proceedings are the subject of the statutory protection, so that the section
assumed its present terms in 1993.
For present purposes, the significance of the fact that the expression "report of proceedings in any court of justice" has remained
unchanged for 100 years lies in the fact that it was in 1887 the subject of judicial attention. In Abbott v Coombs (1887) 13 VLR
917 at 920-21, Holroyd J, while expressing no decided opinion on the point and saying that, if necessary, he would have reserved
the question for the Full Court, was against a submission that the section was limited in its operation to proceedings in open court.
His Honour expressed himself in these terms: For myself I confess I can see no distinction between publication of proceedings in
open court and publication of a writ of summons. Publication of proceedings in open court as proceedings go on, and of ex parte proceedings
too - for that is allowed as well as those where there is a contest between the parties - may be far more injurious to a person's
credit than the publication of a writ of summons. In principle I cannot see any distinction between them. If the words of the Act
of Parliament are wide enough to -
include a writ of summons, I think it ought to be included. It is the commencement of an action; it is a proceeding in the action;
it is a proceeding which may be set aside for irregularity; it is a proceeding in a court of justice although it does not take place
in open court.
The expression in question was not changed in 1915 when the next consolidation was enacted so that it was put to me that his Honour's
observation had attracted legislative approval: see D'Emden v Pedder
[1904] HCA 1
(1904) 1 CLR 91
at 110, per Griffith CJ.
Next, it was submitted that I should have regard to the significant inclusion of the words "in public" in the expressions "report
of the proceedings in public of a court of the Commonwealth ..." in s3A(2) and "report of the proceedings in public of any person"
appointed to hold an enquiry in s3A(3) of the Wrongs Act. These provisions which were introduced in 1979 are to be contrasted with
the expression in question where the words "in public" are omitted. Having regard to the fact that s3A was enacted a very long time
after s4 first appeared, I doubt whether much can be made of the difference in verbiage.
It must be accepted, too, that the omission of the words "in public" in the Victorian
Wrongs Act 1958
is at variance to comparable contemporary statutes in other jurisdictions; in the UK, Defamation Act 1952 Sch para3, para5 (now repealed);
in New South Wales, Defamation Act 1958 s14(1)(d) (now repealed), and
Defamation Act 1974
Sch 2, para2; in Queensland, Defamation Act 1889 s13(1)(c); in South Australia,
Wrongs Act 1936
s6 (introduced in 1983); and in Tasmania, Defamation Act 1957 s13(1)(c). A notable exception to this unanimity of expression is the
Western Australian Newspapers Libel and Registration Act 1884 Amendment Act 1888 s6 to which I will return. It must be accepted,
however, that the value of comparisons such as these is limited in an area of law such as defamation where so much depends upon competing
policy interests. Furthermore, it is significant that the Victorian and Western Australian statutes date from the last century and
they should perhaps be understood in the light of things as they then stood.
S5 of the New South Wales Act of 1847 was not taken from any English statute. Indeed, it was not until 1888 that the English Parliament
enacted a comparable provision: Law of Libel Amendment Act 1888 s3. It is, however, very likely that the 1847 Act owes much to the
report of the select committee of the House of Lords on Defamation and Libel of 1843 most of whose recommendations were adopted in
New South Wales four years later, including the following:
"10. THAT no Action, Indictment, or Information shall be maintainable for a faithful Report of any Proceedings of Courts of Justice,
or before Magistrates acting in the Discharge of their Duty, or of any Proceedings in either House of Parliament at which Strangers
have been permitted to be present, provided that such Proceedings are not of such a Nature that a Report thereof would be contrary
to good Manners. ...
13. THAT pending the Trials of Indictments or Informations it shall be lawful fairly to publish the Proceedings on the said Trials
from Time to Time before the Conclusion thereof.
I am confident that in these recommendations, the select committee intended to refer only to what passed in open court. This conclusion
follows not only from the terms of report and the recommendations themselves but also because, at that time, there was no suggestion
that a wider immunity be granted. Litigation in those days was conducted in open court and this was seen as an essential feature
of the common law privilege conferred on reporters. In Lewis v Levy (1858) ELBL and EL 537;
[1858] EngR 785
Lord Campbell who, 15 years before, had presided over the proceedings of the select committee, was of opinion that in the case of
a magistrate's preliminary enquiry with respect to an indictable offence, a report is privileged when an enquiry is open to the public.
The cases at that time were grappling with such questions as to whether the report of an application in court made ex parte was protected:
Hoare v Silverlock
[1850] EngR 106
(1850) 9 CB 20
(denied); Duncan v Thwaites (1824) 3 B and C 556;
[1824] EngR 4
(denied); cf Curry v Walter (1796) 1 Bos. and Pul 525;
[1796] EngR 913
126 ER 1046
; Wason v Walter (1868) LR 4 QB 73; whether the report or a preliminary investigation before a magistrate was protected: Lewis v Levy
(1858) ELBL and EL 537;
[1858] EngR 785
; Duncan v Thwaites (1824) 3 B and C 556;
[1824] EngR 4
; cf Usill v Hales
(1878) 3 CPD 319
; Kimber v The Press Association Ltd [1893] 1 QB 65; whether the protection was given to a report of statements made before a tribunal
which lacked jurisdiction: Usill v Hales
(1878) 3 CPD 319
at 324, per Lord Coleridge CJ or before a magistrate otherwise than in the exercise of judicial functions: McGregor v Thwaites (1824)
3 B and C 24;
[1824] EngR 104
107 ER 643.
See too Starkie, A Treatise on the Law of Slander, 2nd ed, 1830, at 265-9. There is no mention in the report of the select committee,
or in the evidence given before it, of the privilege being available for reports of judicial proceedings conducted otherwise than
in open court. It is to my mind inconceivable that the New South Wales statute or the report on which it was based would have addressed
the problems which they did without very clearly indicating that a report of a statement made otherwise than in open court was to
enjoy immunity, if such was their intention. The terminology which they adopted, "Proceedings of Courts of Justice" and "any judicial
proceedings", clearly indicates an intention to deal with reports of judicial proceedings with which the drafters were familiar.
It will be recalled that the Western Australian Act of 1888 does not contain words stipulating that the proceedings the subject of
the report be public proceedings or that the court be open court. Notwithstanding this, in Gobbart v West Australian Newspapers
[1968] WAR 113
at 119, Jackson J held that the statutory immunity was available only to reports of proceedings in open court. Even more striking
is the position in New Zealand where, by s17 of the Defamation Act 1954, immunity is conferred on a fair and accurate report of:
the proceedings of any Court of justice in New Zealand, whether those proceedings are preliminary, interlocutory, or final, and whether
in open Court or not, or of the result of any such proceedings.
Notwithstanding the reference to "open court or not", in R Lucas and Son (Nelson Mail) Ltd v O'Brien [1978] 2 NZLR 289, the Court
of Appeal refused to construe this provision so as to provide protection to a report of the content of a statement of claim filed
in court but not used. Richmond P observed at 303: It may be arguable that the filing of a written statement of claim is a step in
a judicial proceeding but to my mind it is completely unarguable to describe it as a proceeding of a Court rather than of the person
who files the document in the office of the Court. Woodhouse J agreed with the judgment of the president. Somers J, also concurring,
said that the statutory immunity was not of a different nature to the analogous common law privilege nor was it given for different
S337 of the Civil Practice Act 1924 of the State of New York conferred a qualified immunity on a fair and true report of "any judicial,
legislative or other public and official proceedings". In Campbell v New York Evening Post Inc 245 -
NY 320 (1927) Pound J, speaking with the concurrence of five other judges of the appellate division, held that the publication of
the contents of a complaint filed in court and which was then abandoned was protected by the statute. In the course of his opinion,
Pound J described the old common law rule that conferred privilege only on reports of proceedings in open court as harsh, and the
distinctions which the rule had spawned as incongruous, frivolous and indefensible. His Honour, however, acknowledged that the common
law of England was different and he derived much support for his conclusion from the fact that the practice was widespread in New
York of newspapers publishing the content of accusations filed in court. The opinion of the court was that the filing of a pleading
was a "public and official act in the course of judicial proceedings" and thereafter protected.
This said, I return to the observations of Holroyd J in Abbott v Coombs (1887) 13 VLR 917 at 920-1 which I have set out above. His
Honour acknowledges that the view of all or a great majority of the judges at that time was that, at common law, the privilege was
restricted to reports of proceedings in open court. He then observes that greater harm might be done to a person's reputation by
what is said in court than by what is said in a writ of summons. There is, in his Honour's view, no distinction between them. It
seems to me, with respect, that there is a significant distinction between a writ of summons filed in the registry and the hearing
in open court and that this distinction touches the policy underlying the immunity in question. It is necessary to emphasise that
the immunity under consideration is absolute; it is available even to a malicious and unjustifiable statement harmful of a person's
character. It means that that person's right to a good reputation is subordinated to some other right. This other right is not the
right to litigate, for it has been beyond argument for centuries that defamatory statements made in the furtherance of litigation
are absolutely protected: R v Skinner
[1763] EngR 35
; (1772) Lofft 54;
R v Skinner (1772) Lofft 54 at 56;
[1763] EngR 35
at 530, per Lord Mansfield; Jamieson and Brugmans v R
[1993] HCA 48
(1993) 177 CLR 574
at 583 per Deane and Dawson JJ. The dominant right is that which says that the court's proceedings must be open to the public, so
that the public has confidence in their integrity. See Webb v Times Publishing Co Ltd [1960] 2 QB 535 at 559-62 where the reasons
for the analogous common law privilege are usefully summarised. A document prepared for, filed and even served is not in that sense
part of the court's proceedings, at least until it is deployed as part of the judicial process. A like distinction between documents
filed and served and documents deployed in court is observed with respect to discovered documents: Harman v Secretary of State for
the Home Department [1983] 1 AC 280, and witness statements: Fairfield-Mabey Ltd v Shell UK Ltd [1989] 1 All ER 576. This distinction
may be applicable, too, to affidavits which are filed in court and which may be never read or tendered. It may be that the parties
have compromised the proceeding before their use in court, perhaps in order that their private dealings contained in the pleadings
or other documents be not made public. What good purpose would then be served for them or for the public if some reporter were permitted
to broadcast these matters for the gratification of the curious public? Public interest is not to be equated with public curiosity:
Stephens v West Australian Newspapers Ltd
[1994] HCA 45
(1994) 182 CLR 211
at 242 per Brennan J (dissenting), at 261 per McHugh J. There is, too, the possibility that the document, even when deployed in court,
may be ordered to be confidential or some restraint may be imposed on it or, it may even be that the court may make an order that
the hearing at which the document is used be in closed court -
pursuant to the
Supreme Court Act 1986
or its equivalent in other jurisdictions. The publication of a filed document before the hearing would defeat the purpose of such
an order. I shall deal later with the common law privilege which may be available for publication of these documents as part of a
public record.
Holroyd J notes that a writ of summons is a "proceeding which may be set aside for irregularities". Doubtless, his Honour had in
mind the terminology of OLXX r1 of the recently passed Rules of Court 1881 which provided: Non-compliance with any of these Rules
or with any rule of practice for the time being in force shall not render any proceedings void unless the Court or a Judge shall
so direct, but such proceedings may be set aside either wholly or in part as irregular, or amended or otherwise dealt with in such
manner and upon such terms as the Court or Judge shall think fit.
The fact that such a step is taken upon application to the court or judge highlights the distinction between preparing a document
and filing it in court and deploying it in court which is, I think, relevant. It is that when a statement is made or a document used
in court this is done under the supervision of the judge who is able in the appropriate case to take steps to prevent or minimise
unnecessary harm caused by any publication of the proceeding. The same power is not available to the court staff who must accept
a document offered for filing provided the appropriate fee is paid and the document complies with the rules. It is true that the
prothonotary in the Supreme Court may refuse to seal an originating process where it would, if sealed, be irregular or an abuse of
the process of the court: r27.06, but such a power is extremely limited and is not available for other documents. Compare r27.07.
There appears to be no comparable discretion in the registrar of the Magistrates' Court. As Lord Campbell LC observed in Davison
v Duncan (1857) 7 EL and BL 229;
[1857] EngR 160
119 ER 1233
Davison v Duncan (1857) 7 EL and BL 229 at 231;
[1857] EngR 160
119 ER 1233
at 1233, the presence of the controlling authority of the judge in court is an important and salutary filter on the publicity which
may at tend the hearing. Where the law, for good reason, gives to one person the right to injure another's reputation, even with
malice, it ought to ensure that the exercise of that right is limited so that it does not go beyond what that good reason demands.
It is difficult, if not impossible, for the court to discharge this responsibility otherwise than at the hearing which will, of course,
normally be in public.
Next it was submitted that, even if the drafters of the 1847 New South Wales Act had in mind a public hearing, changing times have
led to proceedings which are now less oral than in those days. That, of course, is true. Modern courts concerned with the great cost
of hearings have devised and implemented procedures to shorten them where possible. Much of what used to be given orally to the court
in the presence of the public and the press is now given in writing or even electronically. Accordingly, it is said that the considerations
which led to an immunity for reports of what passed orally should lead to a like immunity for what is given otherwise. Again, I find
this argument irresistible. Moreover, in such a context, this may give rise to difficult questions as to whether the document has
been deployed in court in a manner which warrants that its content be available for immune publication and whether, and to what extent,
the text of the document itself, as opposed to what was spoken of it and from it, may be published: see Harman v Secretary of State
for the Home Department [1983] 1 AC 280; Cunningham v The Scotsman Publications Ltd
[1986] ScotCS CSOH_1
1987 SLT 698.
This submission does not, however, take Ms Harris to the conclusion she would have me accept. What is contended for on her behalf
is not that the content of the -
documents deployed by parties or otherwise used by the court in determining proceedings in court should be available for immune publication,
but that documents filed in court and not yet so used should be so available. In my opinion the intent of the section under consideration,
as it may apply in modern litigation, does not demand that the statutory immunity be extended beyond documents used at a hearing
conducted in public.
This conclusion is reinforced by the fact that it avoids or minimises the possibility of an abuse of the immunity. In evidence before
the 1843 select committee the case was put of an unscrupulous litigant who may bring an application without prospect of success and
for the express purpose of injuring the character of the defendant. It was put that great harm would be caused if, on such an application,
extravagant and slanderous things were said in court and the application inevitably failed or was withdrawn before the defendant
had a chance to respond. In such a case, certain witnesses opined, the great injustice to the defendant might be minimised by reserving
to the judge a power to protect publication until the proceeding was completed. This solution, which was described by the New York
Court as "indefensible": Campbell v New York Evening Post Inc
(1927) at 328, per Pound J, was adopted in the 1847 New South Wales legislation and has been retained in
Wrongs Act 1958
. The risk of a comparable abuse was much pressed before me by counsel for Mr Smith. It was said that an unscrupulous and malicious
person might create a situation permitting immune publication of slanderous statements merely by filing in court a document containing
them, as was in fact done in Campbell's case. I was reminded that Ms Harris was contending for a statutory immunity which was absolute;
not dependant upon bona fides or lack of malice. With respect, I adopt the words of the Canadian judge, Duff J, spoken in 1909 in
the context of the analogous common law privilege: "It is, I think, obviously undesirable that, by the simple expedient of commencing
an action and filing a claim, anybody should be able to secure to himself the protection of the law in the dissemination of the most
outrageous libel": Gazette Printing Co v Shallow (1909) 41 SCR 339 at 364. While it may be supposed that legal practitioners would
not lend their names to such an abuse, it was said that a litigant in person might not be so restrained and that, in any event, a
litigant might deceive the legal practitioner in order to achieve this malicious objective. Such considerations dispose me to conclude
that the statute should be construed narrowly as counsel for the plaintiff urged.
I conclude therefore that as a matter of construction
has no application to a report of the content of an initiating process merely filed in the Magistrates' Court.
It is not therefore necessary for me to determine the second submission put on behalf of Mr Smith, that the section has no application
to civil proceedings in the Magistrates' Court, or, indeed, the County Court or this court following the legislative changes of the
late 1980s. Nevertheless, in deference to the submissions put and in the event that this matter may go further, I shall venture my
views upon it.
One of the changes made by the
Supreme Court Act 1986
and Ch I of the rules of 1986 was to characterise all civil proceedings in this court whether commenced by writ or originating motion
or as otherwise provided by or under any Act or the rules as "a proceeding": r1.13. Under
Supreme Court Act 1986
"proceeding" is defined to mean "any matter in the Court other than a criminal proceeding". Previously, the generic term for proceedings
court was "action" which was defined in s3 of the
Supreme Court Act 1958
to mean "a civil proceeding commenced by writ or in such other manner as prescribed by Rules of Court, and does not include a criminal
proceeding by the Crown". It was put that, with the disappearance of actions in these provisions,
had nothing to fasten on.
To my mind, the submission is ill-founded. The fact that the 1986 statutory regime ceases to use "action" as a term to describe civil
proceedings does not mean that the word has been stripped of meaning in another statue or in ordinary parlance. "Action" is not defined
except in PtIV. Where the word is used as in s6 and s
(libel proceedings),
(action of seduction),
(action for the benefit of dependants),
(damage by aircraft), it should be given some meaning. Whether this may be its popular meaning of civil proceeding commenced by writ
(cf R v Day
[1985] VicRp 20
[1985] VR 251
at 266, per Gobbo J) or its more general technical meaning, as to which see Bradlaugh v Clarke (1883) 8 App Cas 354, is of no present
consequence. The proceeding before this court is an action however that expression may be understood.
COMMON LAW QUALIFIED PRIVILEGE
There are two separate and independent bases for the common law privilege contended for. The first is that which relies on the public
interest that proceedings in court be conducted in public so that a publication of a fair and accurate report of such proceedings
is entitled to qualified privilege. The second depends upon the right of access which the public enjoys to documents on a court file.
Where the public has this right of access, it is said, the publication of this information is entitled to the protection of qualified
PUBLICITY FOR COURT PROCEEDINGS
Much of what I have written of the statutory immunity conferred by the
, as to its historical background and its policy, bears upon this aspect of the common law privilege. A significant difference, however,
is that the privilege here is qualified.
It is clear that the privilege is available for reports of proceedings conducted in open court. In Kimber v The Press Association,
Ltd [1893] 1 QB 65 at 68, Lord Esher MR stated the common law in terms which have commanded general acceptance: The rule of law is
that, where there are judicial proceedings before a properly constituted judicial tribunal exercising its jurisdiction in open Court,
then the publication, without malice, of a fair and accurate report of what takes place before that tribunal is privileged. The case
before the Court of Appeal concerned the publication of a report of an ex parte application for a summons for perjury. The application
was heard by the justices at the Guildhall, Canterbury sitting, as was their custom, in the council chamber. No order to exclude
the public had been made so that, whether or not the members of the public availed themselves of the right, they were entitled to
be present. Since the publication was not that of a newspaper, the Law of Libel Amendment Act 1888 s3 had no application; the case
concerned common law privilege only. It was put to me on behalf of Ms Harris that this case, properly understood, does not stand
as authority for the proposition that there is a requirement that the judicial proceeding be held in open court. I reject this analysis.
It is clear from the argument as reported and from the judgments that this requirement was seen as critical. In the passage of the
judgment of Holroyd J. -
in Abbott v Coombs (1887) 13 VLR 917 at 920-21, which I have already quoted, it is apparent that his Honour was of the like opinion:
see also Gobbart v West Australian Newspapers
[1968] WAR 113
at 119, per Jackson J; R Lucas and Son (Nelson Mail) Ltd v O'Brien [1978] 2 NZLR 289 at 298 per Richmond P (Woodhouse J concurring),
at 310, per Somers J; Cunningham v The Scotsman Publications Ltd
[1986] ScotCS CSOH_1
1987 SLT 698.
The standard texts are to the same effect: Butterworths, Australian Defamation Law and Practice, 1991, looseleaf, [15,015]; Gatley
on Libel and Slander, 8th ed, 1981, para624; Duncan and Neill on Defamation, 2nd ed, 1983, para13.25-para16.26; Clerk and Lindsell
on Torts, 15th ed, 1982, Sweet and Maxwell, para20-para133.
The precise point presently before the court, as to whether the common law privilege is available to a document filed in court but
not deployed in a judicial proceeding has also been the subject of judicial consideration in various common law jurisdictions, the
overwhelming preponderance of which has been against the existence of the privilege: in Western Australia: Gobbart v West Australian
[1968] WAR 113
; in Scotland: Richardson v Wilson (1879) 7 R 237; Macleod v Gunn (1892) 20 R 218; Cunningham v The Scotsman Publications Ltd
[1986] ScotCS CSOH_1
1987 SLT 698
; in New Zealand: Campbell v Kennedy (1884) LR 3 SC 8; R Lucas and Son (Nelson Mail) Ltd v O'Brien [1978] 2 NZLR 289; and in South
Africa: Transvaal Chronicle v Roberts
[1915] TPD 188.
I was referred to a number of United States cases on this question, but I did not find them of assistance. There, the question is
complicated by the constitutional protection given to free speech. See AE Cohen, "Access to pretrial documents under the First Amendment"
(1984) 84 Col LR 1813.
Furthermore, such cases as Asay v Hallmark Cards Inc
[1979] USCA8 131
594 F (2d) 692
(1979) and Green Acres Trust v London
688 P (2d) 617
(1984) make it clear that the common law in those jurisdictions is different from that accepted in this country.
In Canada, the 1909 decision of the Supreme Court, Gazette Printing Co v Shallow (1909) 41 SCR 339, until recently represented an
authoritative statement of the law on the point. The court emphatically rejected a claim to privilege for documents merely filed
in court. In 1982 the Canadian Charter of Rights established certain fundamental freedoms including "freedom of thought, belief,
opinion and expression, including freedom of the press and other media of communication": s2(b). It has been held that the provisions
of the Charter do not confer any right of immunity beyond that accorded by the Law of Defamation: see Theophanous v The Herald and
Weekly Times Ltd
[1994] HCA 46
(1994) 182 CLR 104
at 130 and the cases referred to in n 87. Nevertheless, in Edmonton Journal v Attorney-General (Alberta) [1989] 2 SCR 1326, a case
concerning the constitutional validity of a statute limiting access to court records in matrimonial proceedings, Cory J, speaking
for the majority of the court, explained the importance of the ancient principle that courts must be open to public scrutiny and
that this was associated with freedom of speech, a right protected by the Charter. His Lordship said that it was important that,
absent some good reason to the contrary, information in court documents should be available and the press should be able to report
on this for the information of the public. This case serves as a backdrop to a very recent decision of the Supreme Court whose facts,
as it turned out, are close to those assumed before me.
In Hill v Church of Scientology of Toronto [1995] 2 SCR 1130, the plaintiff, Hill, was in 1984 engaged as counsel by the Crown Law
Office of Ontario. He gave certain advice which led to the seizure in March 1983 under warrant of a large number of Scientology documents.
Vigorous litigation between the church -
and the province ensued over some months culminating in a decision on 17 September 1984 by the church to serve a notice of motion
for contempt of court on the plaintiff. Under Ontario Procedure, the notice is served on the respondent and then filed. At 4.00 pm
on the same day, before the notice of motion had been served, Manning, who was counsel for the church and who was wearing his barrister's
gown, and a representative of the church conducted a press conference in which they informed the media about the contempt proceedings
and distributed copies of the notice of motion. This information was published on television the same evening. The information was
untrue and in due course a jury awarded the plaintiff $300,000 general damages, $500,000 aggravated damages and $800,000 punitive
damages. The Ontario Court of Appeal denied common law qualified privilege to the publication on the short point that no proceeding
had been instituted at the time of publication: Hill v Church of Scientology of Toronto (1994) 114 DLR (4) 1;
18 OR (3d) 385
Hill v Church of Scientology of Toronto (1994) 114 DLR (4) 1 at 40-1;
18 OR (3d) 385
at 427-8. It may be said, therefore, that this case sheds little light on the matter before the court. The majority of the Supreme
Court, however, was not troubled by this fact, and addressed the broader question of the privilege available to a person publishing
the content of a document effectively filed in court. Cory J, again speaking for the majority, harked back to his judgment in Edmonton
Journal v Attorney-General (Alberta) [1989] 2 SCR 1326 at 1333-40, noting that "public scrutiny of our courts by the press was fundamentally
important in our democratic society and that s2(b) [of the Charter] protected not only speakers, but listeners as well". His Lordship
continued: This right to report on court proceedings extended to pleadings and court documents filed before trial, since access to
these documents served the same societal needs as reporting on trials. Even in private actions, such as those for wrongful dismissal
or for personal damages, the public may well have an interest in knowing the kinds of submissions which can be put forward.
Having regard to changing societal standards and to legislation which granted greater access to court documents, the privilege which
had been considered and rejected for reports of those documents in Gazette Printing Co v Shallow (1909) 41 SCR 339, was modified.
The court held that qualified privilege was available therefore to the publication of the notice of motion by Manning notwithstanding
that this publication anticipated its filing by one day. His Lordship's reference to societal needs calls up the following passage
in the article by AR Cohen "Access to pretrial documents under the First Amendment"
(1984) 84 Col LR 1813
, to which I have referred. At 1827 Cohen makes the following observation in the context of the United States position: Access to
pretrial documents furthers the same societal needs served by open trials and pretrial civil and criminal proceedings. Court officials
can be better evaluated when their actions are seen by informed, rather than merely curious, spectators. An open courtroom demonstrates
with certainty only that a judge is not sleeping, or drunk, or overtly racist, and that counsel is not appealing to prejudice. The
availability of documents means that graft and ignorance will be more difficult to conceal. The argument in Richmond Newspapers Inc
[1980] USSC 154
(1980) that public understanding of the judicial process improves through the access right is necessarily strengthened the earlier
in the process the right triggers and the more detail is available to public and press. Confidence in the judicial system as a whole
is elevated by the ability of reporters and citizens to examine the early pleadings and discovery in a case, -
and to see from the beginning what issues are raised. Keeping the great majority of pretrial documents accessible assures the public
that what is said in court truly reflects the questions at hand.
If I may respectfully say so, I find it difficult to understand how an awareness of allegations made in pleadings or of the content
of discovery permits the public to evaluate the work of court officials or contributes to a public understanding of the judicial
process. It is, however, sufficient that I note, as did his Lordship in the Edmonton Journal v Attorney-General (Alberta) [1989]
2 SCR 1326 Edmonton Journal case [1989] 2 SCR 1326 at 1339, that the law of England differs in this area from that of Canada. The
decision in the Gazette Printing Co v Shallow (1909) 41 SCR 339 Shallows case in my opinion represents the common law of England
today and, I venture to say, that of Australia.
Such judicial statements as are in favour of privilege in the circumstances before this court have relied upon the right to publish
the content of a public record: Abbott v Coombs (1887) 13 VLR 917; Little v Law Institute of Victoria (No 3)
[1990] VicRp 25
[1990] VR 257.
I shall return later to this, the alternative basis for the claim to common law qualified privilege.
The decisions adverse to the privilege have, for the most part, involved a consideration of the bounds of the principle that it is
essential that the judicial process be conducted in the public arena; that judicial hearings be conducted in open court. A number
of reasons have been given for this, each raising a policy whose importance is said to be greater than the interest of the person
defamed. For present purposes, the significant reasons underlying the privilege in question are the need for those who administer
justice to do so, in the public eye, under a sense of public responsibility. Citizens should be able to satisfy themselves by observation
as to the mode in which this public duty is performed. The justification, then, for the privilege for publishers is that it is for
the public benefit that citizens who cannot be in court to witness the judicial process may be accurately informed as to what took
place: see R Lucas and Son (Nelson Mail) Ltd v O'Brien [1978] 2 NZLR 289 at 299, per Richmond P. This objective is not advanced by
publishing documents which may or may not be used in the court process, and which, in any event, have not yet been so used. I have
already mentioned that affidavits, witness statements and discovered documents may not be used in the proceeding or may be the subject
of confidentiality orders. In the case of pleadings, they may be amended, struck out or simply never used in the judicial process:
Gazette Printing Co v Shallow (1909) 41 SCR 339 at 360, per Duff J. The argument which would extend privilege to these documents
confuses the subject matter of the judicial process with the judicial process itself. Publicity properly attaches to the latter not
to the former unless and until the subject matter bears upon an understanding of the judicial process.
In Gaskell and Chambers, Ltd v Hudson, Dodsworth and Co [1936] 2 KB 595, the plaintiff sued the defendant for slander of goods. One
Hudson, an employee of the defendant, circulated to its customers a letter critical of the proceeding and enclosing a copy of the
statement of claim. The plaintiff sought his attachment for contempt of court. It was argued for the plaintiff that the mere publication
of the pleading constituted a contempt. I was referred to this case for an observation of Goddard LJ at 603-4 that: ... the Court
will not allow its process to be made the vehicle of a libel upon other persons, and that if the litigant uses the process as a means
of disseminating a libel, the Court will not put the injured person to the expense and delay of bringing an action to remedy the
injury, but will, if asked to do so, interfere in a summary way by treating it as a contempt of Court to use its process as a means
of disseminating libels. -
It was submitted, and I accept, that underlying his Lordship's words, is a rejection of the proposition that the libel so disseminated
would be protected by common law privilege. The case is of interest, too, for present purposes in that the court rejected as a general
proposition that the mere publication of a pleading amounts to contempt. Whether it does or not must depend upon whether the publication
would interfere with the fair trial of a proceeding on foot, a conclusion which is not lightly reached. See also Victoria v Australian
Building Construction Employees' and Builders Labourers' Federation
[1982] HCA 31
(1982) 152 CLR 25
at 60, per Gibbs CJ, at 99 per Mason J; Hinch v Attorney-General (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15.
Notwithstanding this, our judicial system has consistently set its face very firmly against what used to be called "trial by newspaper":
John Fairfax and Sons Pty Ltd v McRae
[1955] HCA 12
(1955) 93 CLR 351
at 370, and more recently "trial by media": National Mutual Life Association of Australasia Ltd v General Television Corporation
[1989] VicRp 66
[1989] VR 747
at 765, per Fullagar, Hampel and McDonald JJ; Attorney-General (NSW) v TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 368
at 384, per Gleeson CJ, Kirby P, Priestley JA. These cases, and many like them, were proceedings for contempt of court where the
court was concerned with publications which were said to carry a real and substantial risk of serious prejudice to the fair trial
of a proceeding. The question of principle here before the court is a different one and it may be said that the requirements that
the report be fair and accurate and that the publication be without malice will suffice to protect the relevant interests. I think
not. The contest in a contempt case is between the twin public policies that require that the judicial process be open to public
scrutiny and that there should be freedom of expression, on the one hand, and that policy which is directed to protecting the judicial
process and those involved in it from extraneous pressure or irrelevant material, on the other: Attorney-General v Times Newspaper
("The Distillers Case")
[1974] AC 273.
In defamation proceedings such as the present, the conflict is between those same twin policies, on the one hand, and that which
protects the reputation of an individual who is involved in litigation, whether as a litigant or not, from injury by slander. It
is important for present purposes, that the policy competing with the right to reputation is not one which contemplates that the
public interest is served by debating in public the merits of issues which are destined to be argued and decided in the court. This
resistance to the removal of litigants' disputes into the public arena renders it less probable that the law would lightly confer
a privilege upon those who publish in the public arena documents filed in court for the purposes of the litigation. If this were
not so, pleaders and those responsible for preparing other documents for the court in litigation which has some publicity value would
have to consider the impact of the document and its content not only on the litigation but also on the public debate which may at
tend its publication. The dangers of this may be seen in the facts of Hill v Church of Scientology of Toronto [1995] 2 SCR 1130 to
which I have referred.
I conclude therefore that no common law qualified privilege based on the public interest in court proceedings is available to the
publisher of the content of a document which has been filed in court but not used in the judicial process.
RIGHT OF ACCESS TO PUBLIC DOCUMENTS
When the matter was before me last year on the plaintiff's pleading summons it was put that the terms of para11 of the Harris defence
were not such as would support this common law qualified privilege. It is not a privilege for a report of the court proceeding; it
is a privilege for a report of -
the content of a public record. This point was not taken on the trial of the preliminary question, each party presenting an argument
upon the existence of the privilege. Accordingly, I shall put aside any doubts which I may entertain as to the sufficiency of the
It was submitted on behalf of Ms Harris that the publication to the media of the complaint was subject to qualified privilege as
a report of the contents of a public document available for public inspection: Searles v Scarlett [1892] 2 QB 56.
In Little v Law Institute of Victoria (No 3)
[1990] VicRp 25
[1990] VR 257
, the plaintiff's action was for damages for causes of action including malicious use of civil proceedings. The plaintiff appealed
to the Full Court against an order that his proceeding be stayed as an abuse of process. In the course of allowing the appeal in
part, the court was required to consider the plaintiff's plea that he had been injured in his credit, character and reputation by
reason of the malicious suit. In two cases, the English Court of Appeal had rejected this as an appropriate head of damage: Quartz
Hill Consolidated Gold Mining Co v Eyre
(1883) 11 QBD 674
; Wiffen v Bailey and Romford Urban District Council [1915] 1 KB 600. The basis for this rejection was said to be the fact that a
malicious action could cause no such injury because the damage caused to a defendant by the attendant publicity would be assuaged
by the finding of innocence at the trial - "the poison and the antidote are presented simultaneously". The Full Court unanimously
concluded in favour of Little that, in modern civil litigation, a person might suffer injury to reputation as a result of the malicious
civil proceeding, so that the plea was permitted to stand. Ormiston J subjected the two Court of Appeal cases to a careful scrutiny.
Relevantly for present purposes, his Honour observed that, at the time those cases were decided, little if any publicity might be
expected to at tend civil litigation before trial. This was for a number of reasons. First, the pleadings, affidavits and the like
whose contents might be the subject of publicity were not readily available for inspection by the public by reason of the filing
system which was then used for court documents. Secondly, the then prevailing view was that the mere publication before trial of
pleadings, affidavits and other documents constituted a contempt of court, a view which was not rejected until 1936 in Gaskell and
Chambers, Ltd v Hudson, Dodsworth and Co [1936] 2 KB 595, to which I have referred. The third reason, which is of interest for present
purposes, was the then prevailing perception that the publication of slanderous material brought to light in judicial proceedings
was protected by qualified privilege only if it was published as a report of a proceeding in open court, that is at trial. His Honour
then went on to doubt whether this was an accurate statement of the present common law privilege. It is clear from the context that
his Honour had in mind the greater availability of documents on the modern court files so that the publisher might invoke the qualified
privilege attaching to the content of the public records referred to in Searles v Scarlett [1892] 2 QB 56. Having expressed the doubts
to which I have referred, Ormiston J in Little v Law Institute of Victoria (No 3)
[1990] VicRp 25
[1990] VR 257
at 288 said this: Whether or not it be correct, the practice in this State would appear to accord more closely with the following
proposition in Clerk and Lindsell on Torts, 15th ed, para20-para133: "The privilege extends to copies of the records of a court which
are open to the public and relate to judicial proceedings." Certainly the provision of r28.05 of the Supreme Court Rules would support
the contention that most filed documents are -
now available for public inspection, although it does not necessarily follow that their contents may be freely published or still
at tract the qualified privilege.
Counsel for Mr Smith sought to distinguish Little's case. It was submitted that, whatever may be the public availability of documents
filed in the Supreme Court and the effect of this on the privilege claimed by a publisher, the position was different in the Magistrates'
Court. Unlike the Supreme Court, the Magistrates' Court maintains a register of all orders of the court and of certain other matters:
Magistrates' Court Act 1989
The registrar, in addition, keeps a file containing the original process issued out of the court and of other documents filed:
The Act gives to a party to a proceeding the right to inspect that part of the register which relates to that proceeding: s18(4).
The right of access of the public is contained in s18(3): Any person may, subject to any order made under s126 and on payment of
the prescribed fee, inspect that part of the register that contains the final orders of the Court.
There is no other right conferred by statute or rule to inspect documents filed in the Magistrates' Court or any record of its proceeding.
The register, then, plays a role similar to that of the cause books or the Chancery registrar's books in the High Court of Justice
in the last century as described by Ormiston J in Little v Law Institute of Victoria (No 3)
[1990] VicRp 25
[1990] VR 257
Little's case
[1990] VicRp 25
[1990] VR 257
at 284. So far as documents retained by the registrar are concerned, it was submitted that the lack of public right of access meant
a corresponding lack of any privilege for publication of their contents.
On behalf of the first defendant, Ms Harris, counsel sought to meet this argument by submitting that, at common law, all members
of the public have a right to inspect court files unless the right is delimited by some statute or rule. In support of this proposition
reliance was placed on judicial statements to the effect that courts must operate in public and be open to public scrutiny. Hill
v Church of Scientology of Toronto [1995] 2 SCR 1130 provides an example of this. Contrary statements such as those of Williams J
in Campbell v Kennedy (1884) LR 3 SC 8 at 11-12 and Richmond P and in R Lucas and Son (Nelson Mail) v O'Brien [1978] 2 NZLR 289 at
307 were said to be inconsistent with this general principle and should not be acted upon. I find myself altogether unable to accept
this submission. For reasons which I have set out above, I consider that the policy which demands that the judicial process be open
to public scrutiny does not demand that the subject matter of that process be available except in so far as this is necessary for
the public to scrutinise the process itself. I am unable to put aside the opinions of the New Zealand judges to which I have been
referred. In short, I am of opinion that the documents retained in the registry of the Magistrates' Court are not public documents
available for public inspection. Accordingly, the foundation for the claimed privilege does not exist. It is therefore unnecessary
for me to consider whether any and if so what documents filed in the Supreme Court are public documents available for public inspection,
as to which, see Re a Former Officer of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
[1987] VicRp 70
[1987] VR 875
at 878, per Brooking J. Nor is it necessary for me to consider whether, and in what circumstances, a report of the content of a document
filed in the Supreme Court might not be entitled to qualified privilege notwithstanding that it be a public document available for
public inspection, as to which see Gobbart v West Australian Newspapers
[1968] WAR 113
at 120, per Jackson J; Little v Law Institute of Victoria (No 3)
[1990] VicRp 25
[1990] VR 257
at 288, per Ormiston J; Hill v Church of Scientology of Toronto [1995] 2 SCR 1130 per L'Heureux-Dube J (dissenting). -
I conclude therefore that the matters alleged in para7 of the statement of claim and para11 of the Harris defence, if true, do not
give rise to qualified privilege at common law for a report of a court proceeding or a defence pursuant to the
Wrongs Act 1958
Question answered accordingly.
Solicitors for the plaintiff: Deacons Graham and James.
Solicitors for the first defendant: Howie and Maher.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter