URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VDBT/1997/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:29:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Metricon v Burnell [1997] VDBT 25 (10 October 1997)
THE DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(DOMESTIC BUILDING CONTRACTS AND TRIBUNAL ACT 1995)
- DETERMINATION -
METRICON HOMES PTY LTD
MR ROBERT & MRS JANICE BURNELL
MR ROBERT & MRS JANICE BURNELL
HOUSING GUARANTEE FUND LTD.
(A.C.N. 006 258 233)
FIRST CROSS
METRICON HOMES PTY LTD
SECOND CROSS
PRESIDING MEMBER:
HIS HONOUR JUDGE DAVEY
FORM OF APPLICATION:
Original Application
APPEARANCES:
Mr. Schwarz of Counsel for the Applicant/Second Cross
Mr Samargis of Counsel on behalf of the Respondent/Cross Applicant
DATE(S) OF HEARING:
22 September 1997
DATE OF DETERMINATION:
10 October 1997
I MAKE THE FOLLOWING RULING:
1. The Respondent/Cross Applicant pay the costs of the Applicant/ Second
Cross Respondent on Scale D of the County Court Costs Scale.
2. The costs of the Applicant/Second Cross Respondent be assessed by the Law
Institute Taxing Service on Scale D of the County Court
Costs for incorporation
in a final determination by the Tribunal.
JUDGE DAVEY
CHAIRPERSON
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
AHE DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(DOMESTIC BUILDING CONTRACTS AND TRIBUNAL ACT 1995)
- DETERMINATION -
METRICON HOMES PTY LTD
MR ROBERT & MRS JANICE BURNELL
MR ROBERT & MRS JANICE BURNELL
HOUSING GUARANTEE FUND LTD.
(A.C.N. 006 258 233)
FIRST CROSS
METRICON HOMES PTY LTD
SECOND CROSS
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
In 7 August 1997 I published the reasons for my determination in these
proceedings and reserved the question of costs in relation
to the proceedings as
between Metricon Pty Ltd ("the builder") and Mr and Mrs Burnell ("the owners").
At that time I ordered costs
in favour of HGFL against the owners to be assessed
on Scale D of the County Court Scale. Those costs are to be assessed by the
Institute Costing Service. I have now heard submissions from Mr Schwarz of
Counsel on behalf of the builder and Mr Samargis
of Counsel on behalf of the
In this case the builder succeeded in its application and was awarded
$21,147.27 including interest and on the cross application the
owners succeeded
to the extent of $3,880. The owners’ claim related to defective and
incomplete work. Such a claim maybe
treated either as an equitable set off or
as a counter claim. (
see P. Galambos & Son Pty Ltd v McIntyre
5ACTR 10). Having regard to the provisions of s93 of the Act the way that the
owners’ claim is treated may not affect
the ultimate costs order.
Mr Schwarz submitted that the builder should be awarded all indemnity costs.
He supported this submission on alternative bases.
His submissions may be
summarised as follows:
(a) The builder made three offers of settlement pursuant to s103 of the Act
those offers were made by letter and facsimile and dated
respectively 29 August
1996, 15 October 1996 and 9 April 1997. The first offer was served by certified
mail and a signature was
obtained on the receipt, which was admitted to be the
signature of Mrs Burnell. The other two offers were made by pre-paid ordinary
post and by facsimile to a fax number at Deakin University where Mr Burnell was
employed as a lecturer. Mr Schwarz submitted that
each of those offers came to
the notice of the Burnells and I should be satisfied they were properly served.
He also submitted that
each of those offers were more favourable to the owners
than the result ultimately achieved and on that basis his client was entitled
all the costs that it had incurred in conducting the proceeding after the offer
(b) His alternative submission was that Mr Burnell’s conduct was
such as to attract the operation of s92 of the Act and pursuant
provisions or in accordance with the Tribunal’s general costs discretion I
should award costs against the owners on
an indemnity basis. He also submitted
that costs could be awarded on this basis under the wide discretion given to the
by section 93.
Settlement Offers
Division 6 of the Act headed "Settlement Offers" sets out the pre-conditions
that must be satisfied in order for a settlement offer
to be effective.
Section 103(1) provides as follows:-
"(1) This section applies if-
(a) a party to a proceeding gives another party to the proceeding an offer in
writing to settle the matters in dispute between the
parties; and
(b) the other party did not accept the offer within the time that the offer
was open; and
(c) the offer complies with this Division; and
(d) in the opinion of the Tribunal, the decision of the Tribunal on the
matters in dispute is not more favourable to the other party
Submissions were made by both Mr Schwarz and Mr Samargis on behalf of the
owners in respect to subsections (1)(a), (1)(c) and (1)(d).
The only matter
that was not in contention was that none of the offers were accepted by the
owners within the time that the offer
One question which was raised in relation to whether or not the form of the
offer in each case complied with the Division arose in
relation to s103(3) which
provides as follows:
"If proceedings involve more than 2 parties, this section only applies if the
acceptance of the offer would have resulted in the settlement
of the matters in
dispute between all the parties."
In this case in respect to Application 856/96 HGFL was a party but it was not
included in any of the settlement offers. Accordingly
it was argued that the
offers would not necessarily have resulted in the settlement of the matters in
dispute between all the parties.
Because of the view I have taken of this
matter it is not necessary for me to finally decide this question. As the cross
application
was only issued on 21 December 1996 it can only effect offers after
that date. Accordingly it only applies to the offer dated 9
April 1997. It is
possible and even likely that HGFL may have desired to continue the proceeding
so as to ensure that its costs
were recovered. It is difficult therefore to say
that the offer would necessarily have resulted in the settlement of the matters
in dispute between
the parties. Accordingly it is at least strongly
arguable that the acceptance of the last offer may not have resulted in the
of the matters in dispute between all the parties. On that view the
last offer would in any event have been ineffective.
The other matter that causes me considerable concern is whether or not the
builder complied with the obligation to "give" to the owners
an offer in writing
to settle. The term "give" or "gives" is nowhere defined in the legislation. I
note that the expression "give"
or "gives" is used in a number of other Acts
relating to Tribunals. For example s64 of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
refers to "notices to be served on or given to a person" that section
only deals with service of a decision on the decision maker
circumstances do not arise where the question of proper service is likely to be
a contentious issue. That section uses
both the words served and given. There
is a presumption of statutory interpretation that words will not be used
unnecessarily.
Accordingly it may be that in the AAT Act those words are used
with different meanings. The Small Claims Tribunal Act 1973 in s37
provides as
"Where by this Act the Registrar is required to cause any notice or copy
order to be given to any person the notice may be sent by
post as prescribed to
his last known place of abode or business then the notice so sent shall be
deemed to be sufficient service."
In that case the meaning of given is defined in the section. The
and Tenant Act 1958
also provides for any notice "required by this Part
to be given or served upon any person" and then goes on to specify the means
whereby such notice maybe given or served including delivering it to any person,
leaving it at his usual last place of abode or by
sending it by registered mail.
The Guardianship and Administration Board Act 1986 has similar provisions and
s71 provides for notices
to be given personally unless otherwise ordered. The
Credit Act 1984
Credit (Administration) Act 1984
both have similar
provisions for service and refer to given or served and thereafter specifically
provide for the method of service.
Not only does the present legislation fail
to specify or attempt to define in any way what is meant by given but s104(3)
both refer to an offer being served. In my view it is likely that it
was intended that the words given or served be used interchangeably.
add that no assistance is gained from the Interpretation of
Legislation Act
makes reference to service by post but only in the context of Acts
which expressly authorise service by this method.
treats the expressions
"give", "send" or "deliver" as interchangeable expressions. Although I would
have thought that the expression
"give" may have a narrower meaning than "serve"
for present purposes it probably makes no difference.
Because each of the service provisions in the above referred to legislation
appear in a somewhat different context and with one exception
in a context where
what is permissible service is specified in the section I have obtained little
assistance from the above review
except in a rather negative sense. In that it
would appear by specifying forms of service such as by post or by leaving it at
persons last known place of abode the legislature is giving the expressions
"gives" or "serves" an extended meaning. In
re Poyser and Mills
Arbitration
(1963) 2 QB 407
Megan J was required to consider the meaning of
the words "given to or served". He expressed the view that unless service was
in accordance with one of the methods specified in the section then
either actual delivery or an acknowledgment of service was required.
In my view in the absence of any words in the Act specifying the method of
service the word "gives" where used in s103 of the Act
requires personal service
or in the absence of personal service at least an acknowledgment by the
recipient of receipt. On that
basis the acknowledgment by Mrs Burnell of
receipt is sufficient evidence of service. However the second and third offers
were transmitted
by facsimile and by ordinary prepaid mail. Mr Burnell has
given sworn evidence the neither the facsimiles nor the letters came to
notice. Accordingly there is no acknowledgment of service. Even if I were not
to accept Mr Burnell’s evidence or at least
to take the view that I could
not accept his evidence that does not provide positive evidence of service. In
any event the service
by facsimile was to a fax number which according to Mr
Burnell was shared by up to 100 users at the University. The possibility
fax sent to such a location not reaching the proper party may well be
considerable.
I have examined each of the offers in order to determine whether or not the
decision of the Tribunal on the matters in dispute is
not more favourable to the
other party than the offer as follows.
Offer No. 1 (29 August 1996)
This is an offer by the builder to accept $19,850 in settlement of its claim
and the cross claim I am satisfied that the decision
was more favourable to the
owners than the offer. On 29 August the net interest component of the
builder’s claim would have
been $1260 and accordingly at that time the
builder would only have been entitled to receive $18,124.22 after allowing for
the owner’s
set off. Accordingly the owners were better off with the
determination.
Offer No. 2 (15 October 1996)
The offer in this case was to accept the sum of $18,500. The interest
calculated to the date of the offer is $1867.70 that is $9.20
per day over a 184
days making a total interest component of $1692.80 which when added to the net
sum payable to the builder of $16864.22
would mean that at that point of time
the builder’s entitlement would have been $18,557.02. In this case it
would appear that
the owner would have been better off to have accepted the
offer than to have contested the claim and accordingly if the other requirements
of s103(1) had been complied with the offer of settlement would have been an
effective offer.
Offer No 3 (9 April 1997)
In this offer the builder offered to accept $12500, party costs and the costs
of $3154.90 awarded by the Tribunal on 4 April 1997.
In this case I am also
satisfied that the decision of the Tribunal was not more favourable than the
For the reasons I have given I am not satisfied that the second and third
offers were properly served nor am I satisfied that the
third offer would have
necessarily have resulted in the settlement of the matters in dispute between
the parties. Accordingly for
the purposes of assessing costs I put all the
offers of settlement to one side.
I turn now to the alternative submission made by Mr Schwarz. In my opinion
s92 is directed more towards ensuring in the event of
additional costs are
incurred as a result of the other parties conduct then that party may be ordered
to pay those additional costs.
It does not appear to me to be directed towards
ordering the total costs of the proceeding be assessed on a particular basis as
has been submitted. Section 92(2)(a) of the section is in the following
"the Tribunal may do one or more of the following:-
(a) order that the party causing the disadvantage compensate the other party
for any costs incurred unnecessarily; or...."
In addition I am conscious of the fact that the owners were partially
successful on their cross application. As I noted in my reasons
I thought the
conduct of Mr Burnell was such as to increase the costs incurred by the builder
and indeed the total costs of conducting
the proceeding. I am not of the view
that Mr Burnell’s behaviour justifies costs on an indemnity costs
Mr Schwarz also sought to rely upon a decision of the Victorian Full Court in
Rival Nominees Proprietary Limited v Said Davis Constructions Proprietary
(unreported, delivered 26th June 1981). That case concerned an
appeal from a costs order made by an arbitrator where a builder’s
for the balance due under a contract was successful but so was part of a cross
claim by the owner for defective or incomplete
work. The award of costs in
favour of the builder was upheld. As I propose to award costs in favour of the
builder this decision
would not in any event effect my decision. However, I
take this opportunity to observe that in my opinion the Tribunal is not
constrained
by the authorities such as
Berbette Pty Ltd v Hansa
[1976] VicRp 35
Leighton Contractors Ltd v Western Australian Government
Railways Commission
[1966] HCA 58
(1996) 115 CLR 575.
S93(3) of the Act provides
"(3) Nothing in this section implies that a party to a proceeding is entitled
to an order for costs merely because the party was the
successful party in the
proceeding."
In my view the clear intent of this section is to displace the "established
principle" and to give the Tribunal a very wide discretion
in awarding
Having regard to the view I have taken in this matter I propose to award
costs in favour of the builder. Although I have given serious
consideration to
awarding costs on an indemnity basis I have come to the conclusion that in all
the circumstances costs shall be
assessed on Scale "D" of the County Court
Scale. I direct that the builder submit a bill of costs to the Law Institute
Taxing Service
for assessment who shall act as an expert in
making the assessment. When assessed I shall incorporate the costs as
assessed in a final determination.
JUDGE DAVEY
CHAIRPERSON
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
g:\detch96\0321B-96.doc
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (43.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter