URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/vic/VicSAC/2022/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:23:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Reforming Sentence Deferrals in Victoria: Consultation Paper [2022] VicSAC 8; (11 October 2022)
Reforming Sentence Deferrals in Victoria: Consultation Paper
Sentencing Advisory Council, October 2022
Contributors
Felicity Stewart, Paul McGorrery, Paul Schollum, Anna Chalton
Research assistant:
Michaella Schwartzshetin
Sentencing Advisory Council
Arie Freiberg AM
Deputy-Chair:
Lisa Ward, Council Directors, Carmel Arthur OAM, Fiona
Dowsley, Helen Fatouros, David Grace AM QC, Anoushka Jeronimus, Brendan Kissane
QC, Dan Nicholson, Susanna Quinn, Wendy Steendam
Acting Chief Executive Officer:
Paul McGorrery
Acknowledgments
The Council would like to thank the many people who
took the time to share their experiences with us in preparing this consultation
paper, including those who participated in our survey. Our thanks are also
extended to Court Services Victoria for providing the
data used in this
Chair’s foreword
An ongoing challenge in
criminal justice policy is how best to tackle the root causes of criminal
behaviour. We know that sentencing
alone cannot do this, particularly where the
causes are deeply entrenched, complex and often interrelated, such as mental
impairment,
addiction, and childhood or intergenerational trauma. The best way
to protect the community from criminal behaviour is to address
these issues
directly through preventive measures, such as adequate housing and properly
funded social welfare systems. But for those
people who do offend, it is
essential that sentencing courts have a suite of options that can be tailored to
the circumstances that
contributed to the person’s offending.
Sentence deferral is a useful tool available to courts in Victoria. It allows
courts to postpone sentencing for a brief period, no
more than a year, for a
variety of reasons. It can allow an offender to participate in a behaviour
change program to show that they
have the capacity to change. It can allow the
offender to be assessed by health professionals so that the court is fully
of any underlying mental or other health concerns. It can even be used
to allow restorative justice processes to occur between offenders
For whatever reason a sentence is deferred, by the end of the deferral period
sentencing courts are invariably better able to assess
the offender’s
prospects of rehabilitation and the ongoing risk that the offender poses to the
community. In turn, courts are
better able to craft an appropriate sentence for
that offender.
When sentence deferrals were first introduced to adult courts in Victoria in
2000, they were designed to ‘allow courts to intervene
at an early
stage’ and assist ‘offenders on their road to recovery’.
Rehabilitation is, after all, the most effective
means of long-term community
protection. Originally, however, there were a number of limitations about when
deferrals were available.
They were initially limited to the Magistrates’
Court, to young adult offenders aged 17 to 25, and were for a maximum period
six months. Following recommendations from this Council, sentence deferrals were
extended to the County Court in 2012, the age
restriction was removed, and the
maximum period was extended to 12 months.
It has been 10 years since those changes were made, an opportune time to
reflect on how sentence deferrals are operating in Victoria.
opportunities to increase or improve their use? To better understand
contemporary issues with sentence deferrals, we began
by meeting with senior
representatives of 14 key organisations, and we conducted a survey of legal
practitioners and judicial officers.
As ever, we are grateful to everyone who
took time out of their busy schedules to meet with us and share their invaluable
In this consultation paper we raise 14 questions about potential issues and
possible reforms on which we welcome feedback. Given the
rehabilitative advantages of sentence deferrals, this is an opportunity for the
justice system to be more effective in
reducing recidivism, and therefore reduce
the human and financial costs associated with criminal offending.
Emeritus Professor Arie Freiberg AM
Chair, Sentencing Advisory Council
Call for submissions
The Sentencing Advisory
Council is seeking submissions on the questions posed in this consultation
The deadline for submissions is
Friday 2 December 2022
The Council intends to use submissions, and the results of consultations, to
make recommendations about the use of sentence deferral
in Victoria. The Council
welcomes submissions from stakeholders in the legal profession as well as from
the broader community, including
victims of crime and their representatives.
When making a submission, please identify how you would like your submission
to be treated, based on the following three categories:
submission:
the Council may publish, refer to and/or quote directly from the
submission and name the source of the submission in relevant publications.
submission:
the Council may publish, refer to and/or quote directly from the
submission but will not identify the source of the submission in
publications.
Confidential
submission:
the Council will not refer to or quote from the submission. The
submission will not be published or provided to any third parties.
Confidential
submissions will only be used to inform the Council generally in its
deliberations.
The Council reserves the right not to use or publish
any submission that it considers may be defamatory, sensitive or offensive.
To make a submission, please email contact@sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au.
Consultation questions
Question 1: Supreme Court
sentence deferrals be available in the Supreme Court? If so, why? If not, why
Question 2: Barriers to use
What, if any, are the current barriers to using
sentence deferrals in appropriate cases? What changes would you propose to
those barriers, and why?
Question 3: Eligibility criteria
Are there any issues with the current criteria and
considerations courts must take into account before ordering a sentence
In answering this question, you may want to consider:
deciding whether to order a deferral should be required to consider the
interests or views of any victims, and/or the interests
of justice; and
whether section
83A should specify that a court may order deferral even if it considers that the
seriousness of the offence justifies
a prison sentence.
Question 4: Marginalised groups
Are there reforms that could be made to sentence
deferrals that could reduce the disproportionate effect of the criminal justice
on marginalised groups? If so, what reforms would you propose, and
Question 5: Purposes of deferral
Should the current legislative purposes of sentence
deferral in
section 83A(1A)
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be amended?
If so, what changes would you recommend, and why?
Question 6: Length of deferral
Should there be any changes to the maximum length of
12 months for sentence deferral in the Magistrates’ Court and/or in the
County Court? If so, what changes would you propose, and why?
Question 7: Deferral conditions
section 83A
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be amended to allow conditions to be attached to deferral orders? If so,
why? If not, why not? In answering this question,
you may wish to consider
whether compliance with deferral conditions should be prohibited from being made
a condition of bail.
Question 8: Judicial monitoring
Is there scope to increase or improve the use of
judicial monitoring during sentence deferrals? If so, how?
Question 9: Justice plans
Should justice plans be made available as a condition
of sentence deferral? If so, why? If not, why not?
Question 10: Programs and services
Are there any improvements that could be made to the
availability of support services and programs for people whose sentence has been
deferred? If so, what do you propose, and why?
Question 11: Deferral plans
Should offenders receive a written deferral plan
outlining what they have agreed to do during the deferral period, and the
consequences of not engaging positively with those requirements?
Question 12: Sentence after deferral
Should courts be expressly permitted or required to
tell the offender the sentence that they can expect if they successfully engage
with the deferral? If so, why? If not, why not?
Question 13: Deferrals and totality
To what extent should the requirements imposed on an
offender during a sentence deferral be taken into account at sentencing?
Question 14: Prioritising rehabilitation
If an offender has engaged positively with the
conditions of their deferral, should rehabilitation become the primary purpose
of sentencing?
Introduction
Sentencing Advisory Council was established in 2004 as an independent statutory
The functions of the
Council are set out in legislation and include providing statistical information
on sentencing, conducting research
on sentencing and, most relevantly for this
project, consulting with key stakeholders and the general community on
sentencing matters,
and advising the Attorney-General on sentencing
1.2 The aim of
this project is to consult with key stakeholders and the general community about
the current use of sentence deferrals
in Victoria, identify opportunities for
reform and provide advice to the Attorney-General. The project will examine the
legal framework,
the use of sentence deferral, and the available supports, to
consider how to maximise the effectiveness of the deferral process.
What is sentence deferral?
deferral is a
pre-sentence
option available in the Magistrates’
Court and County Court under
section 83A
Sentencing Act
(Vic) (‘the
It allows a court
to postpone (‘defer’) an offender’s sentence after they have
been found guilty of an offence.
The most common reason for deferring a
person’s sentence is to give them an opportunity to demonstrate their
willingness and
rehabilitate.
Deferring sentence
can also be for other reasons, such as enabling a restorative justice process to
occur between the victim and
the offender in appropriate
The offender must agree to
the deferral, and the deferral must be in the offender’s
deferral first became available in the Children’s Court in
and in the Magistrates’
Court in 2000.
Prior to these
legislative deferral schemes, courts had a common law power to adjourn a
criminal matter and order the offender to
agree to be of good behaviour –
a ‘Griffiths bond’.
deferrals were originally only available for offenders aged 17 to 25 in the
Magistrates’ Court, legislation came into
effect in 2012 –
implementing recommendations of this
– that removed the
age restriction and also expanded the availability of deferrals to the County
This will be the first
dedicated review of sentence deferral in Victoria since its 2012 expansion.
Figure 1: Timeline of legislative deferral schemes in
Children’s Court
Deferral up to 4 months
Magistrates’ Court
Deferral up to 6 months for offenders aged 17 to 25
Magistrates’ Court and County Court
Deferral up to 12 months for all offenders, legislative purposes
Other pre-sentence options
are other ways that a court can give the offender time before they are sentenced
to address factors that contributed to
their offending. For example, a court
the offender to the Court Integrated Services Program
the case to the Assessment and Referral Court
the case to the Koori Court for a sentencing
conversation.
also have a general power to adjourn a criminal proceeding to any time and
place, for any purpose, and on any terms that the
court considers
appropriate.
adjournment can be made for a variety of reasons, such as allowing an
unrepresented accused to seek legal representation,
it can also be used as an
‘informal deferral’.
consideration of
section 83A
sentence deferrals must occur in the context of
these other pre-sentence options, each of which gives courts a useful tool to
an appropriate sentence.
Scope of this project
project primarily focuses on sentence deferrals under
section 83A
Sentencing Act
, in particular asking:
Are there any
issues with the legislative framework for deferrals?
Are there any
issues with how deferrals operate in practice?
Are there any
issues with the systems and services that support deferrals?
relevant, the programs and other orders that often operate alongside sentence
deferrals – such as CISP and ARC –
are also mentioned, but their
operation is beyond the scope of this project.
Human rights considerations
a public statutory authority, the Council is required, ‘in making a
decision ... to give proper consideration to a relevant
human right’. In
developing its recommendations, the Council will have regard to the
of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
(Vic), including the right to
(section 8)
; the right to legal assistance
(section 25)
; the right not
to be punished in a cruel, inhuman or degrading way
(section 10)
; and the right
to humane treatment when deprived of liberty
Five phases of the project
are five phases to this project:
Preliminary
consultation:
meet with stakeholders to identify the key issues relating to
sentence deferrals (December 2021–February 2022).
survey judicial officers and criminal law practitioners about their perceptions
of sentence deferrals (February–March 2022).
on issues and options for reform:
publish this consultation paper and invite
written submissions on the questions raised (October–November 2022).
on issues and draft recommendations:
host a series of roundtable
consultation meetings to seek views on the issues raised in this paper and
options for reform, and draft
recommendations (early 2023).
deliver a final report with recommendations to the Attorney-General,
and then publish the report on the Council’s website (mid-2023).
Method and data
consultation paper analyses section 83A sentence deferrals in Victoria in the
nine years from 2012 to 2020. It includes
CourtLink data on the use of deferrals
in the Victorian Magistrates’ Court; however, reliability issues mean that
is both limited and caveated. A total of 3,507 cases were recorded in
CourtLink as being sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court
following a
deferral (‘deferral cases’). While this is a reliable sample,
recording limitations mean that some (possibly
many) deferral cases would not
have been captured in the data. Further, CourtLink does not capture informal
deferrals. Therefore,
the number of deferrals should be treated as a minimum
count, with the actual number likely to be higher.
consultation paper also includes the results of a survey of judicial officers
and legal practitioners about the use of sentence
deferrals and, using the
Council’s reoffending database, an analysis of the reoffending patterns of
people who received a sentence
1.15 A more
detailed methodology is set out in Appendix
of sentence deferrals
2.1 Using the
limited data that is available, this chapter examines the use of sentence
deferrals in Victoria, the age and gender
of people whose sentence was deferred,
and the offence types in deferral cases. It then explores some practical issues
that may be
limiting the use of deferral and possible improvements to overcome
Sentence deferrals in the Magistrates’ Court
to data limitations (see [2.25]), data on the use of sentence deferrals in
Victoria should be treated as a minimum estimate.
While there were no apparent
false positives in the data (all recorded deferrals seemed to be accurately
recorded), there may be
some, or even many, false negatives (where deferrals
occurred but were not recorded).
that caveat in mind, there was a deferral in at least 0.4% of sentenced cases in
the Magistrates’ Court between 2012 and
or at least one in every
250 cases. The use of sentence deferrals seems to have increased markedly since
the 2012 reforms (see [1.5]),
from at least 85 a year to 753 in 2019 (Figure 2).
The drop in 2020 was most likely due to the effect of COVID-19 on court
operations.
Figure 2: Number of cases sentenced in the
Magistrates’ Court after a recorded sentence deferral, 2012 to
Number of cases
Rural and regional use of deferral in the Magistrates’
on the available data, 75% of cases with recorded deferrals between 2012 and
2020 were sentenced in the greater Melbourne
area with the remainder sentenced
in rural and regional Victoria (25%). This is almost identical to the
distribution of sentenced
cases overall, with 74% of sentenced cases sentenced
in the greater Melbourne area and 26% of cases sentenced in rural and regional
Victoria. If the deferral cases accurately reflect deferral use across Victoria,
this finding suggests that the use of deferral across
Victoria is largely
proportional to the total number of cases finalised.
2012 to 2020, 19% of deferral cases involved a female offender (682 of the 3,505
deferral cases where data on gender was recorded).
Again, noting the data
limitations, if this represents the proportion of men and women receiving
deferrals, it could suggest that
sentence deferrals are slightly less common for
women than for men, as women accounted for 22% of all sentenced offenders in
same period.
suggest that there is a need to better utilise sentence deferrals in cases
involving women, especially given that women
are more likely than men to
experience certain vulnerabilities that make sentence deferral a useful order
(see [4.19]–[4.22]).
Alternatively, this could, to an extent, reflect that
women (for a variety of reasons) have a lower imprisonment rate than men
such that there are fewer
‘borderline imprisonment’ cases (see [3.11]–[3.13]), which
stakeholders suggested are
a common situation in which deferral is currently
median age of offenders with a recorded deferral was 31. One in three deferral
recipients were aged 18 to 25 at sentencing (33%).
This is higher than the
proportion of people aged 18 to 25 in the general sentenced adult population
As Roberts has argued,
this may reflect courts’ recognition that young adults in particular may
benefit from sentence deferral:
they are still developing, which improves their
prospects of rehabilitation, and are often experiencing rapidly evolving life
circumstances.
2.7 Deferral was
certainly not limited to young adult offenders, however, with 42% of recipients
aged 26 to 39 and 25% of recipients
aged 40 and over.
Offence type
most common principal proven
recorded deferral, by far, was assault and injury offences (32%) (Figure 3).
This may in part reflect the use
of rehabilitation programs for violent
offending, such as men’s behaviour change programs in family violence
cases, and anger
management courses. A deferral would allow the offender time to
participate in those programs before sentencing. Similarly, the relatively
rate of drug offences (9% of deferral cases) is most likely representative of
courts deferring sentence for those offenders
to participate in substance abuse
Figure 3: Principal proven offence type in deferral
cases, Magistrates’ Court, 2012 to 2020
Principal proven offence type
Public order offences (ANZSOC 13)
Robbery offences (ANZSOC 6)
Sex offences (ANZSOC 3)
Property damage offences (ANZSOC 12)
Harassment and threat offences (ANZSOC 5)
Fraud offences (ANZSOC 9)
Burglary offences (ANZSOC 7)
Weapons offences (ANZSOC 11)
Endangerment offences (ANZSOC 4)
Traffic/vehicle offences (ANZSOC 14)
Justice offences (ANZSOC 15)
Drug offences (ANZSOC 10)
Theft offences (ANZSOC 8)
Assault and injury offences (ANZSOC 2)
2.9 There were
some notable gender differences in offence types. Although the most common
offence type for both men and women was
assault and injury offences, the
proportion was substantially higher for men (34%) than for women (25%).
Conversely, women had a
higher rate of theft offences (19% compared to 8% for
men) and fraud offences (7% compared to 4% for men).
Criminal history
2019 and 2020, 1,201 offenders were recorded as sentenced in the
Magistrates’ Court after a deferral. In the three years
before their
deferral case was initiated in court, over two-thirds had been sentenced on at
least one prior occasion (68%), and about
one in five had been sentenced to
imprisonment in the preceding three years (19%). These rates were almost
identical for men and
women. These are remarkably high prior offending and prior
imprisonment rates. As a point of comparison, the Council previously found
34% of sentenced children and young people had a prior sentence in the previous
four years, and that 49.5% of people who were
sentenced for breaching a family
violence safety notice or intervention order had been sentenced on another
occasion in the preceding
Both of these groups
– children and family violence offenders – are known to have high
recidivism rates, yet the prior
offending rate for people receiving deferrals
(68%) is even higher than for both of them.
Figure 4: Prior
offending rates of people sentenced after a recorded deferral in the
Magistrates’ Court in 2019 and 2020 (1,201
Percentage with prior sentence (any)
Percentage with prior imprisonment sentence
Within 3 years
Within 2 years
Within 1 year
suggests that sentence deferrals are primarily being used as a therapeutic order
for offenders who have already had some
involvement in the justice system. In
many such cases, the use of sentence deferral may reflect circumstances where a
intervene effectively now will irreparably entrench the offender in
the justice system.
Sentence deferrals in the County Court
has been available in the County Court since 2012 but is used sparingly in that
offences sentenced, the greater use of
prison sentences, and concerns about delays and the effect of these on the
However, the County
Court has advised that sentence deferrals are useful in appropriate
is currently no available data on the use of sentence deferral in the County
Court. We therefore reviewed available sentencing
remarks to identify cases
involving a deferral between 2012 and 2020. We identified 32 cases, involving 27
men and five women.
Of these 32
cases, 10 involved young adult offenders (aged 18 to 25), though there were also
five cases involving offenders aged
addition to the 32 deferral cases, we identified a further 14 cases where the
offender was sentenced after an unsuccessful application
An interesting insight
from the review of sentencing remarks was provided by these 14 additional cases
where the judge decided not
to defer sentencing. In 12 of those cases,
the offender was sentenced to imprisonment, and in six of those imprisonment
court said that the reason for refusing deferral was that a prison
sentence was inevitable. Other reasons for refusing deferral included
of the offender not taking up opportunities for rehabilitation and not making
any efforts towards their rehabilitation
in the time leading up to their
application for sentence deferral. In one case, the reasons for contemplating
the deferral (correcting
a sentencing error) did not fall within the purposes of
deferral under section 83A.
another case, the court had already formed a favourable view of the
offender’s rehabilitation prospects, holding that, as
a result, further
deferral was of limited value and finality was more
Sentence deferrals in the Supreme Court?
deferrals are not currently available in the Supreme Court, although the court
may informally defer sentence using its general
adjournment power (see [1.7]).
However, there is no apparent reason to prohibit sentence deferrals from being
available in the Supreme
Court, especially if there may be cases where they
would be appropriate. While most offenders sentenced in the Supreme Court
a prison sentence, this is not always the
Further, as discussed at
[3.14]–[3.17] and [4.20]–[4.22], deferral can also be useful even in
cases where imprisonment
is inevitable.
Question 1: Supreme Court
Should sentence deferrals be available in the
Supreme Court? If so, why? If not, why not?
‘Informal’ deferrals
flagged in Chapter 1, in addition to a ‘formal’ legislative deferral
power, courts have a general power to adjourn
the hearing of a criminal
proceeding to any time and place, for any purpose, and on any terms that the
court considers appropriate.
Adjournment is used for a range of purposes, such as for an unrepresented
accused to seek legal advice or to enable discussion between
the prosecution and
the defence. It can also, however, be used to achieve the same purposes as a
section 83A sentence deferral, such
as organising for the offender to be
assessed by a psychologist or to arrange
‘The limitation period in respect of deferrals can
sometimes be restrictive, making a simple adjournment more useful prior to
deferral ... In cases where only a short period is required in order to obtain
further materials following the plea, a simple
adjournment would also be more
appropriate than a deferral.’
Survey participant, March 2022
our preliminary consultation and survey, the overlap between section 83A
sentence deferral and the court’s general adjournment
power did not emerge
as an issue. Instead, it appeared that the availability of both options gives
courts flexibility in tailoring
responses. Several respondents mentioned the
12-month limitation on the length of deferral as a circumstance where
adjournment may
appropriate.
One participant
also commented that adjournment may be more appropriate where a short time is
needed after the plea hearing to gather
information for the
Strengths of sentence deferrals
deferrals are an important rehabilitation mechanism allowing sentencing courts
to consider an offender’s actual, rather
than theoretical, prospects of
rehabilitation.
In some cases,
this can allow courts ‘to determine whether or not a custodial sentence
should be imposed, and possibly its
length, or the nature and length of a
non-custodial sentence’.
This is because the offender’s demonstrated rehabilitation during the
deferral may persuade the court to impose a more lenient
option than originally
envisaged, avoiding the ‘unnecessary escalation of the offender up the
sentencing hierarchy’.
Roberts has argued that there ‘is clearly scope to increase the number of
occasions on which sentencing is deferred’,
and that deferral should be
considered ‘for a wide range of individuals whose evolving personal
circumstances may justify imposition
of a sentence other than the one envisaged
think [deferrals] should be used more often than they are and be approached more
creatively by judicial officers than they
often are as well.’
Survey participant, March 2022
2.19 Stakeholders
and survey participants described other benefits of sentence deferral; for
example, it can:
enable offenders
better and earlier access to appropriate programs and services;
enable offenders
with tumultuous life circumstances to stabilise in the community, rather than
being further disrupted by a custodial
restorative justice processes;
acknowledge that
rehabilitation, particularly for offenders with complex needs, will often be a
prolonged journey, best facilitated
by ongoing support;
operate as a
useful period to ensure consistency in the delivery of court-based services and
community-based services;
flexible, in terms of both duration and requirements;
responsive, with opportunities for multiple review hearings; and
incentivise
offenders to engage positively with programs and services.
2.20 During
preliminary consultation with the legal profession and judiciary, stakeholders
and survey participants were overwhelmingly
positive about sentence deferrals,
with almost all of them saying that deferrals should be used more frequently.
The one survey participant
who thought that sentence deferral was used
‘about the right amount’ mainly practised in the County Court where
seriousness means that deferral is less common (Figure 5).
Figure 5: Responses to survey question: ‘Ideally, should s
83A sentence deferrals be more common than they currently are?’
Yes, much more common
Yes, a little more common
No, they are used about the right amount
No, they are too common
views are consistent with the experience in Scotland. The ‘structured
deferred sentence’ in Scotland – which
targets young offenders and
is limited to six months – has been positively evaluated numerous
with suggestions that it
would be used more frequently if it were better
Barriers to the use of sentence deferrals
2.22 During
our preliminary consultation and survey, legal and judicial stakeholders also
identified several barriers to the use of
sentence deferral. These included:
concerns that
increased use of deferrals may delay criminal proceedings (particularly while
courts deal with the backlog caused by
concerns that
delays caused by deferral will have a detrimental effect on victims of crime,
particularly in cases involving physical
and sexual violence (especially family
judicial caution
discussed at [3.14]–[3.17] and
[4.20]–[4.22], there may be good
reasons to use deferrals in these cases);
practitioners
sometimes requesting deferrals without having developed a plan of available
supports if the court were to agree to the
awareness – by judicial officers and practitioners – about section
83A sentence deferrals;
insufficient
funding for lawyers representing legally aided clients to cover all necessary
preparation and appearances for cases where
a sentence has been
the limited
availability of many services (such as housing) and programs (such as
men’s behaviour change programs), and long
‘There are lawyers who come with a
package: “I’ve organised this, I’ve organised that, drug
counselling is
underway, I’ve got them in services” ... But
it’s patchy. And it relies on someone being represented.’
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court (9 December
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service has raised a number of these issues,
including the time pressures on magistrates ‘want[ing]
to clear the list
rather than deferring
sentencing’,
funding restrictions, noting that ‘legal aid grants do not cover
adjournments, so private lawyers may be reluctant
to ask that sentencing is
2.24 In response
to these issues, stakeholders offered some possible ways to encourage increased
use of sentence deferrals in appropriate
funding initial
sentence deferral applications for legally aided clients to ensure resources are
available for lawyers to develop
a proposed plan for the deferral period,
including confirming that services and supports are available;
extending the
availability of CISP in deferral cases to ensure that services are available
throughout the deferral period and are
not limited to four months;
developing an
in-house Magistrates’ Court coordination service (less intensive than
CISP) that could assist some accused people
to find and register with
appropriate supports and programs but, to reduce the resources required by such
a service, leaving ongoing
progress reporting to the program and accused person;
judicial officers’ awareness about sentence deferral through training
provided by the Judicial College of Victoria;
increasing legal
practitioner awareness about sentence deferral through professional development
Question 2: Barriers to use
What, if any, are the current barriers to using
sentence deferrals in appropriate cases? What changes would you propose to
those barriers, and why?
Data issues
of the difficulties that the Council faced in examining the use of deferral in
Victoria is the lack of reliable deferral data.
This was because of constraints
in the current Courtlink system, which uses the same hearing type field to
record deferral, Koori
Court and CISP (among
It was therefore
difficult to accurately identify the overall number of deferral cases in
Victoria. These challenges are not unique
to Victoria. As Roberts recently
observed in the context of sentence deferrals in England and Wales:
[i]t is challenging to determine current use as the statistical record of
deferred sentencing is incomplete. No statistics are currently
available with
respect to the volume of deferred
Magistrates’ Court is currently developing a new case management system,
with the criminal stage due for delivery in the
2022–23 financial
This could provide a
useful opportunity to better record the use of sentence deferrals, the date of
deferral, the date to which sentence
was deferred, any deferral conditions, and
any scheduled review dates. The Council will liaise directly with the
Magistrates’
Court about potential improvements in the recording of
sentence deferral data.
Eligibility
for sentence deferral
Magistrates’ Court and County Court may defer an offender’s sentence
the court has
found the offender guilty of an offence;
the offender
agrees; and
court is of the opinion that it is in the interests of the
legislation in some jurisdictions, Victorian legislation does not require the
court to consider the interests of the victim
or the interests of justice in
deciding whether to defer sentencing. The provision is also silent about the
relevance of offence
seriousness and/or the likelihood of imprisonment. This
chapter explores the above eligibility criteria and whether the legislation
should require any additional considerations to be taken into account.
The interests of the offender
law on the notion of the ‘interests of the offender’ tends to
revolve around circumstances where the offender is
presumed to have an interest
in being rehabilitated and in not reoffending, and in avoiding
incarceration.
The concept
primarily arises in cases involving young offenders, and it tends to be raised
concurrently with the interests of the
community, because rehabilitation and
desistance from offending tend to be mutual goals of both offenders and the
broader community.
For example, in
, the Court of Appeal noted
that ‘rehabilitation and avoiding or reducing the adverse effects of
incarceration’ will typically
be ‘a fundamental aspect in
sentencing’ as it serves ‘the interests of the offender and the
community’.
, the County Court noted that tailoring a sentencing outcome ‘to
promote the offender’s rehabilitation ... serves the
interests of the
individual offender and the community as a
guideline judgment of
Boulton v The Queen
, the Court of Appeal held that
a community correction order (CCO):
offers the sentencing court the best opportunity to promote, simultaneously, the
best interests of the community and the best interests
of the offender and of
those who are dependent on
The interests of the victim?
various stages in criminal cases, a court may be required to consider the views
of the victim. For example:
decision-makers must consider the known or likely view of alleged victims about
granting bail;
may refuse to give a sentence indication if there is insufficient information
sentencing court must consider the impact of the offence on the
contrast, there is no formal requirement that a court consider the possible view
of, or the effects of the deferral on, any victims
in deciding whether to order
a deferral.
In that context, it
is unsurprising that 14 respondents to our survey said that it was somewhat or
very uncommon for courts to consider
the potential effects of a deferral on any
victims. Only seven participants said that it was somewhat or very common to do
are several reasons to consider the interests of the victim before deferring
sentence. Most prominently, postponing sentencing
can cause additional stress
and trauma to victims who want the case to be
For instance, the
South Australian Supreme Court has noted that ‘deferment of sentence,
other than in the truly appropriate
case, delays further healing for victims of
crime’ and ‘exacerbates
suffering’.
our 2008 review of suspended sentences, Victoria Police raised concerns about
the effect of sentence deferral on
In response, section
83A was amended to include a list of intended purposes, to ‘help to ensure
that deferral is not used by
defendants as a means of unnecessarily prolonging
proceedings’.
remains, however, whether the effect of deferral on victims should be a
legislated consideration.
The interests of justice?
Victorian courts are required to consider the interests of the offender before
deferring sentence, there is currently no requirement
to consider the interests
of justice more generally. In comparison, courts in
and in England and
are required to consider
the interests of justice before deferring sentence. The ‘interests of
justice’ is an intentionally
broad notion designed to fit the
circumstances of its
application.
It requires a court
to consider the overall fairness and equity to the parties and the interests of
the community when making a discretionary
decision. How it is interpreted will
vary depending on the facts, circumstances and affected people in a particular
situation. In
the context of sentence deferral, for example, a requirement to
consider the interests of justice might require the court to balance:
the interests of
the offender;
the interests of
the victim(s) and any adverse effect on them (such as distress caused by further
delay) if sentence is deferred;
the need for
finality of litigation where possible;
the risk to the
community if an offender facing a possible prison sentence is given the
opportunity to continue on bail while they
demonstrate their
rehabilitation;
the long-term
benefits to the community if the offender is rehabilitated.
the one hand, including an ‘interests of justice’ consideration for
courts deciding whether to defer sentence could
encourage courts to more
expressly consider the community’s interest in reducing criminal
behaviour, above and beyond the offender’s
own interest in avoiding
further contact with the justice
On the other hand, an
‘interests of justice’ criterion for eligibility may inadvertently
operate as a barrier to sentence
deferrals being used in appropriate cases.
Offence seriousness and the likely sentence?
our preliminary consultation, stakeholders told us that there is currently
uncertainty about whether deferred sentencing is
appropriate in cases involving
serious offending for which a prison sentence is highly likely or even
inevitable. Conversely, they
also expressed uncertainty about whether sentence
deferrals are appropriate in less serious cases where imprisonment is highly
In that context, it may be useful for the
Sentencing Act
clarify whether, and to what extent, the likely sentence to be imposed is a
relevant consideration in the use of deferral.
Borderline imprisonment cases
Western Australia, sentence deferral is
available if an offender is
on the cusp of receiving a term of imprisonment. That is, the seriousness of the
offence justifies the
imposition of a term of imprisonment, but the court might
not impose one if the offender complies with the deferral
conditions.
It is effectively an
opportunity to avoid a term of imprisonment. Similarly, the Sentencing Council
for England and Wales suggests
that deferred sentences are mainly relevant in
the ‘small group of cases’ near the threshold for custody
should the offender be prepared to adapt his behaviour in a way
clearly specified by the sentencer, the court may be prepared to
impose a lesser
comparison, sentence deferral in Victoria (and
is not limited to
cases on the cusp of a prison sentence. Nevertheless it seems to be common in
borderline cases, especially perhaps
where the offender’s circumstances
appear to be changing for the
For example, an offender
may have just secured stable housing or employment, enrolled in education or
started a treatment program.
Deferral in these cases can provide the offender with a final opportunity to
show their commitment to rehabilitation and thereby
assist the court in
determining whether the offender should ultimately receive a prison
‘Often a Court experiences difficulty when sentencing an
offender in determining the offender’s prospects of rehabilitation
whether the foreshadowed rehabilitation will occur. In many instances it will be
of great assistance to the sentencing judge
if there is an adjournment to enable
the offender to demonstrate that rehabilitation has taken place or is well on
the way ... It
is so much better for the court to have evidence of what has
actually taken place than to have to base its decision on the opinions
experts, assertions by the offender and what has happened over a short period of
time, that is, since the commission of the offence
or the offender’s
R v Trindall
[2002] NSWCCA 364
available data on the use of sentence deferrals suggests that many of them may
be occurring in these borderline imprisonment cases.
Of the 3,507 cases
sentenced after a recorded deferral in the Magistrates’ Court, 26%
received a CCO, suggesting that, in at
least some of these cases, the offender
may have avoided a prison sentence by demonstrating their rehabilitation during
the deferral.
As a point of comparison, just 9% to 10% of all Magistrates’
Court cases tend to result in a
suggesting deferrals are
more common in cases that ultimately receive a CCO than in all cases
Inevitable imprisonment cases
and beyond borderline imprisonment cases, sentence deferral may even be used in
Victoria if a prison sentence is likely, or
even inevitable. This is also the
case in most other Australian jurisdictions. For instance, legislation in the
Australian Capital
Territory makes it clear that ‘[a] court may make a
deferred sentence order whether or not it considers that the seriousness
offence justifies a sentence of
imprisonment’.
South Wales, case law has established that, in appropriate cases, sentence
deferral is available even if a period of imprisonment
will be ordered, so long
as the deferral might affect the length of the sentence or non-parole
Sentence deferral is
also possible in inevitable imprisonment cases in South Australia, though courts
have emphasised that it would
No good purpose will usually be served in deferring sentence ... if the demands
of punishment and general deterrence are so great
that a substantial sentence of
immediate imprisonment must be imposed even if the proposed rehabilitation
program is largely successful.
practice, sentencing remarks suggest that Victorian courts have been reluctant
to defer sentencing in cases where imprisonment
is inevitable. For instance:
I consider in this case that a sentence of imprisonment is inevitable, and I
refuse to defer sentencing you.
Your counsel ... submitted that the sentence should be deferred to enable you to
complete participation in rehabilitation courses
... I am simply unable to
accede to that submission. It is inevitable that you will receive a custodial
sentence for this offence
and it should commence
immediately.
[Y]ours was a sentence that could not involve anything but immediate
imprisonment. In those circumstances I found that it was most
inappropriate to
defer sentencing to allow you to commence on a pure rehabilitative process for
the next 12 months. Such would then
have meant that it would have been most
inappropriate to impose a period of imprisonment at that later
3.16 That said,
there were many cases in the Magistrates’ Court where the offender was
imprisoned after a deferral (20% of recorded
deferral cases). While many of
these are likely to have been borderline imprisonment cases where the
offender’s progress on
deferral was insufficient to convince the court
that a non-custodial disposition was appropriate, it is possible that, in at
some of them, imprisonment was inevitable but the court nevertheless
ordered a deferral.
Council is interested in stakeholder views on whether it may be useful to amend
section 83A
to clarify that a court may defer sentencing even if the seriousness
of the offence justifies a prison sentence. Deferrals in such
cases can still be
useful where the offender’s participation would result in a shorter prison
sentence or non-parole period,
where restorative justice is sought and especially where offenders have
child-related responsibilities (see further [4.20]–[4.22]).
In such cases,
however, it would be important not to give the offender a ‘false
expectation’ that their performance on
deferral might allow them to avoid
a prison sentence.
It may even
be appropriate to warn the offender that a prison sentence is still
Less serious cases
deferral is also available for less serious cases, for example, ‘where the
court needs time to consider the outcome
of public or private treatment or other
interventions, or the outcome of restorative justice
conferences’.
this broad availability, half (51%) of the 3,507 recorded deferral cases
ultimately received a sentence at the lower end
of the sentencing hierarchy:
30% received an
adjourned undertaking;
19% received a
2% received a
discharge or dismissal.
is required, however, in using deferral in cases involving relatively minor
offending. Just as the principle of proportionality
does not allow a sentence to
exceed what is necessary in any given
neither should the
conditions imposed
to sentencing exceed what is appropriate (even
if they are intended to support the offender’s
rehabilitation).
Because of the
potentially onerous nature of deferral conditions, it has even been argued that
a ‘deferred sentence is best
conceived as a sentence and not a protracted
adjournment’.
extension, it is arguable that the duration and conditions of any deferral
should be considered ‘part of the totality of
disproportionate to the seriousness of the offending.
Question 3: Eligibility criteria
Are there any issues with the current criteria and
considerations courts must take into account before ordering a sentence
In answering this question, you may want to consider:
deciding whether to order a deferral should be required to consider the
interests or views of any victims, and/or the interests
of justice; and
should specify that a court may order deferral even if it considers that the
seriousness of the offence justifies a prison
of sentence deferral
Sentencing Act
has specified the purposes for which a court may
defer sentencing. These purposes, which were based on the Council’s
are distinct but
overlap. A court may defer sentencing for:
offender’s capacity and prospects for rehabilitation to be assessed;
the offender to
demonstrate that rehabilitation has taken place;
the offender to
participate in a program addressing underlying causes of the offending;
the offender to
participate in a program addressing the impact of the offending on the
other purpose that the court considers appropriate in the
circumstances.
6: Purposes of sentence deferral
Demonstrate
rehabilitation
addressing causes of offending
addressing victim impact
4.2 The purposes
of sentence deferral under
section 83A
will sometimes overlap with the reasons
that a court will exercise its general power to adjourn a criminal proceeding.
Roberts has
argued, however, that sentence deferral can better engage the
In contrast to an adjournment, deferral actively engages the offender in the
sentencing process. Over a longer period, deferment
offers an opportunity to
demonstrate that the offender’s life has changed for the better. Deferral
also provides the offender
with an incentive to participate in restorative
meetings with the victim. Deferred sentencing is thus a rare example of active
participation in the sentencing
legislated deferral purposes are largely similar to those in comparable
the offender’s
rehabilitative prospects or
allowing the offender to
address the causes of their behaviour, demonstrate rehabilitation or undertake
rehabilitative interventions,
and allowing the offender to take part in restorative justice processes or
agreements.
Catch-all ‘any
other reason’ purposes are also
4.4 Participants
in the Council’s survey of legal practitioners and the judiciary
identified rehabilitation-focused purposes
as the most common reason for
sentence deferrals: the offender demonstrating that rehabilitation has taken
place (10 participants),
participating in a rehabilitation program (eight
participants) or having their rehabilitative prospects assessed (six
participants).
No survey participants nominated restorative justice or any other
purpose as the most common reason for deferral.
Assess rehabilitation prospects
4.5 Deferrals
to assess an offender’s rehabilitation prospects or capacity may be
relatively short compared with deferrals for
other purposes. These deferrals can
involve the offender seeing a psychologist, psychiatrist or other health
professional to assess
the offender’s health issues and how they relate to
their offending, ongoing risk and sentencing.
assessment of an offender’s rehabilitation prospects may also include an
assessment of suitability to participate in
a court-based program or process,
such as the Court Integrated Services Program (CISP), the Assessment and
Referral Court (ARC) or
the Koori Court (see further [1.6]).
Demonstrate rehabilitation
second possible purpose of deferral is to enable the offender to show evidence
of their progress towards rehabilitation. This
can include, for example,
desisting from offending, returning negative drug tests, and obtaining stable
accommodation or employment.
4.8 This purpose
overlaps with many of the others. For example, an offender may demonstrate their
rehabilitation by participating
in a program (such as an anger management
course) that addresses factors that contributed to their offending or through
participating
in a restorative justice process.
propose to do this, if you are agreeable, as you appear to be at a critical
place in your life. If you continue in the direction
which you have, I am of the
view that there is a very good prospect of you leaving your offending past
behind, overcoming your difficulties,
and rehabilitating yourself. If you
maintain your positive progress, I will have regard to that when I impose
sentence on you, in
what would be some six months’ time.’
Unpublished sentencing remarks provided to the
Program addressing causes of offending
third possible purpose of deferral is for the offender to participate in a
program addressing the underlying causes of their
offending. For example, an
offender with drug dependency issues may have their sentence deferred to
undertake a drug rehabilitation
program. Genuine and active participation in
these programs can give the court some cause for optimism about the
rehabilitative prospects, even if there are some issues along
the way (such as positive urinalysis tests).
What works well
with deferrals?
‘Deferrals enable flexibility in the sentencing process and account
for the fact that offenders typically achieve relative rehabilitation
progress towards it at different speeds depending on their underlying issues. In
my experience, the disposition ultimately arrived
at following a deferral is far
more effective and tailored to the individual than one imposed immediately
following plea submissions
... and thus is more likely to lead to long-term
benefits for the offender and community.’
Survey participant, March 2022
one case, the offender’s sentence was deferred for him to complete a
residential rehabilitation
He had pleaded guilty
to attempted armed robbery, committed when he was aged 24 and ‘in the grip
of a serious drug
dependency’.
At the time
of his deferral, he had completed three of four stages of the rehabilitation
program. By the time of sentencing, he had
successfully spent about 16 months in
residential rehabilitation, including a period where he was not allowed to leave
the premises.
The court sentenced him to a 12-month community correction order
(CCO), noting that ‘[t]he prosecution did not oppose the possibility
non-custodial disposition, in view of your good
Restorative justice – ‘addressing victim
fourth possible purpose of deferral is to allow for pre-sentence restorative
justice processes between offenders and victims in
appropriate
There is no single
definition of restorative justice, but it most commonly involves bringing
together in a safe and structured way
the offender and anyone harmed by their
behaviour to discuss how the crime has affected the victim(s). In appropriate
cases, it can
be a healing process for victims and give offenders an opportunity
to take responsibility for their behaviour. In recommending restorative
as a purpose of sentence deferral, the Council in 2008 explained that:
deferral of sentencing could provide a useful means by which the court could
encourage participation in [restorative justice] programs.
From a victim’s
perspective, the use of restorative justice could result in greater satisfaction
with the process, while for
the offender it may lead to a better understanding
of the impact of his or her offending behaviour on those directly affected by
is increasing recognition of the benefits of restorative justice as an addition
to the justice system,
particularly as a reason for deferring a sentence. In part, this is because
restorative justice allows the offender to
demonstrate
remorse for their
offending, which can be an important consideration for sentencing
As the Victorian Law
Reform Commission has argued, however, sentence mitigation on the basis of
restorative justice outcomes will
only be available if the offender’s
engagement is genuine.
Further, courts have cautioned against quantifying the extent of any sentence
is limited information about the extent to which deferral has been used to
facilitate restorative justice in Victoria. In our
survey of legal practitioners
and the judiciary, no-one identified restorative justice as the most common
purpose of sentence deferral
(although that does not necessarily mean it has not
been used for that purpose). Further, the Australian Association for Restorative
Justice recently observed that despite ‘a consistent and growing base of
evidence’ about the effectiveness of restorative
approaches in responding
to and preventing crime, ‘restorative approaches remain significantly
underutilised in the Victorian
criminal justice
4.14 There are
three possible issues that emerge in relation to the use of restorative justice
during sentence deferrals:
both the Victorian Law Reform Commission and the Centre for Innovative Justice
have also observed,
current language of
section 83A(1A)(c)
does not clearly signal that the
provision is intended to enable restorative justice processes (‘for the
offender to participate
in a program addressing the impact of the offending on
courts are not
currently legislatively required to ensure that the victim is willing to
participate in restorative justice processes
prior to deferring sentence for
this purpose (even if this already happens in practice, requiring such
confirmation may be a useful
safeguard and symbolically important);
beyond the scope of this project, there is no legislative framework about when,
how and why to use restorative justice processes
Other purposes the court considers appropriate
4.15 Finally,
a court can defer sentencing for any other purpose it considers appropriate.
This has, for example, included:
allow the offender to recover from surgery or receive medical
avoid the risk of suicide if the offender remains in custody before
sentencing;
allow the offender to apply for assistance from the National Disability
Insurance Scheme (NDIS) or to allow the court to get an
update from the NDIS on
the supports currently being provided or available for the
‘ensure that a mother is not separated from a newborn
‘allow [the offender] time to work and earn money to pay the
children’s school fees and to allow [his] prospects of
rehabilitation to
be further assessed’ (as stated in a submission that sentence be deferred,
but the court refused the application
for a deferred sentence for this
give the offender the opportunity to pay restitution to the
There are concerns,
however, that deferral for this purpose may ‘permit wealthy defendants the
time to pay compensation and
thereby evade imprisonment’. It is important,
therefore, to ensure that it does not differentially benefit wealthy
defendants’.
Sentence deferrals and marginalised groups
are a number of groups of people who are often disproportionally affected by the
criminal justice system and/or are frequently
overrepresented in prison. This
includes, for example, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples; people
from culturally and
linguistically diverse backgrounds; people with a history of
trauma, including family violence; people with substance abuse issues;
with mental health issues, intellectual disability or cognitive impairment;
people experiencing homelessness; people living
in rural and regional Victoria;
and young adults.
4.17 Sentence
deferral can be a useful mechanism for keeping such offenders out of prison,
facilitating their rehabilitation and thereby
protecting the community. The
Council is interested in hearing whether there are any reforms that could be
made to sentence deferrals
– whether to legislation, practice or
resourcing – that could improve justice system responses for those
instance, the Council would be interested in hearing about:
whether making
justice plans available for offenders on deferred sentences (especially people
ineligible for participation in ARC)
could improve their access to programs and
services that reduce their risk of reoffending;
encouraging sentence deferrals for offenders with drug and alcohol dependency
issues would give them a better opportunity
to seek treatment prior to
sentencing, particularly given the long wait lists for programs as noted by
stakeholders during preliminary
consultations; and
whether and how
sentence deferral might play a role in reducing the overrepresentation of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
in the criminal justice system
generally, and prisons specifically.
Question 4: Marginalised groups
Are there reforms that could be made to sentence
deferrals that could reduce the disproportionate effect of the criminal justice
on marginalised groups? If so, what reforms would you propose, and
Women, pregnant offenders, and offenders with dependent
particular group for whom sentence deferral may be particularly useful is women,
especially those with child-related responsibilities.
Women have been
increasingly recognised as a particularly vulnerable offender group, especially
in the prison system.
can result from:
low rate of female prisoners in general, meaning there are very few prisons that
can accommodate them, increasing the risk of
them being incarcerated further
away from family and friends;
increased likelihood that their offending is a product of their own past
victimisation, such as childhood sexual abuse and/or
pregnancy and/or
breastfeeding; and/or
primary carer responsibilities, for either children or
grandchildren.
Gerry has argued,
the use of sentence deferrals for female offenders could be a useful tool in
offering women pathways out of the justice
system, including the opportunity to
avoid prison, and thereby strengthening Australia’s compliance with
multiple international
human rights treaties. Deferring sentence can, for
example, allow women the opportunity to
birth outside prison,
breastfeed their newborn children and/or make adequate arrangements for
dependent children. The Prison Reform
Trust in the UK has recommended that when
women are the sole or primary carer, there should generally be a presumption in
of deferral regardless of the likely sentence:
There should be a presumption in favour of sentence deferral ... to give them
the opportunity to work with probation services to
demonstrate their capacity to
comply with community requirements the court may be considering.
If the offence is so serious that only a custodial sentence can be justified,
there should be a presumption where the offender is
a sole carer that sentencing
will be deferred to allow arrangements to be made for the children. This would
reduce the trauma commonly
experienced by both mother and
South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal criticised a trial judge for not deferring
sentence for a breastfeeding mother convicted
of importing a commercial quantity
of narcotics. At the time of sentencing, there was insufficient evidence about
the arrangements
in custody for contact between the offender and her newborn.
The Court of Criminal Appeal held that the trial judge:
failed to have regard to the fact that, by deferring the sentencing task, he may
have been able to ensure that, with the co-operation
of the authorities and
subject to a positive assessment, there would be no such
separation.
arguable that specific legislative inclusion of a purpose of deferral relating
to parental responsibilities would highlight
the particular advantages of
deferral in this context, and therefore increase and encourage consistency in
its use. This could, for
example, include deferring sentence in appropriate
take into account the best interests of an offender’s unborn or newborn
child (for example, to allow an offender to give
birth outside the prison system
or to make arrangements to ensure that an offender will be able to continue
breastfeeding while serving
to enable an
offender who is the primary or sole carer of one or more children to demonstrate
their ability to comply with community
requirements and remain in the community
with their children; and/or
to enable an
offender with dependent children to make caring arrangements for when the
offender is in prison, particularly if they
are the sole carer.
Question 5: Purposes of deferral
Should the current legislative purposes of sentence
deferral in
section 83A(1A)
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be amended?
If so, what changes would you recommend, and why?
of sentence deferral
maximum length of sentence deferrals in Victoria is currently one
This is the same as in
New South Wales, South Australia and the Australian Capital
though in South
Australia a deferral can exceed the 12-month maximum if that restriction would
prevent the offender from participating
in a relevant intervention
The maximum length
is shorter in England and Wales (six months), longer in Tasmania (two years) and
discretionary in Scotland (‘for
a period ... as the court may
determine’).
maximum period in Victoria was previously six months, but it was increased to 12
months in 2010 following a recommendation by
Consultation at the
time revealed mixed feelings about extending the maximum period of sentence
deferrals, because there needed to
be a balance between ensuring timely
finalisation of criminal proceedings and providing adequate time for the
purposes of deferral
5.3 There is
currently no reliable data on the length of sentence deferrals in Victoria.
However, respondents to the Council’s
survey were asked the typical length
of sentence deferrals. The most common response was six months (eight
participants), but answers
ranged from one month (one participant) to 12 months
(three participants).
Availability and length of rehabilitation programs
preliminary consultation, stakeholders told us that the 12-month limit on
deferrals can sometimes be an issue in relation
to offenders with complex needs,
particularly those engaging in treatment programs that either are lengthy or
have long waitlists.
Some respondents to our survey of legal practitioners and
judicial officers similarly told us that the 12-month limit can be one
reasons a court uses a general adjournment power over a deferral, because there
is no limit on the number of adjournments
in a case. Some survey participants
suggested that it was worth exploring increasing the maximum length of sentence
deferral, particularly
in the County Court.
‘[A]n informal
deferral through an adjournment can sometimes be of use as it allows for more
flexibility in terms of ultimate
finalisation of a matter. Also in circumstances
where a lengthy treatment program which has a significant waiting list is being
contemplated
as forming part of the assessment of prospects of rehabilitation,
or assisting dealing with underlying issues, the 12 month cap on
a deferral may
mean that the treatment will not be completed by the time the deferral
Survey participant, March 2022
example, in Case Study 1 (page 37) the offender pleaded guilty part way through
a 16-month residential drug rehabilitation
program. The court deferred
sentencing to allow him to complete the program, and he was ultimately able to
show significant rehabilitative
progress that justified a community correction
order (CCO) rather than imprisonment. The length of that program (much longer
12 months) shows that there would be cases where a deferral of longer than
12 months would be useful.
Case Study 1: Jake
Jake (age 24) was sentenced for an attempted armed
robbery. He had entered a local shop, dressed in dark clothes and a beanie,
with a knife. He pointed a knife at the young male shop assistant and
demanded money. The owner of the shop threw a can of Red Bull
at Jake and told
the shop assistant to ‘get the gun’. Jake ran away and was arrested
a few days later.
At the time of the offence, Jake was using ice daily and committing offences
to pay for drugs. Jake was released on bail, on condition
that he was admitted
to a residential drug rehabilitation program, which required him to stay at the
premises under close supervision.
Jake’s sentence was later deferred to enable him to finish the program
and to allow the court to better assess his progress.
By the time of sentencing,
Jake had spent about 16 months in the residential program and had successfully
completed it. The program
providers reported that Jake had made excellent
progress, was still residing at the premises, was working four days a week as a
bricklayer,
and was doing voluntary gardening work one day a week as well as
becoming a leader, supervisor and mentor for others on the program.
program, Jake had undergone counselling and drug testing, and had engaged in
courses dealing with his previous emotional
difficulties.
While awaiting sentencing, Jake also participated in a mediation session with
the victims of an unrelated burglary. The victims wrote
to the court saying that
they were pleased that Jake had received the help he needed, and said they could
see that he had become
a ‘dramatically different person’ from the
man he was before. Jake was ultimately assessed as suitable for a CCO, and
prosecution did not oppose one being made given Jake’s progress. In
sentencing Jake to a 12-month CCO with conviction,
the court said:
[y]ou have spent a week in custody, and you have now spent about 16 months in
residential rehabilitation, successfully so. Your time
has not been your own,
and in a significant way you gave up your liberty to complete the course and
ensure that you did not offend
again. This is quite unusual, and obviates the
need for me to place great weight on the need for general deterrence, as I
DPP v Wharton
[2014] VCC 1844
Bail provisions and ‘setting an offender up to
issue relevant to considering whether to extend the maximum deferral period
beyond 12 months is whether this could subject some
deferral recipients to an
unduly long period of potential exposure to reverse onus bail laws. The current
provisions of the
Bail Act 1977
(Vic) can expose people charged with an
indictable offence to a reverse onus bail position if they are alleged to have
committed another
indictable offence while on bail during the deferral period.
The new alleged offence becomes a Schedule 2 offence, meaning the person
need to establish a ‘compelling reason’ why they should be released
rather than remanded.
person is then released but is then alleged to have committed another indictable
offence while on summons or bail, they would
then need to establish
‘exceptional circumstances’ why they should be granted
While exceptional
circumstances are not an
‘impossible’
hurdle and can also be based on a combination of
they are nonetheless
the complex lives of many people who come into contact with the justice system
and that desistance from offending can be a journey
rather than a single moment
provisions place people on deferred sentences – a therapeutic order
primarily designed to facilitate rehabilitation
and reduce criminogenic contact
with the justice system – in a very precarious position. As well as
amounting to a barrier
against using deferral at all, this provision is a
barrier to extending deferral beyond the 12-month maximum. As a result of these
provisions, what may seem like an opportunity for longer-term support and
supervision could instead further entrench those individuals
into the justice
system. Although relevant to the consideration of deferral length, the broader
issue of whether bail laws should
be reformed in relation to people on sentence
deferral is beyond the scope of this project and the Council’s
‘I would remove deferrals from the
“conditional sentence” provisions of the
. This would
remove the disincentive from taking a deferral if there is any risk of
reoffending.’
Survey participant, March 2022
Possible options for reform
light of the above, some possible options for reform relating to the maximum
length of sentence deferrals could include:
extending the
maximum duration for everyone, which would allow for participation in
rehabilitation programs that are lengthy or have
long waitlists;
retaining the
12-month maximum but creating an exception if there are good reasons for a
longer deferral period (similar to the provisions
in South Australia);
retaining the
12-month maximum but allowing the offender to apply for an extension if they
have not been able to complete their rehabilitation
program(s); and/or
retaining the
12-month maximum in the Magistrates’ Court but allowing for longer
sentence deferrals in the County Court.
Question 6: Length of deferral
Should there be any changes to the maximum length of
12 months for sentence deferral in the Magistrates’ Court and/or in the
County Court? If so, what changes would you propose, and why?
and support during deferral
6.1 Deferral
orders do not have formal conditions attached to them. Instead, deferral
requirements are imposed either as bail conditions
or as informal requirements.
For this reason, there is no available data on the types of requirements imposed
on offenders during
deferrals, beyond a handful of available higher courts
sentencing remarks. This chapter explores whether the
Sentencing Act
should be amended to specifically allow for the imposition of deferral
conditions, and what types of conditions are appropriate during
Should conditions be attached to deferral orders?
Sentencing Act
does not currently empower courts to impose
conditions on offenders whose sentence has been
Instead, the
offender is released either on bail or on their own undertaking to attend court
when required.
Their deferral
commitments are either included in bail conditions or communicated verbally.
This approach was intended to avoid a
pre-sentence order effectively operating
as a sentencing order, with potentially onerous conditions and compliance
obligations.
‘I think it would be useful to have a
provision written in which allows conditions to be attached to the deferral
itself, rather
than needing to resort to placing someone on bail in order to be
able to mandate participation in particular programs as part of
the deferral
Survey participant, March 2022
6.3 There is,
however, a contrary argument that
section 83A
should specifically allow courts
to impose conditions on deferral orders, particularly given changes to bail laws
in recent years.
We heard in preliminary consultation that many courts tend to
make deferral requirements conditions of bail, which may have undesirable
consequences.
there is an inconsistency between the purposes of deferral and bail conditions.
The purposes of bail conditions are to manage
the risk of an offender either
committing offences while in the community or not attending court as
In contrast, the
purposes of deferral conditions are primarily rehabilitative and
therapeutic.
preliminary consultation, stakeholders observed that this inconsistency meant
that it was often inappropriate for deferral
requirements – such as
participation in rehabilitation programs – to be made conditions of bail.
They particularly emphasised
that when bail conditions relate to abstaining from
substance abuse, this ‘does not account for how drug and alcohol
impacts on people, and is a punitive rather than a health-based
if the requirements of deferral are made conditions of bail, then non-compliance
can lead to revocation of bail and/or charges
of contravening a conduct
condition of bail. This can lead to an unfortunate situation where the aim of a
deferral is to encourage
rehabilitation, but it instead has the contrary effect
of further entrenching someone in the justice
As some stakeholders
observed during our preliminary consultations, there is a measure of
inconsistency in punishing someone for
not participating in treatment.
setting deferral requirements as bail conditions means there is no similar
mechanism for offenders who are on summons rather
than bail. In those cases, the
court is limited to communicating its expectations of the offender verbally.
Alternatively, the court
may find it necessary to release the offender on bail
where it may otherwise have released them on summons.
6.7 In light of
these concerns, it may be beneficial to amend
section 83A
to permit conditions to be attached to deferral orders and to specify
the consequences of insufficient or inadequate engagement. There
is, however, a
risk of courts ‘doubling up’ by making compliance with deferral
conditions a condition of bail. Courts
often make compliance with one court
order a condition of another (for example, a community correction order (CCO)
requiring compliance
with a family violence intervention order). If it is
preferable to separate deferral conditions from bail conditions, it may be worth
considering whether compliance with deferral conditions should be expressly
prohibited from being a condition of bail. Instead, poor
engagement or
non-compliance with deferral conditions might more appropriately lead to a
review where the court may vary the deferral
requirements, end the deferral and
proceed straight to sentencing, or allow the offender to continue on the
deferral after discussing
with them the importance of engagement.
Question 7: Deferral conditions
section 83A
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be amended to allow conditions to be attached to deferral orders? If so,
why? If not, why not? In answering this question,
you may wish to consider
whether compliance with deferral conditions should be prohibited from being made
a condition of bail.
Which conditions?
conditions were attached to deferral orders, consideration would also need to be
given to what types of conditions would be appropriate.
For instance, punitive
or overly onerous conditions, such as curfews, work conditions and supervision
by Corrections Victoria, may
inappropriate.
As Freiberg
and Morgan have argued, some conditions are more properly imposed as part of a
‘formal sentence’ rather than
as a ‘conditional
non-sentence’ such as a deferral
It is important not to
blur the lines between pre-sentence orders and sentencing orders, otherwise
people can be subject to disproportionately
more onerous requirements overall
than what would have been appropriate had they simply been sentenced. Moreover,
punitive conditions
would most likely be inconsistent with the purposes of
sentence deferral.
6.9 Instead,
conditions that reflect the purposes of sentence deferral may be appropriate,
such as conditions that support rehabilitation.
Two conditions worth exploring
further are judicial monitoring conditions and justice plan
conditions.
A judicial monitoring condition?
deferring an offender’s sentence, courts can set a date (before the
deferral end date) for the offender to reappear for review
This is a form of
judicial monitoring, which ‘involves a judicial officer monitoring an
offender’s ... treatment or compliance
via specially listed
At a hearing
to review a deferral order, the court may:
take no further
action (allowing the deferred sentence to continue); or
the deferral order and sentence the
judge or magistrate who originally deferred the sentence may also direct that
the review is dealt with by
This makes the offender
accountable to the judicial officer and allows the judicial officer to intervene
if the offender is not cooperating.
our preliminary consultation, several stakeholders described judicial monitoring
(through the review power) as often critical to
the success of deferral as a
therapeutic intervention to reduce
reoffending.
They said that
it provides a mechanism for altering the requirements of the order if necessary,
building a relationship between the
judicial officer and the offender, and
occasionally holding service providers accountable if the person has not yet
been able to
participate in a particular program. Review hearings can also, as
was observed during the 2012 deferral reforms, ‘provide the
offender with
an incentive to continue to comply with the terms of the
benefits were apparent during the Council’s own observations of sentence
deferral review hearings in February 2022. The
magistrate implemented
motivational interviewing strategies, using the judge–offender
relationship to engage offenders in their
own rehabilitation
works well with deferrals?
‘Regular review by the judicial officer.’
Survey participant, March 2022
positive stakeholder feedback about the value of review hearings is consistent
with research, particularly in the context of problem-oriented
drug courts,
finding the judge–offender relationship can often be the ‘key’
nexus point for behavioural
6.14 However,
despite the potential value of judicial monitoring during deferral, there was
inconsistency in how often survey participants
believed it typically occurred.
Some said that reviews typically happened three or more times during the
deferral (seven participants),
while others said that there is usually no
judicial monitoring at all, such that the offender only sees the judicial
officer again
at the final sentencing hearing (four participants).
6.15 There is
therefore a question whether judicial monitoring should become a more common, or
at least a more consistent, feature
of sentence deferrals than it currently is.
so, one barrier would be the resource implications for courts. The
Magistrates’ Court is a high-volume jurisdiction, hearing
over 90% of
criminal matters in Victoria. Recent research found that many magistrates in
Victoria considered administrative and listing
pressures a barrier to using
judicial monitoring under standard
In the wake of
COVID-19-related court backlogs, there is more incentive than ever to finalise
cases rather than leave them ‘part
heard’ while someone is on
Question 8: Judicial monitoring
Is there scope to increase or improve the use of
judicial monitoring during sentence deferrals? If so, how?
A justice plan condition?
offenders with an intellectual
disability,
allows adjourned undertakings and CCOs to include a condition that the
offender participate for up to two years in services specified
in a justice
plan. To date, there has been very little research into the use of justice plans
in Victoria, though the Council has
found that about 1.7% of
and 0.4% of adjourned
undertakings
have justice
plans attached.
Stakeholders
were unanimous about the potential value of justice plans for people with an
intellectual disability who come into contact
with the justice system. They also
had more general concerns, however, about the limited availability of justice
plans. Justice plans
are limited in both eligibility (because of a narrow
definition of
intellectual disability
) and resources. There are similar
eligibility and resourcing issues associated with the Assessment and Referral
Court (ARC), which
is available for people on bail (and therefore also for
people whose sentence has been
These concerns,
while important, are beyond the scope of this project.
6.19 Despite the
existing limitations of justice plans, stakeholders raised the possibility of
making justice plans available as a
condition of sentence deferral. For
instance, one survey participant said:
[i]t would ... be useful to be able to have the capacity to attach a justice
plan to a deferral in circumstances where an accused
has an intellectual
disability. Unless NDIS is involved, it is near impossible to get appropriate
support in place for those with
an [intellectual disability] until sentence is
being imposed.
6.20 Giving
courts the power to request and ensure compliance with a justice plan as a
deferral condition could improve access to
appropriate services while awaiting
sentence for people with an intellectual disability, especially for those who
are otherwise not
eligible for ARC. This may increase the viability and
effectiveness of sentence deferral for such offenders. If sentence deferral
granted, a justice plan may provide the support they need to fully engage with,
and achieve the purposes of, their sentence deferral.
Question 9: Justice plans
Should justice plans be made available as a
condition of sentence deferral? If so, why? If not, why not?
Available programs and supports
preliminary consultation, stakeholders identified the importance of adequate
programs and services for people on deferral.
Deferral can be a platform to
connect those people to social services beyond the justice system, such as
mental health treatment,
housing, alcohol and other drug services, and services provided through the
NDIS. Some people access private treatment or programs
(such as treatment by a
medical practitioner) but others access them via the court (such as
participation in CISP).
6.22 Stakeholders
also, however, identified areas for improvement, including:
the need for
offenders often to both locate and pay for the services themselves, which can be
difficult from a financial and an administrative
perspective;
long wait times
to access relevant services and programs, especially men’s behaviour
change programs; and
inconsistency
between the usual maximum CISP period in the Magistrates’ Court (about
four months)
and the maximum
possible period of sentence deferral (12 months).
Melbourne Magistrates’ Court recently piloted ‘Navigator’, an
initiative aimed at assisting offenders to overcome
difficulties in finding,
accessing and paying for certain services. During criminal proceedings, if an
accused person with complex
needs is part of the pilot program, they will have
their needs assessed in order for the court to identify the types of services
that may assist the person with their rehabilitation. This includes identifying
and coordinating both court-based services and supports
A similar approach
could be useful for courts considering a deferral, both for ensuring the
relevant services are available and for
alleviating the administrative and
financial burden on offenders having to find and fund the services themselves.
It could not, however,
involve Corrections Victoria as offenders on deferral are
not serving a sentence, an important distinction that cannot be lost sight
pursuing any reforms.
Question 10: Programs and services
Are there any improvements that could be made to the
availability of support services and programs for people whose sentence has been
deferred? If so, what do you propose, and why?
Deferral plans?
6.24 Regardless
section 83A
is amended to introduce deferral conditions, it is worth
considering the merits of introducing a specific ‘deferral plan’
document that outlines what the offender has agreed to do during the deferral.
We were told during preliminary consultation that
this is not currently done
(unless the specific conditions are listed on a bail order), and that the
requirements of deferral, and
consequences of not engaging with them, are
usually only explained verbally in court.
our survey of legal practitioners and the judiciary, most participants believed
that it was somewhat common (eight participants)
or very common (10
participants) for offenders to understand what was expected of them during their
deferral. Nevertheless, as the
Centre for Justice Innovation (UK) has noted,
courts deferring sentence should be ‘upfront about what the individual
to do and what the consequences are of
non-compliance’.
difficult to ensure a lasting consensus about those obligations and consequences
if they are not reduced to an accessible written
document that both the court
and the offender have access to.
6.26 There may
therefore be value in introducing written deferral plans. Some elements of such
deferral plans could potentially include:
being developed
the offender not
the offender. A useful
model for this approach is the individual support plans in the ARC, which are
developed by the ARC case manager
with the client. This empowers offenders
‘to engage with their rehabilitation and achieve positive behavioural
making them ‘an active participant in their own
recovery’ and ‘responsible and accountable to complete and engage
with their [plan] with the help of justice
providing offenders with a copy of their deferral plan, ideally signed by them
in acknowledgment of what they have undertaken
to do. This is similar to the
approach taken with adjourned undertakings, which involves offenders signing a
written acknowledgment
of what they have promised to
is a requirement in Victoria that sentencing courts imposing an order with
conditions attached to it must explain to the offender
the purpose and effect of
the order and possible consequences of
non-compliance.
absence of deferrals being orders with conditions attached to them, this
requirement does not apply (though it would most
likely occur in practice). Some
the expectations
of them during the deferral and the consequences of engagement
(or non-engagement). For example, in England and Wales a court deferring
sentence must ‘forthwith’ give a copy of the deferment order to the
offender (and some others if
Legislation in the
Australian Capital Territory goes even further and requires courts to
‘explain to the offender in general
terms (and in language the offender
can readily understand)’ the nature and conditions of the deferral order,
the offender’s
obligations under the deferral order and the consequences
if the offender breaches their
obligations.
The court must
also ensure that the offender is given a copy of the order ‘as soon as
practicable’ after
If sentencing
courts are required or encouraged to state the sentence that the offender can
expect if they successfully engage with
the deferral (see [7.10]–[7.15]),
this could also be included in the plan to remind the offender of the benefit of
Question 11: Deferral plans
Should offenders receive a written deferral plan
outlining what they have agreed to do during the deferral period, and the
consequences of not engaging positively with those requirements?
after deferral
7.1 This chapter
examines the available data on sentencing outcomes in cases with a recorded
deferral. It then considers whether further
guidance is needed on the effect of
an offender’s behaviour during deferral on the sentence ultimately
Sentences imposed after deferral (Magistrates’
discussed at [2.25], data relating to sentence deferral in Victoria is not
exhaustive. It is, however, possible to examine
the sentencing outcomes in the
3,507 cases with a recorded deferral between 2012 and 2020 (Figure 7).
Figure 7: Sentence types imposed in cases with a recorded
sentence deferral, Magistrates’ Court, 2012 to 2020 (3,507
Sentence type
Number of cases
Imprisonment
Community correction order
Adjourned undertaking
7.3 The most
common sentence imposed in deferral cases was an adjourned undertaking (30% of
cases). In addition, a relatively high
proportion of deferral cases resulted in
fines (19%), with a further 2% receiving discharges and dismissals. This would
seem to run
contrary to the perception of sentence deferrals as an order most
often used in cases where an offender is on the cusp of receiving
imprisonment. Instead, the data suggests that, in the Magistrates’ Court,
sentence deferrals are equally used in
cases involving less serious offending.
use of sentence deferrals in less serious cases proved to be one of the more
polarising topics in our preliminary consultations.
On the one hand, it would be
inappropriate to subject an offender to more requirements prior to sentencing
than would have been imposed
if the court had proceeded immediately to
sentencing.
On the other
hand, the opportunity to receive ongoing support, continue with rehabilitative
efforts and potentially receive a less
severe sentencing outcome can have great
benefits, both for the offender and for the community (see, for example, Case
Study 2, in
which positive engagement with services resulted in an adjourned
undertaking).
Case Study 2: ‘Lisa’ (not her real name)
‘Lisa is a 36-year[-old] single mother of two
young children. Whilst Lisa was on a CCO, she was charged with new dishonesty
offence which contravened the order.
[The Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service] conducted a consolidated plea in the
Koori Court. At the time of the plea she had been referred
to drug and alcohol
support but had been cancelling/rescheduling a lot of appointments. The
magistrate and Elders had a conversation
with her about this and emphasized that
she needed to engage with services.
The magistrate deferred sentence to enable the client to engage in community
supports. Ordinarily, given the offending on a CCO and
given that she had
already been linked into supports, she would be likely to receive a further
The client came back to court a number of times over a period of 6 months.
She was ultimately placed on an adjourned undertaking,
given her engagement with
services and with the Elders. The difference in the Koori Court was the emphasis
on her rehabilitation
and encouragement to work with supports, rather than just
seeing further offending on a CCO and resentencing her immediately.’
Extract from Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Sentencing Act
Reform Project
7.5 More serious
sentence types – imprisonment and community correction orders (CCOs)
– were imposed in 46% of recorded
deferral cases (20% and 26%
respectively). It is not possible to discern how many of the imprisonment cases
involved circumstances
where imprisonment was inevitable, nor how many were
borderline imprisonment cases. It is likely that at least some (if not most)
were borderline imprisonment cases in which the imposition of a prison sentence
suggests inadequate engagement with the deferral.
Conversely, it is also likely
that some or many of the cases receiving a CCO were also borderline cases in
which the offender took
up the opportunity to demonstrate their efforts towards
rehabilitation, justifying a non-custodial sentence.
Sentences imposed after deferral (County Court)
was no available data on the use of deferral in the County Court. The Council
was, however, able to identify 32 cases sentenced
between 2012 and 2020 where a
deferral had been ordered prior to sentencing (see [2.13] and Appendix 2). In 17
of those cases, the
most severe sentence imposed in the case was a term of
imprisonment. In the other 15 cases, another sentence type was imposed (11
two adjourned undertakings and two wholly suspended sentences). In some of the
cases receiving a prison sentence, a term of
imprisonment may have been
inevitable, but the offender’s engagement on deferral may have resulted in
either a shorter term
of imprisonment or imprisonment combined with a CCO. In
other cases, the prison sentence may instead reflect the offender’s
failure to engage positively with the requirements of the deferral.
, the offender was sentenced to imprisonment after failing to engage
adequately with his deferral:
[T]he sentencing purposes of just punishment, denunciation and deterrence cannot
be sufficiently served by ... a community corrections
order, even with onerous
conditions. I am satisfied that I have no alternative but to impose an immediate
custodial sentence. I am
also satisfied that it is not appropriate that you be
sentenced to a combined term of imprisonment and a community corrections order.
You have been assessed as being unsuitable for a community corrections order.
You have failed to satisfactorily complete any rehabilitation
program since the
deferral of sentencing[.]
comparison, in
DPP v Cheong
, the offender’s sentence was deferred
for 12 months because the court was ‘satisfied that [he was] profoundly
psychiatrically
disabled and at the time of the offending he had an undiagnosed
psychiatric illness and that he was mentally
At the time
of deferral, the court concluded that:
it is in the interests of [the offender] that his present therapeutic
arrangement continues. That offers him the best hope for the
future in terms of
his ultimate rehabilitation, but importantly it offers the best protection for
the community in terms of reducing
the likelihood of
re-offending.
the case returned for sentencing, the court observed that the offender had
‘been released on bail with strict curfew conditions’,
‘continued to be effectively managed by [his] psychiatrist’, had
complied with his medication regime, and was accepting
the ‘support and
care provided by the early psychosis
sentenced the offender to an adjourned undertaking without conviction,
concluding that:
[i]n all other respects [he] is a person of good character. He has demonstrated
since the time following his arrest and placement
on strict bail conditions that
he is capable of compliance and the important thing also is that he is compliant
with his medication
regime and treatment
Statement about likely sentence after deferral?
Victoria an accused can request a broad indication of the sentence type that
they would most likely face if they plead
This is known as a
‘sentence indication’. While previously the higher courts were
limited to indicating whether they
would impose an immediate custodial sentence
or not, that restriction was removed in February
Now all courts can
specify which specific sentence type they would be likely to
it is possible to request a sentence indication at almost any stage of
proceedings, sentence indications are about the possible
the accused pleads
the sentence indication provisions of the
Criminal Procedure Act
deferral provision of the
Sentencing Act
appear to expressly allow (or
require) courts to indicate the sentence type they would impose on offenders who
pleaded guilty (for example, if they were to engage
positively with a deferral). As a point of comparison, courts in the Australian
Capital Territory are required when deferring sentence to state the penalty they
might impose if the offender complies with the conditions
of the order as well
as the penalty the offender might receive in the event of
non-compliance.
courts in Victoria are not required to do this, there have been cases where the
court has stated the penalty that the offender
can expect if they engage with
the requirements of their deferral.
instance, in
DPP v Mayoum
, the court said:
because of your progress on bail, because you had no prior convictions and other
reasons, I am deferring your sentence for 12 months.
You’ve still got to
abide by bail conditions. If you are successful, I will then place you on a
Community Corrections Order,
which will go for some
7.13 Similarly,
DPP v Tanti
, the court noted that:
[o]n that last occasion, I indicated that if you proceeded well during the
deferral, I would impose a penalty involving time served
in relation to the
substantive charges, and that ... is what I intend to
statement to the offender at the time of deferral about the sentence they can
expect can incentivise good behaviour and positive
engagement with the
conditions during the deferral period. It also provides transparency and
certainty for offenders and victims
consistency in the event that a different judicial officer ultimately sentences
the offender.
7.15 Conversely,
a statement at the time of deferral about the likely sentence may fetter
courts’ discretion at sentencing,
particularly if other intervening
circumstances between deferral and sentencing might prompt a different sentence.
Further, there
are likely to be varying degrees of engagement with deferral, and
limited engagement may not be sufficient to warrant a reduced sentence.
also leave victims out of the process if the court states the penalty that the
offender can expect prior to the victim being
given an opportunity to make a
victim impact statement.
Question 12: Sentence after deferral
Should courts be expressly permitted or required to
tell the offender the sentence that they can expect if they successfully engage
with the deferral? If so, why? If not, why not?
Considerations when sentencing after deferral
ordering deferral, sentencing courts must consider the offender’s
behaviour during the deferral period in deciding an
appropriate
This is not a
foreign exercise to courts. They are often called upon to take into account what
has happened to an offender prior
to sentencing. They must, for example, declare
any time served on remand as being deducted from any prison sentence
They must consider
the punitive aspects of time spent at a residential rehabilitation facility,
with the extent of any mitigation
‘depend[ing] on ... the nature and
severity of the restrictions to which an offender has been subject and the
duration of the
residency’.
also have to consider whether the offender has been subject to strict bail
conditions while awaiting trial and/or sentencing.
For example, in
, the court said:
[y]ou have complied with strict conditions of your bail, including a curfew, a
residential condition and reporting to police three
days per week. These
conditions may have assisted you in your rehabilitation, yet they also amount to
a substantial imposition on
your liberty and are a form of punishment already
occasioned.
7.17 In the
context of sentence deferrals specifically, most participants in the
Council’s survey indicated that offenders who
engage positively tend to
receive a reduced sentence. Moreover, they said that most offenders typically
engage positively with their
deferral, with little or no non-compliance (Figure
8). And that even for offenders with significant non-compliance, there were
attempts to engage. Further, all participants said that when offenders
engage positively with deferral conditions, it is either somewhat
or very common
for them to make life changes that would reduce their chances of
reoffending.
Figure 8: Survey responses to ‘In your
experience, how do offenders typically engage with their sentence
deferrals?’
Full compliance
Positive engagement, minor non-compliance
Attempt to engage, but significant noncompliance
No attempt to engage
engagement with deferral can have a mitigating effect on sentence, a failure to
engage should generally not be treated as
an aggravating factor (this is also
the case in England and
Instead, the
consequence of inadequate engagement should usually be that the offender loses
any benefit they may have otherwise received
if they had engaged
positively.
The relevance of proportionality?
sentence imposed for a crime should be proportionate to the gravity of the
offence considered in all its
circumstances.
relationship between sentence deferrals and proportionality is one that warrants
closer attention. Two key questions emerge:
First, what
should be the effect of proportionality on sentence deferral? Should courts
avoid imposing deferral conditions that may
be more onerous than the conditions
that the person would have been required to comply with if they had simply been
sentenced immediately?
This is discussed in more detail at [3.19] and [6.8].
what should be the effect of deferral on a sentencing court’s
considerations of proportionality? That is, to what extent
should any conditions
complied with during a deferral period constitute a form of ‘time
served’ towards any sentence
that the court imposes? Roberts has argued
that a deferred sentence should be ‘considered part of the totality of
imposed’ and doing so is one reason to ‘reduc[e] sentence
after the deferral
Question 13: Deferrals and totality
To what extent should the requirements imposed on an
offender during a sentence deferral be taken into account at sentencing?
Prioritising rehabilitation?
weight to be given to any single sentencing purpose, such as protection of the
community or general deterrence, will generally
depend on the circumstances of
the case. There are, however, some exceptions where circumstances will dictate
that certain sentencing
purposes take prominence in the sentencing exercise:
young adult offenders, rehabilitation will usually be the most important
serious offenders, courts will usually need to consider community protection as
the most important purpose in determining the
length of any term of
imprisonment;
drug treatment orders, courts will usually need to consider rehabilitation and
community protection as the most important
adjourned undertakings, one of the purposes of such an order can be ‘to
provide for the rehabilitation of an
7.21 A question
for consideration is whether section 83A should specify that in sentencing a
person after successful engagement with
deferral conditions, rehabilitation
should become the dominant sentencing purpose. Prioritising rehabilitation in
successful deferral
cases would accommodate, for example, a borderline
imprisonment case where, by the time of final sentencing, an offender had
in intensive rehabilitation for 12 months. Whereas at the time of
deferral the appropriate sentence might have been imprisonment,
intensive deferral with excellent engagement, the court might consider that a
CCO or even an adjourned undertaking is the
most appropriate means of continuing
the offender’s rehabilitation, minimising their ongoing contact with the
justice system
and reducing their risk of reoffending.
7.22 Elevating
rehabilitation to the dominant sentencing purpose following a successful
deferral – where the deferral was for
rehabilitative reasons – would
be consistent with:
other sentencing
schemes that elevate a particular purpose;
the purposes of
deferral; and
principle of proportionality in that a person being sentenced after deferral may
have already complied with significant and onerous
conditions.
Question 14: Prioritising rehabilitation
If an offender has engaged positively with the
conditions of their deferral, should rehabilitation become the primary purpose
of sentencing?
Reoffending after deferral
were 916 offenders sentenced in 2016 or 2017 in the Magistrates’ Court
after a recorded deferral. Over half of them
reoffended within three years of
their sentence (54%), at very similar rates for men and women. Most of the
reoffending appeared
to occur within the first 12 months after being sentenced
in that deferral case (Figure 9).
Figure 9: Cumulative
reoffending rates of people sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court in 2016 or
2017 after a recorded deferral
(916 offenders)
Total (916 offenders)
Male (745 offenders)
Female (171 offenders)
Within 1 year
Within 2 years
Within 3 years
reoffending rate was especially high for those who received a prison sentence
after deferral (74% or 125 of 169 people) compared
with those who received other
sentence types (49% or 369 of 747 people). Given that in many deferral cases a
prison sentence imposed
after a deferral period is likely to reflect the
offender’s less-than-ideal engagement with the deferral, it is perhaps not
surprising to find that the same cohort had high reoffending rates.
54% reoffending rate within three years (and 74% for those sentenced to
imprisonment) is relatively high compared to the findings
in much of the
Council’s other work on
reoffending.
However, that is
perhaps to be expected given the nature of this cohort: as stakeholders told us,
people receiving deferrals are
often those with substance abuse issues,
unresolved childhood trauma, underlying mental health issues, and rehabilitation
that are not easily ended by any single intervention. Instead, they are
people for whom the path to desistance will most likely be
long and arduous but
who will invariably benefit from some assistance along the
Appendix 1: Preliminary consultation
3 December 2021
Meeting with County Court
9 December 2021
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
10 December 2021
Meeting with Law Institute of Victoria
14 December 2021
Meeting with County Court
15 December 2021
Meeting with Law Institute of Victoria
16 December 2021
Meeting with Victoria Police
21 December 2021
Meeting with Federation of Community Legal Centres
22 December 2021
Meeting with Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service
17 January 2022
Meeting with Department of Justice and Community Safety
17 January 2021
Meeting with Department of Families, Fairness and Housing
18 January 2022
Meeting with County Court
19 January 2022
Meeting with Victoria Police
19 January 2022
Meeting with Victoria Legal Aid
21 January 2022
Meeting with Office of Public Prosecutions
21 January 2022
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
25 January 2022
Meeting with Criminal Bar Association
15 February 2022
Meeting with Centre for Forensic Behavioural Science
23 February 2022
Magistrates’ Court Observation and Meeting with Magistrates’
30 March 2022
Meeting with Judicial College of Victoria
Appendix 2: Methodology
Sentence deferral data from Courtlink
available data comes from the Magistrates’ Court case management system
(Courtlink). The 3,507 deferral cases analysed in
this paper were sentenced
cases where the court recorded ‘DEF’ (deferral) in the
‘hearing type’ field, indicating
that the cases were sentenced after
a sentence deferral.
Only one value is recorded in the ‘hearing type’ field, which is
also used to record cases heard in the Koori Court and
cases sentenced after the
offender has participated in CISP. Therefore, deferral cases in the Koori Court
involving CISP may have
been recorded as ‘CISP’ or ‘Koori
Court’ instead of as ‘DEF’, in which case they would not be
included in the deferral data. Further, the data only includes cases sentenced
after a deferral, not information about the deferral
itself. Therefore, in this
paper the number of cases sentenced after deferral should be treated as a
minimum, with the actual number
likely to be higher.
Deferral cases in the County Court
There was no available data on the use of sentence
deferrals in the County Court. The Council reviewed County Court sentencing
from 2012 (when deferral became available in the County Court) to 2020,
isolating all cases containing the word ‘defer’
and identifying
those that related to a deferred sentence, whether formally through section 83A
or through the court’s general
adjournment power. Through this process, we
identified 32 deferral cases in the County Court. This number can be seen as a
count of deferrals, with the actual number possibly being higher. An
additional 14 cases identified by the Council involved an offender
after an unsuccessful application for deferral.
Surveying practitioners and judicial officers
To supplement available court data on the use of
sentence deferrals in Victoria, the Council developed a survey to distribute to
prosecutors,
defence lawyers, magistrates and judges to seek their views. A
detailed description of the methodology used – including survey
development, participant recruitment, analysis of results and confidentiality
– is included in the Council’s recent consultation
paper in relation
to adjourned undertakings.
The survey was directed at both sentence deferrals and adjourned undertakings.
The survey questions that relate to sentence deferrals
are set out in Appendix
Prior offending and reoffending data
The Council’s reoffending database links
different sentencing events using unique person identifiers. This allows us to
individuals’ prior and subsequent offences. This database was used
to identify each offender who was sentenced in 2019 and
2020 after a recorded
deferral. Each offender was only counted once, at their earliest deferral case
(the index case) in those two
years. Prior offences were those offences
sentenced in the three years before the index case was initiated.
The index cases for the reoffending analysis were sentenced in 2016 and 2017.
These years were used to ensure a three-year follow-up
period to match the prior
offending observation period. Reoffending was defined as offences committed
between the index case’s
sentence date and the end of the follow-up
period. This was measured using data on offence date provided by the courts.
Appendix 3: Survey
The survey of legal
practitioners and the judiciary was conducted via Survey Monkey. The text below
is not a precise reflection of
the survey’s appearance, but it is a
precise reflection of the survey’s content. Other points to note include:
participants who
selected the last option for Questions 2 and 3 were directed to a termination
page because this indicated that they
were not part of the target cohort;
participants
were only asked to respond to Question 4 if they indicated that they usually
worked in a mix of the Magistrates’
Court and higher courts; and
participants
were only asked to respond to Question 6 if they indicated that they usually
worked in regional or rural Victoria.
Introduction
Thank you for participating. We would like to hear
from you about your experiences with deferrals and adjourned undertakings in
courts in Victoria. We’re seeking your views in relation to your
role as a legal practitioner, police prosecutor or judicial
There are more questions about sentence deferrals than about adjourned
undertakings because court data about adjourned undertakings
comprehensive.
The primary aim of this survey is to enhance our understanding of court data
on deferrals and adjourned undertakings, especially on
deferrals. This survey
does not replace stakeholder consultation. We will be publishing consultation
papers in the middle of the
year, and we will welcome your submissions. You will
also have the opportunity at the end of the survey to provide additional
information
and context to your responses.
This survey should take you about 15 minutes to complete.
Demographic questions
1. What is your email address?
We ask for your email to
avoid duplicate responses. We will not use your email to contact you unless you
give us permission at the
end of this survey.
All information you provide is confidential and is anonymised for the
purposes of analysis.
2. Please identify your role in relation to
am a judge or magistrate
I am a police
I am a legal
practitioner who mainly prosecutes
I am a legal
practitioner who mainly defends
I am a legal
practitioner who prosecutes and defends about equally
3. In which adult jurisdiction do you usually work?
County Court or Supreme Court
Magistrates’ Court
A mix of the
Magistrates’ Court and higher courts
work in the adult jurisdiction
4. Because you work in multiple jurisdictions, we ask that
you select a jurisdiction to keep in mind when answering questions about
sentence deferrals and adjourned undertakings.
Magistrates’
5. In which part of Victoria do you usually work?
Melbourne area
regional Victoria
6. In which justice region do you most often
We ask that you please keep this region in mind when
answering questions about sentence deferrals and adjourned undertakings.
Barwon South
West (including Geelong and Warrnambool)
(including Morwell and Bairnsdale)
(including Ballarat and Horsham)
Hume (including
Wangaratta and Shepparton)
Loddon Mallee
(including Bendigo and Mildura)
Sentence deferrals under s 83A
Section 83A
Sentencing Act 1991
permits courts to defer sentencing an offender for up to 12 months.
This section asks about your experience with sentence deferrals under
Please answer only in relation to
deferrals, not alternative or
informal means of deferring or adjourning sentences.
7. In your experience, how common are
deferrals in criminal cases?
8. Ideally, should
sentence deferrals be more common
than they currently are?
much more common
Yes, a little
more common
No, they are
used about the right amount
No, they are too
9. In your experience, which legislated purpose is the most
common purpose of
allow the offender’s
capacity for and prospects of rehabilitation
to be assessed
to allow the
offender to demonstrate that
rehabilitation has taken place
to allow the
offender to participate in a program aimed at
addressing the underlying
of the offending
to allow the
offender to participate in a program aimed at
addressing the impact
the offending on the victim
for another
purpose (please specify)
10. Think about your experience with cases where there is an
identifiable victim or victims. How common is it for courts to take into
the potential effects of a deferral on the victim(s)?
Very uncommon or
11. In your experience, which offence types are commonly the
main charge in cases where a sentence is deferred? Select all that
offences (e.g. assault, robbery)
Sexual offences
(e.g. sexual assault, rape)
Property and
deception offences (e.g. burglary, property damage, theft)
Drug offences
(e.g. possess or traffick a drug of dependence)
Public order
offences (e.g. weapons offences, disorderly conduct)
procedure offences (e.g. breach bail, breach family violence order)
Driving offences
(e.g. drive while disqualified)
Other (please
12. In your experience, for how long is a sentence typically
deferred under
13. In your experience, how commonly do
involve the following requirements?
Treatment for alcohol or
other drug use
Very common
Mental health treatment
Very common
Other medical treatment
Very common
Participation in an anger management or a behaviour change
Very common
Participation in CISP
Very common
Any other requirements: please list any you regularly
14. In your experience, how common is it for offenders whose
sentences have been deferred to understand what the deferral means for
The offender
understands
what is expected of
Very common
The offender understands how their engagement with the
deferral might affect their
Very common
The offender has the requirements of the deferral
Very common
15. In your experience, how do offenders typically engage
with their sentence deferrals?
complies fully
with all the requirements
The offender
positively with the requirements, but there is
non-compliance
along the way
The offender
tries to engage
with the requirements, but there is
significant
non-compliance
along the way
The offender
does not try to engage
with the requirements
Cannot answer
(e.g. because you do not typically see them again)
16. Does that non-compliance typically involve further
17. Think about offenders who engage well with their
sentence deferral. How often does their engagement lead to the
The offender makes
life changes
reduce their chances or rate of reoffending
Very common
The offender receives a
reduced sentence
Very common
18. In your experience, how often is an offender’s
progress typically reviewed by the court during their deferral
or more times
Never (only at
the final sentencing hearing)
Cannot answer
(e.g. because you do not usually see them again)
19. For offenders whose progress is reviewed, when does that
usually occur?
towards the beginning of the deferral period
Mostly towards
the end of the deferral period
regular intervals
Irregularly,
whether due to the offender’s progress or other factors
Cannot answer
(e.g. because in your experience courts don’t review offenders’
20. In your experience, how often are offenders sentenced
before the end of their planned deferral period?
The sentencing date is brought forward because the
offender is
engaging well
Very common
The sentencing date is brought forward because the offender
not engaging well
has reoffended
Very common
The sentencing date is brought forward because of
(e.g. change of circumstances)
Very common
The sentencing date is
brought forward
Very common
21. In your experience, what works well with deferrals as
they currently operate?
You can interpret this question as broadly as you
like. You may wish to consider the legislation, court practices, and available
22. Based on your experience, how would you change the way
deferrals currently operate? Please explain why you would make those changes.
You can interpret this question as broadly as you
like. You may wish to consider the legislation, court practices, and available
Adjourned undertakings
Questions 23–26 are excluded because they
relate exclusively to adjourned undertakings.
Concluding questions
27. Some of the questions in this survey have asked you to
comment on what is common or typical. However, people who belong to certain
groups might have different experiences with the process of having a sentence
deferred, or be affected differently by the requirements
of deferrals or
adjourned undertakings.
Such groups might
include, for example, young adults, women, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples, people with substance
abuse or mental health issues, people
experiencing homelessness, culturally and linguistically diverse people, and
people in rural
and regional Victoria.
Is there anything else you would like us to know about the different
experiences certain groups might have with sentence deferrals
or adjourned
undertakings?
28. Sometimes, a sentence can be ‘deferred’ by
means other than using
section 83A
, for example, by adjourning the sentence with
or without involving other services or interventions.
In your experience, are there sometimes
circumstances in which an alternative approach to deferring a sentence might be
section 83A?
Please explain how and why.
29. Do you have any further comments about deferrals or
adjourned undertakings?
Bibliography
Association for Restorative Justice,
Submission to the Parliamentary Inquiry
into the Victorian Criminal Justice System
(Australian Association for
Restorative Justice, 2021).
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
National Offence Index
(abs.gov.au,
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/classifications/national-offence-index/latest-release>.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of
Federal Offenders,
Report 103 (Australian Law Reform Commission, 2006).
Baldwin, Lucy and Rona Epstein,
Short but Not Sweet: A Study of the Impact
of Short Custodial Sentences on Mothers & Their Children
(De Montfort
University, 2017).
Barry, Lisa C., Kathryn B. Adams, Danielle Zaugg and Deborah Noujaim,
‘Health-Care Needs of Older Women Prisoners: Perspectives
HealthCare Workers Who Care for Them’ (2019) 32(2)
Journal of Women
Centre for Innovative Justice,
It’s Healing to Hear Another
Person’s Story and Also To Tell Your Own Story: Report on the CIJ’s
Restorative Justice
Conferencing Pilot Program
(Centre for Innovative
Justice, 2019).
Centre for Innovative Justice,
Submission to the Victorian Law Reform
Commission Review on Improving the Justice System Response to Sexual
(Centre for Innovative Justice, 2021).
Centre for Justice Innovation (UK),
Delivering a Smarter Approach:
Deferred Sentencing
(UK Centre for Justice Innovation, 2020).
Community Justice Scotland,
Community Justice Outcome Activity Across
Scotland: Annual Report 2018–2019
(Community Justice Scotland,
Corrections Victoria, ‘Prisons’ (corrections.vic.gov.au, 2021)
<https://www.corrections.vic.gov.au/prisons>.
Department of Corrections (NZ),
Change Lives Shape Futures –
Investing in Better Mental Health for Offenders
(New Zealand Department of
Corrections, 2016).
Department of Justice and Community Safety – Corrections Victoria,
Women in The Victorian Prison System
(Department of Justice and Community
Safety, 2019).
Department of Justice and Community Safety,
Improving Victims’
Experience of Summary Proceedings: Final Report
(Department of Justice and
Community Safety, 2021).
Emmerson, Ben, Andrew Ashworth and Alison Macdonald,
Human Rights and
Criminal Justice
(2nd ed., Sweet & Maxwell, 2007).
Euson, Jane, Lorraine Murray, Hannah Graham, Margaret Malloch and Gill
Review of the Aberdeen Problem-Solving Approach
Government, 2018).
Fox, Richard, ‘The Meaning of Proportionality in Sentencing’
[1994] MelbULawRw 1
(1994) 19(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
Freiberg, Arie and Neil Morgan, ‘Between Bail and Sentence: The
Conflation of Dispositional Options’
(2004) 15(3)
Current Issues in
Criminal Justice
Freiberg, Arie,
Fox and Freiberg’s Sentencing: State and Federal Law
in Victoria
(3rd ed., Thomson Reuters, 2014).
Freiberg, Arie,
Pathways to Justice: Sentencing Review 2002
(Department of Justice, 2002).
Garcia de Frutos, Maria, Rona Epstein and Geraldine Brown,
Pregnant Women in Prison?
(Coventry University, 2021).
Gerry, Felicity and Lyndon Harris,
Women in Prison: Is the Justice System
Fit for Purpose?
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 2016).
Gerry, Felicity, ‘Deferred Sentences – Used Again but Not Used
Enough’ (2017) 181(21)
Criminal Law and Justice Weekly
Gormley, Jay, Julian Roberts, Jose Pina-Sánchez, Cyrus Tata and Ana
The Methodological Challenges of Comparative Sentencing Research:
Literature Review
(Scottish Sentencing Council, 2022).
Handtke, Violet, Wiebke Bretschneider, Bernice Elger and Tenzin Wangmo,
‘Easily Forgotten: Elderly Female Prisoners’ (2015)
of Aging Studie
Huber, Andrea, ‘Women in Criminal Justice Systems and the Added Value
of the UN Bangkok Rules’, in Helmut Kury, Slawomir
Redo and Evelyn Shea
Women and Children as Victims and Offenders: Background, Prevention,
Reintegration
(Springer International Publishing, 2016).
Laub, John H. and Robert J. Sampson, ‘Understanding Desistance from
Crime’ (2001) 28(1)
Crime and Justice
Legal and Social Issues Committee, Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into
Children Affected by Parental Incarceration
(Parliament of Victoria, 2022).
Macdivittt, Katherine,
An Evaluation of the Structured Deferred Sentence
(Scottish Government Social Research, 2008).
MacKenzie, Brian, ‘The Judge Is the Key Component: The Importance of
Procedural Fairness in Drug-Treatment Courts’ (2016)
Court Review
McMahon, Marilyn,
No Bail, More Jail? Breaking the Nexus Between Community
Protection and Escalating Pre-Trial Detention
(Parliamentary Library &
Information Service, Department of Parliamentary Services Victoria 2019).
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Annual Report
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Annual Report 2020–21
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, ‘Assessment and Referral Court
(ARC)’ (mcv.vic.gov.au, 2018)
<https://www.mcv.vic.gov.au/about-us/assessment-and-referral-court-arc>.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, ‘Bail Support (CISP)’
(mcv.vic.gov.au, 2019)
<https://www.mcv.vic.gov.au/find-support/bail-support-cisp>.
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Magistrates’
Court—Guidelines for Contest Mention
(Magistrates’ Court of
Victoria, 1994).
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Submission to The Royal Commission
Into Victoria’s Mental Health System
(Magistrates’ Court of
Victoria, 2019).
Miller, Johanne, Blane Abercrombie and Gillian McLellan,
Evaluation of
South Lanarkshire Structured Deferred Sentencing for Young People: End of
Project Report
(University of the West of Scotland, 2019).
Ministry of Justice (England and Wales),
A Smarter Approach to
(England and Wales Ministry of Justice, 2020).
Ministry of Justice (NZ),
Restorative Justice Best Practice Framework
(New Zealand Ministry of Justice, 2017).
Minson, Shona, Rebecca Nadin and Jenny Earle,
Sentencing of Mothers:
Improving the Sentencing Process and Outcomes for Women with Dependent Children
– A Discussion Paper
(Prison Reform Trust, 2015).
Roberts, Julian V., ‘Deferred Sentencing: A Fresh Look at an Old
Concept’ (2022) 3(1)
Criminal Law Review
Roberts, Julian V., Elaine Freer and Jonathan Bild,
The Use of Deferred
Sentencing in England and Wales: A Review of Law, Guidance and Research
(Sentencing Academy, 2022).
Royal Commission into Family Violence,
Recommendations
(Royal Commission into Family Violence, 2016).
Royal Commission into Victoria’s Mental Health System,
Final Report
Volume 3: Promoting Inclusion and Addressing Inequities
(Royal Commission
into Victoria’s Mental Health System, 2021).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Monitoring
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2014).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Second
Monitoring Report (Pre-Guideline Judgment)
(Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Third Monitoring
Report (Post-Guideline Judgment)
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2016).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Contravention of Family Violence Intervention
Orders and Safety Notices: Prior Offences and Reoffending
(Sentencing
Advisory Council, 2016).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Gender Differences in Sentencing Outcomes
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2010).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in Victoria:
Consultation Paper
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reoffending by Children and Young People in
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2016).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Rethinking Sentencing for Young Adult
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2019).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Personal Safety
Intervention Orders in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the
Magistrates’ Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/sentencing-outcomes-magistrates-court>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Stalking in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Suspended Sentences and Intermediate
Sentencing Orders: Suspended Sentences – Final Report Part 2
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2008).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Threat Offences in Victoria: Sentencing
Outcomes and Reoffending
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2021).
Trood, Michael, Benjamin Spivak, Diane Sivasubramaniam and Stephane Shepherd,
‘Magistrates’ Experiences of Judicial Supervision
in Mainstream
Courts’ (2022) 31(3)
Journal of Judicial Administration
Tudor, Steven K., ‘Why Should Remorse Be a Mitigating Factor in
Sentencing?’ (2008) 2(3)
Criminal Law and Philosophy
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Submission to
Sentencing Act
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service, 2020).
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Improving the Justice System Response to
Sexual Offences: Report
(Victorian Law Reform Commission, 2021).
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process
(Victorian Law Reform Commission, 2016).
Victoria Legal Aid, ‘Handbook for Lawyers’
(handbook.vla.vic.gov.au, 2022) <https://www.handbook.vla.vic.gov.au/>.
Akoka v The Queen
2017] VSCA 214
Armstrong v The Queen
[2013] VSC 111
Azzopardi v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 372
Bergman (A Pseudonym) v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 148
Boulton v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 342
DPP v Amari (A Pseudonym)
[2021] VCC 1406
DPP v Cassidy
[2019] VCC 2121
DPP v Cheong
[2016] VCC 1423
DPP v Cheong
[2017] VCC 1262
DPP v Dattilo
[2018] VCC 1237
DPP v Davis
[2020] VCC 830
[2020] VCC 1540
DPP v Dittloff
[2016] VCC 614
DPP v Evangelistis
[2015] VCC 1192
DPP v Hampson
[2015] VCC 916
DPP v Hassan
[2017] VCC 219
DPP v Kartabani
[2021] VCC 122
[2018] VCC 566
DPP v Matthews-Taylor
[2015] VCC 1812
DPP v Mawien
[2018] VCC 565
DPP v Mauot
[2021] VCC 1388
DPP v Mayoum
[2017] VCC 442
[2022] VSCA 98
DPP v Payne
[2021] VCC 1857
DPP v Petty
(A Pseudonym)
[2020] VCC 1120
DPP v Raymer
[2020] VCC 1289
[2022] VCC 489
DPP v Rowarth
[2012] VCC 1975
DPP v Schembri
[2019] VCC 1774
DPP v Swift
[2015] VCC 1588
DPP v Tanti
[2019] VCC 2124
DPP v Villis
[2021] VCC 684
[2016] VCC 1695
DPP v Wagner
[2014] VCC 350
DPP v Wallis (A Pseudonym)
[2020] VCC 1100
DPP v Wharton
[2014] VCC 1844
DPP v Zaphir
[2020] VCC 1746
Guest v DPP
[2020] VSC 218
McGrath v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 134
[2018] VSC 361
[2018] VSC 559
Re Gloury-Hyde
[2018] VSC 393
[2019] VSC 134
[2009] VSCA 58
[1998] 4 VR 235
Interstate and overseas
Anderson v Commissioner of Police
Forrest v Police
[2021] SASC 116
Griffiths v The Queen
[1977] HCA 44
Hoare v The Queen
[1989] HCA 33
[2009] NSWCCA 6
[2022] NSWSC 399
R v Eric (A Pseudonym)
[2021] QCA 81
R v Farrell
[2014] NSWCCA 30
[2014] NSWCCA 263
[2021] QCA 235
[2010] ACTSC 64
[2021] NSWDC 625
[2002] NSWCCA 381
R v Rayment
[2010] NSWCCA 85
R v Ria Williams
[2019] EWCA Crim 1234
R v Ryan (A Pseudonym) (No 2)
[2021] NSWDC 733
R v Thompson
[2012] SASCFC 149
[2001] NSWCCA 522
R v Trindall
[2002] NSWCCA 364
[2013] SASCFC 12
Siganto v The
[1998] HCA 74
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
[1988] HCA 14
Western Australia v Hatch
[2008] WASCA 162
Legislation and regulations
Bail Act 1977
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Children and Young Persons Act 1989
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Evidence Act 2008
Justice Legislation Amendment (Criminal Procedure Disclosure and Other
Matters) Act 2022
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing (Amendment) Act 1999
Sentencing (Amendment) Act 2003
Sentencing Amendment Act 2010
Interstate and overseas
Crimes (Restorative Justice) Act 2004
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1990
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Criminal Code
Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995
Sentencing Act 2002
Sentencing Act 2017
Sentencing Act 1997
Sentencing Act 2020
Sentencing Act 1995
Victims’ Rights Act 2002
Quasi-legislative materials
Convention on the Rights of the Child
opened for signature 20 November
1989, UNTS 1577
(entered into force 2
September 1990).
United Nations,
United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners
and Non-Custodial Measures for Women Offenders,
GA Res 65/229, 3rd Comm,
65th sess, Agenda Item 105, UN Doc A/65/457 (16 March 2011).
Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative Assembly, 22 April 1999
(Rob Hulls, Shadow Attorney-General).
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 7 October 2010,
5302 (John Lenders, Treasurer).
Published by the Sentencing Advisory Council
Melbourne, Victoria,
© Copyright State of Victoria, Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022
This publication is protected by the laws of copyright. No part may
reproduced by any process except in accordance with the provisions
ISBN 978-1-925071-71-9 (Online)
Authorised by the Sentencing Advisory Council, Level 3, 333 Queen Street,
Melbourne VIC 3000
Copyedited and typeset by Catherine Jeffreys AE
, inserted by
Sentencing (Amendment) Act 2003
A separate deferral scheme (which is not included in
this project) operates in the Children’s Court:
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
Sentence deferral is also available in
several other jurisdictions, such as New South Wales, the Australian Capital
Territory, Western
Australia, New Zealand, England and Wales, and Scotland.
deferral is ‘intended to provide offenders with an opportunity to address
issues that have contributed to their offending
and to demonstrate to the court
that they are taking serious steps to get their lives back on track’:
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Suspended Sentences and Intermediate Sentencing
Orders: Suspended Sentences – Final Report
Victoria, Parliamentary Debates, Legislative Assembly, 22 April 1999, 561 (Rob
Hulls, Shadow Attorney-General).
s 83A(1A)(d).
and Young Persons Act 1989
, repealed by
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
(Vic) s 601.
(Amendment) Act 1999
v The Queen
[1977] HCA 44.
See also Sentencing Advisory Council (2008),
above n 4, 259; Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time:
Sentencing of Federal Offenders,
Report 103 (2006) 227 [7.36]. Courts also
had a general adjournment power that could be used to informally defer a
sentence (see [1.7]).
Advisory Council (2008), above n 4, 595; Arie Freiberg,
Freiberg’s Sentencing: State and Federal Law in Victoria
Amendment Act 2010
This legislation also introduced a list of
statutory purposes for which courts can order a sentence deferral: see
aims to reduce the likelihood of reoffending by addressing offenders’
health and/or social needs and assisting them to
access support services.
ARC aims to help people address the underlying factors that contributed to their
offending, operating on a problem-solving court
model. It is only available for
people diagnosed with a mental illness, intellectual disability, acquired brain
injury, autism spectrum
disorder and/or a neurological impairment. Further, the
person must be on bail and plead guilty to have their case transferred. See
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, ‘Assessment and Referral Court
(ARC)’ (mcv.vic.gov.au, 2018).
Magistrates’
Court Act 1989
Once the case is in the Koori Court, an
offender’s sentence may also be formally deferred under
section 83A
Sentencing Act 1991
Procedure Act 2009
–(2). Upon adjourning the
proceeding, the court may allow the accused to go at large, remand the accused
in custody, or grant
or extend bail.
right has been interpreted as prohibiting disproportionate sentencing: see Ben
Emmerson et al.,
Human Rights and Criminal Justice
(2nd ed., 2007)
total of 3,507 of 791,219 sentenced cases had the hearing type recorded as
‘DEF’ (deferral).
data on gender is restricted to the categories of male and female. Data on
non-binary gender categories is currently unavailable.
Data on gender was
available for 777,375 sentenced cases from 2012 to 2020. In 174,584 of those
777,375 sentenced cases, the offender
was female.
Advisory Council,
Gender Differences in Sentencing Outcomes
on age was available for 686,783 sentenced cases from 2012 to 2020. In 172,203
of those 686,783 sentenced cases, the offender
was aged 18 to 25 at the time of
sentencing.
V. Roberts, ‘Deferred Sentencing: A Fresh Look at an Old Concept’
(2022) 3(1)
Criminal Law Review
principal proven offence
is measured by the offence receiving the most
serious penalty in a case (for example, the longest term of imprisonment), or
alternatively
if multiple offences received the same most serious penalty, by
using the National Offence Index: Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Offence Index
(abs.gov.au, 2018).
Advisory Council,
Reoffending by Children and Young People in Victoria
(2016) 17; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Contravention of Family Violence
Intervention Orders and Safety Notices: Prior Offences and Reoffending
with County Court (3 December 2021).
with County Court (3 December 2021); Meeting with County Court (18 January
these cases, the following are available from the Australasian Legal Information
Institute (AustLII):
DPP v Matthews-Taylor
[2015] VCC 1812
[2016] VCC 1695
[2018] VCC 566
DPP v Mayoum
[2017] VCC 442
DPP v Mawien
[2018] VCC 565
DPP v Cheong
[2017] VCC 1262
[2020] VCC 1540
DPP v Kartabani
In one of the 32 deferral cases (
DPP v Rowarth
[2012] VCC 1975)
sentencing was deferred informally as the sentencing judge did not have the
power at that time to formally defer sentencing in the
County Court.
these cases, the following are available on AustLII:
DPP v Wagner
DPP v Evangelistis
[2015] VCC 1192
DPP v Swift
DPP v Dittloff
[2016] VCC 614
DPP v Schembri
DPP v Davis
[2020] VCC 830
DPP v Petty
(A Pseudonym)
[2020] VCC 1120
DPP v Raymer
[2020] VCC 1289
DPP v Zaphir
[2016] VCC 614
, [4], [9].
[2020] VCC 1289
example, from 2012 to 2020, 83% of cases sentenced in the Supreme Court received
imprisonment (609 of 736 sentenced cases).
Procedure Act 2009
–(2). See [1.7] and above n 15.
McGrath v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 134
, the offender had sought to adjourn
the plea hearing to obtain a neuropsychological report. The Court of Appeal held
that the sentencing
judge erred in refusing the adjournment as this refusal had
denied the offender procedural fairness. See also
Guest v DPP
where an adjournment of a few weeks was granted to an offender on the basis
of hardship arising from the effects of the COVID-19
instance, some programs – such as some residential drug rehabilitation
programs – extend beyond the 12-month maximum
of section 83A sentence
deferrals: see [5.5].
Advisory Council, ‘Deferrals and Adjourned Undertakings Stakeholder
Survey’, Survey Monkey (March 2022).
Aboriginal Legal Service,
Submission to
Sentencing Act
Reform Project
(2014), above n 10, 197.
Aboriginal Legal Service (2020), above n 35, 8.
(2022), above n 21, 228.
Gormely et al.,
The Methodological Challenges of Comparative Sentencing
Research: Literature Review
(2022) 33, citing Katherine Macdivittt,
Evaluation of the Structured Deferred Sentence Pilots
(2008); Jane Euson et
Review of the Aberdeen Problem-Solving Approach
(2018); Johanne
Miller et al.,
Evaluation of South Lanarkshire Structured Deferred Sentencing
for Young People: End of Project Report
et al. (2022), above n 39, 34, citing Community Justice Scotland,
Justice Outcome Activity Across Scotland: Annual Report 2018–2019
offenders who plead guilty and are eligible for legal aid, VLA provides a lump
sum general preparation fee of $445 for a summary
matter ($255 for an urgent
matter), which ‘covers all necessary work’: Victoria Legal Aid,
‘Handbook for Lawyers’
(handbook.vla.vic.gov.au, 2022). As a point
of comparison, offenders in the ARC List are funded for eligibility hearings and
support plan ratification hearings.
Aboriginal Legal Service (2020), above n 35, 9.
example, the Magistrates’ Court 2018–19 annual report records 1,705
CISP participants in 2017–18 and 2,112 CISP
participants in 2018–19:
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Annual Report
(2019) 47. Some of these CISP participants may have had their sentence deferred
to begin or continue CISP. However, those with ‘CISP’
in the hearing
cases involving CISP and/or the Koori
Court will be recorded as
‘DEF’, ‘CISP” or ‘KC’ but not all
(2022), above n 21, 219. Professor Roberts adds: ‘The absence of
statistics on an important sentencing provision reveals
a clear gap in the
Ministry of Justice sentencing statistics’.
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria,
Annual Report 2020–21
(1). The need for the offender’s consent is
consistent with case law stating that deferring a sentence without good reason
constitutes
undue delay, which is unfair to the offender and may constitute a
miscarriage of justice:
[2002] NSWCCA 381
, [30]; see also
[2014] NSWCCA 263
[2010] ACTSC 64
R v Farrell
[2014] NSWCCA 30
, [34], [53].
are a variety of other contexts in which courts have considered the interests of
the offender, including the granting of an
extended parole period (
[2022] NSWSC 399
, [48]), the non-recording of a conviction (
[2021] QCA 235
, [22]), the restoration of a driver licence (
Commissioner of Police
[2021] QSC 254
, [24]), the delayed disqualification
of a driver licence (
Forrest v Police
[2021] SASC 116
, [42]), and in
dealing with inconsistencies in evidence (
R v Ryan (A Pseudonym) (No 2)
[2021] NSWDC 733
[2021] NSWDC 625
[2022] VSCA 98
[2022] VCC 489
, [43]. See also
DPP v Payne
[2021] VCC 1857
DPP v Mauot
[2021] VCC 1388
DPP v Amari (A Pseudonym)
[2021] VCC 1406
Bergman (A Pseudonym) v The Queen
[2021] VSCA
v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 342
s 3AAA(1)(j).
Procedure Act 2009
(5). If the victim is present, the
court may seek their views before giving a sentence indication. If the victim is
not in court,
the court may consider their victim impact statement if it is
available or may postpone the decision to get the victim’s views:
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Magistrates’
Court—Guidelines for Contest Mention
(1994) [6.2]–[6.3], cited
in Department of Justice and Community Safety,
Improving Victims’
Experience of Summary Proceedings: Final Report
(2021) 32–33.
s 5(2)(daa).
can be contrasted with requirements in other jurisdictions, such as Canada where
the court must consider the interests of the
victim in making a deferral
decision: see
Criminal Code
, RSC 1985, c C-46,
Advisory Council (2008), above n 4, 271–272. As Julian Roberts has noted:
‘The tradition in common law jurisdictions
is for a court to sentence
expeditiously following conviction’, with deferral an exception to that
practice: Roberts (2022),
above n 21,
[2012] SASCFC 149
Advisory Council (2008), above n 4, 271.
RSC 1985, c C-46, s 720(2).
(UK) s 5(1).
Sentencing Act 1991
alone, there are multiple references
to the ‘interests of justice’ in different contexts:
(4). It is also referenced over
50 times in the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic), four times in the
Magistrates Court Act 1989
(Vic), three times in the
Evidence Act 2008
(Vic), twice in the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) and once in the
for example, Roberts (2022), above n 21, 224.
See also Roberts (2022), above n 21, 213.
(2022), above n 21, 220.
for example,
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(2022), above n 21, 223.
with County Court (3 December 2021); Roberts (2022), above n 21,223;
[2002] NSWCCA 364
[60]. This function of deferral –
allowing courts to make reasoned assessments of offenders’ rehabilitative
– was one of the bases on which suspended sentences of
imprisonment were abolished in Victoria: Freiberg (2014), above n 10,
Advisory Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the Magistrates’
Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2022).
(2014), above n 10, 198, citing
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
[2009] NSWCCA 6
R v Rayment
[2010] NSWCCA
, [22], [160];
R v Trindall
[2002] NSWCCA 364
[2013] SASCFC 12
[2015] VCC 1588
Unpublished
sentencing remarks provided to the Council.
v Evangelistis
[2015] VCC 1192
, [33]. See also
DPP v Schembri
DPP v Villis
[2021] VCC 684
(2014), above n 10, 197.
[2002] NSWCCA 381
, [29]–[30]. See also
R v Thompson
[2012] SASCFC 149
, [34]. The New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal also held
that deferral should not be used if it unnecessarily causes delay:
[2010] NSWCCA 85
, [89], [121].
(2014), above n 10, 198.
197; Arie Freiberg,
Pathways to Justice: Sentencing Review 2002
(Department of Justice, 2002) 181.
for example, Richard Fox, ‘The Meaning of Proportionality in
Sentencing’
[1994] MelbULawRw 1
(1994) 19(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
[E]xcept where overridden by ... legislation, the common law
... prohibits judges or magistrates from awarding sentences exceeding
is commensurate to the gravity of the crime ... It is impermissible for any
punishment to be extended above this limit
in an effort to ... provide for
medical, psychiatric or other treatment ... or to promote other
‘educative’ purposes,
or to force cooperation, restitution or
compensation irrespective of whether fulfilment of these ancillary objectives
would protect
the community against further crime.
Freiberg and Neil Morgan, ‘Between Bail and Sentence: The Conflation of
Dispositional Options’
(2004) 15(3)
Current Issues in Criminal
(2022), above n 21, 217.
See also Freiberg and Morgan (2004), above n 82.
Advisory Council (2008), above n 4, 596 (Recommendation 13–3).
, (2)(a). The New South Wales provision is very
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1990
(NSW) s 11(1).
(2022), above n 21, 210–211.
for example,
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1990
(NSW) s 11(1)(a).
for example,
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
ss 57A(2)(a)
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
Sentencing Act 2017
–(b). In England and Wales, sentence deferral is permitted to
allow a court ‘to have regard to the offender’s conduct
conviction ... or any change in the offender’s circumstances’, which
would include consideration of the offender’s
rehabilitation efforts:
Sentencing Act 2020
(UK) s 3(1).
for example,
Sentencing Act 2002
(NZ) s 25(1)(b);
Sentencing Act
(UK) s 3(b).
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Sentencing Act 1997
s 57A(2)(d).
In New Zealand,
sentencing can also be deferred ‘to enable inquiries to be made or to
determine the most suitable method of
dealing with the case’:
Sentencing Act 2002
(NZ) s 25(1)(a). See also
Sentencing Act 1995
s 16(1)(a).
And in England and Wales, sentence deferral is permitted to
allow a court ‘to have regard to the offender’s conduct after
conviction ... or any change in the offender’s circumstances’:
Sentencing Act 2020
(UK) s 3(1).
[2014] VCC 1844.
See Case Study 1 (page 37).
[2014] VCC 1844
, [4]. See Case Study 1 (page 37).
[2014] VCC 1844
, [12]. See Case Study 1 (page 37).
ss 83A(1A)(d)
, (2)(a). The New South Wales sentence deferral
provision is very similar:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1990
Advisory Council (2008), above n 4, 595.
for example, Royal Commission into Family Violence,
Volume IV: Report and
Recommendations
(2016) 135; Victorian Law Reform Commission,
the Justice System Response to Sexual Offences: Report
(2021) 184–185;
Australian Association for Restorative Justice,
Submission to the
Parliamentary Inquiry into the Victorian Criminal Justice System
for example, Victorian Law Reform Commission (2021), above n 97, 210–211;
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the Criminal
Trial Process
(2016) 177; Sentencing Advisory Council (2008), above n 4, 47,
595–596; Centre for Innovative Justice,
It’s Healing to Hear
Another Person’s Story and Also To Tell Your Own Story: Report on the
CIJ’s Restorative Justice
Conferencing Pilot Program
Ministry of Justice (England and Wales),
A Smarter Approach to Sentencing
K. Tudor, ‘Why Should Remorse Be a Mitigating Factor in Sentencing?’
(2008) 2(3)
Criminal Law and Philosophy
Law Reform Commission (2021), above n 97, 209. Conversely, refusal to
participate in a restorative justice program is not
an aggravating factor: see
Crimes (Restorative Justice) Act 2004
ss 25(f)(ii)
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
s 34(1)(h).
This is consistent with
case law that suggests that the absence of a mitigating factor should not
generally be treated as an aggravating
Siganto v The
[2009] VSCA 58
, [41]; Freiberg (2014), above n 10,
v Eric (A Pseudonym)
[2021] QCA 81
Association for Restorative Justice (2021), above n 97, 1.
Law Reform Commission (2016), above n 98, 177; Centre for Innovative Justice,
Submission to the Victorian Law Reform Commission Review on Improving the
Justice System Response to Sexual Offences
proposed language in the Council’s 2008 recommendation was more
specifically ‘to allow the offender to participate
in restorative justice
or other programs’: Sentencing Advisory Council (2008), above n 4, 596.
Victorian Law Reform Commission has recommended a restorative justice scheme be
legislated in Victoria: Victorian Law Reform Commission
(2021), above n 97, 206,
211; Victorian Law Reform Commission (2016), above n 98, 194. So too has the
Centre for Innovative Justice:
Centre for Innovative Justice (2021), above n
103, 24. As a point of comparison, the Australian Capital Territory and New
have legislative frameworks to facilitate restorative justice processes:
Crimes (Restorative Justice) Act 2004
Sentencing Act 2002
Parole Act 2002
Victims’ Rights Act 2002
Ministry of Justice (NZ),
Restorative Justice Best Practice Framework
[2015] VCC 916
unpublished sentencing remarks
provided to the Council. See also
R v Trindall
[2002] NSWCCA 364
(2022), above n 21, 224.
Law Reform Commission
(2006), above n 9, 227.
Magistrates’
Court Observation (23 February 2022).
Law Reform Commission
(2006), above n 9, 227, citing
[2001] NSWCCA 522
[2018] VCC 1237
, [63], [74].
for example,
R v Ria Williams
[2019] EWCA Crim 1234.
(2022), above n 21, 224. See also Julian V. Roberts et al.,
Deferred Sentencing in England and Wales: A Review of Law, Guidance and
of Justice and Community Safety – Corrections Victoria,
Women in the
Victorian Prison System
(2019) 3; Felicity Gerry and Lyndon Harris,
in Prison: Is the Justice System Fit for Purpose?
(2016) 3, 8–12; Lisa
C. Barry et al., ‘Health-Care Needs of Older Women Prisoners: Perspectives
of the HealthCare Workers
Who Care for Them’ (2019) 32(2)
Women & Aging
183, 184; Ministry of Justice (England and Wales), 2020),
above n 98, 36, 52; Violet Handtke et al., ‘Easily Forgotten: Elderly
Female Prisoners’ (2015) 32(1)
Journal of Aging Studie
et al. (2015), above n 113, 2, 5–8. For a list of Victorian prisons, see:
Corrections Victoria, ‘Prisons’
(corrections.vic.gov.au, 2021).
for example, Department of Justice and Community Safety – Corrections
Victoria (2019), above n 113, 4, 12 (finding that
65% of women remanded between
2015 and 2016 reported that they had previously experienced family
et al. (2015), above n 113, 2, 5–8. See also Freiberg (2014), above n 10,
Gerry, ‘Deferred Sentences – Used Again but Not Used Enough’
(2017) 181(21)
Criminal Law and Justice Weekly
358. The Ministry of
Justice in England and Wales has also encouraged the increased use of deferral
as a means of ‘changing
the justice pathway’ of
’‘vulnerable women’: Ministry of Justice (England and Wales)
(2020), above n 98,
12, 36, 38, 52. See also Roberts (2022), above n 21, 224;
Shona Minson et al.,
Sentencing of Mothers: Improving the Sentencing Process
and Outcomes for Women with Dependent Children – A Discussion Paper
(2015) 17; Maria Garcia de Frutos et al.,
Why Are Pregnant Women in
(2021) 5; Lucy Baldwin and Rona Epstein,
Short but Not Sweet: A
Study of the Impact of Short Custodial Sentences on Mothers & Their
example is the
Bangkok Rules
, which provide for the treatment of women
prisoners and non-custodial measures for women offenders: United Nations,
United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-Custodial
Measures for Women Offenders,
GA Res 65/229, 3rd Comm, 65th sess, Agenda
Item 105, UN Doc A/65/457 (16 March 2011) (‘
Bangkok Rules
Andrea Huber, ‘Women in Criminal Justice Systems and the Added Value of
the UN Bangkok Rules’, in Helmet Kury
et al. (eds),
Women and Children
as Victims and Offenders: Background, Prevention, Reintegration
35–84. Another example is the
Convention on the Rights of the Child
opened for signature 20 November
1989, UNTS 1577
(entered into force 2
September 1990). Article 6 requires states to ‘ensure to the maximum
extent possible the survival and
development of the child’, and Article 24
upholds the child’s right to ‘the enjoyment of the highest
standard of health’. In
[2001] NSWCCA 522
court discussed Australia’s ratification of that convention in concluding
that the sentence should have been deferred for
arrangements to be made for
et al. (2015), above n 117, 17. See also Legal and Social Issues Committee,
Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into Children Affected by Parental
Incarceration
(2022) 124.
[2001] NSWCCA 522.
[2001] NSWCCA 522
, [7]. Contra
Western Australia v Hatch
[2008] WASCA 162
, where the court held that a woman’s sentence should
not have been deferred, for reasons including that there was no evidence
the offender’s children would not be adequately cared for by her extended
family and that legislation in Western Australia
only permits sentence deferral
if imprisonment is not inevitable: at [21]–[22].
for example,
[2001] NSWCCA 522.
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Sentencing Act 2017
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(UK) s 5(2);
Sentencing Act 1997
Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995
Amendment Act 2010
; Sentencing Advisory Council (2008), above n
4, 592. These same recommendations had also been made six years earlier:
Freiberg (2002),
above n 80, 184.
Advisory Council (2008), above n 4, 584–591.
, sch 2 cl 1(d). A compelling reason is one that is
‘difficult to resist’:
[2018] VSC 361
, [47]. It can
also be based on a combination of factors.
s 4AA(2)(c)
, sch 2 cl 1.
[2018] VSC 559
Gloury-Hyde
[2018] VSC 393
[2018] VSC 559
[2019] VSC 134
[2018] VSC 559
, [64], citing
Armstrong v The Queen
for example, John H. Laub and Robert J. Sampson, ‘Understanding Desistance
from Crime’ (2001) 28(1)
Crime and Justice
was recommended by this Council: Sentencing Advisory Council (2008), above n 4,
593 (‘the Council does not support courts
being permitted to impose formal
obligations on the offender as a condition of deferral’).
s 83A(2)(b).
; Marilyn McMahon,
No Bail, More Jail? Breaking
the Nexus Between Community Protection and Escalating Pre-Trial Detention
from Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service to Sentencing Advisory Council, 29
December 2021.
above at [6.4]–[6.7] on the consequences of deferral requirements being
made conditions of bail.
and Morgan (2004), above n 82, 230.
Concerns about onerous conditions are one of the reasons that Freiberg and
Morgan criticise the ‘pre-sentence order’
available instead of a
deferred sentence in Western Australia (under
Sentencing Act 1995
See also Sentencing Advisory Council (2008), above n 4,
ss 83A(1)(B)
Trood et al., ‘Magistrates’ Experiences of Judicial Supervision in
Mainstream Courts’ (2022) 31(3)
Journal of Judicial Administration
also Sentencing Advisory Council (2008), above n 4, 49, 589, 593.
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 7 October 2010, 5302 (John
Lenders, Treasurer).
Magistrates’
Court Observation (23 February 2022). For a more detailed discussion of the
Council’s court observation see
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Adjourned Undertakings in Victoria: Consultation Paper
MacKenzie, ‘The Judge Is the Key Component: The Importance of Procedural
Fairness in Drug-Treatment Courts’ (2016)
Court Review
(citations omitted).
et al. (2022), above n 144.
(definition of
justice plan condition
75(3), 80(1)(a), 80(4). See also
section 44A(1)(b)(ii)
requiring mandatory
treatment and monitoring orders to include either a treatment and rehabilitation
condition or a justice plan
Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Monitoring Report
17; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Second
Monitoring Report (Pre-Guideline Judgment)
(2015) 16; Sentencing Advisory
Community Correction Orders: Third Monitoring Report (Post-Guideline
Advisory Council (2022), above n 149, 44.
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria (2018), above n 13.
Advisory Council, ‘Deferrals and Adjourned Undertakings Stakeholder
Survey’, Survey Monkey (March 2022).
consistently shows a high rate of mental illness among people who come into
in prison: see, for example,
Royal Commission into Victoria’s Mental Health System,
Final Report
Volume 3: Promoting Inclusion and Addressing Inequities
(2021) 352;
Department of Corrections (NZ),
Change Lives Shape Futures – Investing
in Better Mental Health for Offenders
with Magistrates’ Court (21 January 2022). CISP aims to reduce the
likelihood of reoffending by addressing an offender’s
health and/or social
needs and assisting them to access support services. To be eligible, the
offender must consent and be experiencing
a physical or mental disability or
illness; drug or alcohol dependency or misuse issues; inadequate social, family
and economic support;
or homelessness: Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
‘Bail Support (CISP)’ (mcv.vic.gov.au, 2019). The indictable
crime/County
Court CISP pilot at Melbourne Magistrates’ Court and County
Court provides for longer periods of engagement (up to eight months).
with Magistrates’ Court (9 December 2021).
for Justice Innovation (UK),
Delivering a Smarter Approach: Deferred
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria,
Submission to The Royal Commission Into Victoria’s
Mental Health System
the adjourned undertakings context, this occurs through the signing of an
CP230-9 adjourned undertaking form by both the magistrate
and the offender: see
Sentencing Advisory Council (2022), above n 149, 60–62.
(UK) s 5(3).
(Sentencing) Act 2005
(Sentencing) Act 2005
sentence type includes discharges and dismissals (68), suspended
sentences (59), youth justice centre orders (17), Commonwealth orders
diversion (8).
and Morgan (2004), above n 82.
[2017] VCC 219
[2016] VCC 1423
[2016] VCC 1423
[2017] VCC 1262
, [5], [7].
[2017] VCC 1262
Procedure Act 2009
Legislation Amendment (Criminal Procedure Disclosure and Other Matters) Act 2022
Procedure Act
ss 60(1)(b)
Procedure Act 2009
(1) (emphasis added).
(Sentencing) Act 2005
[2017] VCC 442
, [163]. See also
DPP v Mawien
[2018] VCC 565
[21], [30].
[2019] VCC 2124, [49].
and Morgan (2004), above n 82, 232.
v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 214
, [105]–[110]. See also
DPP v Wallis (A
[2020] VCC 1100
[2019] VCC 2121, [34].
(2022), above n 21, 222.
v The Queen (No 2)
[1988] HCA 14
Hoare v The Queen
[1989] HCA 33
, [7]; Fox (1994), above n 81, 492, 495.
(2022), above n 21, 217.
[1998] 4 VR 235
, 241. See also
Azzopardi v The Queen
, [34]–[36]; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Rethinking Sentencing
for Young Adult Offenders
(2019) 24–26.
s 70(1)(a).
for example,
DPP v Wharton
[2014] VCC 1844
spent a week in custody, and you have now spent about 16 months in residential
rehabilitation, successfully so. Your time
has not been your own, and in a
significant way you gave up your liberty to complete the course and ensure that
you did not offend
again. This is quite unusual, and obviates the need for me to
place great weight on the need for general deterrence, as I otherwise
only previous cohort with a comparable reoffending rate was threat offenders,
also at 58% within three years: Sentencing Advisory
Threat Offences
in Victoria: Sentencing Outcomes and Reoffending
(2021) 43. See also
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Stalking in Victoria
(52% reoffending within three years); Sentencing Advisory Council,
Breaches of Personal Safety Intervention Orders in Victoria
(2022) 65 (53%
reoffending within three years); Sentencing Advisory Council,
Contravention
of Family Violence Intervention Orders and Safety Notices: Prior Offences and
Reoffending
(2016) 33 (40.3% reoffending within three years).
Advisory Council (2022), above n 149, Appendix 2.
Appendix 3.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (0.988 MB)
PDF format (1.41 MB)
Plain text (ASCII) (174 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter