URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/43.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mornington Peninsula C295morn (PSA) [2025] PPV 43 (27 August 2025)
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme
Amendment C295morn
Creswell Street East, Crib Point
Development Contribution
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
27 August 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme Amendment C295morn
Creswell Street East, Crib Point Development Contribution Plan
27 August 2025
Gabby McMillan, Chair
List of Figures
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council
Development Contributions Plan Overlay
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action
Development Contributions
Development Contribution Guidelines Version 5.9 (Department of
Sustainability and Environment, Amended March 2007)
exhibited DCP
Creswell Street East, Crib Point Development Contributions Plan
(Mesh, December 2023)
existing DCP
Creswell Street East Crib Point Development Contributions Plan
(Watsons, June 2024)
General Residential Zone
Neighbourhood Residential Zone
original DCP
Creswell Street Development Contributions Plans
(April 2018)
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning Scheme
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme
Amendment summary
The Amendment
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme Amendment C295morn
Common name
Creswell Street East, Crib Point Development Contribution Plan
Brief description
The Amendment seeks to vary the existing Creswell Street East, Crib Point
Development Contributions Plan (DCP)
Subject land
Eastern end of Creswell Street, Cooma Street and Glossop Street, Crib Point
(between Creswell Street and Disney Street) incorporating:
Creswell Street (inclusive)
- 1, 3 and 6
Cooma Street
- 4 Glossop
- 58, 62, 90 and
92 Disney Street
Planning Authority
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council
Authorisation
21 May 2024, with conditions
31 October – 20 December 2024
Submissions
Number of Submissions: 8 Opposed: 5
Panel process
Gabby McMillan
Directions Hearing
By video, 30 June 2025
Panel Hearing
Hastings Shire Office, 21 Marine Parade, Hastings, 11 August 2025
Site inspections
Unaccompanied, 10 July 2025
Parties to the Hearing
Mornington Peninsula Shire Council represented by Mr Jack Chido of Jackson
Jurgen Dietzsch
Matthew Smith (supported by Ms McGregor)
Mornington Peninsula PSA C295morn [2025] PPV
Date of this report
27 August 2025
Executive summary
Mornington Peninsula
Planning Scheme Amendment C295morn (the Amendment) seeks to implement the
Creswell Street East, Crib Point Development Contributions Plan
December 2023) (exhibited DCP) to support road and drainage infrastructure
upgrades. The exhibited DCP will replace the existing
Creswell Street East,
Crib Point Development Contributions Plan
(Watsons, June 2024) (existing
Specifically, the Amendment proposes to:
amend the mapped
extent of the Development Contributions Plan Overlay Schedule 1 (DCPO1) to
include an additional 12 properties (comprised
of 11 residential properties in
the General Residential Zone 1 (GRZ1) and one property zoned Public Use Zone
amend Schedule 1
to the DCPO to reference the exhibited DCP
Schedule to Clause 72.04 to reference the exhibited DCP as an incorporated
document and remove reference to the existing
amend Schedule 1
to the Clause 52.17 (Native Vegetation) provide exemptions for native vegetation
removal to facilitate the works
identified in the exhibited DCP.
issues raised in submissions included:
Whether the
financials of the DCP (project cost, demand unit calculation and apportionment)
are sufficiently justified?
Whether the
additional road infrastructure should be included in the DCP?
Whether the
additional properties should be included in the DCP?
vegetation removal exemptions should be provided for in the
Strategic justification
The Amendment seeks to update the existing DCP that is already in the
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme. The existing DCP will
expire in June 2026
and the costings in the existing DCP are not reflective of current construction
costs. Accordingly, it is logical
to update the DCP to ensure that the land
rezoned for residential purposes in
can be serviced.
The core issue is whether the expanded scope of the DCP (in terms of the DCP
project scope and the additional properties proposed
to be included in the DCP
area) is appropriate.
Scope of the DCP
Submitters opposed the inclusion of additional residential properties in the
DCP area. They submitted that it was not equitable
for the properties in Cooma
Street, Disney Street and the established part of Creswell Street to contribute
to the DCP project when
they already have electricity, gas, sewerage, water and
fibre optic cable infrastructure and sufficient road access to meet their
Several submitters also opposed the road upgrades proposed to be delivered
through the DCP, arguing it was not necessary nor
in keeping with the character
of the area.
Council reduced the scope of the DCP in response to submissions in the Day 1
Amendment. It removed several properties from the DCP
area and reduced the
extent of road upgrades.
Ms Fisher gave evidence that the additional residential properties would
receive a shared benefit. On that basis, Ms Fisher said
they should be included
and did not support the Day 1 Amendment. She supported the exhibited
Council submitted that the costings in the DCP should be updated to reflect
the most recent cost estimated prepared in July 2025.
Ms Fisher supported the
use of the July 2025 costings. Council accepted that the cost increase between
the existing DCP and the
Day 1 DCP was ‘not insignificant’.
Conclusions
The Panel concluded that the Amendment was strategically justified, subject
to the changes recommended by the Panel.
In relation to the inclusion of the 11 additional residential properties in
the General Residential Zone 1 (GRZ1), the Panel concluded
· It is not equitable for
established residential properties, that are already serviced to contribute to
the cost of infrastructure
at the same rate as unserviced (and recently rezoned)
properties through the DCP.
These properties will receive some level of
shared benefit, however the level of benefit will be generally equivalent to the
of other residential properties in the local area (i.e. other properties
which are not liable for contributions under the exhibited
In relation to the scope of the DCP project, the Panel
The scope of
road upgrades identified in the exhibited DCP is appropriate and should not be
The DCP should
not include water mains and rising sewer mains (as presented in Council’s
Day 1 DCP).
In relation to the financials of the DCP, the Panel
· The use of lot area to calculate
demand is acceptable.
· The approach to apportionment is
acceptable.
· The cost of the road upgrades in
the exhibited DCP should be redistributed among the remaining properties mapped
in the DCPO1.
The updated project costings prepared by
Harlock in July 2025 for the project scope presented in the exhibited Amendment
the basis of the costings in the DCP.
Council should
consider whether further notice is required, noting the cost increases expected
for the remaining properties mapped
in the DCPO1.
In relation to
the native vegetation exemptions, the Panel concluded:
· The native vegetation exemptions
should be deleted from the Amendment.
· The removal of vegetation can be
considered through the usual planning application process, enabling a full
consideration of
options to avoid, minimise and offset any impacts on native
vegetation.
· The project delivery date at
section 5.4 of the exhibited DCP should be extended to 2030, rather than 2028 to
allow sufficient
time to secure any required approvals.
Recommendations
Based on the reasons set out in this Report, the
Panel recommends that Council:
1 Introduction
1.1 The exhibited Amendment
purpose of Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme Amendment C295morn (the
Amendment) is to implement the
Creswell Street East, Crib Point Development
Contributions Plan
(Mesh, December 2023) (exhibited DCP) to support road and
drainage infrastructure. The exhibited DCP will replace the existing
Creswell Street East, Crib Point Development Contributions Plan
June 2024) (existing DCP).
The Amendment also seeks to provide exemptions for native vegetation removal
to facilitate the works identified in the exhibited DCP.
Specifically, the Amendment proposes to:
amend the mapped
extent of the Development Contributions Plan Overlay Schedule 1 (DCPO1) to
include 12 12 additional properties (comprised
of 11 residential properties in
the General Residential Zone 1 (GRZ1) and one property zoned Public Use Zone
amend Schedule 1
to the DCPO to reference the exhibited DCP
Schedule to Clause 72.04 to reference the exhibited DCP as an incorporated
document and remove reference to the existing
amend Schedule 1
to the Clause 52.17 (Native Vegetation) provide exemptions for native vegetation
removal to facilitate the works
identified in the exhibited DCP.
exhibited DCP included the following changes:
Changes to the
extent of the infrastructure proposed to be funded through the control:
- Extends the
local road and drainage works to include an additional part of Creswell Street,
Cooma Street and Glossop Street as shown
in Figure 1.
- Increases the
total length of unmade local roads to be upgraded from 860 linear metres DCP to
1,151 linear metres. Notably the road
design will not be altered from the
existing DCP, it will still be a 5.5 metre wide asphalt pavement and stormwater
drainage, with
no footpath.
Changes to the
- Increases the
total costs included in the DCP to account for the extended road length, updated
construction costs based on detailed
design plans, Quantity Surveyor estimates,
financing costs to deliver the project by 30 June 2028 and plan preparation
- The total cost
will be $5,559,668.12 (made up of $4,720,000 for roads and drainage
infrastructure construction, $520,427.93 for
finance costs and $319,240.19 for
plan preparation costs).
- Increases the
individual landowner DCP charges required due to the increase in total DCP
costs. Noting that the apportionment arrangements
are not altered, so Council
will continue to contribute 30 percent of the cost.
Council, as the Development Agency, to deliver the project within the revised
timeframe of 30 June 2028.
- Revises the
demand units from linear metre of lot frontage as defined in the existing DCP to
metre square of lot area. This is consistent
with the State Government’s
DCP Guidelines and standard practice for DCPs in other planning schemes.
- Removes the
DCP expiry date and replaces it with:
This DCP commences
on the date it is gazetted into the Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme and it
adopts a long-term outlook for
development and is intended to operate for 20
years. This timeframe considers planned future development of the area and this
will end when it is removed from the Mornington Peninsula Planning
This approach provides Council the ability to continue collecting
contributions, regardless of whether works have been delivered,
whilst the DCP
remains in the Planning Scheme. Removing the DCP from the Scheme will require a
planning scheme amendment in the future.
1.2 Amendment land
The exhibited Amendment
applies to land shown in Figure 1. The extent of road upgrade proposed is also
shown in Figure 1.
Amendment land and extent of proposed road upgrade
Source: Explanatory report
1.3 Background
This section explains
the background which is relevant to the Panel’s consideration of
submissions. This includes events leading
up to the exhibited Amendment and
further changes proposed by Council after the exhibition period.
1.3.1 Introduction of DCPO1 (2019)
Most of the Amendment land is already affected by
DCPO1 as shown in Figure 2 (existing DCP land). This land was historically
for industrial purposes. The DCPO1 was introduced by Amendment C210morn
in 2019 at the same time the industrial land was rezoned
to Neighbourhood
Residential Zone Schedule 1 (NRZ1). Amendment C210morn was initiated by a
private proponent.
extent of the Development Contributions Plan Overlay 1
1.3.2 Original DCP and scope of works
Amendment C210morn gave effect to the
Street Development Contributions Plan
(April 2018) (original DCP).
Some key features of the original DCP:
The extent of
project works included the formalisation of Creswell Street from Denman Street
to its eastern end and Cooma Street as
shown in Figure 3.
The total cost
of the project was estimated to be $2,091,053 and subject to indexation.
apportioned using a methodology equivalent to a Special Charges Scheme where
landowners contribute to 70 percent of the
costs and Council contributes 30
It required
Council to deliver the project by 6 June 2024, regardless of whether
contributions have been collected. The DCP needed
to be removed from the
Planning Scheme once the project works were
Extent of work in the original DCP
1.3.3 Minor revisions to the DCP (2019 –
Several revisions were made to the DCPO1 and DCP
between 2019 and 2024 in response to Victoria Planning Provisions changes and
changes. The main change that has occurred was the extension of the
delivery date
such that Council was
required to deliver the DCP project by 6 June 2026 (regardless of the
contribution amount that had been collected
at the time).
Throughout this period there have been no substantive changes to the original
DCP in terms of costing, however the DCP has been given
a revised date of June
(current DCP).
1.3.4 Contributions collected (2019 to now)
The DCP is already in the Planning Scheme. This
means that Council has already collected contributions from 14 properties under
DCPO1 as identified in Figure 4. These contributions have amounted to
$362,476.21
Properties in
the Amendment land who have already contributed (shown in red hatch)
Source: Council’s Part A submission (page 26)
1.3.5 Substantive review of design, costings and DCP (2022 -
In 2022, Council prepared a detailed design and
costings for the project identified in the original DCP. This review estimated
the project would cost $3,700,000. Even when accounting for indexation,
the review identified a shortfall of approximately $1.1
Council commissioned Mesh to complete an independent peer review of the
original DCP. In November 2022 Mesh prepared a report which
recommended
revisions to the DCP, including recommended changes to the scope of the DCP.
In response, Council commissioned further drawings and a range of technical
assessments to inform updates to the DCP including detailed
design drawings,
biodiversity assessment and cost estimates.
1.3.6 Post exhibition revisions (May 2025)
At its meeting on 20 May 2025, Council resolved to
refer all seven
submissions to a
panel. At that same meeting Council endorsed changes to the Amendment in
response to submissions. These changes
included the following:
Removal of the
following properties and infrastructure adjacent to these properties from the
DCPO1 and DCP as shown in Figure 6:
- 90 Disney
- 92 Disney
Update the DCP
project costs to reflect the changes to the scope of infrastructure proposed to
be delivered.
Deletion of the
native vegetation permit exemptions (e.g. so that a permit application process
would apply).
1.3.7 Post exhibited revisions (June – July
In the lead up to the Hearing, Council undertook
additional work to inform the updated DCP project costs:
Detailed Design
Drawings (for Council’s Day 1 Amendment), prepared by JCA Land
Consultants, dated 20 June 2025, revision E
regarding drainage inclusions within the DCP Project, prepared by JCA Land
Consultants, dated 25 July 2025
Updated Quantity
Surveying Estimates (for both the exhibited Amendment and Council’s Day 1
Amendment), prepared by Harlock Consulting,
dated 31 July 2025 (July 2025
Detailed Design
Drawings (for the exhibited Amendment), prepared by JCA Land Consultants, dated
30 July 25, Revision F.
Notably, the revised design prepared in 2025
included a sewer rising main that was not included in the exhibited DCP.
These most recent changes were integrated into Council’s Day 1
1.4 Day 1 Amendment
Council presented its
Day 1 Amendment as its preferred position at the Hearing. The Day 1 Amendment
included Council’s response
to submissions and revised design and
The Day 1 Amendment applies to the land shown in Figure 5.
Amendment land
The following revisions to the exhibited Amendment were proposed in the Day 1
section of road infrastructure in Cooma Street (i.e. 63 metres), reducing the
scope of works.
Removed 6 Cooma
Street, 90 and 92 Disney Street from the DCPO1 mapping and the DCP.
Updated the DCP
infrastructure costs to reflect the reduction in road length in Cooma Street and
inclusion of a sewer rising main
in the scope of the project. This results in a
net increase in costs.
Removed the
native vegetation exemptions at Clause 52.17 from the Amendment so that a
separate planning permit would be required for
any vegetation removal.
1.5 Procedural issues
1.5.1 Late submission
referred a late submission (submission 8) to the Panel on 25 July 2025. The
Panel provided the late submitter with an opportunity
to be heard at the
Hearing. The submitter did not appear at the Hearing however the Panel
considered the submission. Other parties
were provided with a redacted version
of submission 8.
1.5.2 Exhibition process
Mr Dietzsch and Mr Smith raised concerns about the
original exhibition process for the Amendment. Council provided a detailed
explanation
of the exhibition that occurred.
The submitters confirmed at the Hearing that they had received all the
material circulated by Council for the Hearing and the late
submission.
The Panel is satisfied that the submitters have been provided with the
relevant material to participate in the Hearing.
1.6 The Panel’s approach
issues raised in submissions were:
Whether the
financials of the DCP (project cost, demand unit calculation and apportionment)
are sufficiently justified?
Whether the
additional road infrastructure should be included in the DCPO?
Whether the
additional properties should be included in the DCPO?
vegetation removal exemptions should be provided for in the
The Panel has assessed the Amendment against the
principles of net community benefit and sustainable development, as set out in
71.02-3 (Integrated decision making) of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment, observations from site visits, and
submissions,
evidence and other material presented to it during the Hearing. All submissions
and materials have been considered
by the Panel in reaching its conclusions,
regardless of whether they are specifically mentioned in the Report.
This Report deals with the issues under the following headings:
infrastructure and property inclusions
vegetation exemptions.
2 Strategic issues
2.1 Planning context
chapter identifies planning context relevant to the Amendment.
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
- Part 3B of the
- Section 4 of
Municipal Planning Strategy
- Clause 2.03-8
(Infrastructure)
Planning Policy Framework
- Clauses 11.01
(Victoria), 11.01-1S (Settlement)
- Clauses 11.02
(Managing Growth), 11.02-1S (Supply of urban land)
- Clauses 19
(Development Infrastructure), 19.03-1S (Development and infrastructure
contributions plans), 19.03-2S (Infrastructure
design and provision), 19.03-3S
(Integrated water management), 19.03-3L (Integrated water management –
Mornington Peninsula)
Planning scheme provisions
- Development
Contributions Plans Overlay
- Clause 52.17
(Native vegetation)
Ministerial directions
- Ministerial
Direction 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments)
- Ministerial
Direction on the preparation and content of development contributions plans and
Ministerial reporting requirements for
development contributions
- Development
Contributions Guidelines (March 2007)
2.2 Strategic justification
Amendment seeks to update and extend DCPO1 and the existing DCP that is already
in the Planning Scheme. Accordingly, the key
strategic issue is whether the
updates are strategically justified.
The existing DCP will expire June 2026 and the costings in the existing DCP
are not reflective of current construction costs, even
when accounting for
indexation. Accordingly, it is logical to update the DCP.
The Amendment is generally consistent with the Planning Policy Framework
which seeks to:
supporting infrastructure is available to support sustainable urban development
provide an integrated approach to the delivery
of infrastructure for urban areas
(Clause 11.02-1S)
facilitate the
timely delivery of planned infrastructure (Clause 19.03-1S).
updates to the costings and calculation of demand unit in the exhibited DCP are
more reflective of current practices in the
Ministerial Direction on the
preparation and content of development contributions plans and Ministerial
reporting requirements for
development contributions plans
Development Contributions Guidelines
. Subject to the resolution of more
specific issues around the inclusion of additional infrastructure, properties
and native vegetation
exemptions, the Amendment is strategically justified.
(i) Conclusions and recommendation
For the reasons set out in this Report, the Panel
concludes that the Amendment:
is supported by,
and implements, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy Framework
is consistent
with the relevant Ministerial Directions
is generally
well founded and strategically justified
should proceed
subject to addressing the more specific issues raised in submissions as
discussed in the following chapters.
The Panel recommends
Mornington Peninsula Planning Scheme Amendment C295morn as exhibited with the
changes recommended in this Report.
3 Financials
(i) The issue
issue is whether the financials of the exhibited DCP (project costs, demand unit
calculation and apportionment) are sufficiently
(ii) Background
The exhibited DCP is proposed to increase the
project costs and alters the demand unit calculation, compared with the existing
Council’s Day 1 DCP includes further cost increases. There is no
change proposed to the apportionment of costs within the
Table 2 shows the cost changes between the existing DCP, exhibited DCP,
revised costs following exhibition
and Day 1 DCP
in June 2025
Costs comparison
for different version of the DCP (June 2025 dollars)
Existing DCP
Existing DCP
Revised cost following exhibition
‘Day 1’ DCP
$2,796, 974
(Originally $2, 091,053)
$4,985, 245
(Originally $4, 720,000)
Source: Council’s Part B submission
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Council made the following submissions:
Project costs
Accepted that
the costs increases presented in the Day 1 DCP are ‘not
insignificant’ when compared with the existing DCP.
It is likely the
costs in the original DCP were based on concept plans only.
Council has
undertaken significant work to scope out the DCP project and provide a realistic
cost estimate (in June 2025 dollars).
The updated
costs presented in the Day 1 DCP includes water mains and rising sewer main that
is not typically included in a DCP, noting
an exception in the Arden
It is reasonable
to include the costs associated with the water mains and rising sewer mains on
the basis that:
infrastructure is relatively localised and would not otherwise be delivered by
service authorities
- the overall
cost is relatively minor
- Council would
be funding at least 30 percent of the costs of the delivering the project
- if the cost of
water infrastructure was not included in the DCP, Council would not be able to
easily recoup costs through other
mechanisms.
It is reasonable
to use the cost estimated prepared by Harlock in July 2025 in the DCP as this
represents the best available information
and the exhibited DCP anticipated some
adjustment to the cost of infrastructure:
5.10 Adjustment to the
Infrastructure Scope
The infrastructure project in this DCP has been costed to a sufficient level
of detail; however, the Council may amend or modify some
aspects of the project,
so long as they are still generally in accordance with any direction regarding
the scope outlined in this
Where the Council or another agency seeks to change the scope of a DCP
infrastructure item to meet changing standards imposed by adopted
policy or a
public regulatory agency, such changes of standards and the resulting cost
changes should normally be made through a
change to the DCP at the time of a
regular review of the DCP.
Where, after the DCP has been approved, a Council or other agency proposes
changes to the scope of a DCP infrastructure item for reasons
other than changes
in standards imposed by policy or regulation the net cost increases resulting
from the change should normally
be met by the agency requesting the change.
notice of the Amendment would be required if the July 2025 costing were included
in the DCP because:
- it is the best
available information
- notification
would further delay the recouperation of more accurate costs (noting that
several properties
in the existing
DCPO1 have already made
contributions).
Apportionment
apportionment costs, being 70 percent to landowners and 30 percent to Council is
a pragmatic and reasonable approach given
the small scale of the project.
apportionment approach has already been accepted by a Panel in Amendment
C210morn (i.e. when the original DCP was introduced).
Demand unit
calculation
That the demand
unit should be calculated on the basis of lot area, rather than street
demand unit calculation is consistent with the State’s
Development
Contributions Guidelines
Demand units
defined by the total size of the lot is more logical and equitable as it has
regard to the development capacity of the
Ms Fisher gave the
following evidence on behalf of Council:
Project costs
Do not support
the inclusion of water mains and rising sewer mains in the DCP project. This
included in DCPs, but there had
been exceptions in the Arden precinct.
The project
costs prepared by Harlock in July 2025 should be reflected in the planning
Apportionment
In her peer
review, she initially recommended that 100 percent of the costs should be
apportioned to landowners in the DCP area.
In her evidence
statement she acknowledged that Council intended to contribute 30 percent of the
project costs and considered this
reasonable response in the circumstances.
In her evidence
statement she said:
I note that Council could have pursued 100%
apportionment however Council’s acceptance of 30% effectively deals with
any external
benefit that would be associated with the proposed DCP project and
therefore I consider this approach reasonable in the circumstances.
unit calculation
Supported the
use of lot area to calculate demand.
The use of lot
area is reasonable as it aligns with common practice.
Mr Smith and
Mr Dietzsch made the following submissions:
That landowners
of the former industrial zoned land should contribute 100 percent of the project
costs, as they were the ones who
benefited from the original rezoning.
Council should
not contribute 30 percent of the project costs.
Mr Smith submitted
that he was concerned about the change in the demand unit calculation.
(iv) Discussion
Project costs
Council has accepted that the cost increases included in the exhibited DCP
and Day 1 DCP are ‘not insignificant’. These
costs increases are
attributed to several factors, including:
the inclusion of
financing costs
plan preparation
the inclusion of
water infrastructure in the DCP project
a further review
of costs by a quantity surveyor in July 2025.
The costs associated
with financing and plan preparation costs are typically included in a DCP. The
Panel accepts this approach given
it is consistent with the
Development
Contribution Guidelines
and was supported by Ms Fisher in her
The costs associated with water mains and rising sewer mains are not
typically included in DCPs. The Panel accepts the evidence of
Ms Fisher that
these items should not be included. This is particularly the case given these
works were not included in the exhibited
DCP and already the 'not
insignificant’ cost increase flagged by Council. While the Panel
understands Council’s dilemma
in terms of recovering funds, it is not
reasonable to add additional infrastructure that would not normally be expected
to be covered
in a DCP. Council needs to identify an alternative funding
The Panel accepts Ms Fisher’s evidence that the project costs should be
calculated using the best available information, being
the estimates prepared by
Harlock in July 2025. However, Harlock’s July 2025 estimates will need to
be adjusted to reflect
the DCP project scope changes recommended by the
Council should consider if further exhibition of the Amendment is needed on
the basis noting that:
some level of
cost review was anticipated in the exhibited DCP
the Panel is
recommending the removal of established residential land from the DCP area (see
section 4 of this Report) so they will
not be required to bear the costs, but
these costs will need to be redistributed to the balance of properties within
the DCP area.
Apportionment
The Council has proposed to continue with a 30 percent contribution towards
the project costs. This approach is consistent with the
existing DCP and
effectively deals with any external benefit that would be associated with the
DCP project.
This is a reasonable approach in the circumstances and removes the need for a
detailed (and costly) analysis of the split between
the beneficiaries of the DCP
Demand units
The use of lot area to calculate the demand unit is logical. This approach
more accurately reflects the development capacity of land
(and associated demand
on the planned infrastructure), is consistent with the
Development
Contribution Guidelines
and is a more equitable that an approach relying on
the length of a lot’s frontage.
(v) Conclusions and recommendations
Panel concludes:
DCP should not include water mains and rising sewer mains (as presented in
Council’s Day 1 DCP).
updated project costings prepared by Harlock in July 2025 for the project scope
presented in the exhibited Amendment can form
the basis of the costings in the
DCPO1 and DCP.
use of lot area to calculate demand is acceptable.
approach to apportionment is acceptable.
The Panel recommends:
Creswell Street East, Crib Point Development Contributions
(December 2023) and the Development Contribution Plan Overlay Schedule
1 to reflect the
Updated Quantity Surveying Estimates prepared
Consulting (31 July 2025) for the project scope presented in the exhibited
4 Road infrastructure and property inclusions
(i) The issues
issues are:
whether the
additional road infrastructure should be added to the DCP.
whether the
additional properties should be added to the DCP.
(ii) Background
The exhibited DCP expanded the extent of road
infrastructure to be upgraded (as shown in Figure 1) that added 12 additional
as shown in Figure 6 (New DCP land).
Residential
properties proposed to be included in the New DCP area
Council’s Day 1 Amendment reduced the scope of road works and
properties proposed to be included in the DCP area (as described
in section 1.3
of this Report). The extent of road works presented in Council’s Day 1
Amendment are shown in Appendix B.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Council made the following submissions:
It acknowledged
that four submitters (from properties proposed to be added to the DCPO1) already
had access to existing drainage infrastructure.
The Day 1 DCP
had been updated in response to submitter concerns to:
- remove 6 Cooma
Street, 90 and 92 Disney Street, Crib Point from the Amendment
infrastructure immediately adjacent to 6 Cooma Street, 90 and 92 Disney
- revise the DCP
infrastructure costs to account for those changes (as discussed in section 3 of
this Report).
It did not have
a position in relation to submitter 8. This was a late submission received
after Council had resolved its position
on the Amendment. No adjustments to the
scope of the DCP project were proposed in response to submitter
Ms Fisher gave the following evidence on behalf of Council:
Did not support
the road infrastructure changes presented in Council’s Day 1 DCP for the
following reasons:
I am concerned that the impact of the Day 1 DCP
changes will result in an inconsistent road network that conflicts with the
of the Exhibited DCP as it does not deliver a continuous local road
network that is of shared benefit to the DCP area.
Did not support
the removal of 6 Cooma Street, 90 and 92 Disney Street, Crib Point from the
Amendment on the basis that these properties
would have a shared benefit from
the DCP project. There was insufficient justification to exclude those
submitters from the DCP
area and reduce the DCP project extent noting the
disbenefit to other landowners that would arise due to the delivery of a
discontinuous
Street, 90 and 92 Disney Street were removed from the DCP area, she would prefer
to retain the exhibited DCP project scope
but reallocate the costs to the
remaining properties in the DCP area.
In response to
cross-examination, she accepted that there was a discrepancy between the cost of
constructing the southern end of Cooma
Street ($62,000) and the required
contributions for those abutting properties under the DCP ($100,000). However,
she gave evidence
that the abutting properties still obtained a benefit from the
project and they should still be required to contribute.
intended on removing 6 Cooma Street, 90 and 92 Disney Street from the DCP area,
it would be consistent to remove the other
properties in Creswell Street
infrastructure proposed in Cooma Street was not appropriate and would impact on
the amenity of his property.
Upgrades to
Cooma Street were not warranted, and that Glossop Street was historically the
preferred access for the former industrial
residential properties should not be required to contribute to the cost of the
DCP on the basis that they did not need or
benefit from the proposed works.
appropriate to charge properties a second time for existing infrastructure such
as the drainage and road infrastructure.
Mr Dietzsch’s
infrastructure proposed in Cooma Street and Glossop Street was not consistent
with the character of the area and should not be
supported, noting a more
particular concern with Cooma Street.
equitable for the properties in Cooma Street and Disney Street to contribute to
the DCP project when they already have
electricity, gas, sewerage, water and
fibre optic cable infrastructure and sufficient road access to meet their
Properties in
Disney Street already have access to a sealed road.
contributions required in the exhibited DCP for Cooma and Disney Street
properties were not equitable. Council had
that the costs of
works in Cooma Street equated to $62,000, but that the properties in Cooma
Street would need to contribute $100,000
through the exhibited DCP.
The Amendment is
inconsistent with Council’s other plans,
Council’s Asset Plan requires Council to prioritise
maintaining or renewing existing assets over new ones – this Development
Plan [on the former industrial land] was privately led and will only benefit
those properties clearly within Cresswell (sic) Street
and should therefore be
fully funded by those properties without subsidisation from adjoining existing
properties already having
the benefit from the other infrastructure
Street should be a no through
from properties in the New DCP land raised similar concerns to Mr Smith and Mr
Opposed the
inclusion of established residential properties in the DCP area on the basis
that it was unjust and disproportionate.
residential properties should not be required to contribute to the cost of the
DCP on the basis that they did not need or
benefit from the proposed works.
At least 14
properties had already paid their contributions under the existing DCP, at a
significantly lower rate than the rate proposed.
It would not be fair for new
properties, that did not accrue material benefit to pay a higher rate than those
properties (who also
benefited from the rezoning).
fundamentally unfair to levy existing serviced property to fund infrastructure
for future development for which they gain no
(iv) Discussion
Property inclusions
Most submissions were received from owners of established residential
properties that are proposed to be included in the DCP area.
The Council
acknowledged that these properties (all zoned GRZ1) are already serviced by
electricity, drainage, sewer and road access
(though in some instances an unmade
The Panel agrees that these properties will receive some level of shared
benefit, however the level of benefit will be generally equivalent
benefit of other residential properties in the local area (i.e. other properties
which are not liable for contributions under
the exhibited DCP). The Council has
acknowledged these broader local benefits by accepting that it will contribute
30 percent of
The additional properties would contribute disproportionately to the cost of
the DCP project for the following reasons:
They are only
benefiting from a slight upgrade in their existing infrastructure (not the full
upgrade which will be experienced by
the former industrial properties).
The costs these
residents would be required to contribute would be disproportionate. As
illustrated by the example provided by Mr
Dietzsch, the Cooma Street properties
would contribute $100,000 to a part of the infrastructure project that will cost
Several existing
properties have already contributed at the lower rate; and it would be
unreasonable for properties that receive less
shared benefit to contribute
higher costs.
The Panel agrees with Ms Fisher that if Council
supported the removal of the Cooma and Disney Street properties from the DCP,
11 of the established residential properties in the GRZ1 should be removed
from the DCP for consistency.
(v) Conclusions and recommendations
Panel concludes:
is not equitable for established residential properties, that are already
serviced to contribute towards the cost of infrastructure
at the same rate as
unserviced properties in the DCP.
established residential properties adjacent to the DCP project will receive some
benefit from the works, however the benefit will
be generally equivalent to the
benefit of other residential properties in the local area which are not liable
for contributions under
the exhibited DCP.
scope of road upgrades identified in the exhibited DCP is appropriate and should
not be altered.
cost of the road upgrades in the exhibited DCP should be redistributed among the
properties already mapped in the Development
Contributions Plan Overlay Schedule
Council should
consider whether further notification of the DCP is required, having regard to
the increases costs and the recommendation
to redistribute costs between less
properties.
The Panel recommends:
the Development Contributions Plan Overlay Schedule 1 mapping to delete the 11
additional residential properties (i.e. land
zoned General Residential Zone
Creswell Street East, Crib Point Development Contributions
(December 2023) and the Development Contributions Plan Overlay Schedule
1 to redistribute the costs to the properties remaining in
the Development
Contributions Plan Overlay Schedule 1.
5 Native vegetation exemptions
(i) The issues
issues are:
vegetation removal exemptions should be provided for in the Amendment
whether the
project delivery date in the exhibited DCP should be extended to allow for
vegetation removal application processes.
(ii) Background
The exhibited Amendment included the introduction of
a native vegetation exemption through a modification to the schedule at Clause
52.17 (Native vegetation). The exemption was proposed to facilitate the removal
of native vegetation required for the DCP project.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Council submissions:
vegetation exemption was initially introduced at the suggestion of Department of
Transport and Planning officers who suggested
it as a means of streamlining the
approvals process for the DCP project.
The exemption
would have applied to native vegetation only and removed the formal requirement
for Council to provide offsets for the
losses incurred.
Council was
mindful of its lead role in protecting and enhancing Mornington
Peninsula’s biodiversity.
Council had
committed to voluntarily pay for native vegetation offsets as part of its
resolution to proceed with the Amendment.
Accepted the
submissions of the Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action and had
resolved to remove the native vegetation
exemption in the Day 1 Amendment.
Would pursue a
separate planning application process to remove native vegetation to facilitate
the DCP project. The permit application
would be able to encompass other
vegetation removal triggers that might exist (e.g. under the Vegetation
Protection Overlay).
DEECA written submissions:
Did not support
the native vegetation removal exemption as proposed in the exhibited
appropriate statutory process to facilitate the removal of native vegetation to
facilitate the DCP project was a permit application
This permit
application process would require referral to DEECA.
Other written
submissions:
submitters raised concerns about the extent of vegetation removal required,
identifying particular trees that should be retained.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel accepts that Council introduced the native
vegetation exemption as part of the Amendment with a view to streamlining the
process for the delivery of the DCP project. The Panel accepts Council’s
revised position and notes there are some benefits
in terms of enabling the
consideration of all vegetation removal requirements (for example, for native
and non-native vegetation).
This approach is more likely to enable further avoidance of impacts and
secure native vegetation offsets through the permit application
The Panel canvassed the implications of delays in the permit process with the
overall DCP project delivery timelines at the Hearing
(completion by 2028).
Council did not have a formal position on project delivery, but was open to the
Panel considering an extension.
To ensure the DCP does not need to be amended
another time, it is recommended the project delivery time be extended to 2030
this will not affect the project finance costs which are capped at a 5
year period).
(v) Conclusions and recommendations
Panel concludes:
native vegetation removal exemptions should be deleted from the Amendment.
removal of vegetation can be considered through the usual planning application
process, enabling a full consideration of options
to avoid, minimise and offset
any impacts on native vegetation.
project delivery date at sections 2.2.2 and 5.4 of the exhibited DCP should be
extended to 2030, rather than 2028 to allow sufficient
time to secure any
required approvals.
The Panel recommends:
the exemptions for native vegetation removal from the Schedule to Clause
Creswell Street East, Crib Point Development Contributions
(December 2023) to extend the project delivery date to
A Document list
Description
Provided by
Panel Directions and Hearing Timetable
25 Jul 2025
Late submission from Caitlin and David Phillips (referred to the
Email to late submitter providing opportunity to complete a request to be
heard form for the Hearing
Planning Panels Victoria
Part A submission with attachments:
- Photos of
Amendment land
- Map of photo
- Authorisation
Request for Further Information, responses and authorisation with
- Submitter
Permit applications map and table
design drawings (Rev E) (20 June 2025) (Preferred position), Updated Quantity
Surveyor estimates (exhibited and preferred
position), memorandum drainage
within DCP (July 2025)
Expert evidence statement of Jo Fisher of Mesh Planning Pty Ltd
Day 1 documents:
- Explanatory
report (tracked)
- Instructions
sheet (tracked)
- Clause 45.06
Schedule 1 DCPO (tracked)
- Clause 52.17
Schedule (tracked)
- Clause 72.04
Schedule (tracked)
Street East, Crib Point DCP (tracked)
- Comparison
Table – DCP costs using revised figures
Part B submission
10 Aug 2025
Additional material referred to in Council’s submissions:
- Amendment
C210morn Explanatory report
- Amendment
C210morn Panel report
- Existing DCP
sought to be amended
- Aerial images
(April 2019 and June 2025)
12 Aug 2025
Drainage comparison plans (as presented at the Hearing)
Appendix B Council’s preferred extent of
road works in Day 1 Amendment
preferred extent of works in Cooma Street
Source: Council’s Part B submission (page 17)
preferred extent of works in Creswell Street (West)
Source: Council’s presentation at the Hearing
preferred extent of infrastructure Glossop Street
Source: Council’s presentation at the Hearing
Through Amendment C210morn
Through Amendment C300morn
Revised date introduced through
Amendment C305morn which came into effect on 18 July 2024
Council’s Part A
submission, page 25
At that time the late
submission had not been received, this was referred to the Panel in July
This is the revised cost
estimate of the project as exhibited (e.g. including the Cooma Street
infrastructure)
This is revised cost estimate
of the project based on Council’s preferred position (e.g. not including a
portion of Cooma Street
infrastructure).
Arden Precinct Development
Contributions Plan (Amended December 2023)
Refer to discussion in section
1.2.4 of this Report
An issue raised by submitter
Part B submission, page
The Panel clarified that
this issue was outside the remit of the Hearing.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (23.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter