URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2024/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
OXQ [2024] VMHT 23 (14 October 2024)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2024] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan hospital
Mode of hearing:
Videoconference
Tribunal members:
Matthew Carroll (Legal Member)
Peter Millington (Psychiatrist Member)
Helen Walters (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from the health service
With online video
Treating team member
With online video
George Kominakis
Legal representative, Victoria Legal Aid
With online video
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal made an order
authorising up to 12 electroconvulsive treatments over 26
This statement of reasons:
After the hearing
your legal representative requested a written explanation of the Tribunal's
decision. A copy of this statement of
reasons will be given to your treating
team as well as to you and your legal representative.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
At the time of this hearing you were on a 26-week
inpatient treatment order that had been made by the Tribunal on 7 October 2024.
This hearing was held because on 4 October 2024 your treating psychiatrist
applied to the Tribunal for an order to allow electroconvulsive
treatment (ECT)
to be used as part of your treatment. The Tribunal had to have a hearing to
decide whether to make an ECT order.
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the criteria for an ECT order applied to you. The criteria are
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Act’) and are attached at the end of this statement of
Under the Act the Tribunal must give proper consideration to the
mental health and wellbeing principles (‘principles’).
Based on the
information provided in your hearing and our understanding of your
circumstances, the Tribunal identified the following
principles were
particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
autonomy and least restriction – you made it clear that your preference
was to not have ECT.
Lived experience
– you have had ECT in the past and have also managed your mental health as
a voluntary consumer.
Diversity of
care – your needs related to your age, and your experience of multiple and
significant trauma must be actively
considered.
Dignity of risk
– this principle recognises that a person receiving mental health
treatment is entitled to take reasonable risks.
When making its decision about
whether or not you have capacity to give informed consent to ECT the Tribunal
must not evaluate the
reasonableness of your decision (including the degree of
risk it may involve), only your ability to make a decision. As such this
principle does not apply in relation to determining whether you have capacity.
However, if the Tribunal is persuaded that you do
not have capacity, and
therefore needs to decide whether or not ECT is the least restrictive way for
you to be treated, the dignity
of risk principle needs to inform the
Tribunal’s consideration of your preferences.
The Tribunal
must also give proper consideration to your rights under the
Charter of Human
Rights and Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’). If
the Tribunal makes an ECT order this engages and limits a number of human rights
protected under
the Charter including privacy and freedom from medical treatment
without consent. To give proper consideration to your rights protected
the Charter, and whether limits on them are reasonable, the Tribunal must
thoroughly examine whether the ECT criteria apply
3. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your file. Both you and your treating team spoke
to and answered questions from the Tribunal in the hearing.
representative also made submissions on your behalf. This statement of reasons
does not summarise all that information,
but the next section refers to the
information the Tribunal relied on to make its decision and explains
In line with the principles in the Act, the Tribunal considered your
views and preferences. From what you and your lawyer told the
Tribunal we
understood you did not want to have ECT, amongst other concerns (noted below)
you described memory loss from having had
ECT in the past. You were also very
clear that you wanted to go home immediately as in your view, being in hospital,
and treatment
in general, was unnecessary.
4. The Tribunal’s decision about the ECT criteria
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the two questions that need to be answered under the ECT
(a) Do you have capacity to give informed consent to
If a patient has capacity they make the decision
the information they have been given for the purposes of deciding
whether or not to consent to ECT, and they are able to remember
and use or weigh
that information. A person also needs to be able to communicate their decision.
Based on what is set down in the Act and from relevant court decisions,
when making a decision about whether a person does or does
not have capacity,
the Tribunal must bear in mind that:
The starting
point is that a person is presumed to have capacity.
This presumption
can be rebutted, but a decision that a person does not have capacity is serious.
Accordingly the information or evidence
relied on to displace this presumption
must be sufficiently robust to persuade the Tribunal that a person does not have
decision that someone else may consider unwise does not mean a person lacks
capacity. To put this differently, the Tribunal
only considers whether a person
is able to make a decision, it must not evaluate the substance of their
A person is not
required to make a well-considered, rational or sensible decision, the person
only needs to be able to understand,
remember and use or weigh relevant
information and communicate a decision.
A person does
not have to agree with their diagnosis or have insight to have capacity, nor do
they have to be free of symptoms. However
lack of insight and/or the presence
of symptoms are relevant considerations, the issue is whether or not they impair
ability to understand, remember and/or use or weigh relevant
information, and/or to communicate a decision.
To reach a decision
Tribunal focused on whether you were
able to use or weigh information to decide
whether or not to consent to ECT. The presumption of capacity means that the
consideration of this issue must commence from a position of
presuming you were able to use or weigh relevant information. Further
two factors reinforced the presumption that you were able to use or weigh
information to reach a decision. Firstly, you
participated in a lengthy
discussion with the Tribunal during your hearing, which from the report and what
TD told us, was very different
to what had occurred between you and your
treating team in the lead up to your hearing. Secondly, you drew upon your past
of ECT and could describe the procedure and briefly referred to past
memory loss when telling the Tribunal that you did not want
These were very important considerations, and we gave them
significant weight when making our decision. But the Tribunal needed to
consider the totality of the discussion it had with you, including the following
You said your
treating psychiatrist was ‘a quack’ and like other members of your
treating team was not qualified. You
thought you were being treated as a guinea
pig and that medications were being invented and trialled on you.
You described
your situation as a case of tall poppy syndrome in that your treating team was
motivated by their envy of you, you also
drew a connection between this and a
belief that members of the treating team were stealing your cigarettes.
You were adamant
that you were already being administered ‘uncontrolled ECT’ by your
treating psychiatrist or –the
nurses, that this was happening during the
night downstairs in the hospital, and this was making you vague and
You told us you
were at risk of contracting smallpox from the injectable medication you had been
given (Acuphase).
You said ECT
would reduce your life expectancy and when you were asked why, you said ‘I
just know’, and that someone once
told you that you would be lucky to
reach 60 years of age, and you were now in your late sixties.
You regarded
your hospitalisation as a mistake and recounted that you had been taken to
hospital by police after you attended a police
station to make a report about
the treatment provided by your private psychiatrist. You explained you went to
that station because
at some time in the past you went there to make a report
When asked why
you thought your treating team were recommending ECT you explained you wanted to
answer very bluntly and told us ‘buggered
if I know’. You did say
ECT may be a useful treatment for depression, but also said it did not work for
anyone. You said
you could not recall any discussions between you and your
treating team about having ECT (TD confirmed discussions had been attempted
number of times leading up to the application being made and this hearing).
You were very
clear that you did not need to be in hospital and did not need treatment –
you thought you should be discharged
immediately.
Considering all of
the above the Tribunal formed the view that at the time of the hearing you were
overwhelmed by your symptoms and
as a consequence of this you were unable to use
or weigh information to make a decision about whether or not to consent to ECT.
Specifically:
You did not have
any appreciation of your current situation – you did not think you needed
any treatment for your mental health,
and you thought the alternative to having
ECT was to be discharged from hospital immediately.
Your thinking
delusions. You thought you were already
being administered ECT and that your
treating team was motivated by jealousy of you, for reasons that the Tribunal
could not follow
you thought ECT would reduce your life expectancy, and you
thought at least some of the medications you had been given were part
experiment upon you. The Tribunal did not regard these beliefs as reality
All four domains of capacity need to be present for a person
to have capacity. Having reached this conclusion about your ability
weigh relevant information the Tribunal was therefore persuaded that you did not
have capacity to give informed consent
to ECT. In light of this the Tribunal
did not reach a final view on whether you were able to understand and remember
relevant information,
but we do acknowledge you were able to communicate your
(b) Is there a less restrictive way for you to be
When deciding whether there is a less
restrictive way for a person to be treated, the treating psychiatrist must
consider the person’s
views and preferences, their advance statement of
preferences (if they have one)
the views of their nominated support
person, guardian or carer, whether ECT is likely to remedy or lessen the
symptoms of mental illness,
the likely consequences if ECT is not performed, and
any second psychiatric opinion that has been provided. The Tribunal also has
regard to these matters when deciding whether there is a less restrictive way to
treat a person.
Even when the Tribunal has decided a person does not have capacity their
views and preferences must still be considered. The Tribunal
consideration that your preference was to not have ECT. Alongside that the
Tribunal also considered the following matters.
psychiatrist who provided a second opinion on 2 October 2024 noted that there
had been an improvement in your condition,
TD advised this had been relatively
short-lived. TD explained that on each occasion that you had been administered
Acuphase your
mental state improved temporarily. The second opinion review was
conducted during one of these brief improvements, and while you
had been moved
to a low dependency unit, as the effect of the Acuphase diminished, your mental
state had declined and you had to
be moved back to the high dependency
Acuphase is only
an acute treatment and is not a medium or long-term treatment option. You had
been declining a number of recommended
medications, including medications for
other medical conditions. Multiple medications had been tried with minimal
response, including
zuclopenthixol, brexpiprazol, risperidone and lorazepam. An
injectable antipsychotic was being introduced to your treatment, but
a sustained
response would take time.
In the past you
had taken lithium and it had played a key role in improving and maintaining your
mental health, however it was no
longer possible for you to have this medication
due to complications with your liver.
After a 40-day
admission that had been very difficult and distressing for you there had been no
meaningful progress in your recovery,
your treating team noted that your
previous admission had been for several months and they were focused on trying
to prevent a similarly
lengthy admission on this occasion.
Tribunal accepted the medical evidence that to continue with treatment based
only on medication would be unlikely to lead to a
meaningful improvement in your
mental health within any reasonable timeframe. Your distress at being in
hospital was clearly evident
during the hearing. Waiting for additional
medications to take effect seemed likely to prolong your admission considerably.
Tribunal was persuaded that while it was a treatment that you preferred to
not have, in the circumstances ECT was the least restrictive
way for you to be
5. Decision
Given the Tribunal decided that the criteria for
an ECT Order applied to you the Tribunal made an ECT order.
The Act sets a maximum of 12 treatments for ECT orders.
Your treating team requested 12 treatments. The Tribunal decided to authorise
up to 12 treatments to allow for the possibility that a full course of ECT may
be needed to address your symptoms
Length of the ECT
The Act sets a maximum duration of six months for ECT orders.
Your treating team recommended the ECT order to run for 26 weeks
Tribunal decided
to make a 26-week order as this would allow for the
possibility of spacing treatments out over a longer period of time if that was
appropriate
Date of determination: 08-10-2024
[Signed by the legal member]
Matthew Carroll
Presiding member,
on behalf of the Tribunal division.
Date: 14 October
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
When does a person have capacity to give informed
(1) A person has capacity to give informed consent if the person—
(a) is able to understand the information they are given for the purpose of
deciding whether or not to consent; and
(b) is able to remember that information; and
(c) is able to use or weigh that information in deciding whether or not to
consent; and
(d) is able to communicate the decision the person makes by speech, gestures or
any other means.
(2) The following must be considered in deciding whether a person has
capacity to give informed consent—
(a) the person's capacity to give informed consent is specific to the particular
decision that the person is making;
(b) the person's capacity to give informed consent may change over time;
(c) it should not be assumed that the person does not have capacity to give
informed consent only because of the person's age, appearance,
disability,
condition or behaviour;
(d) it should not be assumed that the person does not have capacity to give
informed consent only because the person makes a decision
that could be
considered unwise;
(e) whether the person may be enabled to give informed consent by providing the
person with appropriate supports.
(3) In assessing whether a person has capacity to give informed consent, the
person carrying out the assessment must take all reasonable
steps to ensure
(a) the assessment is carried out at a time, and in an environment, that the
capacity of the person being assessed can be determined
most accurately; and
(b) the person being assessed is provided with appropriate supports to enable
the person to give informed consent.
Application to Mental Health Tribunal for course of
electroconvulsive treatment – adult patient
(1) An authorised psychiatrist may apply to the Mental Health Tribunal for
authority to perform a course of electroconvulsive treatment
on an adult patient
(a) the patient does not have capacity to give informed consent to receiving the
electroconvulsive treatment; and
(b) the authorised psychiatrist is satisfied that in the circumstances there is
no less restrictive way for the patient to be treated.
(2) In deciding whether there is a less restrictive way for the patient to be
treated, the authorised psychiatrist must have regard
to the following—
(a) the patient's views and preferences regarding electroconvulsive treatment,
and any beneficial alternative treatment that is reasonably
available, and the
reasons for those views and preferences, including any recovery outcomes the
patient would like to achieve;
(b) any of the patient's relevant views and preferences specified in their
advance statement of preferences (if any);
(c) any of the patient's relevant views and preferences expressed by the
patient's nominated support person;
(d) the views of the patient's guardian;
(e) if the authorised psychiatrist is satisfied that the decision will directly
affect the carer and the care relationship, the views
of the patient's carer;
(f) whether the electroconvulsive treatment is likely to remedy or lessen the
symptoms of mental illness;
(g) the likely consequences for the patient if the electroconvulsive treatment
is not administered;
(h) any second psychiatric opinion that has been given to the authorised
psychiatrist.
(3) An authorised psychiatrist may make a further application under
subsection (1) during or after the course of electroconvulsive
Section 100
Determination of an application for an order
– adult patient
On receiving an application under this Division,
the Mental Health Tribunal must determine the application and—
(a) make an order authorising a course of electroconvulsive treatment if the
Tribunal is satisfied that—
(i) the patient does not have capacity to give informed consent to the
electroconvulsive treatment; and
(ii) there is no less restrictive way for the patient to be treated; or
(b) make an order refusing the treatment.
Mental Health Tribunal order authorising course of
electroconvulsive treatment
(1) If the Mental Health Tribunal makes an order authorising a course of
electroconvulsive treatment, the Tribunal must specify in
(a) the duration of the order and the date on which it will expire, which must
be no more than 6 months after the date on which the
order is made; and
(b) the maximum number of electroconvulsive treatments authorised to be
performed over the duration of the order, which must be no
more than 12
treatments.
(2) Nothing in this Part requires a course of electroconvulsive treatment to
be completed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (528 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter