URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2024/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MFG [2024] VMHT 24 (29 October 2024)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2024] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan hospital
Mode of hearing:
Tribunal members:
Brook Hely (Legal Member)
John Serry (Psychiatrist Member)
Penny Webster (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from the health service
With online video
Treating team member
With online video
Patient support person
By telephone
Interpreter
With online video
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal made an order
refusing electroconvulsive treatment.
This statement of
After the hearing your advocate requested a written
explanation of the Tribunal's decision. A copy of this statement of reasons will
be given to your treating team, your advocate as well as to you.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because you were on a
Treatment order due to end on 15-01-2025. In late September your treating
psychiatrist
applied to the Tribunal for an order to allow electroconvulsive
treatment (ECT) to be used as part of your treatment. The Tribunal
had to have
a hearing to decide whether to make an ECT order.
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the criteria for an ECT order applied to you. The criteria are
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Act’) and are attached at the end of this statement of reasons.
Under the Act the Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental
health and wellbeing principles (‘principles’).
Based on the
information provided in your hearing and our understanding of your
circumstances, the Tribunal identified the following
principles were
particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
autonomy – having control of your treatment was clearly very important to
Diversity of
care – we considered the range of supports that might be suitable to your
particular circumstances
restriction – we considered the least restrictive means by which you could
receive support for your mental health
decision making – we knew that it was important for you to be involved in
any decisions relating to your treatment
carers – we understood that your family live in another country, but you
have an ex-partner and a friend from that
country in Australia who have been
providing you with support
Health needs
Lived experience
– we acknowledged that you had an extensive and valuable history of lived
experience with the mental health
system which deserved recognition
Dignity of risk
– we considered your preference to decide your own treatment, even if that
involved a degree of risk
Cultural safety
- we were aware that you were a person of a culturally diverse
background.
The Tribunal must also give proper consideration to your
rights under the
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’). If the Tribunal makes an ECT order this
engages and limits a number of human rights protected under
the Charter
including privacy and freedom from medical treatment without consent. To give
proper consideration to your rights protected
under the Charter, and whether
limits on them are reasonable, the Tribunal must thoroughly examine whether the
ECT criteria apply
3. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your file. You spoke to and answered questions
from the Tribunal in the hearing. This statement of reasons
does not summarise
all that information, but the next section refers to the information the
Tribunal relied on to make its decision
and explains why.
In line with
the principles in the Act, the Tribunal considered your views and preferences.
From what you told the Tribunal and the
materials we read, you were happy to
follow the advice of your doctor, including to commence a course of
4. The Tribunal’s decision about the ECT criteria
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the two questions that need to be answered under the ECT
(a) Do you have capacity to give informed consent to
If a patient has capacity they make the decision
the information they have been given for the purposes of deciding
whether or not to consent to ECT, and they are able to remember
and use or weigh
that information. A person also needs to be able to communicate their decision.
Evidence in the Report
The Report outlined a range of attempts that
the treating team had made to explain ECT to you with the assistance of an
interpreter.
You were also provided with a statement of rights for ECT in your
native language. The Report stated that you had been in hospital
for a number of
weeks and your treating team felt that you were experiencing a manic episode
with psychotic features. You were fearful
of being persecuted and had been
paranoid in the community for a few months. You reported hearing birds talking
to you and were reporting
some unusual beliefs. You were also experiencing a
significant disturbance in your behaviour, including such a high level of
and disorganisation that you required nursing in the intensive care
area (ICA). You also required periods in seclusion due to your
high levels of
agitation at times. The treating team had also struggled to stabilise you on
medication as you had been spitting out
tablets. The nurses reported that your
food and fluid intake had been erratic and you had lost weight since admission.
Your treating team had obtained a second opinion from another
psychiatrist in September 2024, who noted that your psychotic symptoms
improved but your manic symptoms remained. The psychiatrist recommended that you
remain in the ICA, that you should be commenced
on lithium and your sodium
valproate increased to 1500mg. The psychiatrist recommended that your doctors
‘consider ECT if not
improving by the end of the week.
In summary,
your treating team recommended ECT on the basis that you had shown a poor
response to medication with ongoing significant
symptoms of mania, particularly
disorganised behaviour, disordered thought, agitation and poor sleep. The report
also noted concerns
treating team felt that you were unable to understand, use or weigh the
information they had given you about ECT as you were too unwell.
report noted that your responses were incomprehensible to the interpreter. You
presented as thought disordered and were unable
to engage in any meaningful
discussion about ECT.
Your evidence at the hearing
At the hearing, you presented much
better than the description given in the Report. You remained calm and composed
throughout the
hearing, which lasted over an hour. You were aware that your
doctors were recommending ECT and that you had been told that there
percent chance of it being effective. You were also aware that your doctors felt
that it would be more effective than any
other treatment. We provided you with a
detailed description of what ECT involved. Whilst you could not recall many of
the details,
you appeared to retain a rudimentary understanding of what the
procedure entailed. When asked whether you would have ECT if given
the choice,
you said that you have to get it done because you want to start a new life. When
asked about your plans for this new
life, you told us that you wanted to start a
new business. You did not have any plans to leave Australia and said that you
love living
in Australia. You emphasised with us a number of times that you were
leaving it in the hands of the doctors as they are the experts.
You clearly
wanted to get better.
Evidence of Dr RG
Dr RG told us that you were much better on the
day of the hearing than earlier in your admission. She noted, for example, that
the previous weekend you had gone three days without sleep and your
presentation significantly worsened. When Dr RG reviewed you
three days prior to
the hearing, you were very disorganised, agitated and preoccupied with your
psychotic symptoms. You had no capacity
to understand the discussion or to use
or weigh the information she was trying to give you. However, Dr RG acknowledged
had improved since then. She spoke with you the day prior to the
hearing, and you were more coherent and were able to understand
what she was
saying about the benefits and side effects of ECT. You apparently said at the
time that you wanted to give ECT a try
and you trusted the advice of the
treating team. When we asked Dr RG, she agreed that you had maintained this
position on ECT over
the past two days. She also agreed that you now recognised
that you were unwell and wanted to get better. Dr RG said you understood
recalled that 80 percent of people in your situation improve with ECT and you
were able to weigh that information against the
risks in deciding to
Overall, Dr RG accepted that you were improved over the past
48-72 hours compared with earlier in your admission and she agreed that
much more coherent during the hearing than previously. However, she felt that
you had shown minimal improvement over your
time in hospital. She also noted her
concern that you had fluctuated over the course of your admission and was
concerned that your
presentation could deteriorate rapidly in future.
Other relevant evidence
Your friend SP said that he had discussed
ECT with you in detail the day before the hearing. He explained what it was and
how it worked.
He felt that you had understood and were supportive of giving ECT
a try. He agreed that you seemed better today than earlier in your
although he acknowledged that he did not know you well.
We also noted
the comments in the report that your ex-partner remained supportive of you
throughout the admission and agreed that
you were not improving. She was
supportive of you commencing ECT.
We note that the interpreter told us
a number of times that they were was struggling to understand you. However, it
was difficult
to know whether this was due to your thoughts being disorganised
as opposed to your speech being slurred due to heavy sedation from
medication, combined with the poor audio. The interpreter felt that it was more
likely the latter.
Findings and reasoning
In applying the ECT criteria we are required
to presume that you have capacity unless convinced otherwise on the basis of
cogent evidence.
We are also required to assess your capacity based on our
assessment at the time of the hearing. Whilst the events leading up to
hearing can help to inform our assessment, we must be cautious not to rely on
past evidence of incapacity when assessing your
capacity at the hearing. We must
also be cautious not to set the bar for capacity too high, otherwise we risk
being discriminatory
against patients with mental illness as compared with other
We acknowledged that you did not have a perfect understanding
of ECT. Your understanding and recollection of the information given
patients about to undergo a serious medical
procedure. Importantly, you
appreciated that you were seriously unwell and you wanted to get better. You
understood that there were
risks with the procedure, but you weighed those risks
against you being unwell and being informed that approximately 80 percent of
people in your situation improve with ECT. You also understood that your doctors
felt that this was the best treatment for you at
the moment and you were
prepared to accept that advice and proceed. We felt that this reflected a fairly
typical attitude of a patient
who knew he was unwell, wanted to get better, was
contemplating a significant medical procedure and ultimately decided to follow
the advice of his doctor.
Also, whilst you had often been highly
agitated during your admission, you remained calm throughout a lengthy hearing.
Your thoughts
appeared to be mostly coherent. You also did not express any
thoughts that appeared delusional in nature.
We acknowledged the
possibility that we happened to catch you within a window of lucidity that might
soon close. We were mindful of
the concerns expressed by Dr RG that your
presentation had fluctuated over your admission and your treating team were
concerned that
you might deteriorate in future. However, as set out earlier, we
are required to assess your capacity based on how you present at
the hearing.
Also, we were equally mindful that your improved presentation at the hearing
could be a sign that you had ‘turned
the corner’ of your manic
episode. You had shown a positive trajectory of improvement that had been
sustained over two days.
Dr RG agreed that you had been noticeably improved over
the past 72 hours. We also noted that your lithium level was not yet
therapeutic,
indicating that the medication might be still taking time to have
full effect.
Weighing these matters together, we ultimately were not
comfortably satisfied that the presumption of capacity had been rebutted.
therefore accepted that you had capacity to make your own decision about
(b) Is there a less restrictive way for you to be
Given our finding above that you had capacity to
make your own decision about ECT, we were not required to reach a finding on
there was a less restrictive way for you to be treated.
5. Decision
Given the Tribunal was not satisfied all the ECT
criteria applied to you the Tribunal refused to make an order authorising
Date of determination: 03-10-2024
[Signed by the legal member]
Presiding member, on
behalf of the Tribunal division.
Date: 29 October 2024.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
When does a person have capacity to give informed
(1) A person has capacity to give informed consent if the person—
(a) is able to understand the information they are given for the purpose of
deciding whether or not to consent; and
(b) is able to remember that information; and
(c) is able to use or weigh that information in deciding whether or not to
consent; and
(d) is able to communicate the decision the person makes by speech, gestures or
any other means.
(2) The following must be considered in deciding whether a person has
capacity to give informed consent—
(a) the person's capacity to give informed consent is specific to the particular
decision that the person is making;
(b) the person's capacity to give informed consent may change over time;
(c) it should not be assumed that the person does not have capacity to give
informed consent only because of the person's age, appearance,
disability,
condition or behaviour;
(d) it should not be assumed that the person does not have capacity to give
informed consent only because the person makes a decision
that could be
considered unwise;
(e) whether the person may be enabled to give informed consent by providing the
person with appropriate supports.
(3) In assessing whether a person has capacity to give informed consent, the
person carrying out the assessment must take all reasonable
steps to ensure
(a) the assessment is carried out at a time, and in an environment, that the
capacity of the person being assessed can be determined
most accurately; and
(b) the person being assessed is provided with appropriate supports to enable
the person to give informed consent.
Application to Mental Health Tribunal for course of
electroconvulsive treatment – adult patient
(1) An authorised psychiatrist may apply to the Mental Health Tribunal for
authority to perform a course of electroconvulsive treatment
on an adult patient
(a) the patient does not have capacity to give informed consent to receiving the
electroconvulsive treatment; and
(b) the authorised psychiatrist is satisfied that in the circumstances there is
no less restrictive way for the patient to be treated.
(2) In deciding whether there is a less restrictive way for the patient to be
treated, the authorised psychiatrist must have regard
to the following—
(a) the patient's views and preferences regarding electroconvulsive treatment,
and any beneficial alternative treatment that is reasonably
available, and the
reasons for those views and preferences, including any recovery outcomes the
patient would like to achieve;
(b) any of the patient's relevant views and preferences specified in their
advance statement of preferences (if any);
(c) any of the patient's relevant views and preferences expressed by the
patient's nominated support person;
(d) the views of the patient's guardian;
(e) if the authorised psychiatrist is satisfied that the decision will directly
affect the carer and the care relationship, the views
of the patient's carer;
(f) whether the electroconvulsive treatment is likely to remedy or lessen the
symptoms of mental illness;
(g) the likely consequences for the patient if the electroconvulsive treatment
is not administered;
(h) any second psychiatric opinion that has been given to the authorised
psychiatrist.
(3) An authorised psychiatrist may make a further application under
subsection (1) during or after the course of electroconvulsive
Section 100
Determination of an application for an order
– adult patient
On receiving an application under this Division,
the Mental Health Tribunal must determine the application and—
(a) make an order authorising a course of electroconvulsive treatment if the
Tribunal is satisfied that—
(i) the patient does not have capacity to give informed consent to the
electroconvulsive treatment; and
(ii) there is no less restrictive way for the patient to be treated; or
(b) make an order refusing the treatment.
Mental Health Tribunal order authorising course of
electroconvulsive treatment
(1) If the Mental Health Tribunal makes an order authorising a course of
electroconvulsive treatment, the Tribunal must specify in
(a) the duration of the order and the date on which it will expire, which must
be no more than 6 months after the date on which the
order is made; and
(b) the maximum number of electroconvulsive treatments authorised to be
performed over the duration of the order, which must be no
more than 12
treatments.
(2) Nothing in this Part requires a course of electroconvulsive treatment to
be completed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (505 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter