URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VLPT/2005/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:33:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mitchell v Samuel Sleigh and Associates [2005] VLPT 1 (23 May 2005)
Tribunal reference: T0125 of 2004
and address of client:
Mrs Helma Mitchell
address, and reference of legal practitioner:
Samuel Sleigh and
Legal Ombudsman
reference: LOV/03/3121
RPA and its reference: Law Institute of
Victoria Limited
Ref: ML:BB:LOV/03/3121
[2005] VLPT 1
CONCERNING A DISPUTE
between Mrs Helma Mitchell C/- Mr Howard Mitchell (the “client”)
and Samuel Sleigh and Associates (the “legal practitioner”).
REASONS OF LEGAL PROFESSION TRIBUNAL FOR DECISION
GIVEN ON 23 MAY, 2005
(Section 409 Legal Practice Act)
This is a pecuniary loss dispute between Mrs Helma Mitchell, as
client, and Samuel Sleigh and Associates as legal practitioner.
background is that the client has been in dispute for some time with her former
solicitors, Messrs. Wilmoth Field and Warne, over
legal services provided by the
solicitors and the question of whether she was indebted to that firm of
solicitors.
On 10 July 2002 Wilmoth Field and Warne obtained a judgment
in the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria against the client in the
$4,100.71, inclusive of costs and interest. This money was not paid by the
It is clear from the evidence that at some stage prior to the
obtaining of judgment by Wilmoth Field and Warne against the client,
consulted the legal practitioner. There is a dearth of written material
surrounding occurrences during that period. However,
there is in evidence a
letter from the legal practitioner to the client, dated 24 October 2001. There
is also an accompanying account
and a copy of a money order, dated 25 October
2001, issued from the Broadmeadows Post Office in the sum of $220.00 in payment
that account.
The client, in evidence, said that the letter of 24
October 2001 should in fact have borne the date of 24 October 2002. The legal
practitioner, in evidence, stated that the date was correct and tendered not
only the copy letter but the accompanying material being
the account and the
copy of the money order.
I am satisfied that 24 October 2001 was the
correct date. In that letter the legal practitioner advises that he perused
documentation
provided to him by the client and that he did not foresee a
successful outcome should the matter be pursued. He further advised
that it was
his view that the matter was a very complicated one and one which his firm did
not have the capacity to pursue.
There was also advice concerning the
possibility of very high costs payable by the client with very little likelihood
of success.
The letter then went on to state that in the best interests
of the client his firm was declining to proceed any further on behalf
client and further advised that should the client wish to pursue the matter a
reference could be arranged for litigation lawyers
to take up the matter on
behalf of the client.
I put this in simply to illustrate that the legal
practitioner was aware of the difficulties which would be experienced by the
in further disputation with Wilmoth Field and Warne.
aware of the circumstances under which the judgment was obtained against the
client by Wilmoth Field and Warne in the Magistrates’
Court of Victoria.
However, no evidence has been given to suggest that the legal practitioner was
acting on her behalf at that point
on 10 July 2002.
After the judgment
was obtained against the client, Wilmoth Field and Warne issued a bankruptcy
notice against the client in respect
of the judgment debt and upon receipt of
that notice the client consulted the legal practitioner. In doing so, she
provided the
bankruptcy notice to him.
This notice listed the hearing
of the matter as 22 October 2002. It is the evidence of the legal practitioner
that he was somehow
under the impression that the hearing was to take place on a
shortly later date. It was also suggested by him that the client was
similar misapprehension. No evidence has been given in relation to the
client’s position on this point.
The question is what instructions
did the legal practitioner have and was he providing legal services. It seems
clear to me that,
at the very least, the legal practitioner did have
instructions to attend court on the return date of the bankruptcy notice and
for an adjournment. The question of whether he was to do anything beyond
that is still moot.
The legal practitioner has given evidence that he has
no experience in bankruptcy matters and it may well be that beyond applying
an adjournment the mysteries of bankruptcy law were beyond his realm of
The question then is was the legal practitioner providing
legal services to the client. Evidence has been given that there was a
connection between the legal practitioner and the client inasmuch as the
practitioner’s wife and the wife of the client’s
professional colleagues, thus providing a connection between the two
The legal practitioner has given evidence that what he was
really doing was just assisting the client, that he did not intend to charge
his services and that he was not acting as such. However, it is clear that the
client, when she came to the legal practitioner,
was relying upon him for
This is an area which is in fact a deadly trap for legal
practitioners. Where a piece of advice, sometimes referred to as kerbside
advice, is given, without any intention of opening a file or providing any
follow-up service or indeed charging for that advice or
minor assistance, it can
sometimes return to be of great detriment.
The short answer is that no
matter what the relationship is between the parties in circumstances where a
person approaches a legal
practitioner for assistance, which may be seen as
professional assistance, then whatever is done, no matter how minor, is the
of legal services.
It was put to the legal practitioner in
cross-examination that in applying for an adjournment it would be necessary for
him to appear
before the court and announce that he acted on behalf of the
To do so is to announce a relationship of a professional nature.
Should no such relationship exist then the legal practitioner would
standing to appear before the court on behalf of the client.
It is quite
obvious that, in these circumstances, a professional relationship was formed and
that whatever the legal practitioner
did, however, minor, it was the provision
of legal services.
This being the case, it is clear to the Tribunal that
this dispute comes within the ambit of section 122 of the
Legal Practice Act
inasmuch as the client claims to have suffered a pecuniary loss as a
result of an act or omission by a legal practitioner or firm
in the provision of
legal services to the person, other than loss in respect of which a claim lies
against the Fidelity Fund.
Next, it is necessary to determine what would
have been the outcome of the bankruptcy proceedings but for the inaction of the
practitioner.
Mr P.D. Mack, who previously was with Wilmoth Field
and Warne and who had the conduct of the matter on behalf of that firm, gave
that in such matters whenever an appearance is made by or on behalf of
the defendant the court adjourns the bankruptcy application
in order to enable
the parties to negotiate the matter.
In this case, there having been no
appearance on behalf of the client, the Federal Magistrates’ Court of
Australia made a declaration
of bankruptcy against the client on 22 October
In short summary, what transpired thereafter was that a notice
requiring the client to pay the sum of $14,515.00 to the Insolvency
and Trustee
Service Australia (ITSA) was made. The client’s son subsequently took out
a loan and paid that sum on behalf of
his mother to ITSA and, as a result of
that, an annulment of bankruptcy was made on 12 August 2003.
client’s claim is for that sum, plus interest, stating her loss and damage
in that sum resulted from the negligence of the
legal practitioner.
first, it must be said that the sum of $14,515.00 includes the sum of the
judgment debt and interest thereon and may not be properly
seen as part of the
claim against the legal practitioner simply because no further matters have
resolved the question of what money
is properly owing to Wilmoth Field and
However, the further question is this: What would have been the
outcome but for the failure of the legal practitioner to obtain an
adjournment?
There has been no resolution of the question of a lesser amount owing to Wilmoth
Field and Warne and I am not satisfied
that the client would not have been made
bankrupt other than as a result of the legal practitioner’s failure to
attend court
to request an adjournment.
Certainly, had the legal
practitioner sought the adjournment on the return date it would have been
granted if the evidence of Mr Mack
is to be accepted and I have no reason not to
accept that.
The situation then is no better or worse than it was prior
to the return date. The question of the propriety of the amount of the
debt is still unresolved and there has been no evidence that there would have
been a settlement other than for the amount
which was finally paid in order to
discharge the bankruptcy.
Indeed, it could be seen that in the absence of
a settlement there may have been further matters before a court and more costs
and the amount higher than the one upon which resolution was finally
There has been also no evidence that any application was made
to set the bankruptcy order aside. It would have been possible, given
circumstances of the non-appearance before the Federal Magistrates’ Court
of Australia on the return date, to have applied
to have the order set aside.
This would have resulted in an order for costs thrown away but it may well have
been that these costs
would have been accepted by the legal
practitioner.
However, the fact remains that even had this been the
course of action there would have been no change to the situation in relation
the impending bankruptcy. It would still have been necessary for the client to
either settle the matter or dispute the bankruptcy.
As I have said, I
have no evidence to suggest that settlement on any terms, other than the terms
upon which the matter was resolved,
would have been achieved. I also have no
evidence that bankruptcy could have been avoided.
circumstances, I am not satisfied that the client has suffered any pecuniary
loss as a result of the action or inaction
of the legal practitioner. Under
these circumstances the dispute is to be dismissed.
.......................................................................................................
Registrar and Member of the Legal Profession Tribunal
1. Copies of this document will be provided by the Tribunal to the client, the
legal practitioner, the Legal Ombudsman, the recognised
professional association
that originally handled the dispute, and the conciliator.
2. More information about the operation of the Tribunal can be found on the
Tribunal’s website at
www.legalpt.vic.gov.au
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter