URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:36:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HSB [2025] VMHT 7 (14 March 2025)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
. The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2025] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan hospital
Mode of hearing:
Videoconference
Tribunal members:
Kim Magnussen (Legal Member)
Harold Hecht (Psychiatrist Member)
Kenton Winsley (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from the health service
With online video
With online video
With online video
Legal representative, Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service
With online video
Observer, University Student
With online video from the health service
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal made a community
treatment order with a duration of 26 Weeks expiring on
13/08/2025.
This statement of reasons:
After the hearing
your treating team requested a written explanation of the Tribunal's decision. A
copy of this statement of reasons
will be given to your treating team as well as
to you and your legal representative. While the statement of reasons was
by your treating team, because it concerns you it is addressed to
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because you were on a
temporary treatment order due to end on 17/02/2025. The Tribunal had to have a
before the temporary treatment order expired to decide whether or not to
make a treatment order.
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental
health and wellbeing principles (‘principles’).
Based on the
information provided in your hearing and our understanding of your
circumstances, the Tribunal identified the following
principles were
particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
autonomy – you are willing to have treatment for your mental health and
you accept medication has been helpful.
restriction – you are very opposed to remaining in hospital but are
willing to continue treatment in the community.
decision making – you have not made an advance statement of preferences
Dignity of risk-
there is some risk that you could again become unwell if you leave hospital but
there is a tolerable level of risk
provided you continue treatment in the
Cultural safety
– you are an indigenous woman with connections in two different states.
The Tribunal must also give proper consideration to your rights
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’). Compulsory treatment engages and limits a number
of human rights protected under the Charter including
from medical treatment without consent, and where a person is being treated in
hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your rights
protected under the Charter, and whether limits on them are reasonable, the
must thoroughly examine three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your file. You read a statement you had prepared
prior to the hearing as well. Both you and your treating
team spoke to and
answered questions from the Tribunal in the hearing. Your legal representative
also made submissions on your behalf.
This statement of reasons does not
summarise all that information, but the next section refers to the information
the Tribunal relied
on to make its decision and explains why.
Tribunal must have regard to your views and preferences. From what you told the
Tribunal and the materials we read you accept
that you have a mental health
issue that needs treatment but you very much want to have the treatment in the
community rather than
remain in hospital. You are now in a good headspace and
you acknowledge that your drug use has had a detrimental impact on your life
your mental health so you are now committed to not using any illicit substances.
This time you were placed on an assessment order
when you were put on bail by
the Court, and you did not abscond from treatment as stated in the Report. A
housing service has arranged
accommodation for you when you leave hospital as
you are unable to return to your previous Office of Housing accommodation. You
in a priority group for new State provided housing and hope to have new
permanent accommodation in the next three to six months.
Your mother recently
passed away when you were in custody, but you hope to re-establish contact with
your sister now that you are
not using substances, as she has a young family.
You want to keep taking the medication that has been prescribed for your mental
health because it helps to keep you stable. You were willing to have treatment
arranged by a particular community health service
, but then the hospital became
involved and you were admitted to hospital. You are currently on bail. When you
were previously in
custody it was because a person had accused you of offences
that have not been proved, and this person has also previously made false
allegations against you.
Your lawyer made submissions that you are now
wanting to make a new start and turn your life around. You agree that you have a
health condition for which you are willing to have treatment on a
voluntary basis. A specialist service has arranged temporary accommodation
you, initially at a hotel and this is available now. There are also multiple
additional services in place to support you. You
are not a risk to yourself or
anyone else and you strongly deny the allegation in the report that you were
carrying a knife in public.
You have also never received any financial
compensation for past abuse. You have made many positive changes in your life.
found being in hospital frustrating and traumatic but despite this you
have complied with all recommended treatment. You are willing
to continue to
follow all recommendations from your treating team.
4. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the four questions that need to be answered under the
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
Your Report said that you have experienced
mental illness which at times has involved a significant disturbance of thought,
perception. You experienced very significant trauma in your earlier
life including abuse in foster care, sexual assaults, and multiple
miscarriages,
which have affected your mental health in adulthood. You have had over 40
admissions to hospital for mental health
treatment. You have had multiple
periods of incarceration since the early 2000’s . This current admission
to hospital came
(although it is noted that you dispute this). At times you have experienced
distressing psychotic symptoms however this has not been observed during the
current admission, although you have been guarded about
this in discussions. On
admission your mood was elevated and at times agitated, but this had settled
with the reinstatement of anti-psychotic
medication.
This information
was reiterated by AP during the hearing, who whilst he has not been your
treating psychiatrist for the current admission,
has treated you in previous
admissions.
As noted above, you told the Tribunal you accept you have a
mental illness and are willing to continue with recommended treatment
lawyer r confirmed that this criterion for treatment was not disputed. The
Tribunal was therefore satisfied that you have
mental illness, characterised as
a significant disturbance of thought, mood and perception.
(b) Does your mental illness mean you need to be treated now,
to try and prevent your mental health or physical health seriously
deteriorating;
or to prevent serious harm to you or someone else?
Your Report said you needed immediate treatment
to prevent a serious deterioration in your mental health, and to prevent serious
to you and to others. In the past there has been significant self-harm and
you have needed many admissions to hospital for treatment
since first
experiencing symptoms many years ago. Your treating team believe you are at risk
of harm from misadventure and potentially
from others, and you have had a long
history of being incarcerated for various criminal offences. You damaged your
previous Office
of Housing accommodation by burning it , so you are now
experiences
which have affected your mental health. You have had multiple
previous serious suicide attempts and have put yourself in significant
when you have been acutely unwell, for example running into traffic. In
addition, when unwell your self-care deteriorates
including you having
inadequate oral intake and not having wounds attended to, which means your
physical health is also at risk.
Your use of substances has impacted
significantly on your mental health, and during the current admission you had a
medical episode
after using methamphetamine.
It was apparent to the
Tribunal that when you have not been receiving consistent mental health
treatment and support you have quickly
required admission to hospital for
necessary treatment to be reinstated, and for necessary supports to be put in
place. You have
repeatedly suffered harm from misadventure and from others, and
have had many interactions with the criminal justice system, all
of which were
at least partly a result of inadequately treated mental illness. Your
vulnerability to using substances increases the
risks to your mental and
physical health. Whilst you told the Tribunal you had not used substances for
the last three months, you
recently had a medical episode in hospital after
using methamphetamine. When the Tribunal raised this with you, you said you had
forgotten about this.
For these reasons the Tribunal was satisfied that
you need immediate treatment to prevent a serious deterioration in your mental
physical health, and to prevent serious harm to you. The Tribunal considered
there was insufficient detailed evidence to be satisfied
that you pose a risk of
serious harm to another person.
(c) Will you receive immediate treatment if you are on a
treatment order?
Your report said that your treatment plan
includes mood stabilising and antipsychotic medication, and you will continue to
medication as part of your treatment if you are on a treatment
Your treatment plan currently is for an admission to an extended
care unit for rehabilitation once a bed becomes available. AP said
you may need
to be discharged from hospital and have treatment in the community whilst
waiting for a bed in the extended care unit.
This is discussed further
(d) Is there a less restrictive means than a treatment order
that would enable you to receive immediate treatment?
Your lawyer submitted that you could be treated
less restrictively, as a voluntary patient, as you are willing to continue to
the advice of your treating team. You also told the Tribunal you are
willing to continue treatment and will accept the recommendations
of the doctors
Whilst the Tribunal acknowledges
you have good intentions to continue treatment, there was considerable clear
evidence that when you
have not been on a treatment order in the past you have
not had consistent mental health treatment. You have also previously been
to follow up many times after being discharged from hospital, and it has only
been when you have either been readmitted to hospital
or in custody that mental
health services were able to engage you and ensure you received treatment with
medication and other necessary
psychosocial supports. On this basis the Tribunal
was satisfied that, at the time of the hearing, there was no less restrictive
for you to receive necessary mental health treatment than a treatment
5. Decision
Given the Tribunal decided that all of the
compulsory treatment criteria applied to you the Tribunal made a treatment
Treatment in hospital or in the community
above, your treating team have a plan for you to be admitted to an extended care
unit for further treatment with a rehabilitation
However, an
inpatient treatment order places the greatest limits on your rights protected
under the Charter. For this reason, the
Act says that the Tribunal can only make
an inpatient treatment order if it is satisfied that a person cannot be treated
in the community.
Your treating team said they were seeking an inpatient
treatment order so that you can be admitted to an extended care unit with a
rehabilitation focus once a bed is available. This level of treatment is not
available from a community mental health service. This
would include engagement
with alcohol and drug supports, occupational therapy, social work and psychology
input, with an eventual
discharge to National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)
supported accommodation, all in a safe and structured care setting.
were very opposed to the plan for long term treatment in an inpatient setting.
You said you had turned your life around and had
made a commitment to abstain
from substance use and that you would be very willing to continue treatment with
a community mental
health service.
Whilst your treating team’s
long-term plan appeared to represent optimum treatment, the mental health and
wellbeing principles
provide that decisions about a person’s treatment and
care must be provided with the least possible restriction of a person’s
rights, dignity and autonomy, and that their views and preferences should be key
determinants of the nature of recovery and participation.
The principles also
provide that a person has the right to take reasonable risks to achieve personal
growth, self-esteem and overall
quality of life.
Placing due weight on
these principles and your commitment to continue treatment once discharged from
hospital, the Tribunal decided
you should be given a further opportunity to have
treatment in the community rather than in hospital and made a community
Length of the Treatment Order
sets a maximum duration of six months for treatment orders. Your treating team
requested a treatment order to run for six
The Tribunal decided to make an order for this six-month period, as you
will very likely require ongoing intensive mental health treatment
indefinitely.
You have many significant barriers to achieving recovery and will need extensive
ongoing psychosocial rehabilitation
and support for an extended period of
Date of determination: 13-02-2025
[Signed by the
legal member]
Kim Magnussen
Presiding member, on behalf of the
Tribunal division.
Date: 14 March 2025.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143 Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
Section 5 What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (518 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter