URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clayton v State of Victoria No.2 [1998] VADT 29 (24 August 1998)
VICTORIAN CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LIST
ERIC CLAYTON
STATE OF VICTORIA & ORS
BRENDA WALSH
NRMA & MR PATRICK
ADRIAN ALLISEY
OTIS BUILDING TECHNOLOGY
MS C. McKENZIE
, Deputy President
TRANSCRIPT OF DECISION
AT MELBOURNE ON MONDAY 24 AUGUST 1998 AT 10.35 AM
MR CLAYTON appeared on his own behalf.
MS COHEN appeared on behalf of Ms Allisey.
MS FIRKIN appeared on behalf of Ms Walsh.
MS JUKIC and MR JANSON appeared on behalf the State of
MS O'BRIEN appeared on behalf of Australia Post.
MS HUME appeared on behalf of NRMA.
MS PATRICK appeared on behalf of Mr Patrick.
MR NICHOLSON appeared on behalf of Otis.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Very well. I do not propose to go through appearances
again. I assume that all parties either knew on Thursday or
have been contacted
by the Tribunal here and those who are not here may later request written
reasons for the decision but we will
deal with that matter as we come to
I should first indicate that my decision is that the Tribunal does have
appropriate
directions conveying that decision and the registrar is now in a position to be
able to hand those to the various parties.
I now give my reasons for that
decision. The reasons relate, as will be clear from them, to all the complaints.
I have dealt with
them generically rather than one by one.
The Tribunal had convened this jurisdiction hearing because the Equal
Opportunity Commission had written to it advising it that in
the light of the
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal's decisions, and I will call that the ADT in
these reasons, in
Wood v Ford Motor Company
, a decision handed down on 5
May 1998 and
Staines v Crown Limited & Ors
, a decision handed down on
25 May 1998, there may be jurisdictional difficulty with the number of
complaints.
The Tribunal then directed the issue of summonses to the Equal
Opportunity Commission so that its files would be produced to the Tribunal
that happened at the hearing. And at the hearing the Tribunal also heard
evidence from Mr Greg Manning, the Equal Opportunity
Commission's - and I will
call that the Commission in these reasons - the Commission's legal
It also received two affidavits from Dr Diane Sisely, the chief executive
officer of the Commission, a member of the Commission and
the Commission's chief
conciliator all rolled into one. It heard oral submissions from Mr Clayton in
relation to the complaints of
his that were the subject of the hearing and also
from the legal representatives and a number of the other parties. It received
submissions also in respect of a number of the complaints.
One of the complaints mentioned by the Commission was not dealt with at
that hearing and that was because the parties who were both
unrepresented
applied for and had been granted an adjournment. With another complaint, that of
Mr Clayton v. The Yarra Community
Housing Group, Tribunal reference number
72/1998, there appears to the Tribunal to be no relevant irregularity on the
face of the
Commission's file and therefore I do not consider that complaint
further here.
I first make findings based on the Commission's file and all the evidence
before the Tribunal. I then set out the relevant statutory
provisions. And then
I deal with the submissions made by the parties. I should say at this point that
two of the respondents to Mr
Clayton's complaints, in respect of one of those
respondents there were two complaints and in respect of the other one complaint,
those respondents have indicated that they did not propose to make oral or
written submissions but would abide the decision of the
Tribunal. Those
respondents were the Brotherhood of St Laurence and Yarra Community Housing
Group and again the decision covers those
complaints but of course, no written
or oral submissions were made.
It was submitted for one of the respondents to another of Mr Clayton's
complaints, that respondent being Australia Post, that Mr Clayton's
against it should proceed for a number of reasons with which I will deal later
and which, if I accept, would apply equally
to all the other complaints before
Now, leaving aside these complaints, the ones concerning the Brotherhood
of St Laurence and Yarra Community Housing Group and the
one to which a
respondent was Australia Post, it was submitted by all the other respondents in
general terms that the Tribunal did
not have jurisdiction to deal with these
complaints and it was submitted for the complainants that it did. I deal later
submissions.
But first I come to my findings and I take the complaints in turn. The
first was a complaint by Walsh v. NRMA and other respondents.
It was lodged with
the Commission on 20 June 1997. The Commission file contains a letter dated 18
December 1997 from the complainant's
solicitors advising that the complainant
had decided to reject certain offers made by the respondents and requested
referral of the
complaint to a Tribunal. Before this letter was written there
had been, as the Commission file shows, a conciliation conference of
13 November
According to the date stamp on the file, the Commission received the
letter of request on 14 January 1998. By a letter dated 30 January
signed by Charlotta Ziems, manager of complaints resolution and clearly
emanating from the Equal Opportunity Commission the
complainant was advised that
further attempts to conciliate would not resolve the matter, that the file has
been closed and that
the complainant had a right to request referral of the
complaint under s.117 of the Equal Opportunity Act (1995) which I refer to
the Act. By letter dated 30 April 1998, the Commission referred the complaint to
the ADT. The letter of referral states that the
referral is under s.117(3) of
the Equal Opportunity Act.
I next deal with the complaint of Allisey v. Otis Building Technologies.
This was lodged with the Commission on 22 March 1996. There
Commission's file, a letter from the complainant requesting referral dated 24
September 1996, date stamped as having been
received by the Commission on 26
September 1996.
By letter dated 31 October 1996, Dr Sisely, who as I have said is the
chief executive, the chief conciliator and a member of the Commission,
notice to the complainant that the matter was not conciliable and advised the
complainant of the right to request referral of
the matter to the ADT. The
Commission referred the matter to the ADT on 20 January 1997, stating in
its letter of referral that it
was referring the matter under s.117(3) of the
Then there are a number of complaints by Mr Clayton against various
respondents. All of those complaints were declined by the Commission
under s.108
of the Act and in respect of all of them Dr Sisely wrote to Mr Clayton
informing him of this decision.
The first of them is Clayton v. Australia Post. That complaint was lodged
with the Commission on 6 August 1997. There is a letter
on the Commission's file
signed by Mr Clayton requesting referral of the complaint to the ADT dated 26
September 1997 and date-stamped
by the Commission as having been received by
The Commission declined to entertain the complaint by a written decision
dated 30 September 1997 and expressed to be under s.108 of
the Act. There is a
letter signed by Dr Sisely, one to the complainant and one to the respondent
dated 3 October 1997 advising the
parties of this decision and that the
complainant has a right to request referral of the complaint to the ADT. The
complaint was
referred by the Commission to the ADT on 21 October 1997 and the
referral was expressed to be under s.108(3) of the Act.
Then there was the complaint of Mr Clayton v. the State of Victoria and
Minister for Police and Emergency Services, Tribunal reference
number 173/1997.
That was lodged with the Commission on 14 August 1997. Mr Clayton wrote to the
Commission requesting a referral
to the ADT by letter dated 26 September 1997,
date stamped by the Commission as having been received on that date.
By a decision dated 30 September 1997, the Commission decided to decline
to entertain the complaint under s.108 of the Act and then
by a letter dated
3 October 1997, Dr Sisely wrote to Mr Clayton advising him of that decision
and of his right to request referral
to the ADT.
Dr Sisely gave similar advice to the respondents by a letter dated 6
October 1997. The complaint was referred by the Commission to
the ADT on 21
October 1997 and the referral is expressed to be under s.108(3) of the
Next there is the complaint of Mr Clayton v. the State of Victoria,
Minister for Police and Emergency Services, Tribunal reference
number 71/1998.
That was lodged with the Commission on 20 June 1997. The Commission declined to
entertain the complaint on 13 January
1998. Dr Sisely wrote to the
complainant and the respondent advising them of this decision and of the
complainant's right to request
referral to the ADT on 19 January
On the Commission's file there is a photocopy of a letter from Mr Clayton
dated 2 January 1998 requesting referral to the ADT but
there is no date stamp
showing that the letter was received by the Commission. The Commission referred
the matter to the ADT on 20
April 1998 and expressed the referral to be under
s.108(3) of the Act.
I am satisfied on all the material before me that the Commission must at
some time have received the request for referral signed by
Mr Clayton and that
this is likely because otherwise the Commission would not have referred the
matter to the Tribunal. It states
in its letter of referral that Mr Clayton
requests that referral but I am not prepared to find that the Commission
received that
request before it gave notice of its decision to decline the
complaint from Mr Clayton.
Accordingly, I am not prepared to make a finding upon which argument as
to whether the request was received before the giving of that
notice could be
based. I therefore consider that the complaint does not suffer from the
irregularities that I am here discussing
and consider it no further at this
I then deal with the complaint of Mr Clayton v. the Brotherhood of St
Laurence. That was lodged with the Commission on 22 August 1997.
requested that the complaint be referred to the ADT by letter dated
26 September 1997 and that letter is stamped by the
Commission as having
been received on that date.
By a decision dated 30 September 1997, the Commission declined to
entertain the complaint under s.108 of the Act. By a letter dated
1997, Dr Sisely advised the complainant of that decision and of his right
to request referral to the ADT. The same advice
or similar advice was given to
the respondent by letter from Dr Sisely dated 7 October 1997. On 21 October
1997, the Commission referred
the complaint to the ADT and stated in its letter
of referral that the referral was under s.108 of the Act.
Then there is the complaint of Mr Clayton v. the State of Victoria,
Department of Premier and Cabinet. That complaint was lodged with
the Commission
on 14 August 1997. Mr Clayton requested referral of the complaint to the
ADT by letter dated 26 September 1997, date-stamped
by the Commission as having
been received by it on that date.
By a decision dated 30 September 1997, the Commission declined to
entertain the complaint under s.108 of the Act. Dr Sisely wrote
to Mr Clayton by
letter dated 3 October 1997 advising him of the decision and of his right to
request referral to the ADT. Dr Sisely
wrote a similar letter to the
respondent dated 6 October 1997. The complaint was referred to the ADT on 21
October 1997 and the referral
was expressed to be under s.108(3) of the
Next there is a complaint of Mr Clayton v. The State of Victoria, Office
of Fair Trading and Business Affairs. That complaint was
lodged with the
Commission on 6 August 1997. Mr Clayton requested that it be referred to the ADT
by letter dated 26 September 1997
date stamped by the Commission as having been
received on that date.
The Commission declined to entertain that complaint under s.108 of the
Act by a decision dated 30 September 1997 and Dr Sisely wrote
to Mr Clayton
giving him notice of this decision and advising him of his right to request
referral to the ADT by letter dated 3 October
1997. She wrote a similar letter
to the respondent dated 6 October 1997. The complaint was referred by the
Commission to the ADT
on 31 October 1997 and that referral is expressed to be
under s.108(3) of the Act.
Then there is a complaint by Mr Clayton v. Yarra Community Housing Group,
Tribunal reference 70/1998. That was lodged on 20 November
1997. Mr Clayton
requested it to be referred to the ADT by letter dated 2 January 1998.
There is no date stamp on that letter as
to when it was received by the
Commission. The Commission declined to entertain the complaint under s.108 of
the Act by a written
decision dated 13 January 1998. By letter dated 19 January
1998, Dr Sisely wrote to Mr Clayton and to the respondent advising them
decision and that the complainant had a right to request referral of the
complaint to the ADT.
On 20 April 1998, the Commission referred the complaint to the ADT and
expressed that referral to be under s.108(3) of the Act and
at the complainant's
request. Now, as to this complaint I reached the same conclusion as the
complaint concerning Mr Clayton, Tribunal
reference number 71/1998, that is that
the request was received by the Commission at some time before the referral but
I am not prepared
to find that it was received before the Commission had given
notice of its decision to decline the complaint to Mr Clayton and therefore
there is no finding on which an argument as to the relevant irregularity could
be based and I do not consider this matter further.
On the evidence before me, when the Commission processed these
complaints, its practice was at all relevant times to receive requests
referral of the complaints to the ADT before it decided whether the complaint
was non-conciliable or conciliation was unsuccessful
- now, that was the chief
conciliator's decision under s.117 - or before it decided to decline to
entertain Mr Clayton's complaints.
There was evidence from Mr Manning that the
Commission may not have followed the same practice with other complaints which
it declined
to entertain but that it did follow this practice with
Mr Clayton's complaints. So it accepted requests before giving notice of
decision either under s.108 or under s.117. In that case of course it was
the chief conciliator who was concerned.
There was also evidence, which I accept, that the conciliators who
conducted conciliation conferences under Division 3 of Part 7 of
followed the practice of indicating at the end of the conference what the
recommendation as to the outcome would be and
also explained to the complainant
that the complainant could there and then write a request to refer the matter to
the ADT and in
fact if that request was written there and then or any subsequent
time, the Commission accepted that request.
In his submissions to the Tribunal, Mr Clayton said that he could not
recall exactly why he had made the request to refer his complaints
when he did and before receiving notice from the Commission that the complaints
had been declined. But he was emphatic
that he did not expect his complaints to
be declined and was always devastated when he received the notice and he
believed, he said,
that he would not have thought of requesting referral of the
complaints unless either a member of the Commission staff had explained
that that request was in order or had explained to him what the forthcoming
decision was likely to be.
The Commission certainly followed the practice of accepting the requests
if they were made before the relevant notices under s.108
were given and the
chief conciliator followed that practice as well under s.117. No further
requests were asked for from the complainant
and in each of those cases, the
Commission proceeded to referral without questioning the chain of events that
had occurred, without
requiring any further documentation from the complainant
and in fact without explaining to the complainant that the request might
have been valid. So much is apparent both from the Commission's files and from
the evidence given by Mr Manning.
It seems to me, taking into account the submissions that Mr Clayton has
made, and I accept what he said, that he would not have made
the requests unless
he had been advised that this was in order and it was the Commission's practice
to accept it, or that in fact
the forthcoming decision of the Commission would
go a particular way, that his complaints would be declined and support for what
he said is, in my mind, given by the fact that when one looks at the complaints,
in fact the Commission's decisions occur very shortly
after the request is made.
I think that this is the more probable explanation rather than that in fact when
Mr Clayton made his request,
this prompted the Commission to decline the
complaints. That seems to me not to be as probable an explanation.
I find that the Commission's practice at all relevant times was to treat
the request for referral as operative only when it gave the
relevant notices
under s.108 or the chief conciliator gave a relevant notice under s.117 of the
Act and this finding is supported
by what the practice was in relation to
conciliators explaining to the parties at conciliation conference that the
recommendation
would follow a particular course and that a request could be
accepted at that time. It is also, of course, supported by the fact
Commission did not require any further request or documentation from the
complainant.
Although all the requests do not expressly state that they are operative
only when a relative notice of decision or a relative decision
is made, it seems
to me that in the context of this practice, one must conclude that that is how
they were intended to operate. The
Commission's statements in the letters it
sent to the complainant when it gave the relevant notice under s.108 and the
in the letter or in the notice given under 117 in the case of the
Walsh and Allisey files, do not detract from this conclusion, it
seems to me.
The evidence is very strong of the practice that the Commission follows and
there is no clear statement, even in those
letters - although there is a general
statement about the complainant's right to refer the matter - there is no clear
statement that
the request previously received is regarded as invalid and a new
request needs to be made. So that seems to me to be the position
concerning the
Commission's practice and the nature of the requests that were
I now make findings about the notice given by or signed by Charlotta
Ziems and expressed to be, under s.117 of the Act and which is
the subject of
the Walsh complaint. At the relevant time, Ms Ziems was not the chief
conciliator. The chief conciliator was Dr Sisely
and she had been appointed
under s.173 of the Act on 31 May 1994 and still occupies that
Ms Ziems was manager of the complaints resolution branch which is a
branch of the Commission. The title of that branch has recently
been changed but
at all material times for my purpose it remained complaints resolution. Ms Ziems
held the post of manager, complaints
resolution from 22 May 1995 to 17 April
1998, that is as head of that branch.
In one of the affidavits which were before me, Dr Sisely exhibits
copies of a number of instruments of delegation. One of these relates
of the Act. It is undated, it states that it is a delegation pursuant to s.179
of the Act and it reads, "I hereby delegate
authority for signature of letters
with respect to decisions under s.117 of the Equal Opportunity Act (1995) to the
manager, complaints
resolution" and it is signed by Dr Sisely.
In her affidavit dated 19 August 1998, Dr Sisely states that she executed
this instrument in November 1996 although she cannot remember
the exact date in
November, and that it was executed partly to put in place arrangements to apply
while she was on leave in December
and January and also partly so that the
manager, complaints resolution could exercise relevant powers even after her
In a second and supplementary affidavit dated 20 August 1998, Dr
Sisely deposes that this and the other instruments of delegation
exhibited to
her earlier affidavit were intended by to her to delegate to Ms Ziems all
the chief conciliator's powers and functions
under the provisions mentioned in
those various instruments, including the power to make decisions under those
provisions, that at
the time of executing those instruments she advised Ms Ziems
of her intention to delegate those powers to her and that from the time
executed those instruments, Ms Ziems exercised all those powers and functions
including the power and function to make decisions
under those various
provisions.
The notice in the Walsh complaint was not, I find, regular on its face
because it did not state that it was given by the chief conciliator
delegation and because it is signed by someone who does not state obviously that
she is the conciliator or the delegate
or the chief conciliator, and also it is
undated. I find that the instrument of delegation is ambiguous on its face
because it is
undated. It refers to both the signing of letters and to decisions
and it seems to me on the basis that the instrument is ambiguous,
take into account what Dr Sisely says in her affidavits as to its intention and
nature and as to her intention when she
I find that the instrument was in fact executed in November 1996 and was
in force when Ms Ziems gave the relevant notice in the Walsh
complaint. I find
that it was intended by Dr Sisely and does delegate to Ms Ziems, who at the time
was manager of complaints resolution,
the powers and functions of the chief
conciliator under s.117 and it is not to be interpreted as delegating those
powers and functions
to the holder of the office of manager, complaints
resolution from time to time. It delegates only to the person who was, at the
time of executing the instrument, that manager because that is what Dr Sisely
intended when the instrument was made. As I have said,
I find that the
instrument delegates all the powers and functions and not just the power to sign
letters, a very limited power.
Turning now to the legislation itself, all these complaints were pending
before the ADT on 30 June 1998. They are governed by the
Equal Opportunity Act,
generally by that Act as in force before 8 December 1997. On 8 December
1997, the relevant part of the Law
and Justice Legislation (Further Amendment)
Act (1997) came into operation and that made some changes to s.108 and included
transitional provisions the effect of which is that those changes apply
only to one of Mr Clayton's complaints and it also made some
changes to s.117(1)
but it seems to me that those changes do not affect this proceeding at this
The effect of s.108 of the Act is as follows. The effect of sub-s.(1) is
that if the Commission considers that certain specified matters
apply, and now I
quote, "the Commission may decline to entertain the complaint by notifying the
complainant and the respondent in
writing within 60 days after the day the
complaint was lodged". Now, that reference to the respondent is one of those
additions by
the Law and Justice Legislation (Further Amendment) Act (1997) and
I have said already that the transitional provisions mean that
the section in
its old form applies to all but one of Mr Clayton's complaints - there is one
that has been lodged after 8 December
- but it does not seem to me that anything
turns on that amendment for the purposes of this proceeding.
108 sub-s.(2) provides, "Within 60 days after receiving the Commission's
notice declining to entertain a complaint, the complainant
by written notice may
require the Commission to refer the complaint to the Tribunal for hearing under
Division 7". Sub-s.(3) provides,
"The Commission must comply with a notice under
sub-s.(2)". Sub-s.(4) provides, "If the complainant does not notify the
under sub-s.(2), the Commission may dismiss the complaint and the
complainant may take no further action under this Act in relation
to the subject
matter of the complaint".
S.117 is headed, "What happens if conciliation fails or is
inappropriate?". Sub-s.(1) provides, "If the chief conciliator (a) does
consider it reasonably possible that a complaint may be conciliated
successfully; or (b) has attempted unsuccessfully to conciliate
the complaint,
he or she must notify the complainant and respondent in writing and the
Commission". Now, again the words "and the
respondent" have been added by the
Law and Justice Legislation (Further Amendment) Act (1997) but in my view
nothing turns on those
for this proceeding.
Sub-ss.(2),(3) and (4) are in similar terms to s.108(2),(3) and (4) with
this exception, that in s.117 sub-s.(2) there is a referral
to a notice under
sub-s.(1) - that is under s.117 sub-s.(1) instead of, as s.108 does, a notice to
the party to entertain the complaint.
Division 4 of Part 7 of the Act is headed, "Jurisdiction of the
Tribunal". S.134 is headed, "When may the Tribunal hear a complaint?"
provides, "The Tribunal may hear a complaint (a) referred to it by the
Commission under s.108, 113, 117 or 123". The rest
of that sub-section is not
relevant here. And sub-s.(2) provides, "The Tribunal also has the jurisdiction
conferred by" and then
a number of sections are listed which are not relevant
S.179 is headed, "Delegation by Chief Conciliator" and it provides that,
"The Chief Conciliator may, in writing, delegate to an officer
of the Commission
any of his or her powers or functions under this Act other than this power of
delegation".
S.191 as in force before 1 July 1998, provided by sub-s.(1) that, "There
are to be appointed under the Public Sector Management Act
(1992) a registrar of
the Tribunal and any other staff, including deputy registrars, that are
necessary for the purposes of administering
S.154 sub-s.(1) provided that, "The Tribunal or the President may give
directions as to any matter or thing not provided for by this
regulations in relation to any proceedings or inquiry before the Tribunal". The
effect of sub-s.(2) is that directions
may be given either on application or at
the Tribunal's initiative.
Now, there has been a considerable change since 1 July 1998. On that
date, the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal, or VCAT
as I have called
it, was created. It is governed really by the combined effect of two Acts, the
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act (1998) which I will call the
VCAT Act, and the Tribunals and Licensing Authorities (Miscellaneous Amendments)
which I will call the Miscellaneous Amendments Act.
The combined effect of those pieces of legislation is to establish VCAT,
to abolish the ADT, to confer the jurisdiction previously
exercised by the ADT
under the Equal Opportunity Act on VCAT and to amend in a number of substantial
ways the Equal Opportunity Act.
It removes s.154 for example which is the
directions power of the former ADT. It also changes references to the Tribunal
Act to references to VCAT. It deletes the provision concerning the
appointment of staff and re-enacts it at an earlier place in the
Act but that
amendment, of course, is not relevant because we are dealing with a time before
1 July in relation to the question of
delegation.
The effect of clause 9, sub-clause 1 of schedule 2 of the Miscellaneous
Amendments Act is that where a proceeding was pending before
the ADT immediately
before 1 July 1998, but that Tribunal had not begun to hear evidence on the
material question of fact, that proceeding
is to be taken to have been commenced
before VCAT, things done by the ADT or by the parties in relation to that
proceeding have effect
as if done by or in relation to VCAT, VCAT has the
procedure under the new Act, that is the VCAT Act, from 1 July onwards but only
has the powers, functions and duties that the ADT had before 1 July 1998. So it
comes about that, even though s.154 has been repealed,
that is one of the powers
that VCAT still has because, in my view, clause 9 sub-clause 1 of schedule 2
applies to this complaint
proceeding.
I should briefly mention some other sections which quite clearly I have
said confer the jurisdiction formerly exercised by the ADT
on VCAT. S.41 of the
VCAT Act deals with the original jurisdiction of the Tribunal and says that that
is its jurisdiction other than
its review jurisdiction. S.43 is headed, "How is
original jurisdiction invoked?" and it relevantly provides, "The original
of the Tribunal is invoked" - and I read paragraph (b) only, - "by
a matter being referred to the Tribunal under an enabling enactment
accordance with s.69."
"Enabling enactment" is defined as, "an enactment by or under which
clearly the Equal
Opportunity Act. And s.69 relevantly provides, "If an enabling enactment
provides for a matter to be referred to
the Tribunal, the referral is to be made
in accordance with the enabling enactment". So in short, we are taken back to
Opportunity Act.
Now, the question of the power to deal with jurisdiction is reinforced
also by rule 6.07 sub-rule 1 of the VCAT Rules (1998) and that
provides, "The
Tribunal may give any directions it considers appropriate in determining any
question raised in proceeding under the
Equal Opportunity Act (1995) as to its
I now deal with some of the submissions as to the law which were raised
at this hearing. Ms O'Brien, for Australia Post, submitted
that the Tribunal did
not have power to determine its own jurisdiction, that at the most it could only
determine the matter as a
threshold question at the hearing of the complaint and
could then only dismiss the complaint if it found it had not been properly
She submitted that the Tribunal should distinguish between want of
relied on a
number of cases and on Sykes, Lennon, Tracey and Esser, General Principles of
Administrative Law, the 1997 edition, particularly
on chapters 4 and 5. The
cases upon which she relied included the judgment of Phillips, JA in
(1998) 1 V.R. 102
at p.116 to 117 particularly.
The case of
R v. Gray (exparte Marsh)
(1985) 157 C.L.R. at p.351.
The judgment of Tadgell, JA. in
Schwerin v. City of Sale
(1997) 2 V.R.
p.219 at 222-3 in particular. The judgment of Justice Dixon, as he then was, in
Parisienne Basket Shoes Pty Ltd v. Whyte
(1938) 59 C.L.R. p.369 at
I have considered the submission very carefully. It is a difficult
question and I have considered carefully all the material that
is relied on in
support of it but I have finally concluded that I ought not to accept this
submission. It seems to me that on the
proper interpretation of s.134 of the
Equal Opportunity Act, the Tribunal does have power to consider whether a
complaint has been
properly referred.
The Tribunal is a creature of statute. It only has the powers, it only
can exercise the powers, that are conferred by statute. It
only has the
to see what that is. Under s.134(1)
it seems to me the Tribunal only has
provisions.
It seems to me that whether a complaint has been properly referred is not
a threshold question for it to consider after it has entered
founds the Tribunal's power to hear the complaint,
founds its jurisdiction. If
there is no referral or no referral under the appropriate provision, then there
is nothing which the
statute empowers the tribunal to hear.
The Tribunal must be able to decide, it seems to me, before hearing any
part of the complaint, whether it has jurisdiction to embark
on that hearing. I
do not think that Parliament intended the matter to be left outstanding for
determination by some other court
which might have power to determine the
matter, to adapt some words of Dixon's in the
Parisienne Basket
If the complaint is not properly referred, then there is nothing before
the Tribunal, there is nothing which the Tribunal can hear
and it cannot proceed
further and it must say so in some way permitted by the Act. The ways permitted
are, it seems to me, to be
found in the combined operation of ss.134 and 154 of
the Act as applied by schedule 2 of the Miscellaneous Amendments Act and of
6.07 of the VCAT Rules. It is by an appropriate direction.
It seems to me that this is really a question of construction of statute
and that it confuses the issue to look at the question of
it is sometimes called and non jurisdictional fact, want of jurisdiction error
within jurisdiction. That distinction,
it seems to me, is more relevant when a
court comes to consider whether a decision of an inferior court or Tribunal is
amenable to
review and what, if any, remedies it might have.
But here we are determining whether there is a proceeding before the
Tribunal which it may go on to hear or whether there is none.
It seems to me
that that is a question which the Tribunal must, under the statute, be able to
determine. It is not a review proceeding
here of the Commission's processes such
as a court might undertake if there in application for prerogative remedies.
Certainly it
is not a general review of the Commission's procedures, it is
simply a review to see whether the referral has occurred under the
section. That is why I find it unnecessary and in fact I would think it
incorrect to consider whether the Commission ought
to have dismissed any of
these complaints. That is not a relevant question at this time.
I find some support for my views in the judgments I have referred to, in
the Rabel case and in Schwerin. It seems to me that the effect
of them is that
if there is a referral then the Tribunal is, at least under the 1984 Equal
Opportunity Act, bound to hear the complaint
and that the proper course is not
so much to strike out the complaint for want of jurisdiction, but when the
Tribunal embarks on
that hearing it must consider whether the complaint ought to
be dismissed in effect under s.46 of the 1984 Act which is now s.136
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
I should emphasise, of course, that the Rabel case and the Schwerin case
are not dealing with the question of whether the complaint
was properly
referred. But with another, and it seems to me quite different question, and
that is whether the complainant's allegations
were capable of amounting to a
contravention of the Act. It is in that context, it seems to me, that they deal
with the question
of whether the complaint should proceed to hearing and
whether, if the matter is raised at hearing, it should then be dismissed rather
than struck out because in fact that is what the sections, relevant sections,
permit. I should also emphasise that I am not suggesting
that the decision of
this Tribunal on this occasion would not be subject to review.
Turning then to the next matter and I propose first to deal with the
question of the notice and the delegation raised in respect to
complaint because that question only applies to the Walsh complaint and it is
convenient to deal with that first and deal
with the other matters that are
raised with respect to all the complaints at one time.
Assuming for the moment that we are not dealing with the correct sequence
between the request and the notice under s.117, the question
is really was the
notice executed in accordance with the instrument of delegation? In other words
was there a valid notice at all?
Under s.179 of the Act there is clear power to
delegate to an officer of the Commission. As the ADT noted in the Staines case,
Act contains no express provision enabling the Commission to appoint
officers. But there may be some implied power for the Commission
to be able to
appoint officers itself and that may be implied from the fact that it is a body
corporate under s.160.
The fact that it has power to do everything that a body corporate may do
under that section and also from the variety of its functions
given under ss.161
and 162 including the preparation of policies and guidelines, the investigation
of complaints, the undertaking
of education and research and the dissemination
of information and the review of legislation and the fact that under 161(2) the
is given all powers necessary to perform those functions, it may be
possible for it to appoint officers under those powers.
Light is also cast on who an officer of the Commission might be by s.191
in its pre-July 1998 form which states that there are to
be appointed under the
Public Sector Management Act, staff for the purposes of administering the Act.
The Public Sector Management
Act enables the creation of offices in the public
sector basically and the appointment of people to fill those offices and it
to the people who fill those offices as officers.
So there is guidance I think as to who the officers of the Commission
might be. This instrument of delegation, I found, is to Ms Ziems.
There is no
material before me that indicates that she was not relevantly on the staff of
the Commission, whether by appointment
by the Commission or under the Public
Sector Management Act and it seems to me that she is an officer for the purposes
of the delegation
power under s.179 of the Act. She was such an officer when
that power was executed and when she signed the notice.
I have said already that the instrument, properly interpreted, is an
instrument of delegation to her and that it covers all the powers
under s.117
and it was to her only and not to the holder of an office for the time being.
Since, in fact, the notice was signed in
accordance with the valid instrument of
delegation, I do not think that the fact that the notice does not state that it
is so signed
invalidates it or takes it out of the scope of that instrument of
delegation.
Support for this view, it seems to me, is given for example by s.42(a)(1)
paragraph (c) of the
Interpretation of Legislation Act 1984
, the effect of which
is that where an Act confers on a person a power of delegation, then unless the
contrary intention appears,
the power, delegated power, when exercised by the
delegate, must be taken for the purposes of the relevant Act to it being
or performed by the delegator.
I conclude that this notice was executed in accordance with the valid
instrument of delegation under s.179 of the Act. That then deals
question raised as to the notice in the Walsh complaint.
I now turn to the question that applies generally to all the complaints
which concerns the request for referral. In all the cases
with which we're now
dealing, the request was made before the relevant notice was given by the
Commission or the chief conciliator.
That is, before notice of the decision to
decline by the Commission under s.108 or before notice by the chief
conciliator's delegate
under s.117 of the Act in the case of the Walsh and
Allisey complaints.
I first refer briefly to some submissions made by the respondents for the
Walsh complaint, that the request for referral in respect
of that complaint was
not a proper request because it was too non specific, too vague, it did not
identify that it was a request
for referral to the ADT. I do not accept this
submission. It seems to me that the request was made in the context of a
lodged with the Commission under the
Equal Opportunity Act
that Act only permits referral to one Tribunal, at that stage the ADT, now VCAT,
and the request for referral must be construed
as a request to refer to the ADT.
It is not invalid on that ground.
I now turn to the more general submissions made by all the respondents
and complainants. The respondents argued that the sequence
for those complaints
which were covered by s.108 of the Act is that the Commission gives notice that
it has declined to entertain
the complaint under s.108(1) and then after
receiving that notice the complainant requests referral under s.108(2) and if
the request
is made within the relevant 60 day period the Commission must comply
with the request under s.108(3) and if it is not made within
the relevant period
then the Commission may dismiss the complaint under s.108(4).
Then it is argued by those respondents whose complaints were dealt with
under s.117 of the Act, that the sequence under s.117 is that
conciliator forms the opinion that the complaint is not reasonably possible to
be conciliated or that attempts at conciliation
have been unsuccessful and
notifies the complainant and the Commission, under s.117(1). That the
complainant, after receiving that
notice, then requests referral within the 60
day period under s.117(2). That the Commission must comply with that requirement
request under s.117(3) and that if the complainant does not make that request
within the 60 day period under sub-s.2 then the Commission
may dismiss the
complaint under s.117(4).
The respondents submit that the sequence and the time limits in ss.108
and 117 for requesting referral are mandatory. Mandatory, as
far as the sequence
is concerned, in the sense that the referral must be made only after receiving
the notice under s.117 or 108.
And that a failure to observe these makes the
request for referral invalid. It means that the request for referral has not
under s.117(2) or s.108(2) and that therefore, because there has been
no valid request for referral, the Commission then cannot comply
with a notice
under those relevant sub-sections the request has not been given and what the
Commission then did by referring the
complaints is in fact a nullity.
The complainants and Australia Post, one of the respondents to Mr
Clayton's complaint, submit to the contrary. First that Woods case
wrong or distinguishable, then also that the within 60 days time limit in
s.108(2) and the within 60 days time limit in
s.117(2) defines the end of the
relevant period within which to request referral rather than its
That is, that those sub-sections, properly construed, mean that the
request must be made at any time before the end of the relevant
period. That the
error is technical only and should either be dispensed with or waived if it is
possible to do so or ratified by
the Tribunal. That otherwise there would be
great prejudice to the parties by additional costs and delay if the matter went
to the Commission and had to start again or continue in the Commission.
That non compliance with time limits in relation to non expedited
complaints,
that is complaints which are not expedited complaints, should not be looked at
as invalidating what is done and that
the relevant requests were conditional,
operative only when the relative Commission decision was made.
Finally, that conclusions like this are consistent with the liberal
interpretation which the High Court has suggested ought to be
given to human
rights legislation in
Waters v. Public Transport Corporation
(1991) Equal
Opportunity Cases, 92/390 and with the objectives of the Act set out in s.3 of
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
which include, of course, the provision of
redress to those who have been discriminated against or sexually harassed.
Finally that
this matter has arisen through no fault of the parties but through
practices of the Commission.
The question is a difficult one but I have decided that these complaints
have been properly referred and I now explain why. In my
view Wood is
distinguishable but is not wrong. It was decided in the context of division 4 of
which relates to expedited complaints and it decided that the sequence of
events set out in that division and the time limits in
that division, apart from
one which does not concern me at this time, were mandatory and that failure to
comply with them rendered
the referral a nullity.
The Tribunal in Wood itself points out that there is a clear distinction
between expedited and non expedited complaint processes and
that they are, once
the application for expedition is made, that they are separate processes,
separate and different. After examining
the Act at length it was held that there
is a strict and tight sequence of events and set of time limits which have to be
There is a time limit for applying for review to the Tribunal of a
decision to determine that a complaint is expedited, there is a
within which the Tribunal must begin to hear that application, there is a time
limit within which an application to have
an expedited complaint heard without
conciliation may be made and a period within which the Tribunal must begin to
hear that application.
There is a time limit within which the Commission must
give notice to the parties that conciliation has not been completed
successfully,
there is a time limit within which the complainant may request
referral to the Tribunal and that is a shorter time limit than that
under s.117
for non expedited complaints and there is a time limit within which the tribunal
must begin to hear an expedited complaint.
As to this see generally ss.121-124
and 135 of the Act.
What the Tribunal was saying in Wood was decisions about these complaints
are made in this tight sequence of events and tight set
of time limits. Now, it
itself pointed out that non expedited complaints are different. In contrast to
expedited complaints, there
is no requirement to refer for conciliation as soon
as practicable, there is no requirement to attempt to conciliate as soon as
practicable,
there is no requirement to give notice within a specific period if
conciliation is not successfully completed. There is a longer
referral, within which to request referral. There is no provision for direct
application to the Tribunal to hear without
conciliation, there is no provision
that the Tribunal must begin to hear the complaint within a specified
These, it seems to me, are substantial differences and indicate that a
different attitude to be adopted, should be adopted, to both
the timing that is
set in relation to non expedited complaints and the sequence of events and what
the consequences are of a failure
to comply with both of those.
Here there was no request beyond the end of the relevant prescribed time
limits for requesting referral so I don't deal with that
matter in detail here.
But the second thing to say about Wood is that Wood also looked at the sequence
of events and the decision
was based on a second ground, not just on the fact
that there were different provisions for expedited complaints which required a
different interpretation of the sequence.
What was said in Wood was that the Act contemplated that the process
would take place in a particular order and under a particular
regime of control
and that it would interfere with this particular regime of control if the
processes took place in some other order.
It seems to me that that reason
applies with equal force to ss.108 and 117 of the Act as well. Under s.108 the
Commission can decline
to entertain a complaint by giving notice of that
decision and then the complainant may request referral within 60 days after that
notice has been given and then the Commission must comply with that
S.108(3) does not say the Commission must comply with that notice after
it has decided whether or not to decline the complaint or
it has given a notice
under sub-s.1 or when it thinks appropriate. It simply says it must comply with
the notice. It seems to me
that it must comply whatever it is doing at the time,
it must comply with the notice forthwith.
If the Commission receives a notice from the complainant requesting
referral before it decides whether or not to decline the complaint,
must, it seems to me, comply with that notice and refer the matter to the
Tribunal forthwith without making that decision
if I am right about how s.108(3)
ought to be interpreted. In other words making the request at that time, making
the request before
the Commission had made its decision, could thwart the
process by which the Commission determines whether or not to decline the
For that matter, could also thwart the processes which follow the
Commission's decision that the complainant should not be declined.
Because what
follows that is a consideration by the Commission whether the matter is
reasonably conciliable and if it decides that
it is, a referral of the matter
for conciliation.
If the request is intended to operate immediately, I think it can only be
made after the complainant receives notice from the Commission
under s.108(1)
and on conditional requests, a request intended to operate immediately made
before that time would not, it seems to
me, come within s.108(2).
It seems to me that s.108(2) does more than set an end period within
which the relevant request must be made. It is linked, and inextricably
to the provisions of s.108(1). I reach a similar conclusion concerning s.117, if
the Commission under s.112 of the Act refers
a matter for conciliation, the
chief conciliator must, under s.114, attempt to conciliate it and may require
the parties to attend
and produce documents for that purpose.
Under s.117(1) the chief conciliator must notify the parties where the
chief conciliator considers that it is not reasonably possible
to conciliate or
attempts to conciliate are unsuccessful. Under s.117(1) the complainant, may,
within 60 days after receiving the
notice, require referral to the tribunal and
under s.117(3) the Commission must comply with that notice.
If a complainant can make an unconditional request before receiving the
notice under sub-s.1, the Commission, it seems to me under
sub-s.3 must comply
with that notice forthwith. So that even if the conciliation process is not
complete and even if the chief conciliator
has not decided whether the
conciliation will be reasonably successful or in fact is even reasonably
possible, there must still be
compliance with that requirement.
This, it seems to me, will thwart the conciliation process - a process
which, it seems to me on the proper scheme of the Act, is controlled
Commission and the chief conciliator rather than the parties. There is nothing
in sub-s.3 to indicate that the chief conciliator
or the Commission can simply
postpone compliance with the requirement until some relevant notice is given
under sub-s.1. If the request
is unconditional, the complainant must make it, it
seems to me, after the complainant receives notice under s.117(1).
In other words after the chief conciliator has considered that the
process for conciliation, for whatever reason, is at an end. So
again, s.117(2)
does more than define the end of the period within which the request for
referral may be made. It is inextricably
linked with a notice which can be given
under sub-s.1.
But I have found that the requests in these cases were not unconditional.
That they were made by complainants aware of the Commission
practice to accept
requests before the relevant notices were given. And that the Commission
accepted these notices in accordance
with these practices, didn't require the
complainants to make further requests and it seems to me on the whole of the
material before
me that these requests, when made, were intended to operate only
when and not until or unless the relevant notices were given under
I cannot say, I am not prepared to say that they were operative
immediately when given and it seems to me that if this is the case,
possible to make a request of this kind and for it to fall within s.108(2) and
117(2) respectively and that then the Commission,
operating on the true
construction of the request, would then only refer the matter, and was only
required to refer the matter when
the relevant notice had been given under
either 108(1) or 117(1) whichever was the provision applicable.
It seems to me that this decision gives effect to the intention of the
complainants which stems really from the practice of the Commission
in this case
and that it is consistent with the scheme of the Act. One of the objectives, as
I have said, is to provide redress for
those who are discriminated against or
sexually harassed and also that is consistent with the liberal way in which the
possible, ought to be interpreted.
It is therefore unnecessary for me to consider whether, for example, the
chief conciliator has ratified certain decisions because
I felt that the
delegations were valid in the Walsh case or whether the Tribunal has power to
dispense with any of the requirements
of the Act which might not have been
complied with. The result of this decision is different from the result in both
Wood and Staines
and that is not because those cases were wrong but because
those cases related first to expedited complaints and because the material
placed before the Tribunal in those cases was different from the material which
has been placed before me.
I conclude then that these matters have been properly referred and that
the Tribunal may then go on and proceed to deal with them
and I have made
directions to that effect. Thank you very much.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (57.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter