URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/268.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cook v The King [2025] VSCA 268 (7 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCR 2024 0208
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
Determined on the papers
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
7 November 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
JUDGMENT APPEALED FROM:
[2024] VCC 1493 (Judge
CRIMINAL LAW – Leave to appeal –
Sentence – Whether sentencing judge erred in their findings as to the
applicant’s
role in trafficking a commercial quantity of drugs –
Trafficking various drugs – Possess various drugs of dependence
Possess tablet press – Make false document – Possess fireworks
– Possess prohibited weapon – Source
and manufacture steroids
– Counterfeit drug business – Leave to appeal
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
[2014] VSCA 93
(2014) 240 A Crim R 574
DPP (Vic) v Dalgliesh (a
[2017] HCA 41
(2017) 262 CLR 428
[2023] VSCA
Gregory v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 151
(2017) 268 A Crim R 1
R v Olbrich
(1999) 199 CLR 270
, considered.
S Cooper, counsel for the applicant
Respondent:
J Gullaci, counsel for the respondent
Emma Turnbull Lawyers
Respondent:
A Hogan, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
21 August 2024, the applicant pleaded guilty to the following offences and was
sentenced as
Between 25 February and 9 March 2022 attempt to possess testosterone
contrary to s 73(1) of the
Drugs, Poisons and Controlled Substances Act
400 penalty units or level 6 imprisonment (5 years maximum) or both
On 13 July 2022 traffick a commercial quantity (‘CQ’
Testosterone (8.399 kg) contrary to s 71AA(1) of the
Level 2 imprisonment, 25 years maximum
On 13 July 2022 traffick CQ MDMA (994.6 g) contrary to s 71AA(1) of
Level 2 imprisonment, 25 years maximum
On 13 July 2022 traffick CQ Trenbolone (5.25 kg) contrary to
s 71AA(1) of the
Level 2 imprisonment, 25 years maximum
On 13 July 2022, traffick a drug of dependence – Phenazolam (58,000
tablets) contrary to s 71AC(1) of the
Level 4 imprisonment (15 years maximum)
On 13 July 2022 possessed various drugs of dependence (a variety of
steroids and anabolic steroids) (11 kg in total) contrary to s
400 penalty units or level 6 imprisonment (5 years maximum) or both
Possession of a Tablet press contrary to s 71C of the
600 penalty units of level 6 imprisonment (5 years maximum) or
Make false document to the prejudice of another contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
Level 5 imprisonment 10 years maximum
Summary Offences
On 13 July 2022 possessed a variety of pharmaceutical drugs including
Viagra and Tamoxifen contrary to s 36B(2) of the
On 13 July 2022 stored unauthorised explosive (11.8 kg) contrary to
Dangerous Goods Act 1985
Maximum penalty of 100 penalty units plus
(s 45(2)(b)
unit for every kilogram or part of a kilogram of explosive
Fined $500 plus
12 penalty units
On 13 July 2022 possess prohibited weapon (extendable baton and Taser)
contrary to s 5AA of the
Control of Weapons Act
240 penalty units or maximum 2 years’ imprisonment
Effective Sentence:
Pre-sentence
Detention Declared:
Section 6AAA
Total Effective
Sentence 13 years 6 months
Parole-Period 9 years
Relevant Orders:
Pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1991
applicant was sentenced as a serious drug offender in respect of charges 3 and
applicant seeks leave to appeal against the sentence on the ground that the
sentencing judge erred in her findings as to the applicant’s
role in the
particulars of the appeal are:
(a) It was open to the sentencing judge to accept the prosecution’s
submissions as to the applicant’s role in relation
to charges 1, 2 and
(b) The learned sentencing judge did not distinguish between the
applicant’s role in trafficking the MDMA and trafficking the
other drugs
and, as such, overstated the applicant’s role in trafficking the MDMA.
(c) It was not open to the sentencing judge to make the findings they did as to
the applicant’s role in trafficking the MDMA.
applicant submits that if error is established as to the trial judge’s
assessment of the applicant’s role in relation
to charge 3 (trafficking
MDMA(CQ)), the sentencing discretion would be reopened. It is submitted that the
term of imprisonment imposed
on charge 3 ought to be reduced. The applicant then
submits that the term of imprisonment imposed on charge 3 ought to be reduced
with a resultant reduction in the total effective sentence and non-parole
period. No error is asserted as to the length of the non-parole
period as a
percentage of the total effective sentence.
the reasons which follow, I have concluded that the proposed ground is not
reasonably arguable. I have therefore refused leave
Uncontroversial
circumstances of the offending
25 February and 9 March 2022, Australian Border Force intercepted three packages
of testosterone — in total weighing
2,917 g — addressed to the
applicant. The packages all originated from an address in Zhuhai in China. One
package was sent
to the applicant’s address, and the other two packages,
to addresses which the applicant later admitted to police were associated
attempting to possess
testosterone).
13 July 2022, police attended the applicant’s home residence and executed
a search warrant. They located the following drugs,
substances, equipment and
of dependence:
(a) a quantity of
testosterone — 8,399 g (
traffick Testosterone (CQ)).
(b) a package of MDMA weighing 994.6 g located in the applicant’s
walk-in wardrobe in her bedroom (
(c) a quantity of
trenbolone (steroids) in vials stored in three
containers in separate rooms across of the house weighing a total of
(d) Bulk quantities of manufactured Phenazolam tablets (fake Xanax) weighing
over 20 kg (58,000 pills) (
Phenazolam).
(e) A variety of other steroids and anabolic acids. These included 3,342 g
of oxymetholone, 2,893 g of Drostanolone, and just over
1 kg each of
Nandolone and Boldernone (
, possess various drugs of dependence).
(f) An extensive amount of drug preparation equipment was located in multiple
rooms and areas throughout the house including:
(i) An electric pill press in an upstairs bedroom (
tablet press). This pill press was used to produce the fake Xanax. Powder and
produced pills were located in the catchment
container of the pill press.
(ii) Large amounts of chemicals, various substances and other tablets were
found. Some were labelled with names such as ‘Viagra’,
‘Cialis’, ‘Sustanon’, ‘Equipose’ and
summary charge 12
, possess variety of pharmaceutical
(iii) A clandestine steroid processing plant in one of the upstairs bedrooms. A
drug preparation system was set up across two tables.
Pills, chemicals and vials
were located in this room.
(iv) A separate tablet bottling area located on the upstairs landing.
(v) A separate rigid industrial shop press located in the
police also located documents confirming the applicant’s acquisition of
two pill stamp dies, with the ‘Superman’
motif and the ‘Rolls
Royce’ motif.
identification documents — including drivers’ licenses — were
located in large plastic tubs (
, make false document).
police located fireworks (
summary charge 21
, unauthorised storage of
explosives), a baton and a taser (
summary charge 22
, possess prohibited
weapons), printed labels, a number of printers, a large amount of cash, a cash
counting machine, tick books,
laptops, and SIM cards.
police obtained the following evidence from the applicant’s
(a) Searches for drug names, including Xanax, and images of Xanax tablets which
had the appearance of an advertisement for sale.
(b) Orders for drug production equipment and products.
(c) An electronic tick book.
(d) References to the delivery of large amounts of Valium and Xanax.
(e) Text messages concerning the sale of Xanax and the applicant’s
complaints that someone is using her Xanax label design.
and record of interview
the applicant was placed under arrest she was asked about the chemicals and the
pill press upstairs. She responded, ‘I
don’t know. I don’t go
into those rooms, I’ve been told not to. I don’t ask
questions.’ When the applicant
was subsequently asked ‘Who told you
not to go into the room?’ she did not
her record of interview, the applicant answered mostly ‘no comment’
to questions asked by police.
However, she admitted that the testosterone packages from China were sent to two
addresses which belonged to her friends. She said
the cash found at her premises
came from winnings at the pokies. She also said that people are coming and going
all the time from
the house because she was not great on her
sentencing reasons
applicant was able to call in aid a number of mitigating and personal
(a) The applicant was 38 years of age at the time of her arrest. The applicant
had a difficult and traumatic childhood which the
sentencing judge accepted
contributed to the applicant’s poor decision-making from a young age. The
applicant completed year
12 but did not complete her university studies.
(b) The applicant began using cannabis as a teenager. She left home at age 18
and started work in the exotic dance industry where
she began using cocaine,
amphetamines, ecstasy and methylamphetamine.
(c) The applicant had an addiction to drugs — including methylamphetamine
— for 20 years. The sentencing judge accepted
that the applicant’s
drug addiction had some role to play in the offending. The judge noted that
while this did not mitigate
the applicant’s offending, it placed it in a
category of seriousness below that of a businessperson who was trafficking only
for profit.
(d) The judge took into account that she had no prior convictions. The
sentencing judge did not accept that the applicant was of
good character because
of her admitted history of involvement in
(e) It was the applicant’s first time in custody. The sentencing judge
acknowledged that her period of incarceration has been
difficult. It commenced
when there were pandemic restrictions. In addition, there has been her
isolation, limited contact with family,
drug withdrawal and the delay in
sentencing.
(f) The applicant entered a plea of guilty at an early stage which provided a
‘utilitarian benefit’ at a relevant post-pandemic
However, there was no
evidence of remorse over and above her plea of guilty. She had not offered to
assist authorities and had sought
to minimise her
offending.’
(g) Although the delay was not inordinate, the judge accepted that the applicant
had had the matter hanging over her head for over
two years since being charged.
The judge took into account the substantial gains she had made in her
rehabilitation and drug recovery
and found that she had very good prospects of
rehabilitation.
to the objective seriousness of the offending, the sentencing judge identified
the following relevant features:
(a) The substantial quantity of the MDMA (996.4 g
being nearly double the
CQ threshold (500 g) and just 5.4 g below the large commercial
quantity threshold (LCQ)
The judge noted
that the seriousness of this offence is apparent from its 25-year maximum period
of imprisonment.
(b) The significant quantities of the other drugs and substances (especially the
Testosterone, Phenazolam, and Trenbolone).
(c) The sophisticated way in which the Phenazolam (fake Xanax) and the
Trenbalone (steroids) were prepared, packaged and labelled.
This placed the
trafficking charges for these substances at the higher end of the range of
seriousness for this type of
sentencing judge found that:
(a) It was ‘difficult to imagine a more systematic
operation’.
(b) The applicant’s moral culpability was
(c) While most of the offending was on a single date, she considered ‘the
size and nature of the enterprise at your home, together
with the large quantity
and variety of pharmaceutical and illicit drugs, place[d] it in the mid to high
range of seriousness for
offending of this
noted the applicant fell to be sentenced as a serious offender for charges 3
(traffick MDMA (CQ)) and 4 (traffick
Trenbolone (CQ)) and that the
principal purpose of those sentences was the protection of the
The sentencing judge
emphasised that general deterrence was a very important aspect of the sentences
on those charges.
factual contest at the plea
applicant’s ‘storeman’ case at the plea
assessment of this proposed ground of appeal requires an appreciation of how the
applicant framed her case at the plea hearing.
applicant’s case at the plea was as
(a) In relation to all of the drug activities, the applicant was ‘nothing
more than a storeman’, who was acting under
direction of others.
(b) She leased some spare rooms within her house and in return she was provided
with rental assistance and money to feed her drug
(c) She had no knowledge of what took place in the upstairs spare bedrooms
(which contained an operating pill press and clandestine
respectively, and various pills and chemicals).
(d) She was ‘a gram only seller’ (of methylamphetamine) to friends.
She was not involved in the manufacturing process
of the tablets, but she
assisted with the preparation of the Xanax tablets having made the labels.
Otherwise, she had no active involvement
in the trafficking activities.
(e) The applicant relied upon a text exchange with an associate which the
applicant argued demonstrated that she was acting on instructions
from someone
for Xanax did U find out’ to which the applicant responded ‘
I’m not allowed to sell any at the moment. Oops. I’ll ask
again when we get more bottles’
exchange’).
(f) She was looking to ‘get out’ and move to Queensland when the
second pill press arrived (which was located in the
(g) There was no evidence that the applicant was aware of the weight or purity
of the MDMA and there was no telephone or forensic
evidence linking her to the
(h) A person conducting an ‘in-depth knowledgeable sophisticated
operation’ would not be sitting on the floor smoking
ice when the police
arrived. An offender with that type of involvement would have had a greater
volume of text messages conducting
the business with sales to the public.
plea was conducted upon the basis that the applicant was engaged in one unified
mixed drug enterprise, and that the applicant
was a ‘storeman’ for
all of these activities.
from the Xanax text exchange, and some limited comments to police upon her
arrest in her record of interview, the ‘storeman’
hypothesis was
substantially based upon assertions from the Bar table. The applicant did not
give evidence at the plea hearing.
prosecution’s case on the storeman hypothesis at the
the plea, the prosecution submitted that:
(a) The applicant was operating and involved in a drug business on 13 July 2028
in which she was
involved in the importation, manufacture,
preparation, offer for sale and actual sale of various drugs.
(b) The applicant was a
willing and enthusiastic participant
large enterprise.
(c) The irresistible inference was that the applicant was not only aware of the
pill press but that she was actively involved in
all stages of the process from
manufacture to sale. The prosecutor relied on the applicant being a sole
resident of the house. The
content of her phone suggested she played an active
role in printing labels, sourcing medicine bottles and providing purportedly
pharmaceutical drugs for sale.
judge’s findings on the applicant’s role
question which the sentencing judge had to resolve was whether the applicant was
a disinterested ‘storeman’ (as the
applicant would have it) or
whether she was actively, willingly and significantly involved in the
trafficking activities linked to
her home (as the prosecution would have it).
substance, the sentencing judge ‘rejected’ that the applicant was a
‘mere storeman’ or a mere lacky.
rejecting the suggestion that the applicant was a mere ‘storeman’,
the sentencing judge made reference to following
(a) The applicant’s active involvement in sourcing the three packages of
testosterone.
(b) The applicant was the sole resident in the house.
(c) The scale of the drugs and substances involved and the estimated potential
(d) The extensive drug preparation equipment — including the pill press
and clandestine laboratory — at her home.
(e) While the two upstairs bedrooms (containing the clandestine laboratory and
the pill press) were lockable, the keys were in the
locks when the police
arrived. In the laboratory, the police found a can of soft drink with her
fingerprints on it.
(f) At the time of the execution of the search warrant, the pill press in the
upstairs bedroom appeared to have recently been used.
The judge said ‘it
is inconceivable’ the applicant would not know or see that it was
operating when she was there.
(1) The finding of payment receipts dated 30 June 2022 in her name for the
purchase of two pill stamp dies (Superman and Rolls-Royce).
(g) The applicant’s phone analysis disclosed the applicant’s
‘significant involvement and participation’
in the drug-trafficking
operation. For example, the phone analysis included data confirming the purchase
of the pill stamp dies,
promotional images for Xanax tablets, confirmation of the purchase of products
in manufacturing pills, an electronic tick book (which recorded the sale of
‘ice’ and ‘GHB’) and messages
in relation to the sale of
(h) The sentencing judge appears to have allowed for the possibility that there
were others involved in this enterprise, and that
the applicant may have acted
under some direction, but the evidence did not allow for a conclusive finding on
the ‘degree or
extent’ of the involvement of other persons. The
sentencing judge concluded:
If there were
others involved in your business, such as for instance the ‘he’ to
whom you refer in the text message in
relation to the sale of the Xanax, there
is no evidence of the degree or extent of their involvement in the operation,
over and above
that in the text
a nutshell, the judge rejected the hypothesis that the applicant was a
‘mere storeman’ acting only on the directions
of others, concluding
that she was ‘actively and knowingly engaged’ or had
‘significant involvement and participation’
in this drug enterprise.
When read as whole, these core findings were made beyond reasonable doubt. The
sentencing judge found that
the size and nature of the enterprise at the
applicant’s home, and the quantity and variety of drugs, placed the
overall offending
in the mid-to-high range of
seriousness.
the judge did not discriminate between the various drugs on the question of
role. Thus, these core holdings as to role
extended to the applicant’s CQ
trafficking in the MDMA.
the sentencing judge did not discriminate between the various drugs on the
question of role generally, she made some specific
observations in relation to
the applicant’s specific activities concerning particular drugs. Mostly
these observations related
to the applicant’s dealings relating to the
illicit steroids, pharmaceuticals and similar substances. The judge made one
relating to the MDMA:
The New Dawn invoice and payment receipt dated 30 June 2022, in your name for
the purchase of two pill stamp dies, one Superman,
one Rolls Royce, supports the
prosecution position of your willing awareness of and preparedness to use the
pill press.
I also find beyond reasonable doubt that you sourced the pill die stamps
commonly used to stamp illicit drug tablets such as MDMA
less than two weeks
prior to the discovery of the commercial quantity of MDMA in your wardrobe. That
links you to that MDMA and to
trafficking
judge did not affix a particular label to the applicant’s position in the
enterprise, place the applicant at any particular
rung within a hierarchy, or
make a finding that the applicant was the sole operator, proprietor or head of
this trafficking business.
parties’ submissions on this application
Applicant’s
submissions
her written case in this application, the applicant has now conceded that it was
open to the sentencing judge to reject the ‘storeman’
hypothesis in
relation to her role in respect of charge 1 (attempted possession of
testosterone), charge 2 (traffick of testosterone),
and charge 5 (traffick
counterfeit Xanax, ie, Phenazolam). The applicant also does not challenge that
finding insofar as it relates
to charge 4 (traffick Trenbolone). At least in
respect to these activities, the applicant takes no issue with the finding that
applicant was ‘actively and knowingly engaged’ or had
‘significant involvement and participation’.
Nevertheless,
the applicant submits that it was not open to conclude that the applicant had
the same role in the MDMA CQ trafficking
offence. The applicant says:
(a) The analysis of the applicant’s phone did not reveal any evidence
relating to trafficking MDMA like it did in relation
to the trafficking of
Phenazolam (counterfeit Xanax) and steroids.
(b) The applicant’s text messages with associates does not necessarily
relate to MDMA in circumstances where the applicant
was selling other drugs. In
other words, if ambiguous, the communications are consistent with having related
to the other drugs and
substances.
(c) The applicant’s home was not set up for the trafficking of MDMA in the
same way as it was set up for the trafficking of
Phenazolam (counterfeit Xanax)
and steroids.
(d) There was no evidence that the tick books were associated with the sale of
(e) There was no fingerprint or DNA evidence linking the applicant to the MDMA
(f) There was no evidence of significant enrichment and certainly none
attributable to MDMA.
(g) As she did at the plea, the applicant relies upon the Xanax text exchange as
showing that she was subordinate in the trafficking
hierarchy and was acting
under direction.
applicant also argues that the sentencing judge wrongly linked the Superman and
Rolls-Royce stamp dies (purchased in the applicant’s
name) to the MDMA.
The applicant also points out that the prosecution did not make this submission
at the plea. It was not open for
the sentencing judge to make this finding in
circumstances where the die stamps themselves were not found in use at the
and where drugs other than MDMA were being produced using the pill
support of her contention that the sentencing judge overstated the
applicant’s role for charge 3, the applicant relies upon
the case of
v The King.
, the offender received the same sentence of 6 years’
imprisonment for CQ trafficking in a similar quantity of MDMA. The offender
was one of three people operating a sophisticated enterprise on
the dark web. The applicant had many mitigating circumstances put
on her behalf
at her plea hearing which were not available to the offender in
The fact that the applicant received a comparable sentence further illustrates,
the applicant says, that the sentencing judge overstated
the applicant’s
role for charge 3.
Respondent’s
submissions
respondent submitted in their written case that the applicant’s
concessions concerning the judge’s findings as to
the applicant’s
significant and active role in the non-MDMA drug activities were
significant.
is because, the respondent says, the plea was conducted by both parties that the
applicant was part of a singular enterprise,
and this included the MDMA
trafficking. At no stage during the plea did the applicant seek to submit that
the MDMA CQ trafficking
was part of a separate enterprise. The judge sentenced
the applicant on the basis that this was a single enterprise, in respect of
which the possession of the MDMA was ‘evidence of the diversification of
the enterprise to incorporate street
The respondent
points out that this finding is not challenged.
respondent further submits that:
(a) The applicant did not offer any explanation as to her role in respect of the
MDMA in either her record of interview, or in evidence
on the plea.
(b) There was no evidentiary basis upon which the judge could meaningfully
distinguish between the applicant’s role in respect
of charges 1, 2, 4 and
5, and her role in respect of charge 3.
(c) Even with the Xanax text exchange evidence, there was no evidence capable of
supporting an inference that the applicant had a
lesser role in respect of the
(d) The absence of evidence linking the applicant to the sale of the MDMA is
insufficient of itself to necessitate a finding that
the applicant had a
comparatively lesser role in respect of that charge.
respondent submits that it was open to the sentencing judge to find
(a) The applicant was a willing and enthusiastic participant in a very large
drug trafficking enterprise.
(b) The applicant was actively involved in the importation, manufacture,
preparation, offer for sale and actual sale of various drugs.
respondent submits that the sentencing judge did not otherwise affix a
particular label to the applicant’s involvement in
the enterprise.
for the judge’s reliance upon the Superman and Rolls-Royce pill die
stamps, the respondent submits that, at the plea hearing,
the sentencing judge
made the observation that these pill die stamps were ‘commonly used to
stamp illicit drug tablets such
as MDMA’, and no issue was taken at that
time by the applicant.
if this finding was impermissible, it had no additional bearing on the
judge’s assessment of the applicant’s
in respect of
trafficking the MDMA. The applicant was already linked to the MDMA by reason of
it being found in the wardrobe of her
bedroom, in circumstances where she was
the sole resident of the house and in the context of her playing an active role
in the drug-trafficking
enterprise operating from that house. Further, the
applicant acknowledged that she was trafficking the MDMA by her plea of guilty.
Even putting the pill die stamp finding to one side, her Honour’s overall
conclusion as to the applicant’s involvement
in trafficking in the MDMA
was well open.
the respondent submits that even if error was established concerning the
Superman and Rolls-Royce pill die stamps and the
MDMA, there is no reasonable
prospect of lesser sentence. In support of this submission, the respondent
relies upon statements by
this Court that sentences well into the double figures
may be expected for CQ trafficking where the quantity trafficked approaches
LCQ threshold.
Consideration
relevant principles
is first convenient to summarise the relevant legal
principles:
(a) In cases of trafficking drugs of dependence, an accused’s role, and
their position in the drug trafficking hierarchy, is
a relevant matter when
assessing the seriousness of the
(b) It is important that any label attaching to an accused’s role not
obscure the nature and extent of their actions and involvement
(c) It is not essential that a sentencing judge establish the precise role of an
offender in a criminal
(d) A judge is only able to sentence on the basis of the facts known to the
court, and a full picture of the relative roles and responsibilities
trafficking operation may not be known with any
(e) Quantity is a highly relevant consideration in sentencing for trafficking
offences. Other things being equal, the greater the
quantity trafficked the more
serious the offence.
(f) Where an offender seeks a mitigatory finding that they had a particularly
lowly role in a criminal hierarchy — for example,
courier’, ‘mule’, or ‘house sitter’ — this
requires a sound evidentiary basis.
It is not a finding ‘to be made by
default or to be inferred simply from an absence of
(g) It follows that the quantity of the drug involved, and the circumstances in
which it is found, is likely to be a highly relevant
factor in any assessment of
a mitigatory claim that the accused played a lowly role, with limited knowledge
and no expectation of
financial reward. In the absence of a sound evidential
foundation which sustains such inferences (on the balance of probabilities),
level of culpability can be implied from the scale or magnitude of the illicit
drugs trafficked.
(h) Finally, the question on appeal is whether the sentencing judge’s
findings as to the offender’s role were reasonably
open on the evidence,
as these are findings of fact.
reformulation of the applicant’s case
my view, the applicant’s proposed ground of appeal represents a
significant departure from her case presented at the plea
case at the plea hearing was advanced upon the basis that this was a single
integrated drug trafficking enterprise in which she
played a very lowly role
— that of ‘storeman’ — with limited interest and
knowledge, and with an expectation
of only a modest financial benefit in the
form of some rent.
plea proceeded upon the footing that the MDMA formed part of that singular
enterprise. The holistic approach is exemplified by
this submission made on the
applicant’s behalf at the plea by Senior Counsel:
She’s under direction
. Yes. And we say that person is presumably
the person who’s running
is true that at the plea the applicant emphasised the absence of forensic and
telephone evidence specifically connecting her to
the MDMA. But she did not do
this to suggest that her relative culpability for the MDMA was less than that
for the other drug activities.
The argument was mounted in support of the
broader proposition that her role for the entire enterprise was that of
‘lowly storeman’.
judge engaged in her fact finding, and exercised her sentencing discretion, in
conformity with the way in which the defence framed
the controversy at the plea.
The sentencing judge’s conclusion that the applicant was not a mere
disinterested ‘storeman’
with minimal knowledge, and with a modest
expectation of financial benefit thus applied across all the drug activities.
this application, the applicant now accepts — or at least does not
challenge — those findings insofar as they relate
to the non-MDMA
trafficking activities at her house (charges 1, 2, 4 and 5). But the applicant
now contends — contrary to the
position she took at the plea — that
she had a lesser role in the trafficking in respect of the MDMA (charge 3) than
in respect of these other drug and substance activities (charges 1,
2, 4 and 5). Contrary to what the applicant had effectively accepted
plea, it is now said that it was not reasonably open to the judge to find
my view, the approach now taken by the applicant contradicts the case presented
by her at the plea hearing. It supplies a good
reason to not entertain this
ground of appeal. Absent circumstances which demonstrate that there has been a
miscarriage of justice
arising from the plea and sentence, this Court will
‘usually be reluctant to entertain appeal grounds that seek to resile from
concessions made below or are a contradiction of submissions previously
the end, I have reached the view that the proposed ground for appeal is
unarguable on its merits. This application can be resolved
upon that basis. The
manner in which the plea was contested forms the backdrop to that analysis. It
is my view that the applicant
approached this plea hearing in the manner in
which she did for considered and realistic forensic reasons, having regard to
of the evidence.
now turn to address this evidence.
that applicant did not play lowly storeman role on the MDMA
applicant contends that the sentencing judge ‘overstated the
applicant’s role’. The contention is a little opaque.
The applicant
has not identified a specific finding made by the judge — as to her role
in relation to the MDMA — which
she attacks.
course the judge, unsurprisingly, did not discriminate in her assessment of the
applicant’s role, as between the drugs, because
she was not asked to do
is important to observe that the sentencing judge did not make a specific
finding as to where the applicant precisely sat within
this overall enterprise.
The judge rejected the proposition that the applicant was a disinterested
‘mere storeman’ with
limited knowledge and interest, finding instead
that she was an active, knowing and significant participant in the trafficking
at her house. The latter finding was largely a corollary of the
former. But the judge did not exclude that others were involved,
and she did not
positively conclude that the applicant was the sole proprietor or head of this
trafficking enterprise.
take the applicant’s complaint — that the judge ‘overstated
the applicant’s role’ — to be that
it was not open to the
(a) reject the proposition that the applicant played a low-level disinterested
storeman role in relation to the MDMA trafficking
(b) find that the applicant played an active, knowing and interested role in
relation to the MDMA trafficking (CQ).
(c) not to find that the applicant played a materially lesser role in relation
to the MDMA trafficking (CQ) than she did in the drug
activities covered by
charges 1, 2, 4 and 5.
of the applicant’s argument rests upon the absence of evidential links
between the applicant and the MDMA. At the very
least, she says there is an
absence of a link of the kind which can be seen with respect to the other drug
activities (covered by
charges 1, 2, 4 and 5) such as phone evidence, forensic
evidence, transactional evidence in the tick books. The applicant also points
the drug preparation evidence which she says concerns the other drugs and
substances. In this regard, the evidence concerning
the Superman and Rolls-Royce
stamp dies did not, the applicant says, link her to the MDMA.
is merit to the underlying premise of the applicant’s argument. Once the
evidence concerning the Superman and Rolls-Royce
stamp dies is put to one side
(I will address this specifically later), the phone, forensic and preparation
evidence does seem to
be concerned (or largely concerned) with the other drug
activities.
it does not follow that the applicant played a lowly, unknowing and
disinterested storeman role in relation to the MDMA, or that
her role or
culpability was relatively lower in relation to the MDMA than for the other drug
activities.
the first place, it is important to address what seems to be a theme to some of
the applicant’s arguments that she was not
really connected to the MDMA.
It is to be recalled that, by her plea of guilty, the applicant admitted to
intending to traffick in
at least a CQ of MDMA. By her plea, the applicant was
aware that there was a significant or real chance that the amount of drug
was not less than the CQ.
the plea does not itself provide a measurement of role, the contextual
circumstances do illuminate her role.
applicant’s case rests upon the proposition that she was nothing more than
a street level hand-to-mouth drug trafficker.
All she did was to make her house
available for the use by others, with very modest expectations of financial
reward (in return for
some rent). These people were ‘coming and
going’, but she was otherwise ignorant and disinterested in their
and had no meaningful involvement. In some ways, on her version
advanced at the plea, she was less involved than a mere ‘storeman’.
She simply made her house available for the use of the drug traffickers.
hiding and having control of nearly twice the CQ of MDMA undermines this claim.
quantity of the MDMA was very significant — nearly twice the CQ threshold.
As senior counsel for the applicant acknowledged
at the plea, even if she did
not know the precise quantity or its purity, ‘it’s a lot’ of
this drug. The applicant
was, therefore, closely and exclusively connected to
MDMA was secreted in a private space closely controlled by the applicant —
in a wardrobe in the applicant’s own bedroom,
in a house where she was the
sole resident. The applicant was, therefore, exercising close and exclusive
physical dominion over a
substantial quantity of this drug.
acute appreciation on her part of the importance and value of the drug, and of
the significance of her own role, can be implied
from these circumstances.
absence of forensic evidence tying her to the packaging in which the MDMA was
found, or phone evidence tying her to any MDMA dealings,
does not supply
affirmative evidence that she was an unknowing and disinterested
‘storeman’ acting only under direction
with modest expectations of
financial reward. That argument obscures the powerful evidence exclusively tying
her to the package itself
— through it being hidden in her wardrobe, in
her bedroom, in her house.
any assessment of her association with the MDMA must be viewed within the
broader evidential context of her other trafficking
activities. Once the mere
storeman hypothesis in relation to her other trafficking activities was
rejected, as a matter of common
sense, this hypothesis lost its entire mooring
as an explanation for any of the trafficking activities taking place in this
including her admitted CQ trafficking of the MDMA. All these drug and
trafficking activities were being conducted simultaneously
by the applicant at
her home, which she solely occupied. The notion that the applicant was a knowing
and active participant in the
other trafficking activities upstairs and
throughout her house, but remained a disinterested and
house‑sitter or storeman in relation to the significant quantity of MDMA
found in her bedroom wardrobe stretches credulity.
the absence of evidence to the contrary, and applying the reasoning of Nettle JA
, a degree of culpability is necessarily implied in the
applicant’s case. It was well open to the judge to conclude that the
possession of the MDMA (CQ) represented ‘the diversification of the
enterprise to incorporate street
Indeed, I think
the judge was bound to reach that conclusion. The applicant does not even appear
to quibble with that finding.
all events, there was no evidential basis which supported, still less compelled,
the conclusion that the applicant played a lowly
role in relation to the MDMA,
or that she played a demonstrably less culpable role in relation to the MDMA
relative to the other
drug activities:
(a) In her record of interview, the applicant did not offer any explanation as
to her role in any of the trafficking activities,
including her trafficking of
the MDMA (CQ).
(b) The applicant did not give evidence on the plea concerning the MDMA in her
bedroom wardrobe.
(c) There was no evidence which affirmatively placed the applicant in a
particularly lowly position in relation to her trafficking
of the MDMA (CQ).
(d) There was no evidence offered by the applicant that she played a different
and lesser role in her trafficking of the MDMA (CQ)
than she did in relation to
the other drug activities.
(e) There was no evidence offered by the applicant that her trafficking of the
MDMA (CQ) was unconnected with the other trafficking
activities.
applicant still places significant reliance upon the Xanax text exchange. This
is misplaced:
(a) The Xanax text exchange does not supply any evidence that the applicant was
a mere storeperson in relation the counterfeit Xanax.
Still less did it show
that she occupied a lowly role in relation to the MDMA (CQ) trafficking.
(b) At its highest — from the applicant’s standpoint — the
Xanax text exchange shows that others might have been
involved in this
enterprise, and that someone may have been above the applicant. But the mere
fact that the applicant was acting
under the direction of others does not
support the conclusion that she was a mere ‘storeperson’ or lacky.
The involvement
of others above the applicant does not preclude the
applicant’s active and knowing engagement in the enterprise.
(c) There was otherwise no evidence of the degree or extent of other
persons’ involvement in the trafficking operation, or
specifically in
relation to her trafficking of the MDMA
the face of this evidential framework, it is understandable why the applicant
did not, at the plea hearing, advance the implausible
and artificial scenario
that she may have been actively, knowingly and significantly involved in all the
trafficking activities,
save for the MDMA (CQ) trafficking. The approach taken
at the plea, reflects the reality that there was, logically, no basis to
distinguish the applicant’s role or culpability in relation to
her admitted trafficking of the MDMA (CQ) under charge 3 from
her relative role
and culpability in the drug activities under charges 1, 2, 4 and 5.
The applicant’s Elkadi
applicant then makes some arguments about a single past sentencing case —
where the accused received the same sentence as the applicant (6 years’
imprisonment) for CQ trafficking in a similar
quantity of MDMA. This further
suggests, the applicant says, that the sentencing judge ‘overstated the
applicant’s role
for charge 3’.
reject this argument.
, this Court concluded that current
sentencing practice for CQ quantity trafficking in the upper category of the
offence ‘is
inadequate’.
Court observed that:
[i]t would therefore be expected — and Parliament must be taken to have
intended — that there would be a spread of sentences
statistical range. In particular, sentences well into double figures would have
been expected for CQ trafficking offences
of the following features was present:
the quantity involved approached the LCQ threshold
• the offender was in charge of the trafficking business;
• the business was conducted for a substantial period;
• the offender pleaded not guilty; and/or
• the offender had relevant prior
convictions.
observations have since been cited with approval, and applied, by this
the metric of quantity, the applicant’s offending was very much at the
upper end of seriousness for this offence. As I have
said above, quantity is an
important indicator of the gravity of the offending, and so it was
my view, notwithstanding the applicant’s guilty plea, lack of criminal
history, efforts at rehabilitation and other matters
in mitigation, once it is
accepted that she sat above a lowly functionary or storeperson, the sentence of
6 years’ imprisonment
for trafficking for charge 3 was lenient having
(a) The maximum sentence for that offence is 25 years’ imprisonment,
reflecting the seriousness of the offending.
(b) Given the quantity of drugs involved, clearly, the applicant’s
offending in relation to charge 3 — on this measure
alone — was
(c) The fact that the applicant fell to be sentenced as a serious drug offender
for charge 3 (trafficking in the MDMA (CQ)).
(d) The applicant’s high moral
culpability.
(e) The emphasis which had to be placed upon general
deterrence.
explanation for the leniency of the sentence might be that the judge has made
allowance for the fact that the evidential landscape
as to the role of the
applicant was incomplete. The authorities recognise that the issue of the role
of an offender in a drug trafficking
enterprise — ancillary or principal
— is not ‘a ‘binary
a sentence of 6 years’ imprisonment is self-evidently not of the order
suggests would be expected for CQ trafficking offending
involving quantities of this order (approaching the LCQ threshold) by someone
who has been placed at the top of the hierarchy, or near to it. In my view, a
sentence of this magnitude goes nowhere near implying
that the judge
misapprehended the applicant’s role and culpability.
applicant’s reliance on
wrongly treats a single past
sentencing decision as some kind of binding precedent which invites a parity
comparison as if
co-offender.
The judge’s
consideration of the applicant’s role falls to be assessed by reference to
the evidence in this case, not
the evidence in
. The leniency or severity of the
sentence imposed can only be measured by reference to the broader sentencing
practices and principles
applicable to trafficking drugs in a CQ, not a solitary
Superman and Rolls-Royce stamp dies to link the applicant to the
turn now to the applicant’s contention that the judge impermissibly used
the Superman and Rolls-Royce stamp dies to link the
applicant to the MDMA. The
judge made these findings relating to the Superman and Rolls-Royce stamp
The New Dawn invoice and payment receipt dated 30 June 2022, in your name for
the purchase of two pill stamp dies, one Superman,
one Rolls Royce, supports the
prosecution position of your willing awareness of and preparedness to use the
pill press.
I also find beyond reasonable doubt that you sourced the pill die stamps
commonly used to stamp illicit drug tablets such as MDMA
less than two weeks
prior to the discovery of the commercial quantity of MDMA in your wardrobe. That
links you to that MDMA and to
trafficking it. The remainder of the charges
relate to the various drugs to be
is now made by the applicant that it was not open to the sentencing judge to
make the finding that these stamp dies linked
the applicant to the MDMA in
circumstances where the die stamps themselves were not found in use at the
residence, and where drugs
other than MDMA were being produced using the pill
little argument was made by either party concerning the question of whether this
knowledge was common knowledge and not open
There have been some
cases in this Court where it has not been in issue that pills marked with a
Superman motif are MDMA or ecstasy
True also, at the plea
hearing, the judge observed that she understood stamp dies with the motifs
Superman and Rolls-Royce were commonly
used to stamp ‘ecstasy’
tablets. The respondent notes that at the plea no issue was taken with this
observation by the
Nevertheless,
it seems to me that there is some force in the applicant’s point that the
judge may have overreached in making
her finding that there was a concrete link
between these stamp dies and their intended use to produce pills from the MDMA
in her wardrobe. The prosecution had not asserted that this was their
case. There was no specific evidence on this issue.
the circumstances, I am prepared to allow that it is at least arguable that the
judge’s conclusion — that the stamp
dies linked the applicant to the
MDMA — involved some speculation and was thus a factual error.
turn then to whether it is reasonably arguable that it was a material
Gillespie (a pseudonym) v The Queen
Court said:
A mistake of the kind made by the sentencing judge here will not be an
‘error in the sentence’ so as to vitiate the
sentencing discretion
in every case. If it can be seen that the mistake was so insignificant that it
‘could not have materially
affected the decision’ then it will not
be an error ‘in the sentence’. The court must be satisfied that the
could not have materially affected the decision before concluding that
there is no error in the sentence. If there is such error,
the court must then
consider whether it is satisfied that a different sentence should be
test of materiality of an error was further explained in
Repac v The
An error is material if, at the least, it had the
to influence
the judge’s instinctive synthesis of all the circumstances in arriving at
the sentence imposed. The burden is on
the respondent to demonstrate that it did
not have such a capacity.
one level, the impugned finding was superfluous:
(a) The judge appears to have relied upon this evidence merely ‘to link
the applicant to that MDMA and to trafficking it’.
Of course, this link
between the applicant and the trafficking of the MDMA was already established by
the applicant’s plea
of guilty and was thus not in issue.
(b) Also, for reasons which I have outlined, the fundamental conclusion reached
by the judge — that the applicant was not a
disinterested
‘storeman’ but an active and knowing participant in this entire
enterprise including the MDMA — did
not rest upon the establishment of an
evidential link between the stamp dies and the possession of the MDMA.
Nevertheless,
I accept that it is reasonably arguable that this evidence at least had the
to inform the assessment of the degree of the applicant’s
involvement or role in the MDMA trafficking.
then leaves the question of whether — despite the establishment of a
material error — it is reasonably arguable that
a different sentence
should be imposed. In my view, if the Court relied only upon the facts properly
established, there is no reasonable
prospect that the Court would impose a less
severe sentence upon this applicant than 6 years’ imprisonment for
the trafficking
of the MDMA (CQ), and consequently there is therefore no
reasonable prospect of a reduced total effective head
have reached that conclusion because:
(a) On the facts properly established, there is no prospect that the applicant
would be sentenced upon the basis that she was a lowly
‘storeman’ in
relation to the trafficking of the MDMA (CQ). It is inevitable that the
applicant would be sentenced upon
the basis that she was a knowing and active
participant in relation to all the drug-related activity at her house, including
trafficking of the MDMA (CQ). That is so, even if the state of the evidence
does not allow for a more precise finding, with respect
to her role or position
within the drug trafficking enterprise. These conclusions do not turn upon the
establishment of the connection
between the Superman and Rolls-Royce die stamps
and the MDMA located in her wardrobe.
(b) Once that is accepted, there is no reasonable prospect that the sentence of
6 years’ imprisonment for charge 3 would be
reduced. As I have said,
having regard, in particular, to the principles set out in
was a lenient sentence for someone who trafficked in nearly twice the commercial
quantity of MDMA, who was actively involved
and, demonstrably more than a
minion, who fell to be sentenced as a serious offender and whose moral
culpability was ‘high’.
to appeal is refused.
Reasons, [4].
Reasons, [6]–[7].
Reasons, [6]–[31].
The threshold for CQ is
The threshold for CQ is
500 g and LCQ is 1 kg.
The threshold for CQ is
Reasons, [14], [16]–[17],
Reasons, [22], [29].
Reasons, [25]–[26].
Reasons, [47]–[49],
Reasons, [81].
Reasons, [82], [98].
Reasons, [89].
Reasons, [90].
[98]–[102].
Charge 3, traffick
Reasons, [52].
Reasons, [110].
Reasons, [44].
Reasons, [45].
Reasons, [63].
[113]–[115].
Largely taken from Reasons
[33] and supplemented by some submission made in discussion at the plea.
Emphasis added.
Reasons, [32].
Reasons, [32(e)].
Reasons, [41].
Reasons, [63].
Reasons, [36],
[38]–[39], [45].
Reasons, [32(g)].
Reasons, [39(b)].
[2023] VSCA 328 (Macaulay
and Taylor JJA)
Reasons, [62].
Gregory v The
[2017] VSCA 151
(2017) 268 A Crim R 1
, 24, [100] (Maxwell P, Redlich and Beach JJA);
[2017] VSCA 151.
In this respect, I have been
assisted by the summaries provided in the parties’ written cases.
Lieu v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 277
, [41] (Beach and Kaye JJA);
Gregory v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 151
268 A Crim R 1
, [24] (Maxwell P, Redlich and Beach JJA);
[2017] VSCA 151
McCabe v The King
[2023] VSCA 329
, [21] (Macaulay and Taylor JJA);
Elkadi v the King
[2023] VSCA 328
, [30] (Macaulay and Taylor JJA).
R v Olbrich
199 CLR 270
, 279 (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Hayne and Callinan JJ);
Nguyen v The
[2019] VSCA 134
, [59] (Priest and Beach JJA). See also
[2022] VSCA 9
, [23] (McLeish JA).
Dao v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 93
(2014) 240 A Crim R 574
, 587, [39] (Redlich);
[2014] VSCA 93
R v Olbrich
(1999) 199 CLR 270
, 278, [14] (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Hayne and Callinan JJ).
Awad v The Queen;
Tambakakis v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 285
, [216] (McLeish and Niall JJA);
Johnson v The Queen
[2022] VSCA 9
, [23] (McLeish JA).
Gregory v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 151
(2017) 268 A Crim R 1
, [24] (Maxwell P, Redlich and Beach JJA);
[2017] VSCA
Johnson v The Queen
[2022] VSCA 9
, [25] (McLeish JA);
Dao v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 93
(2014) 240 A Crim R
, 582, [17] (Nettle JA).
Dao v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 93
(2014) 240 A Crim R 574
, 582, [17] (Nettle JA).
Carroll v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 150
, [16]–[18] (Maxwell P);
Willis v The Queen
, [94] (Weinberg and Beach JJA).
Emphasis added.
Bednar v the Queen
[2024] VSCA 180 (Emerton
P, P McLeish and T Forrest JJA);
Romero v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 45
(2011) 32 VR 486
, 489–90, [11] (Redlich JA, Buchanan JA agreeing at
494, [28] and Mandie JA agreeing at 494, [29]);
[2011] VSCA 45.
Johnson v The Queen
[2022] VSCA 9
, [25] (McLeish JA);
Dao v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 93
(2014) 240 A Crim R
, 582, [17] (Nettle JA).
Reasons, [62].
Reasons, [41].
[2023] VSCA 328 (Macaulay
and Taylor JJA).
Gregory v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 151
(2017) 268 A Crim R 1
, 24, [100] (Maxwell P, Redlich and Beach JJA);
Gregory v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 151
(2017) 268 A Crim R 1
, 24, [98] (Maxwell P, Redlich and Beach JJA);
(emphasis added).
DPP v Condo
, [29] (Maxwell P, T Forrest and Weinberg JJA);
Belhaj v The
[2025] VSCA 174 (Boyce
Dang v The Queen
[2020] VSCA 24
Gregory v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 151
(2017) 268 A Crim R 1
24 [97] (Maxwell P, Redlich and Beach JJA).
Reasons, [45].
Johnson v The King
[2022] VSCA 228
, [24] (Priest AP and Niall JA).
Nguyen v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 134
, [59] (Priest and Beach JJA).
DPP (Vic) v Dalgliesh (a
[2017] HCA 41
(2017) 262 CLR 428 (Kiefel
CJ, Bell and Keane JJ);
Reasons, [32(g)].
Reasons, [39(b)].
Evidence Act
R v Johnston
[2008] VSCA 133
, [6]–[7] (Nettle JA);
Schembri v The Queen
, [16] (Maxwell P and Niall JA).
Repac v The King
[2023] VSCA 313
, [37] (Macaulay and Whelan JJA).
Gillespie (a pseudonym)
v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 151
, [53] (Whelan and McLeish JJA).
Repac v The King
[2023] VSCA 313
, [37] (Macaulay and Whelan JJA) (emphasis in original). See
Potter v The King
[2023] VSCA 104
, [32] (Niall and Hargrave JJA);
Gundry v The King
[2025] VSCA 233
, [38]–[39] (Emerton P and
Criminal Procedure Act
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (703 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter