URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cudlipp v Henty Jepson & Kelly Pty Ltd [2025] VMC 5 (24 April 2025)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
MAG-CI-230070638
RICHARD CUDLIPP
HENTY JEPSON & KELLY PTY
ACN 118 869 793
MAGISTRATE:
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
17-18 February 2025, written submissions 21 February
2025 and 24 February 2025
DATE OF DECISION:
24 April 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS:
Cudlipp v Henty Jepson & Kelly Pty Ltd
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VMC 5
CONTRACT – Contract of employment – Rights accrued prior to
termination of contract – Terms which survive termination
of contract
– Repudiation of contract – Effect of termination following
repudiation on accrued rights or survival of
APPEARANCES:
For the Plaintiff
Harry Hill-Smith
Stenta Legal
For the Defendant
Timothy Donaghey
Hentys Lawyers
HER HONOUR:
INTRODUCTION
this matter, the Plaintiff, Mr Cudlipp, claims he is owed remuneration by his
former employer, the Defendant, Henty Jepson &
Kelly Pty Ltd
). Mr Cudlipp contends that he has a contractual entitlement to 40
per cent of fees collected by Hentys in respect of his work to
24 December 2021,
along with 10 per cent of fees for the work of solicitors on files he introduced
for the same period, totalling
$22,200.54. He contends that these amounts are
payable notwithstanding that the fees were collected after his employment
in May 2022 (
Fees Collected Claim
). Mr Cudlipp further
contends that to the extent that the fees collected by Hentys do not reflect all
of the relevant work in progress
) recorded by himself or those other
solicitors, he also has a contractual entitlement to the same percentage of that
‘written-off’
WIP, totalling an additional $11,438.20 (
quantum of the Fees Collected Claim and the WIP Claim was not in dispute,
however Hentys denies it is obliged to pay Mr Cudlipp
in respect of either
claim. Hentys contends that Mr Cudlipp repudiated his contract of employment in
May 2022 and Hentys accepted
that repudiation, disentitling Mr Cudlipp to any
further payment of remuneration thereafter. Further, Hentys denies the WIP Claim
on the basis that on a proper construction of the contract, Mr Cudlipp was only
entitled to a percentage of those fees which were
billed and collected.
EVIDENCE AND FINDINGS
Background and Employment Agreement
Cudlipp gave uncontested evidence about the background to the employment, which
I accept. He and Mr Timothy Ashton were, until
1 July 2017, equal partners in
Hentys. Mr Cudlipp was responsible for wills and estate litigation. Mr Cudlipp
had been a partner
for over 30 years and it was the only firm he worked for over
his career. He was older than Mr Ashton, being around 65 years of age
In the years prior, the two partners had discussed from time to time that Mr
Cudlipp would leave the firm before Mr Ashton,
and, accordingly, arrangements
would need to be made for Mr Cudlipp’s equity in the firm to be purchased
either by Mr Ashton
or someone else.
was not in dispute that on 1 July 2017, the parties and their related entities
entered into a share sale agreement, which in effect
transferred Mr
Cudlipp’s equity in Hentys to Mr Ashton. At the same time, the parties
Employment Agreement,
in terms annexed to, and as a condition
precedent to, the share sale agreement.
Employment Agreement provided that: Mr Cudlipp would be employed with the title
Partner, but as if he were employed as a salaried
Partner (cl 1); that he would
continue to be a Director and Secretary of Hentys during his employment (cl 2);
that his remuneration
‘factored in [his] continuing role overseeing the
financial aspects of the Companies [sic] operation’ (cl 2); and that
was not envisaged that his work would be the subject of supervision and he would
have authority to sign off on correspondence
and advice to clients (cl 4).
Commencement and Term Clause of the Employment Agreement provided:
employment will commence on 1 July 2017 and subject to a notice period of not
less than 8 weeks only conclude if otherwise agreed
in writing with you, or it
is subject to termination as provided for hereinafter.
Otherwise it is anticipated that your employment will continue for a period not
less than five (5) years from the Commencement Date
unless you are prevented
from so doing by ill health or otherwise at your election.
Remuneration Clause
in the Employment Agreement provided:
will be remunerated as follows:
1.1 By being in receipt of, subsequent to the Commencement Date, an amount
equivalent to forty (40%) of your fees that have been
billed to a file at your
agreed hourly rate as soon as practicable after the fees of which your
percentage firms [sic] part have
been collected by the firm.
1.2 In addition you will entitled [sic] to receive, subsequent to the
Commencement Date, an additional amount equivalent to ten (10%)
of the gross
fees from files where the billings by any employee of the firm is for work
billed by them on a file which has been
introduced to the Firm by you which
amount will also be paid as soon as practicable after the fees of which your
percentage firms
[sic] part have been collected by the Firm.
the Employment Agreement included a
Retainer Clause
, as follows:
advance against your remuneration will be paid to you by way of a retainer based
on a figure equivalent to eighty (80%) of a mutually
agreed budget based upon
the anticipated fees to be received by the Firm from professional fees rendered
by you and those employees
of the firm who are engaged on matters introduced to
the Firm by you (Advance)
1.2 Such (Advance) will be paid to you in equal monthly instalments on an
arrears basis with the first payment of such Advance to
be made at the
expiration of one (1) month from the Commencement date and monthly thereafter.
Advance shall have credited against it in each month any amount that is received
by the Firm by way of fees generated by
you, or by employees of the firm who are
generating fees from working on files introduced by you, until the Firm has
received a total
of fees equivalent to the amount that you have received by way
of such Advance.
1.2.2 Thereafter
any amount in excess of the Advance (Excess Amount) shall be due and payable to
you in accordance with the terms
of this letter under the heading Remuneration
sub clauses 1.1 and 1.2 with recourse to the procedure in subclause 1.2.1 if and
1.2.3 It is
agreed that the repayment of the Advance will not be subject to any charge by
way of interest.
1.2.4 Any fees
to which you are entitled to otherwise receive in relation to a file which is
being conducted by the Firm on a “success
fee” basis will be payable
to you in accordance with the terms contained in this letter but only upon the
receipt by the Firm
of those success fees. ...
Accordingly,
the effect of the Retainer Clause was that each month Hentys would pay Mr
Cudlipp the
, and have credited to it (against the Advance) the
remuneration to which Mr Cudlipp was entitled under the Remuneration Clause. Any
amount in excess of the Advance was payable to Mr Cudlipp, in addition to the
was not in dispute that between 1 July 2017 and approximately December 2021,
the parties performed their obligations under the
Employment Agreement,
including the Remuneration Clause and the Retainer Clause.
The December Variation
Cudlipp’s uncontested evidence, which I accept, was that in around
December 2021 he wanted to provide Mr Ashton with lengthy
notice that he was
going to leave the firm at the end of June 2022. He had discussions with Ms
Melissa Dawson, the then Practice
Manager, about this.
was not in dispute that on 7 December 2021, Mr Cudlipp emailed Ms Dawson with
the subject line ‘A Plan’ (
7 December Email
). The email
perform around 10 hours per week @$300 per hour paid monthly and not tied to
collections which would involve supervising/mentoring
Marcus & a pa as well
as doing file work;
current wip relating to my files is to be paid on collection;
remain an employee & director until 30 June 2022;
The costs for me will $150k per annum (pro rata) as best I can estimate, the pa
an attractive salary subject to attract & retain
the right person, the same
amount or slightly less for the Lead Agency & Marcus will be able to bill at
his current rate.
Can you review the billings over the last four & half years which will
provide an accurate guide for the future as well as the
current wip.
Historically I have been able to write the wip on an annual basis (I suggest you
check this with Keith).
If we cannot create a small team there is no future for this work. The fees
generated are significantly in excess of the cost of
production which allows for
some flexibility with salaries.
I request a response in the next few working days especially so given that at
the moment I do not have a personal assistant and it
is unclear when one will be
was not in dispute that on 21 December 2021, Mr Ashton emailed Mr Cudlipp in
response to his email to Ms Dawson (
21 December Email
), stating:
Hello Richard,
Thank you for your email below, Melissa has passed this email on to me and I
understand that there has been a discussion concerning
the matter raised between
the two of you.
Given we have now employed George on a full time basis, I believe that this
again ensures the smooth running of the Wills and Estates
Department.
I confirm that you will mentor Marcus upon his return to the office which will
be on Tuesday, 18 January 2022. Marcus has agreed
to return to the office 1 week
earlier than originally planned.
I confirm that as of Monday 10 January 2022 you will commence working a maximum
of 10 hours per week, this will be paid at $300 per
hour. If for some reason
that you believe additional hours ought to be worked in a period, please discuss
that with me.
The above will be paid to you on a monthly basis, on or around the
of each month.
Please confirm which days you intend on coming into the office.
I request that you continue to record your time directly into Affinity so that
this can be billed to the files.
I confirm that all WIP recorded by you prior to
Friday, 24 December 2021 will be paid to you at an amount equivalent to forty
of your fees that have been billed to a file upon collection of those
On 4 January 2022, I confirm that Melissa will again do the figures and these
will be forwarded to you.
I confirm that you will remain a Director and an Employee until 30 June 2022,
and confirm that I am in the process of making other
arrangements for someone to
come in at Director level who will take over from 1 July 2022.
was put to Mr Cudlipp that he understood Mr Ashton’s reference to
‘all WIP recorded by you’ in the 21 December
Email to mean the
amount of WIP collected. He agreed with this proposition, but said he was also
aware that WIP was quite often ‘written
up’ as well.
response to the 21 December Email, on 22 December 2021 Mr Cudlipp emailed Mr
22 December Email
The only alteration to what has been proposed is to include the 10% of fees
billed and collected from the work of other fee earners
on the files operated by
Mr Ashton did not reply to this email, he forwarded it on to Ms Dawson shortly
after receiving it. It was not in dispute that
these emails constituted a
variation to the Employment Agreement (
December Variation
The events of May 2022
was not in dispute that the parties subsequently reached agreement that Mr
Cudlipp’s employment would terminate in May 2022.
Mr Cudlipp contended
that his employment terminated by agreement on 25 May 2022. Hentys contended
that the parties had agreed that
the employment would terminate on 31 May 2022,
however, in breach of the Employment Agreement, Mr Cudlipp left his employment
25 May 2022 and failed or refused to undertake a handover of files as
Cudlipp’s evidence as to what occurred in May 2022 was as follows.
to the December Variation, he was performing 10 hours of legal work a week. He
was assisted by a full time graduate lawyer,
George Tabet. Because of Mr
Tabet’s assistance and the subsequent employment of Peter Bourke to be Mr
Cudlipp’s successor,
Mr Cudlipp’s workload reduced and there was a
gradual unofficial transfer of files from him to Mr Bourke. It got to the stage
in May 2022 where Mr Cudlipp had virtually nothing to do. He thought it was
inappropriate to try and find work to do when there wasn't
any. At that point he
had very few files, less than a handful. This caused him to email Ms Alex
McFarlane, Practice Manager, and
Mr Bourke on 25 May 2022 at 9.25am stating
‘Dear Peter & Alex, I will be in around 10.45 today and suggest we
meet at 12.00
to discuss the remaining files to be handed over to Peter.’
He didn’t recall Ms McFarlane previously trying to set up
meeting or that his email was in response to her doing so.
attended the office on 25 May 2022 and found that his room had been completely
cleaned out. There were no remaining files. There
was a box on his desk or chair
containing his photographs and personal belongings. He gave evidence to the
effect that whilst he
did not expect a gold watch, everyone knows from watching
movies what a box full of bits and pieces on a desk means. Mr Cudlipp left
office. He agreed he was paid but performed no service after 25 May 2022. After
that, the extent of communication between he
and Hentys was an exchange of
emails about the transfer of phone numbers for he and his wife. There was no
communication about rescheduling
the handover meeting or about his failure to
McFarlane also gave evidence as to what occurred in May 2022. She had been the
Practice Manager at Hentys since 17 January 2022.
When she commenced, she was
told Mr Cudlipp was a Legal Director and he was retiring mid-year. She was
preparing for the transition
by seeking to understand how Mr Cudlipp operated
his practice and the nature of the practice. Mr Cudlipp was not in the office
but she made many attempts to engage with him, however it was hard to catch
him other than hallway interactions.
McFarlane was involved in cleaning up Mr Cudlipp’s office. Mr Cudlipp
occupied one end of the office. There was stuff everywhere.
She had to clean up
everything, knowing that he was going to be leaving within the next few months.
She did so because she had to
make sure he got everything before he left, which
was not going to be simple.
receiving Mr Cudlipp’s email on 25 May 2022, she arranged with Mr Bourke
and Mr Ashton to attend the handover. She and
Mr Bourke waited for 15 to 20
minutes and determined Mr Cudlipp was not coming in, which was not unusual.
Other than telling Mr Ashton
couldn’t do anything about it, so she just went back to work and hoped
Cudlipp came in. No contact was made with Mr Cudlipp by anyone at Hentys
asking him to reschedule the meeting or to explain why he
did not attend.
was not in dispute that there was an exchange of emails between Ms McFarlane and
Mr Cudlipp on 27 May 2022 (
27 May Emails
) and 30 May 2022 (
). In the 27 May Emails, Ms McFarlane requested that Mr Cudlipp return
he and his wife’s phones, and his access pass, by 4pm
on 30 May 2022. Mr
Cudlipp replied stating he had no intention of doing so as Ms McFarlane had
previously informed him that she would
facilitate the transfer of the phones to
Mr Cudlipp. Ms McFarlane stated in the 30 May Email ‘[w]hen you decided to
not return without a handover of files or any kind of discussion with
anyone, I was left with no choice but to assume you did not
want the phones,
email address or the mobile numbers.’ She then in effect provided
instructions to Mr Cudlipp to facilitate
the transfer of the phones. The 30 May
Email further stated ‘You will need to do this as a matter of urgency as I
have organised
for all outgoing calls and data to be suspended as of 5pm
tomorrow until you enter into your own plan at a Telstra store.’
consider that the accounts of the two witnesses as to the events in May 2022 are
largely able to be reconciled. Based on the evidence
of both witnesses, I find
that Mr Cudlipp was performing very little work in May 2022. I accept Mr
Cudlipp’s evidence and find
that this was due to the absence of work for
him to perform, as Mr Bourke had largely taken over his files, assisted by Mr
I find that, notwithstanding Mr Cudlipp’s minimal file load at this
time, Ms McFarlane regarded dealing with matters relating
to the impending end
of Mr Cudlipp’s employment as urgent. Accordingly, I accept that she had
been trying to make arrangements
to transition his practice, and I find on
balance that Mr Cudlipp’s email on 25 May 2022 regarding the handover
meeting was
in response to these efforts.
further find that upon Mr Cudlipp’s attendance at the office on 25 May
2022, all files had been removed from his office and
his personal belongings had
been placed in a box by Ms McFarlane. I find based on Mr Cudlipp’s
evidence, in particular his
comment as to the gold watch and the movies, that he
was not aware that his office was going to be cleared out and his belongings
placed in a box. I find that discovering this caused him to leave the office. I
find that, other than the 27 May Emails and the 30
May Email, no Hentys
representative contacted Mr Cudlipp further, to reschedule the handover meeting
or for any other purpose, and
Ms McFarlane hoped Mr Cudlipp would come back into
the office. I find that Ms McFarlane had arranged for Mr Cudlipp’s phone
to be suspended as at 5pm on Tuesday 31 May 2022 and that she communicated this
in the 30 May Email.
Billing practices, WIP and Fees
Cudlipp gave evidence that work on the vast majority of files in the wills and
estates practice was undertaken on a ‘no win
no fee’ basis.
Generally, and as of December 2021, it would take a minimum of 12 months for
matters to be finalised and for
the firm’s invoice to be paid. For less
than 10 per cent of files, this may take up to 18 months or 2 years.
Keith Westbrook, Accounts Manager for Hentys, gave evidence as to financial
reports he had prepared. He was not asked directly
delay between WIP and billing, however the Calculation Summary he prepared in
respect of the Fees Collected
Calculation Summary
) bears out Mr
Cudlipp’s evidence as to the delay. It illustrates that fees relating to
WIP from prior to 24 December 2021 continued
to be collected beyond 31 December
2021 for five further quarters, until the quarter ending 31 March 2023.
find based on this evidence that a feature of the remuneration arrangement,
known to both parties, was that there was commonly a
lengthy delay between the
writing of WIP and the realisation of the fees from it (and subsequent
accounting of those fees towards
Mr Cudlipp’s Advance), usually 12 months
and, more rarely, longer.
Cudlipp said that prior to 2017, he had sole discretion on writing off WIP for
himself and others on files for which he was responsible.
It was rare for him to
write off WIP and in the period 2017 to 2021 WIP was never written off without
his consent. He conceded in
cross examination that in unsuccessful ‘no win
no fee’ cases the only option was to write off WIP, and he agreed that
time could accidentally be recorded incorrectly and that he would remove it if
it was not chargeable. He agreed he would scrutinise
WIP before billing a file
and he may alter amounts billed by junior solicitors. However, he disagreed that
he routinely altered WIP
down. I find based on Mr Cudlipp’s uncontested
evidence that prior to the termination of his employment, he was solely
responsible
for determining the extent to which any WIP would be written off.
However, I was not persuaded by Mr Cudlipp’s evidence that
this was rare.
I formed the view, based on the concessions he made, that it was more common
than he sought to portray.
CONSIDERATION OF THE WIP CLAIM
Mr Cudlipp contended that pursuant to the December Variation,
Hentys was not permitted to unilaterally write off or write down WIP
prior to 24 December 2021. Because writing down WIP was previously wholly in his
control, the December Variation should
be construed to prohibit this occurring
without his permission. This construction is open without the need to imply a
term to this
effect. Hentys was aware of the WIP balance as at the time of the
December Variation and did not seek to dispute it. Further, there
is no express
term permitting writing down of WIP. The express language of the 7 December
Email refers to ‘the current wip’
and the 21 December Email to
‘all WIP recorded’. This construction of the December Variation
would provide maximum certainty
as to what Mr Cudlipp would be paid, which is to
be preferred over a construction which would lead to uncertainty as to amounts
contended that on Mr Cudlipp’s own evidence he knew that the December
Variation referred to fees received by Hentys,
which is consistent with the
terms actually used by the parties in the December Variation. To read the
December Variation otherwise
requires the implication of a term. Hentys referred
to a number of authorities to the effect that the objective common intention
the parties may be inferred from their words and conduct and the objectively
known surrounding circumstances, and only after actual
intention has been
ascertained does the question of whether a term should be implied
Further, for a term to be
implied, it must be necessary.
There is no necessity to imply such a term.
my view, the construction contended for by Mr Cudlipp would only be open if such
a term were to be implied, and I do not consider
it necessary to do so. I
conclude that the parties objectively intended that Mr Cudlipp’s
remuneration would be based on only
fees billed and collected. I do not consider
the construction contended for by Mr Cudlipp is reasonably open based on the
the December Variation, having regard to the objective common intention
of the parties, in light of the following matters.
the December Variation resulted in Mr Cudlipp’s remuneration changing to
an hourly rate, and being no longer ‘tied
to collections’.
Accordingly, the December Variation refers to WIP in the objective context that
it was necessary to specify
what, if any, ‘legacy’ entitlement Mr
Cudlipp would have in respect of ‘collections’ for work he had
performed but had not been remunerated for. In this context, the use of
the term ‘WIP’ is explicable by the parties’
need to define
this work. I conclude that Mr Cudlipp’s reference to ‘current’
WIP and Mr Ashton’s reference
to ‘all’ WIP are both directed
at identifying the parameters of the work to which Mr Cudlipp’s legacy
entitlement
related, as opposed to being a positive statement that
‘all’ or all ‘current’ WIP would be billed and
subject to Mr Cudlipp’s permission not to.
each reference to WIP in the December Variation is qualified. Mr Ashton’s
statement as to ‘all WIP’ was
subject to the qualifier that payment
will be based on ‘fees that have been billed to a file upon collection of
those fees’.
Mr Cudlipp’s own proposal qualified his reference to
‘current WIP’ to that paid ‘on collection’. The
December Email, in respect of other fee earners, does not refer to WIP at all
but refers to ‘fees billed and collected’.
Accordingly, the text of
the December Variation distinguishes between WIP, on the one hand, and amounts
billed and collected on the
other, with Mr Cudlipp’s entitlement to be
paid based on the latter.
for the duration of the employment prior to the December Variation, the relevant
touchstone for Mr Cudlipp’s remuneration
was not WIP, but fees that had
been billed and collected. I conclude that the express qualifications on the
references to WIP are
directly referable to preserving this status quo. The
construction contended for by Mr Cudlipp would mean that the legacy arrangements
in the December Variation altered the status quo, in respect of work Mr Cudlipp
had already performed. I consider it objectively
unlikely that the parties
intended, by the language of the December Variation, to achieve this effect.
it was objectively known to the parties that not all WIP recorded would be
billed and collected. Whilst Hentys knew what
the relevant WIP was at the time
of the December Variation, Hentys could not have known what proportion of that
WIP would be collected.
Prior to the December Variation, it was Mr Cudlipp who
assumed the risk of write-downs. Accepting he was the decision-maker in respect
of these write downs, they nonetheless occurred due to matters outside his
control such as an unsuccessful outcome. The construction
contended for by Mr
Cudlipp would reallocate this risk, after the December Variation, to Hentys, and
require Hentys to pay Mr Cudlipp
remuneration in respect of amounts which were
never collected, unless he agreed otherwise. I again consider it objectively
that the parties intended, by the language of the December Variation,
to give effect to such a reallocation of risk.
the balance of probabilities, Mr Cudlipp’s WIP Claim is not made out.
CONSIDERATION OF THE FEES COLLECTED CLAIM
than in respect of the WIP Claim, it was not in dispute that the December
Variation entitled Mr Cudlipp, in respect of WIP prior
to 24 December 2021, to
payment of an amount equivalent to 40 per cent of his fees billed and collected,
and 10 per cent of the fees
billed and collected of other fee earners on files
operated by him (
the Fees Entitlement
). However, at issue was whether Mr
Cudlipp remained entitled to the Fees Entitlement
his employment
terminated. Mr Cudlipp contended that both the relevant terms of the December
Variation, and the rights to payment
he accrued pursuant to those terms,
survived the termination.
Hentys contended that it
was not obliged to pay Mr Cudlipp the fees collected post-termination because Mr
Cudlipp repudiated the contract
and it accepted his repudiation.
Cudlipp referred to
McDonald v Dennys Lascelles Ltd
and several other authorities as to the effect of termination on terms and
obligations under a contract. Other than in respect of
a termination by
acceptance of a repudiation, Hentys did not take issue with these principles. On
termination, a contract is not
rescinded as from the beginning but the parties
are discharged from future performance. Accordingly, rights or obligations which
accrued unconditionally under the contract, prior to its termination, remain
enforceable.
Further, obligations
which are intended to survive termination are still required to be
Whether or not a term of
a contract survives termination depends on the proper construction of the
Did the Fees Entitlement survive the termination of the
Cudlipp relied on established principles that the contract should be construed
in light of the language used by the parties, the
surrounding circumstances
known to them (where necessary) and the commercial purpose or object to be
to contend that on a proper
construction, the Fees Entitlement was intended to survive termination. Hentys
contended that it could
only be by way of implication of a term that the Fees
Entitlement survived the termination of the contract, and that such implication
was not necessary.
consider it clear from the text of the December Variation that the commercial
purpose or object intended to be secured by the Fees
Entitlement was to make
provision for Mr Cudlipp to realise income from work he had already performed up
to 24 December 2021, upon
his future remuneration no longer being tied to
collected fees.
was the objective intention of both parties, at the time of the December
Variation, that Mr Cudlipp’s employment would terminate
approximately six months (on 30 June 2022). The 21 December Email made express
provision to this effect. It was also objectively
known to both parties that
there was usually a delay of 12 months or longer between the writing of WIP and
the collection of fees
(and consequent remuneration for Mr Cudlipp). Because of
this, I conclude that the actual (objectively determined) intention of the
parties, inferred from the context of the December Variation, was that the Fees
Entitlement would survive termination. Otherwise,
the Fees Entitlement would not
be capable of achieving the commercial purpose or object of providing income to
Mr Cudlipp referable
to work performed up to 24 December 2021.
reached the conclusion that the parties’ actual intention was that the
Fees Entitlement survived the termination of the
contract, it is not necessary
to consider Mr Cudlipp’s alternative argument that there was an implied
term to this effect.
Does Mr Cudlipp have an accrued right to the Fees Entitlement?
Cudlipp also claimed, on an alternative basis, that he had accrued a right to
payment pursuant to the Fees Entitlement prior to
the termination. Mr Cudlipp
contended that the Fees Entitlement was an accrued right because it was for work
already performed and
recorded by him, or overseen by him. The only further
‘performance’ was for Hentys to pay Mr Cudlipp from the relevant
fees collected. He relied on the principle that a right can accrue
unconditionally notwithstanding that it is contingent on a future
however only if the right is not dependent on facts or events resulting
from any further act of performance of the
Hentys did not take issue
with this principle, other than in respect of its arguments as to repudiation.
that payment pursuant to the Fees Entitlement may constitute an accrued right
notwithstanding that it is contingent on a
future event, the critical question
is whether the future event (being the billing and collection of those fees) was
a further act
of performance of the contract. Hentys did not contend that its
billing and collection of the relevant fees was required by its contract
Cudlipp. Rather, Hentys billed and recovered Mr Cudlipp’s fees whilst
taking the position that it had no further contractual
obligation to Mr Cudlipp
in respect of those fees. In this context, I accept that Mr Cudlipp’s
entitlement to payment pursuant
to the Fees Entitlement was not subject to any
further act of performance of the contract, but accrued unconditionally prior to
termination of the contract.
Termination by acceptance of repudiation
primary contention of Hentys in opposition to the Fees Collected Claim was that
Mr Cudlipp ceased being entitled to any accrued
right, and there could be no
surviving term, because Mr Cudlipp repudiated the contract and Hentys accepted
that repudiation.
Was the contract terminated by acceptance of a repudiation by
Mr Cudlipp?
was no significant difference between the parties as to the applicable legal
principles regarding termination of a contract
by way of acceptance of a
repudiation. A repudiatory breach of contract may arise either by way of breach
of an essential term
sufficiently serious breach of a non-essential or intermediate term, such that
the other party is entitled to conclude that
the contract will not be performed
substantially according to its
requirements.
Repudiatory
conduct is conduct which evinces an intention to no longer be bound by the
Repudiation of a
contract is not to be lightly found or inferred. Relevant conduct of a
defaulting party must objectively convey
to the other party the defaulting
party’s intention to not perform the contract, or to only fulfil it in a
manner substantially
inconsistent with their obligations. All of the
circumstances must be
considered.
the event of repudiatory conduct, the other party can either accept the
repudiation and terminate the contract, or seek to enforce
the contract. Unless
and until an election is made, there is no alteration in the rights and
obligations of the parties. An unaccepted
repudiation is of no consequence if
the contract is then validly
terminated.
Further, for the
termination of a contract in response to a repudiation to crystallise, the
acceptance of the repudiation must be
communicated by the innocent party to the
defaulting party. Communication may be direct or indirect, and by words or by
Conduct inconsistent with a recognition of continuing obligations will
ordinarily be sufficient.
contended that Mr Cudlipp’s conduct in failing to attend the handover
meeting on 25 May 2022 was a breach of an essential
term of the contract, being
the requirement to perform service. Mr Cudlipp’s failure to attend the
meeting and provide service
subsequently evinced an intention to no longer be
bound by the contract. Hentys communicated its acceptance of this repudiation by
no longer dealing with Mr Cudlipp, no longer requiring him to attend the
handover meeting and not paying him the sums he now claims
by way of the Fees
Entitlement.
Cudlipp contends that whilst his non-attendance at the handover meeting may have
been a breach of his obligations to Hentys, it
does not rise to the level of
repudiatory conduct as it is not a breach of an essential term or a serious
breach of an intermediate
term in the absence of any follow up by Hentys.
Further, even if that conduct amounted to a repudiation, Hentys failed to
communicate
its acceptance of that repudiation prior to the contract coming to
an end by agreement on 31 May 2022, evidenced by the 27 May Emails
am not persuaded that Mr Cudlipp’s failure to attend the handover meeting
or provide service subsequently was a repudiatory
breach of his contract.
has not established, on the evidence before me, that Mr Cudlipp was generally
required to attend work or perform service in
May 2022, or that there was any
general refusal by Mr Cudlipp to do so. The express terms of the December
Variation provide that
Mr Cudlipp will work ‘a maximum’ of 10 hours
per week. Further, the reason that Mr Cudlipp was performing very little
May 2022 was the absence of work for him to perform.
remaining repudiatory conduct alleged relates to the handover meeting. Whilst
Hentys had required Mr Cudlipp to make arrangements
to transition his practice,
and he scheduled the handover meeting in response to this requirement, Hentys
had not specifically required
Mr Cudlipp to attend that meeting on that day.
Having regard to the authorities referred to above, attendance at that specific
was not, in my view, an essential obligation under the contract.
I consider that Mr Cudlipp’s failure to attend the handover meeting was
adequately explained by the discovery that
his office had been packed up and his
belongings placed in a box. In these circumstances, his conduct did not
objectively convey
an intention to no longer be bound by the contract.
Additionally, there was no subsequent attempt by Hentys to establish why Mr
did not attend the meeting or to require him to attend a rescheduled
handover meeting. In these circumstances, I do not consider
Cudlipp’s conduct can reasonably be characterised as a serious breach of a
non-essential term.
any event, whilst acceptance of a repudiation may be communicated by way of
conduct, I conclude that Hentys conduct did not amount
to acceptance of the
alleged repudiation by Mr Cudlipp prior to the contract terminating on 31 May
2022. The contract was to end
by agreement on that day, and Mr Cudlipp was
otherwise performing very little work in May. In this context, something other
silence on Hentys part was required. Silence is equally consistent with the
contract continuing on foot for that short remaining
period. Moreover, Ms
McFarlane’s evidence that she hoped Mr Cudlipp would come back into the
office is not consistent with
Hentys having accepted a repudiation. Neither is
the 30 May Email, which positively conveyed that the contract remained on foot.
It confirmed that Mr Cudlipp still had the use of his phone, which would cease
at 5pm on 31 May 2022, being the end of the day on
which the parties had agreed
the employment would terminate. The failure to pay Mr Cudlipp the Fees
Entitlement has no bearing on
this issue. The Calculation Summary shows that as
at the fourth quarter of the 2021/22 financial year, Mr Cudlipp had been
his Advance. It was only fees recovered subsequently which required
further payments to be made by Hentys.
the balance of probabilities, Hentys repudiation argument is not made out.
Does a termination by acceptance of a repudiation alter the
above analysis?
any event, a termination by acceptance of repudiatory conduct would not alter my
conclusions that Mr Cudlipp’s Fees Entitlement
was a right which survived
the termination of the contract, or that he had unconditionally accrued a right
to payment pursuant to
the Fees Entitlement.
conclude that even if the termination was brought about by acceptance of Mr
Cudlipp’s repudiation, his unconditional accrued
right to payment pursuant
to the Fees Entitlement survived. The authorities referred to by Mr Cudlipp
establish that the general
principle derived from
applies equally
to termination by way of an acceptance of a
repudiation.
am I persuaded that a termination based on Mr Cudlipp’s repudiatory
conduct affects the post-termination survival of the
Fees Entitlement. In this
respect, I was referred to authorities in which post-employment restraint of
trade clauses were held to
be unenforceable by an employer whose repudiatory
breach had led to the termination of the relevant
However, these
decisions are specific to post-employment restraints. They do not establish any
general principle that termination
by repudiation renders other terms incapable
of surviving that termination.
Crowe Horwarth
, the Court identified several different bases on which the
post-employment restraint was unenforceable. One such rationale was that
proper construction of the contract, the restraint clause was not objectively
intended to survive termination by way of an employer’s
repudiatory
Applying that approach
to the present case, I see no basis to construe the post-termination survival of
the Fees Entitlement as inapplicable
because of termination by acceptance of a
repudiatory breach. The commercial purpose of the Fees Entitlement was to make
for Mr Cudlipp to realise fees from work he had already performed
prior to 24 December 2021. The Fees Entitlement is unconnected
to any future
conduct by Mr Cudlipp or any loss or damage arising from repudiation.
Accordingly, I am not persuaded that termination
by repudiation alters my
previous conclusion in this respect.
will order that Hentys pay Mr Cudlipp the sum of $22,200.54. I will make
directions for the parties to confer and seek to agree
on the questions of
interest and
Realestate.com.au Pty Ltd v
(2022) 277 CLR 115
[2022] HCA 39
, [15]-[17] (Kiefel CJ
and Gageler J) (
Hawkins v Clayton
CLR 539, 570 (Deane J) (
Byrne v Australian Airlines
(1995) 185 CLR 410, 442 (McHugh and Gummow JJ)
Hardingham,
Hospital Products Ltd v United States Surgical Corporation
[1984] HCA 64
, 121 (Deane J) (
Hospital Products
[1933] HCA 25
(1933) 48 CLR 457.
, 476-7 (Dixon
J, Rich, McTiernan JJ agreeing), 469-470 (Starke J);
Richmond v Moore
Stephens Adelaide Pty Ltd
[2015] SASCFC 147
, [193]-[195]
ACN 115 918 959 Pty Ltd v Hoeys Lawyers Pty Ltd
[2021] VSC 79
Gantley Pty Ltd v Phoenix
International Group Pty Ltd
[2010] VSC 106
Trafalgar West Investments Pty Ltd v LCM Litigation
Management Pty Ltd
[2016] WASC 159
Trafalgar West
Investments
Trafalgar West Investments
, [195]-[196].
Mt Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v
Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
(2015) 256 CLR 104
[2015] HCA 37
, [46]-[50]
(French CJ, Nettle and Gordon JJ);
Electricity Generation Corporation v
Woodside Energy Ltd
(2014) 251 CLR 640
[2014] HCA 7
, [35] (French CJ,
Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ).
Referring to
, 121 (Deane J) and
, 446 (McHugh and Gummow JJ).
Trafalgar West
Investments
Koompahtoo Local
Aboriginal Land Council v Sanpine Pty Limited
(2007) 233 CLR 115
, [47] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Heydon and Crennan JJ).
Ibid, [49];
Constructions Pty Ltd v Page Steel Fabrications Pty Ltd
[2024] VSCA 142
Makland Constructions
Melbourne Yifang Group
Pty Ltd v Guangao A Group Pty Ltd & Ors
[2023] VSC 577
, [168], quoting
Pacific Brands Sport & Leisure Pty Ltd v Underworks Pty Ltd,10
[2006] FCAFC 40
149 FCR 395
Construction
, [52] citing
Alphater Consulting Engineers Pty Ltd v
[2016] VSCA 111
Willis v Crosland
[2021] VSCA 320
Actrol Parts Pty Ltd v
Coppi (No 2)
[2015] VSC 694
, [417]-[421];
Striker Resources NL v
Australian Goldfields NL
[2006] WASC 153
Crowe Horwarth (Aust) Pty Ltd v Loone
[2017] VSCA 181
, [193(6)], [193(9)],
[193(11)] (
Crowe Horwarth
Crowe Horwath
[193(11)-(13)], [253].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (625 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter