URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/35.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:24:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wangaratta C83wang (PSA) [2025] PPV 35 (10 July 2025)
Wangaratta Planning Scheme
Amendment C83wang
Low Density and Rural Residential Strategy, 2021
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
10 July 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
Wangaratta Planning Scheme Amendment C83wang
Low Density and Rural Residential Strategy, 2021 (Rural Component)
10 July 2025
Rachael O’Neill, Chair
List of Figures
Glossary and abbreviations
the Amendment
the Strategy
Wangaratta Planning Scheme Amendment C83wang
Low Density and Rural Residential Strategy, 2021 (Rural Component)
Country Fire Authority
Rural City of Wangaratta
Design and Development Overlay
Development Plan Overlay
Environment Protection Authority Victoria
Low Density Residential Zone
North East Catchment Management Authority
North East Water
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning Scheme
Practitioner’s Guide
Wangaratta Planning Scheme
A Practitioner’s Guide to Victoria’s Planning Schemes, April
Rural Living Zone
Warby Range Estate
Victoria Planning Provisions
Warby Range Estate Pty Ltd
Amendment summary
The Amendment
Wangaratta Planning Scheme Amendment C83wang
Common name
Low Density and Rural Residential Strategy, 2021 (Rural Component)
Brief description
The Amendment proposes to implement recommendations of the Low Density and
Rural Residential Strategy, 2021 (Rural Component) by changing
the Wangaratta
Planning Scheme to:
Clause 15.01-3L-02 Subdivision design in Low Density Residential and Rural
Living Zones
amend Clause
11.01-1L-01 (Glenrowan Township), Clause 11.01-1L-02 (Milawa Township) and
Clause 11.01-1L-03 (Oxley Township)
amend Schedules
1 and 2 to Clause 32.03 Low Density Residential Zone
insert Schedules
8 and 9 to Clause 43.02 Design and Development Overlay
rezone land from
Farming Zone to Rural Living Zone and Low Density Residential Zone
delete Schedule
7 to Clause 43.04 Development Plan Overlay from 246 Old Hume Highway,
Schedule to Clause 72.08 Background Document
amend Clause
74.02 Further Strategic Work
Subject land
Detailed in
of the report
Planning Authority
Rural City of Wangaratta
Authorisation
23 April 2024, with conditions
22 August to 30 September 2024
Submissions
Number of Submissions: 16 Opposed: 6
Panel process
Rachael O’Neill, Chair
Directions Hearing
Video conference, 27 March 2025
Panel Hearing
Council Chambers, 30 April 2025
Site inspections
Accompanied and unaccompanied, 29 and 31 April 2025
Parties to the Hearing
Refer Appendix A
Wangaratta PSA C83wang [2025] PPV
Date of this report
10 July 2025
Executive summary
Wangaratta Planning
Scheme Amendment C83wang (the Amendment) seeks to implement the recommendations
of the Low Density and Rural
Residential Strategy, 2021.
All agencies supported the Amendment and some suggested changes, which in
most part, the Rural City of Wangaratta (Council) included
in its Day 1 version
of the Amendment. Agencies noted in submissions that Council had consulted
extensively during the preparation
of the Amendment. Of note, the Country Fire
Authority was supportive of the Amendment and appeared at the Hearing.
Most individual submissions supported the Amendment. Submissions partially
supporting or opposing the Amendment raised key issues
policy relating
to battle axe lots
servicing and
access requirements for the Milawa triangle
walking track in
deletion of
Schedule 7 to the Development Plan Overlay from 246 Old Hume Highway, Glenrowan
and the subsequent change in designation
in policy from “
investigation area
update the Low
Density and Rural Residential Strategy to allow the rezoning of 246 Old Hume
Highway, Glenrowan
bushfire risks
the ability to
continue to farm the land and to continue to access the land.
Panel commends Council on the preparation of the Low Density and Rural
Residential Strategy, 2021 and its work on the Amendment.
It has sought to
consult extensively with agencies and the community, and its efforts are
illustrative through the limited number
of submissions and overwhelming support
for the Amendment.
The Amendment will successfully implement existing policy objectives and
strategies and build on these through changes at a local
level, through policy
and overlay controls. Consistent with the Low Density and Rural Residential
Strategy, it will provide for
long term planning of townships, with future
directions guided by and informed by consideration of these planning policies.
overarching objective has been to prioritise the protection of human life
over all other policy considerations. As such, the Amendment
is consistent with
Clause 71.02-3 (Integrated decision making) of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel concludes the Amendment:
is supported by,
and implements, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy Framework
is consistent
with the relevant Ministerial Directions and Practice Notes
is well founded
and strategically justified
no changes are
required further to the Council’s Day 1 version of the Amendment
documentation.
Recommendation
Based on the reasons set out in this Report, the
Panel recommends that Council:
Wangaratta Planning Scheme Amendment C83wang as exhibited and with changes shown
in Appendix C.
1 Introduction
1.1 The Amendment
(i) Amendment description
purpose of the Wangaratta Planning Scheme Amendment C83wang (the Amendment) is
to implement the recommendations of the Low Density
and Rural Residential
Strategy, 2021 (Rural Component) (the Strategy).
Specifically, the Amendment proposes to:
Clause 15.01-3L02 Subdivision design in Low Density Residential and Rural Living
amend Clause
11.01-1L-01 (Glenrowan Township) to delete reference to a future investigation
area from Precinct H(b) (246 Old Hume
Highway, Glenrowan)
amend Clause
11.01-1L-02 (Milawa Township) to reflect changes to Precinct E, and to reflect
the existing mixed use, proposed rezoning
and designated long term growth
amend Clause
11.01-1L-03 (Oxley Township) to reflect changes to Precinct F, including
proposed rezoning
rezone land in
Oxley from Farming Zone to Rural Living Zone (Map Ref. 35)
rezone land in
Oxley from Farming Zone to Low Density Residential Zone (Map Ref. 36)
rezone land in
Milawa from Farming Zone to Low Density Residential Zone (Map Refs. 37 and
amend Schedules
1 and 2 to Clause 32.03 Low Density Residential Zone to include a minimum lot
size for subdivision in Oxley East
insert a new
Schedule 8 to Clause 43.02 Design and Development Overlay to the Milawa Triangle
(Precinct E(b))
insert a new
Schedule 9 to Clause 43.02 Design and Development Overlay to land in Oxley
(Precinct F(b))
remove Schedule
7 to 43.04 Development Plan Overlay from land at 246 Old Hume Highway,
Schedule to Clause 72.08 Background Documents to include the Strategy
amend Clause
74.02 Further Strategic Work requiring further work to implement recommendations
of the Strategy.
(ii) The subject land
The Amendment applies to all land zoned Low Density
Residential and Rural Living across the municipality, with specific changes to
the zoning and overlays on the following land:
9, 10, 32, 39
and 40 Oxley-Greta West Road, Oxley
1109, 1115,
1129, 1161, 1163 and 1069 Wangaratta-Whitfield Road, Oxley
962, 974 and 988
Snow Road, Oxley
75 Oxley-Meadow
Creek Road, Oxley
39 Oxley-Meadow
Creek Road, Oxley
27, 39 and 55
Milawa-Bobinawarrah Road, Milawa
1374, 1400 and
1410 Oxley Flats Road, Milawa
315 and 317
Kerrs Road, Milawa
246 Old Hume
Highway, Glenrowan.
1.2 Background
Council prepared the
Strategy to analyse the future need for low density and rural residential zoned
land to respond with long term
strategies and actions. The Strategy seeks to
allow sufficient land supply within the Low Density Residential Zone (LDRZ) and
Rural Living Zone (RLZ) over a 30 year period.
The Strategy acknowledges that in many parts of the municipality there are
various features that are attractive to residents, including
topography, outlook and vegetation. These features also result in areas being
higher risk locations in which to live,
especially due to bushfire and flooding
risks. It identifies this as an inherent conflict between preferred locations
for rural residential housing and locations where supply can be
provided in accordance with planning policy.
The Strategy notes that it has been developed in:
The knowledge that many existing and potential future housing areas are
partially or fully constrained for development and therefore
adopts a long
planning period. The approach is designed to create a diverse range of housing
opportunity for relevant market segments
to address existing supply gaps, meet
latent demand for housing in the study zones, facilitate competition in the
housing market,
respond to population growth projections and support economic
development and growth within the municipality.
Council considered the submissions received in response to the Draft Strategy
at its meeting on 14 December 2021 and resolved to adopt
the Draft Strategy,
apart from the parts that apply to Wangaratta. It resolved to undertake further
investigation into the potential
of rezoning of land in Wangaratta; and to
prepare documentation and seek authorisation to exhibit the Amendment to
implement the
recommendations of the Strategy (which is now Amendment
The Amendment implements the recommendations of the Strategy as it applies to
the rural areas of the municipality. This excludes
the parts of the Strategy
that relate to Wangaratta.
On 23 April 2024, the Minister for Planning approved authorisation to prepare
and exhibit the Amendment. The Amendment was exhibited
between 22 August and 30
September 2024 and a total of 16 submissions were received. Council considered
a report at its meeting
on 25 February 2025 and resolved to request the Minister
for Planning appoint a Panel to resolve outstanding submissions.
1.3 The Panel’s approach
the 16 submissions, eight were from agencies and eight were from the
individuals. Two of the submissions objected to the Amendment
submissions partly supported the Amendment. The following outlines the issues
raised and requests for changes.
1.3.1 Agency submissions
The following responses/issues were raised.
Catchment Management Authority (NECMA) supported the Amendment but raised
concerns with the proposed rezoning of land in
Precinct H in Oxley and in
particular the potential to allow more intensive residential uses.
Goulburn Murray Water and Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action
supported the Amendment and did not request
any changes.
North East Water
(NEW) supported the Amendment but requested changes to the Amendment that relate
to the reticulated water and sewerage
capabilities of land.
Department of
Transport and Planning supported the Amendment but requested changes to policy
that seek to avoid direct access to Snow
Road, Oxley and to provide a safe
pedestrian crossing on Snow Road between Precinct F(b) and the pedestrian and
cycle link on the
north side of Snow Road.
Environment
Protection Authority Victoria (EPA) supported the Amendment but requested
- identifying
that land subject to the Amendment is not contaminated or potentially
contaminated
- that rezoning
of land in Oxley near the former Oxley landfill comply with the Landfill Gas and
Landfill Buffer Guidelines (EPA Publication
1950), August 2024
separation distances be considered and addressed in Oxley and Milawa to comply
with the Separation Distances and Separation
Distance Guidelines (EPA
Publication 1949, August 2024.
Country Fire
Authority (CFA) supported the Amendment but requested a change to required
setbacks from bushfire hazard interfaces.
1.3.2 Individual submissions
Key issues raised in submissions were:
policy relating
to battle axe lots
servicing and
access requirements for the Milawa triangle
walking track in
deletion of the
Schedule 7 to the Development Plan Overlay from 246 Old Hume Highway, Glenrowan
and the subsequent change in designation
in policy from “an investigation
Strategy to allow the rezoning of 246 Old Hume Highway, Glenrowan
bushfire risks
the ability to
continue to farm the land and to continue to access the land.
Panel has assessed the Amendment against the principles of net community benefit
and sustainable development, as set out in Clause
71.02-3 (Integrated decision
making) of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment, observations from site visits, and
submissions,
evidence and other material presented to it during the Hearing. All submissions
and materials have been considered
by the Panel in reaching its conclusions,
regardless of whether they are specifically mentioned in the Report.
This Report deals with the issues under the following headings:
1.4 Versions of the Amendment
Panel directed Council to circulate a ‘Day 1’ version of the
Amendment documentation before the commencement of the
Hearing. Council
circulated Day 1 Amendment documents (Document 3).
The Day 1 version incorporated changes in response to submissions, including
changes that address issues raised by NECMA, NEW, Department
of Transport and
Planning, EPA and CFA.
These changes were not contested during the Hearing and the Panel supports
the changes in the Day 1 version, which provide greater
clarity and improve the
operation of the planning provisions. For transparency, the Panel has prepared
a track change version of
the exhibited policies and Design and Development
Overlay (DDO) schedules which include the Council’s changes and some
typographical
corrections.
The Panel’s recommended version of the planning policy and DDO
schedules is in Appendix C.
1.5 Limitations
One submitter raised
concerns with potential rate increases and the windfall gains tax. These
matters are not within the Panel’s
2 Strategic issues
2.1 Planning context
chapter identifies planning context relevant to the Amendment.
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Municipal Planning Strategy
- Clause 02.03-1
Planning Policy Framework
11.01-1S (Settlement), 11.01-1R (Settlement – Hume), 11.01-1L01
(Glenrowan), 11.01-1L-02 (Milawa) and 11.01-1L-03
13.02-1S (Bushfire Planning)
14.01-1S (Protection of agricultural land), 14.01-1L (Dwellings and subdivision
in rural areas)
15.01-3S (Subdivision design)
16.01-3S (Rural residential development)
18.01-3S (Sustainable and safe transport), 18.02-1S (Walking)
Other planning strategies and policies
- Glenrowan
Township Development Plan, Mesh Planning, revised November 2016
- Glenrowan
Bushfire Assessment, Terramatrix, January 2014
Township Development Plan, Mesh Planning, September 2015
- Oxley Township
Development Plan, Mesh Planning, revised December 2016
Planning scheme provisions
- Low Density
Residential Zone
- Rural Living
- Design and
Development Overlay
Planning scheme amendments
- Wangaratta
Amendments C66, C67 and C68
Ministerial directions
- Ministerial
Direction on the Form and Content of Planning Schemes
- Ministerial
Direction 1 (Potentially Contaminated Land
- Ministerial
Direction 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments)
Planning practice notes
Practice Note 30: Potentially Contaminated Land, July 2021
Practice Note 37: Rural Residential Development, February 2025
Practice Note 42: Applying the Rural Zones, June 2024
Practice Note 46: Strategic Assessment Guidelines, September 2022
Practice Note 92: Managing buffers for land use compatibility, February
2.2 Strategic justification
(i) Submissions
submitted the Strategy has been completed to investigate and provide guidance in
relation to both the future supply of LDRZ
and RLZ land and the development of
the existing supply of land. It said that the Amendment seeks to create
opportunities within
the rural settlements of the municipality within Milawa,
Oxley and the King Valley. It also seeks to delete reference to future
investigations for rural living within Glenrowan, as this is no longer supported
by planning policy and the updated bushfire assessments
that informed the
Strategy, which seeks to direct growth to low risk townships within the
municipality.
In its opening submission at the Hearing, Council noted the majority of the
housing in the municipality is located within the urban
areas of Wangaratta with
low density and rural living lots in other towns. The largest townships are
Glenrowan, Oxley, Milawa and
Moyhu. Council submitted that the effect of the
Amendment will be as follows:
Milawa triangle,
with an area of 12 hectares will yield approximately 50 lots
Oxley, with an
area of 48hectares will yield approximately 78 lots
The rezoning of
in Oxley reflects the existing subdivision and development of this area, with no
further subdivision or development
The removal of
the designation from the land (for future investigations) and deletion of
Schedule 7 to the Development Plan Overlay
(DPO) mean that there is no further
subdivision or development of the 246 Old Hume Highway,
Council submitted the Amendment had fully considered
environmental factors in areas of future development and directs growth to areas
of low bushfire risk and to that generally free of riverine flooding, avoids
productive agricultural land and seeks to maximise retention
of vegetation.
Council submitted the Amendment has strategic justification and is supported
by planning policy. It said the Explanatory Report identifies
that the planning
scheme at Clause 71.02-3:
sets a clear hierarchy of policy settings when undertaking integrated
decision making in bushfire prone areas.
It included the following extract of Clause 71.02-3 and emphasised the last
Planning and responsible authorities should endeavour to integrate the range
of planning policies relevant to the issues to be determined
and balance
conflicting objectives in favour of net community benefit and sustainable
development for the benefit of present and
future generations.
However, in
bushfire affected areas, planning and responsible authorities must prioritise
the protection of human life over all other
policy considerations
Council submitted the proposed zones and overlays were consistent with the
relevant Planning Practice Notes and the Practitioner’s
Victoria’s Planning Schemes (the Practitioner’s Guide).
At the Directions Hearing and during the course of the Hearing, the Panel
asked questions of Council about consistency with the Practitioner’s
in relation to the proposed changes to the local policy (to satisfy
NECMA’s submission) and the use of schedules to the
DDO. Council
submitted that the Amendment is consistent with the Practitioner’s Guide,
The land in
Oxley is currently subject to flooding controls and that the inclusion of a
strategy in the policy that seeks to discourage
more intensive residential uses
is consistent with Clause 13.03-1S (Floodplain management).
Oxley and Milawa
have separate and distinct characteristics that warrant the use of schedules to
the DDO and that based on the purpose
of the overlay, which is to enable
specific development outcomes and recognise the specific characteristics of each
place, that the
use of individual schedules is warranted.
Range Estate Pty Ltd (Warby Range Estate) was the only submitter that opposed
the Amendment in terms of its strategic justification.
It submitted that the
Amendment failed to consider all of Glenrowan and “
zeroed in on one
”. It submitted that the land at 246 Old Hume Highway,
Glenrowan was identified as being strategically located to provide for
residential development by the Glenrowan Township Development Plan, 2019 and the
Glenrowan Bushfire Assessment, 2014.
It submitted that DPO7 should be retained to facilitate future development of
the land and that services including roads and reticulated
water supply have
been designed and provided in anticipation of both precincts within the land
being developed.
(ii) Discussion
The Panel is satisfied that the Amendment is
supported by, and implements, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy
The Amendment is consistent with Clause 11 (Settlement) in that it puts in
place the planning to anticipate and respond to the needs
of existing and future
communities. It will ensure the townships are developed in accordance with the
Hume Regional Growth Plan
and that the relevant planning provisions will
consider the specific context and framework. Clause 11.01-1R (Settlement-Hume)
to facilitate growth in the larger regional cities, but to foster the
sustainability of small rural settlements.
The Amendment updates the existing township plans at Clauses 11.01-1L-01,
11.01-1L-02 and 11.01-1L-03 to make changes to the precincts
identified for
short and long term rezonings. In doing so, the Amendment is consistent with
Clause 11.01-1S in that it directs growth
into existing settlements, it
preserves and protects features of rural land, and minimises exposure to natural
hazards, including
increased risks due to climate change.
A detailed discussion regarding bushfire is in Chapter 3 of this report, but
the Panel agrees that the Amendment supports the objectives
of Clause 13.02-1S
Bushfire – Settlement Planning).
The Amendment is consistent with Clause 14 (Natural Resource Management) and
the Panel notes that the Strategy seeks to direct growth
and the rezoning of
land to existing settlements and to protect productive agricultural land. It is
also noted that the Department
of Energy, Environment and Climate Action
supported the Amendment.
The land proposed for rezoning in Milawa is generally not classified as
agricultural land and the existing subdivision pattern supports
lifestyles. The Panel notes that in Oxley, the land is currently used for
agriculture, and that it is identified as ‘high
versatility’ in the
background document An Assessment of the versatility of Agricultural Land in
the Rural City of Wangaratta,
DNRE, April 2000 but that the land to the north,
west and south of the town, the agricultural land has a rating of ‘very
versatility’.
Council seeks to redirect growth to the east of Oxley, where there are
locational advantages in terms of proximity to the town and
infrastructure, and lower fire risk.
The Amendment is consistent with Clause 15 (Built environment and heritage).
The new policy Clause 15.01-3L-02 introduces design
standards and considerations
that will apply to all land zoned low density residential and rural living. The
policy will provide
guidance in terms of vegetation, road networks, bushfire and
The Amendment is consistent with Clause 16 (Residential development) and more
specifically Clause 16.01-3S (Rural residential development)
where the objective
is to identify land suitable for rural residential development. The Strategy
and the proposed rezoning and planning
controls and policies are consistent with
strategies to demonstrate the need and identify locations for rural residential
development,
encourage the consolidation of existing settlements, protect high
quality agricultural land, and protect existing landscape values
environmental qualities.
The rezoning of land in the Amendment is consistent with Planning Practice
Note: 37 – Rural Residential Development for the
following reasons:
identified as being suitable to accommodate rural residential development has
been sited to minimise land use conflicts between
agricultural uses, avoid
impacts to primary production or environmental impacts and ensures growth is
directed to locations with
a lower risk of natural hazards.
The Strategy
includes a strategic and planning context, land supply and capacity analysis and
demand assessment and in turn identifies
future areas as candidates for rezoning
and growth.
As discussed
above, the Amendment is consistent with the state, regional and local planning
Rezoning the
land will consolidate existing townships and is on land that can be efficiently
serviced at an acceptable and sustainable
community costs. Costs will be
imposed on subdivisions in the Milawa triangle and in Oxley to provide
reticulated services, however
this is not uncommon and will not impose undue
limitations on the realisation of the strategic objectives for those areas.
is no other impediment to these services being provided to the land.
It does not
affect land that has been identified as having a valued landscape character or
heritage value.
version of the Amendment responds to the EPA’s comments and in turn
ensures that compliance with relevant separation
distances is achieved.
proposed for rezoning has been identified as being of a lower risk of natural
hazards, including bushfire. The Panel is
satisfied that the Strategy is
underpinned by a hazard assessment consistent with the Practice Note 37 which
requires that “strategic
planning proposals should ensure that hazard
mitigation, including prevention, is addressed proactively at the earliest
opportunity,
rather than deferring to statutory planning
. The Amendment is consistent with the Planning Scheme
and the Practice Note identifies that “
the planning scheme directs that
life safety prevails over other policy objectives in bushfire affected
The rezoning of land in Oxley to rural living is
consistent with Planning Practice Note: 42 Applying the Rural Zones. It
the existing subdivision and development pattern and there is no
expectation for future subdivision of these lots. In turn, the
Rural Living
Zone is the most appropriate zone as it reflects the physical attributes of the
land and the existing lot size and land
use patterns. The RLZ is a zone that
caters for residential use in a rural setting, which accurately reflects the
existing conditions
of this land.
The Amendment is consistent with the Practitioner’s Guide for the
following reasons:
The proposed
schedules to the DDO seek to control development of the land that is subject to
the provision.
The objectives
of the proposed schedules seek to guide subdivision that is consistent with the
respective context, including in terms
of existing character, and in the Oxley
context, in that it provides a transition to the surrounding farming land. The
also seek to prioritise the retention of native and significant
vegetation and ensure that subdivisions are adequately serviced.
Each schedule
contains a series of detailed requirements to achieve consistency with the
objectives. This is consistent with the
approach detailed in the guide where a
schedule may provide more specific local objectives, purposes or requirements
for specified
The application
of the RLZ is appropriate in the context where farming is subordinate to the
existing land use and subdivision.
The application
of the LDRZ is appropriate to apply to areas on the fringe of townships and
where the schedule places restrictions
on lot sizes depending on
serviceability.
The proposed
changes to the local policy to respond to NECMA’s requirements, express
local objectives and will provide specific
local guidance. The additional
strategy is consistent with, but does not repeat, the objectives of Clause
13.03-1S. The existing
lot sizes prevent further subdivision, and the policy
seeks to discourage more intensive residential accommodation.
Amendment will successfully implement existing policy objectives and strategies
and build on these through changes at a local
level. Consistent with the
Strategy, it will provide for long term planning of townships, with future
directions guided by and informed
consideration of these planning policies and a
balancing of objectives to deliver sustainable development for present and
generations. The overarching objective has been to prioritise the
protection of human life over all other policy considerations.
As such, the
Amendment is consistent with Clause 71.02-3 (Integrated decision making) of the
Planning Scheme.
(iii) Conclusions
For the reasons set out in this report, the Panel
concludes that the Amendment:
is supported by,
and implements, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy Framework
is consistent
with the relevant Ministerial Directions and Practice Notes
is well founded
and strategically justified
should proceed
subject to addressing the more specific issues raised in submissions as
discussed in the following chapters.
3.1 Strategic approach to the Amendment
(i) The issues
issues are whether:
the Amendment is
consistent with Planning Scheme provisions relating to bushfire
strategic justification for the Council’s approach.
(ii) Background
The Glenrowan Bushfire Assessment, City of
Wangaratta, 2014 is a background document in the planning scheme which informed
the Glenrowan
Township Development, 2016. Amendment VC140 was gazetted on 12
December 2017 to implement land use planning recommendations of the
Royal Commission. It introduced Clause 13.02-1S to the Victoria Planning
Provisions which prioritises the protection of
human life above other policy
considerations. The objective of Clause 13.02-1S is to “
strengthen the
resilience of settlements and communities to bushfire through risk-based
planning that prioritises the protection of
Strategies of Clause 13.02-1S that relate to the protection of human life
Prioritising the protection of human life over all other policy
considerations.
Directing population growth and development to low risk locations and
ensuring the availability of, and safe access to, areas where
human life can be
better protected from the effects of bushfire.
Reducing the vulnerability of communities to bushfire through the
consideration of bushfire risk in decision making at all stages
of the planning
Previous bushfire assessments, including the Glenrowan assessment, were
undertaken prior to VC140.
In accordance with the requirements of Clause 13.02-S, a strategic bushfire
risk assessment was undertaken and included the following
steps in determining
low risk locations for settlement growth:
landscape scale bushfire (municipal and township wide) assessment (up to 15kms
wide). High risk areas not suitable for rezoning
identified.
localised bushfire assessment (up to 1 km from each low and moderate risk
towns). Bushfire risk aspects are key to identifying
lower risk growth
directions. See graphic 1.
Development of a suite of design principles and bushfire protection measures for
any area selected for future rezoning / redevelopment.
This bushfire
risk assessment informed the Strategy.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Council relied on the expert evidence of Mr
Matthews, but in submissions noted that the Amendment:
prioritises the protection of human life over all other considerations and
the areas of Milawa and Oxley identified for rezoning have
been selected as they
are considered to be low risk from a bushfire and flood perspective.
Mr Matthew’s evidence was that the Amendment is generally well aligned
to the bushfire planning objectives of the Planning Policy
Framework and the
Strategic Bushfire Assessment prepared by his office (which informed the
Strategy). The Strategic Bushfire Assessment
was a municipal wide assessment
and assesses the bushfire hazard based on landscape conditions, local conditions
and neighbourhood conditions.
an assessment of alternative low risk locations for settlement growth at
municipal, local and neighbourhood scales.
informed by consultation with the relevant fire authority early in the process
to gather their recommendations and implement appropriate
bushfire protection
developed in response to the settlement planning strategies of Clause
The Strategy excludes the townships with the highest
bushfire risk from being rezoned, which includes Cheshunt, Eldorado, Glenrowan,
Peechelba and Whitfield. It prioritises rezoning in townships that have the
lowest bushfire risk, being Milawa, Oxley and the south-east
precinct of
Wangaratta.
Mr Matthew’s evidence was that the bushfire assessment was consistent
with the state policy approach, where it is necessary
to look at the entire
municipality and once that has been done it is not necessary to undertake a
local assessment (where it is identified
as being high risk and discounted at a
strategic level). Whilst the bushfire assessment was prepared prior to the
Settlement Planning
at the Bushfire Interface Design Guidelines, Department of
Environment, Land Water and Planning, 2020 the assessment aligns with
Guidelines.
In opening submissions at the Hearing, the CFA submitted that it is unusual
for the CFA to appear at Panel Hearings in support of
Amendments. It noted that
Council had engaged with the CFA early in the process in the preparation of the
Amendment and that it
supports Council’s “
” and how it has addressed the policy framework. It submitted
that it hopes that this approach will inform a municipal wide
approach across
the state. The CFA submitted it supported Mr Matthew’s work.
The CFA identified the various bushfire risks and hazards across the
municipality, including in recent fires. It submitted that it
supported the
bushfire assessment that informed the Strategy and that it demonstrated how
Clause 13.02-1S has guided development
in consideration of the following
bushfire consideration
alternative
locations for development
availability of
safer areas
road layout
protection measures.
It also submitted that it was satisfied that
the Amendment, and while the bushfire assessment was prepared prior to, it
the Design Guidelines Settlement Planning at the Bushfire Interface,
DTP July 2020. Further, the proposed schedules to the DDO provide
detail and demonstrate that basic vegetation principles can be implemented.
It submitted that:
the bushfire policy response demonstrates that risks are reduced, locations
for future development have been identified appropriately
and future rezoning
and development of land that include relevant bushfire mitigation to build
community resilience to bushfire.
The CFA recommended the controls provide for on-going management requirements
for vegetation. Mr Matthews’ evidence was that
the proposed controls
should deal with vegetation management at the bushfire interface rather than
within the settlements themselves.
However, in its response to Council’s
Part C submission, CFA submitted that it was supportive of the proposed
schedules to
the DDO and submitted that it does not seek any changes.
Warby Range Estate submitted that the 2014 Bushfire Assessment identified the
Glenrowan bushfire risk, and its assessment was based
on the same dot points
that are set out at Clause 13.02-1S. It submitted that a local assessment is
required to assess specific
characteristics, and whilst acknowledging that
Glenrowan was a high risk location, it submitted that the future subdivision and
development
of the land would provide a buffer between the Warby Ranges and the
township and “
significantly enhance the safety of the
Warby Range Estate’s submission to the exhibition included a report
prepared by SPIIRE and a bushfire risk assessment prepared
by Practical Ecology.
The Bushfire Risk Assessment, Practical Ecology 2022 submitted with the Warby
Range Estate submission included
the following observations:
One of the key strategies of Clause 13.02-1S is assessing alternative low
risk locations for settlement growth on a regional, municipal,
settlement, local
and neighbourhood basis. The report prepared by Nexus Planning has
comprehensively assessed multiple townships
at the municipal scale in order to
comply with this strategy.
The consequence of this is that some townships are considered of higher risk
due to the availability of alternative lower risk locations
municipality. This is appropriate in accordance with the implications of Clause
13.02-1S at this scale further analysis
is required at the local scale of the
planning scheme to determine the true bushfire risk to a specific site, which
the following
assessment aims to address.
(iv) Discussion
The Victoria Planning Provisions (VPP) provide very
clear guidance and a policy framework in relation to bushfire and planning.
71.02-3 requires integrated decision making and unequivocally states that
bushfire affected areas, planning and responsible authorities must
prioritise the protection of human life over all other policy
considerations
The Amendment satisfies this approach and the objective at Clause 13.02-1S.
The Strategy has been informed by a bushfire assessment
that assesses bushfire
risk at a municipal level and directs population growth to low risk
In doing so, the Strategy is consistent with the protection of human life
strategies of protection of human life. The Amendment appropriately
prioritises
the protection of human life over all other policy considerations, directs
population growth and development to low risk
locations to ensure safe access
where human life can be better protected, and considers bushfire risk at the
strategic planning stage
which has the effect of reducing the vulnerability of
communities to bushfire. The Amendment appropriately limits the growth in
Glenrowan and redirects growth in Oxley.
The Amendment is consistent with Planning Practice Note 64: Local planning
for bushfire protection. As required by this Practice
Note, the Strategy
addresses bushfire risk and determines that the changes sought through the
rezoning will not increase the risk
to life, property and community
infrastructure from bushfire. In accordance with the Practice Note and
consistent with Clause 13.02-1,
Council has engaged extensively with the CFA in
preparation of the Amendment. Of note, the CFA is wholly supportive of the
where it referred to the Council’s “
” to policy and its view that this approach should inform
other strategic planning work across the state.
Despite the submissions by Warby Range Estate, the Panel also notes that the
bushfire assessment lodged with the submission also notes
that the approach
adopted by the Strategy accords with the Clause 13.02-1S. The Panel accepts Mr
Matthew’s evidence that the
proper approach to bushfire planning is to
undertake a municipal wide assessment and direct growth to low risk locations.
13.02-1S does not require further assessments for areas that have been
classified as high risk because of its approach to risk-based
The proposed wording of the schedules and the vegetation management
requirements included at Clause 53.02 (Bushfire planning) of the
effectively provide the framework to manage vegetation.
(v) Conclusions
The Panel concludes:
Amendment is consistent with planning scheme provisions relating to
The Amendment is
strategically justified and correctly prioritises the protection of human
3.2 Warby Range Estate
(i) The issue
issue is whether the existing DPO7 should be retained to allow for the potential
rezoning of land known as Precinct H(b) in the
Glenrowan Township Development
(ii) Background
Wangaratta Planning Scheme Amendment C66 introduced
the Glenrowan Township Development Plan, 2016 into the planning scheme.
exhibition of the Amendment, it was split into two parts. Amendment
introduced key recommendations from the Glenrowan Township
Development Plan and was approved with changes and gazetted on 15 June
Amendment C66
related specifically to 184-256 Old Hume Highway,
Glenrowan (known as Precinct H(a) and (b)) of the Glenrowan Township Development
Plan. Amendment C66
involved the re-exhibition of planning controls for
Precinct H and an expansion of the Precinct. Council advised the Panel that
Amendment was split following the owner of Precinct H lodging a submission
objecting to the original Amendment to avoid referring
the matter to a Panel to
consider one submission. Amendment C66
was resolved through negotiation
and an agreed outcome by Council, the then Department of Environment, Land,
Water and Planning and
the landowner.
The Amendment rezoned the eastern part of the property to Rural Living Zone
and applied DPO7 to the entire property.
Council issued a planning permit (18/160) on 8 July 2019 for subdivision of
the land in three stages (for Precinct H(a)).
Clause 11.01-1L-01 as it relates to Precinct H(b) includes the strategy
Protect the primacy of agricultural uses in Precinct H(b) until it is
considered for rezoning for rural living.
The map to the Clause includes Precinct H(b) within the rural township
boundary and shows it as a ‘future investigation area’.
The Amendment proposes to exclude Precinct H(b) from the township boundary,
delete the ‘future investigation area’ from
the map at Clause
11.01-1L-01, amend the strategies that relate to the precinct and delete
(iii) Submissions
In relation to Glenrowan, Council submitted that the
municipal wide bushfire assessment that informed the Strategy identified
as a high risk township and as such the:
further rezoning of land was not considered appropriate as there are
alternative locations (towns) that were considered more suitable
to accommodate
population increase and support the protection of human life.
Having considered the reports lodged with the Warby Range Estate submission,
Mr Matthew’s evidence was that the requested changes
should not be
supported for a range of reasons, including that:
It undermines the robust approach adopted by the Rural City of Wangaratta in
undertaking a municipal-wide assessment of the opportunities
and constraints for
the provision of additional rural lifestyle development.
Warby Range Estate noted that the eastern part of the land at 246 Old Hume
Highway, Glenrowan is being developed and that the roads
and reticulated water
supply system has been constructed and sized for the ultimate development of the
entire site, including the
western part (which is the subject of the Amendment).
It submitted that:
These properties were identified as Precinct 2, being strategically and
logically located to provide for future rural residential
development of
Glenrowan in both the Glenrowan Township Development Plan (2019) and Glenrowan
Bushfire Assessment (2014).
Council supported the rezoning of this Precinct for rural residential
development on the basis they provided a buffer/shield between
the built up
areas of Glenrowan and the rural areas where the threat of bushfire was
greatest. The eastern portion was zoned with
the balance (subject site) to be
rezoned once the eastern portion was mostly developed. Fourteen of the
seventeen lots have been
developed and all are now sold. There are only 3
remaining lots to be developed (anticipate completion by early 2025).
(iv) Discussion
The Panel has concluded that Council’s
approach in preparation of this Amendment is correct and strategically
justified, including
how it has weighted bushfire above other policy
considerations. There is no dispute between any party that Precinct H(b) or
more broadly is a high risk fire location, and this was identified in
the 2014 bushfire assessment and the Glenrowan Township Development
The policy framework that currently applies to Precinct H(b) does not
guarantee that the land will be rezoned as it identifies it
as a ‘future
investigation area’. In the intervening period since the approval of
Amendment C66
, there has been a clear planning policy framework that
relates to bushfire. If the overlay control is retained and should the land
permitted for rezoning, this would be inconsistent with the objective and
strategies of Clause 11.02-1S.
The Panel accepts that the landowner has proceeded with the subdivision of
Precinct H(a) on the assumption that the rezoning of Precinct
H(b) would follow,
however there was never any certainty that this would occur. The planning
authority is required to prepare and
Amendment and the Panel is required to
consider an Amendment based on the planning controls and policies of the day.
It is on this
basis that the Panel concludes that the Amendment as it relates to
Precinct H(b) is strategically justified.
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes:
Amendment as it relates to 246 Old Hume Highway, Glenrowan (Precinct H(b)) is
strategically justified.
3.3 Battle axe blocks
(i) The issue
issue is whether it is appropriate to include policy and controls to discourage
battle axe blocks.
(ii) Background
The Amendment proposes to introduce policy at Clause
15.01-3L (Subdivision Design) for land in the LDRZ, RLZ and where DDO8 and 9
apply to avoid battle axe style access to lots.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Council submitted that the policy and controls seek
to discourage the creation of battle axe blocks, a position that is derived from
the Strategy and is based on the bushfire assessment.
Mr Matthew’s evidence in relation to battle axe lots was as
My concerns with battleaxe lots in bushfire prone areas include the
39.1. The access handle to these lots is often long and narrow, which can
significantly constrain access by firefighting and other
emergency service
vehicles – particularly where fencing and vegetation encroach into the
carriageway.
39.2. This subdivision layout often results in dwellings being sited some
distance from the public road.
39.3. Battleaxe lots typically preclude the capacity for the provision of a
second point of access or egress.
39.4. They may limit the ability of emergency responders to visually identify
the dwelling’s location from the public road or
Concerns with battleaxe subdivisions were also raised by the CFA during my
consultation with them in the preparation of the Strategic
Assessment.
The inclusion of this design principle as a strategy in the Planning Policy
Framework does not preclude a site-specific merits assessment
of a battleaxe
subdivision design and in my opinion the strategy should be retained.
Mr Morton submitted that each subdivision proposal should be site specific
and determined on its own merits. He submitted that “
subdivision design layouts, which includes a battle-axe block, would have a
wider entrance than some streets in Milawa,
Oxley and Wangaratta
(iv) Discussion
As noted by Mr Morton and Mr Matthews, the policy
and controls seek to ‘avoid’ the creation of battle axe blocks, but
do not prohibit them and allow for consideration on an individual basis.
There are sound bushfire planning reasons why battle axe blocks should be
avoided in particular circumstances, and the Panel accepts
Mr Matthew’s
evidence in this regard. No change is required in terms of the drafting of the
policy and schedules in relation
to battle axe blocks.
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes:
No change is
required to the drafting of Clause 15.01-3L and the schedules to the Design and
Development Overlay that relate to battle
4 Other issues
The issues are
access and connectivity in the Milawa triangle.
Walking path in
Continued use of
the land for farming.
4.1 Servicing, access and connectivity in the Milawa
(i) The issue
issue is whether the provisions applying to the Milawa triangle are
appropriate.
(ii) Submissions
Mr Morton submitted that on the basis that the
Milawa triangle will be rezoned to low density residential there is no need for
and pedestrian connections or a need to provide sewerage to lots. He also
submitted that in not allowing 0.4 hectare lots without
sewerage connection,
that it will “
stifle development
”. He submitted:
Unlike Council, I have spoken to some property owners in the “Milawa
Triangle”. Without exception, they cannot understand
why 0.4 hectare lots
without sewerage connection are not permitted.
Faced with the enormous cost of compulsory self funded sewerage connection
they probably would not proceed with subdivision.
Council submitted that the need for connectivity in the Milawa triangle is
underpinned by the proposed increase in density that will
occur because of the
proposed rezoning. It submitted that:
Indicative road links are often illustrated on strategic plans, and the
proposed layout shown in the DDO8 accommodates connectivity,
minimises access
points onto a Significant Municipal Road and provides multiple exit points in an
emergency situation. It also addresses
fragmentation of land ownership in an
‘infill type’ situation.
In relation to proposed lot sizes, Council submitted that:
Development at the scale of 0.2 ha requires reticulated sewerage connection
under the subdivision requirements of the zone (32.03
Low Density Residential
Zone and 32.03-3 Subdivision). Proposed changes to the LDRZ Schedule 1
doesn’t vary this requirement.
The proposed DDO8 envisages a scale of
development density between 0.2 and 0.25 ha which doesn’t provide
sufficient capacity
for onsite sewerage detention, therefore its appropriate to
connect to reticulated services.
NEW provided the following additional comments in response to Council’s
Part C submission, which relates to the Milawa triangle
and also to Oxley (the
Panel invited submissions from other parties following the issue of
Council’s Part C submission). NEW
does not currently provide reticulated
water services to any areas of the Milawa township. Reticulated water supply in
of the township is currently provided by an independent
co-operative.
NEW has capability within the existing water treatment plant (WTP) and clear
water storage to accommodate the additional lots that
will be covered by the
DDO9, but has no plans to provide reticulated water supply services to DDO8 or
DDO9 without demonstration
of significant demand for NEW to provide reticulated
water supply.
As advised in our September 2024 submission to Council which was considered
by the Panel, sewerage infrastructure is capable of being
provided to the Milawa
Triangle to service additional lots of between 0.2 and 0.25ha as envisioned by
the DDO8 but would attract
additional negotiated New Customer Contributions
(NCC’s) or another form of contribution mechanism in addition to
standard NCC’s to facilitate the servicing of the proposed
rezoned area.
NEW would require the developer to provide a sewer servicing strategy for all
new subdivisions of 3 lots or more within DDO8 and DDO9
and has requested that
this provision be included by Council in the planning scheme.
Any requests by a developer to connect to sewer in DDO8 or DDO9 would be
subject to NEW’s standard development procedures for
determining the
suitability of connections and sufficient capacity in the network.
(iii) Discussion
The proposed size of lots in the Milawa triangle is
0.2 to 0.25 hectares in DDO8 is consistent with the lot sizes proposed in the
Whilst the Strategy identifies water supply to be a “
weakness rather than a specific constraint
” it notes that the land is
in a suitable location for growth and that the establishment of reticulated
water should be further
investigated.
It is true that Clause 32.03 (Low Density Residential Zone) requires the
provision of reticulated sewerage on lots of 0.2 hectares
and that Council is
not proposing to vary this requirement through the Amendment, including in the
schedule to the zone. It is also
the case that lots of this size cannot
adequately accommodate on-site waste treatment.
The provision of reticulated services will impose costs on developers, but it
is required to facilitate expansion of the towns in
a strategic manner. As Mr
Morton submitted, the uptake to subdivide land may take time to occur, however,
the Strategy forecasts
growth over a considerable period. Although the Strategy
identifies that growth will occur over the short term, the short to medium
timeframe is over a 15 year period.
The Milawa triangle is a relatively large area of land, and it is appropriate
to provide indicative through road connections on the
plan and as the Council
submits, has the benefits of providing connectivity through the land and two
connecting roads, minimises
direct access points onto these roads and provides
multiple exit points in an emergency situation.
The Panel is satisfied that the proposed controls for the Milawa triangle
will deliver a well resolved outcome, with consideration
required to be given to
all relevant factors at the time of subdivision. It will deliver the outcomes
proposed in the Strategy.
(iv) Conclusion
The Panel concludes that no change is required to
the proposed provisions for the Milawa triangle.
4.2 Walking path in Oxley
(i) The issue
issue is how the Amendment will affect the walking path shown on the Oxley
Township Development Plan.
(ii) Submissions
Council submitted that the location of the walking
path on public land along the King River interface in Oxley remained the same as
it did in the Oxley Township Development Plan (introduced through Amendment
C67). It submitted that as part of this Amendment, there
is no change to the
location of the walking path or the indicative connectivity in Precinct D.
Extract from
the Oxley Township Plan in Clause 11.01-1L-03
Source: Council’s Part B submission
Mr Barclay submitted that the area is unique and is subject to erosion and
flooding and raised concerns regarding the potential impacts
from a walking
track along the King River. Mr Barclay currently maintains the reserve, based
on an existing lease arrangement.
(iii) Discussion
The Amendment proposes no change to the Oxley
Township Plan as it relates to trails or paths.
The Panel in Amendment C67 considered submissions raised in relation to the
location of the path and concluded:
The Panel concludes that the post exhibition Amendment documents have
generally rectified mapping anomalies and pedestrian and bike
paths (or other
associated infrastructure) are delivered through mechanisms other than the
Amendment. What the Oxley TDP does is
provide guidance as to where resources for
open space infrastructure should be focused in the future.
(iv) Finding
The Panel concludes that no change to the walking
path is required in the Amendment.
4.3 Continued use of land for farming
(i) The issue
issue is whether the proposed rezoning will affect the ability to continue to
farm nearby land.
(ii) Submissions
Submitter 15 was supportive of the Amendment but
raised the ‘right to farm’ if the rezoning proceeds.
Council submitted that the rezoning of land in precinct F of the Oxley
Township, does not automatically mean any existing land use
will change. It
said existing uses can continue, and further subdivision and development will be
assessed on individual merit as
part of a planning permit application.
(iii) Discussion
The VPP encourages protection of agricultural land
in terms of use and potential conflicts with residential uses. DDO9 also
objectives requiring that proposed subdivisions respond, and respect
adjoining farming land and the proposal includes siting larger
minimum lot sizes
of 1 hectare closest to the farming land.
(iv) Conclusion
The Panel concludes the Amendment adequately
considers the interface with farming land and agricultural uses will continue to
A Parties to the Panel Hearing
Represented by
Rural City of Wangaratta
Meghan Kelly (Strategy Planner) assisted by Olivia Baker (Strategic
Planner), who called expert evidence on bushfire planning from
Anthony Matthews
of Nexus Planning.
Country Fire Authority
Darren Viney and Luci Johnson
Robert Morton
Warby Range Estate
Richard Hughes
Neil Barclay
Appendix B Document list
Description
Provided by
Panel Directions and Hearing Timetable (version 1)
Planning Panels Victoria (PPV)
Response to Panel Directions on behalf of Warby Range Estate
Richard Hughes
Day 1 documents
Rural City of Wangaratta (Council)
Details for accompanied site inspection
Warby Range Estate
Part A submission, including attachments
Expert witness statement, Anthony Matthews, Nexus Planning
Neill and Lynette Barclay
Amended expert witness statement, Anthony Matthews, Nexus Planning
Part B submission, including attachments
Warby Range Estate
Robert Morton
submission, including attachments
Reply submission
North East Water
Reply submission
Reply submission
Robert Morton
Appendix C Panel
recommended version of the planning policy and DDO schedules
A11.01 VICTORIA
To facilitate the sustainable growth and development of Victoria and deliver
choice and opportunity for all Victorians through a network
of settlements.
Develop sustainable communities through a settlement framework offering
convenient access to jobs, services, infrastructure and community
facilities.
Focus investment and growth in places of state significance in Metropolitan
Melbourne and the major regional cities of Ballarat, Bendigo,
Geelong, Horsham,
Latrobe City, Mildura, Shepparton, Wangaratta, Warrnambool and Wodonga.
Support sustainable development of the regional centres of Ararat, Bacchus
Marsh, Bairnsdale, Benalla, Castlemaine, Colac, Echuca,
Gisborne, Hamilton,
Kyneton, Leongatha, Maryborough, Portland, Sale, Swan Hill, Warragul/Drouin and
Ensure regions and their settlements are planned in accordance with their
relevant regional growth plan.
Guide the structure, functioning and character of each settlement taking into
account municipal and regional contexts and frameworks.
Create and reinforce settlement boundaries.
Provide for growth in population and development of facilities and services
across a regional or sub-regional network.
Plan for development and investment opportunities along existing and planned
transport infrastructure.
Promote transport, communications and economic linkages between settlements
through the identification of servicing priorities in
regional land use
Strengthen transport links on national networks for the movement of
commodities.
Deliver networks of high quality integrated settlements that have a strong
identity and sense of place, are prosperous and are sustainable
Building on
strengths and capabilities of each region across Victoria to respond sustainably
to population growth and changing environments.
settlements that will support resilient communities and their ability to adapt
and change.
strategic objectives to achieve improved land use and development outcomes at a
regional, catchment and local level.
Preserving and
protecting features of rural land and natural resources and features to enhance
their contribution to settlements and
landscapes.
Encouraging an
integrated planning response between settlements in regions and in adjoining
regions and states in accordance with
the relevant regional growth
Providing for appropriately located supplies of
residential, commercial, and industrial land across a region, sufficient to meet
needs in accordance with the relevant regional growth plan.
transport network connections in and between regional cities, towns and
Integrating the management of water resources into the
urban environment in a way that supports water security, public health,
environment
and amenity outcomes.
exposure to natural hazards, including increased risks due to climate
Contributing to
net zero greenhouse gas emissions through renewable energy infrastructure and
energy efficient urban layout and urban
a form and density of settlements that supports healthy, active and sustainable
Limit urban sprawl and direct growth into existing settlements.
Promote and capitalise on opportunities for urban renewal and infill
redevelopment.
Develop compact urban areas that are based around existing or planned
activity centres to maximise accessibility to facilities and
Ensure retail, office-based employment, community facilities and services are
concentrated in central locations.
Ensure land that may be required for future urban expansion is not
compromised.
Support metropolitan and regional climate change adaption and mitigation
Policy documents
Consider as relevant:
Highlands Regional Growth Plan
(Victorian Government, 2014)
G21 Regional
Growth Plan
(Geelong Region Alliance, 2013)
Regional Growth Plan
(Victorian Government, 2014)
Great South
Coast Regional Growth Plan
(Victorian Government, 2014)
Hume Regional
Growth Plan
(Victorian Government, 2014)
Loddon Mallee
North Regional Growth Plan
(Victorian Government, 2014)
Loddon Mallee
South Regional Growth Plan
(Victorian Government, 2014)
Southern Mallee Regional Growth Plan
(Victorian Government, 2014)
Melbourne 2017-2050: Metropolitan Planning Strategy
(Department of
Environment, Land, Water and Planning, 2017)
Melbourne 2017-2050: Addendum 2019
(Department of Environment, Land, Water
and Planning, 2019)
Victoria Settlement Framework
Settlement - Hume
Facilitate growth and development specifically in the regional cities of
Shepparton, Wangaratta, Wodonga and Benalla.
Facilitate and strengthen the economic role of Seymour, while supporting
population growth.
Support growth and development in other existing urban settlements and foster
the sustainability of small rural settlements.
Support improved access to a range of employment and education opportunities,
particularly in key urban locations such as Benalla,
Seymour, Shepparton,
Wangaratta and Wodonga.
Hume Regional Growth Plan
11.01-1L-01
Proposed C83wang
Glenrowan Township
Policy application
This policy applies to all land identified in the Glenrowan Township
To preserve the landscape character and develop a sense of place unique to
Landscape strategies
Support development that enhances the landscape character of Glenrowan.
Support the use of selected native vegetation species in landscaping works to
preserve ‘bushland’ character.
Require the use of low threat vegetation in areas recognised as having high
bushfire risk.
General strategies
Require any new installations of services to be located underground.
Precinct A – Gladstone Street
Promote Precinct A as the commercial hub of Glenrowan.
Facilitate opportunities to consolidate further retail and commercial
tenancies, within Gladstone Street, in particular between Kate
Street and Ned
Direct residential development outside this precinct, unless it does not
compromise its commercial nature, such as multi-unit development
with limited
street frontage.
Support subdivision of double-fronted lots fronting Gladstone and Hill
Streets to enable commercial development to Gladstone Street
and residential
development to Hill Street.
Support development that respects existing scale and heritage character.
Encourage development on Gladstone Street to be built to the front boundary
with active edges.
Locate car parking at the rear of developments.
Precinct B – Community Hub
Direct future development of public and community facilities to Precinct
Support upgrades to public and community facilities within this precinct.
Support use and development that conserves native vegetation and avoids
adverse impact on the natural bushland character.
Precinct C – Core heritage
Maintain the ‘Siege Precinct’ as the focus of the town and
protect its immediate context.
Facilitate tourism uses and commercial development related to the
‘Siege Site’ and bushranger experience.
Precinct D – Residential
Direct residential development to Precinct D.
Facilitate the subdivision of large double-fronted lots.
Precinct E – Fire Risk Area
Avoid subdivision and new development in areas of high fire risk.
Precinct F – Beaconsfield Parade
Maintain the streetscape character of Beaconsfield Parade.
Support community and residential development that enhances the amenity of
the public realm.
Precinct G – Western Glenrowan
Discourage further subdivision.
Limit development due to servicing and drainage constraints.
Precinct H(a) – Northern Foothills - East
Encourage rural residential development with a connected street network and
quality design that protects and enhances the rural character
of Precinct H
Support smaller lots along the Old Hume Highway transitioning to larger lots
closer to the foot hills.
Protect existing servicing assets, easements and infrastructure, such as the
high pressure gas pipeline and major North East Water
Dam water supply.
Design a pedestrian and cycling pathway (linear public open space) to Mount
Glenrowan that connects with the existing networks.
Maintain the existing bushland character.
Precinct H(b) Northern Foothills – West
Protect the continued use of the precinct for agricultural uses.
Avoid subdivision of this precinct that results in any increase in
settlement.
Precinct I – Sporting precinct strategies
Re-enforce the role of Precinct I as a formal recreation area, a gateway site
and community meeting point.
Support the consolidation of recreation and sporting facilities.
Precinct J – Residential - South of Gladstone
Support subdivision of double-fronted, undeveloped lots in Precinct J, south
of Gladstone Street.
Ensure agriculture remains the key land use.
Create a pedestrian and cycling network that links the township to Fosters
Policy guideline
Consider as relevant:
development fronting Gladstone Street to not more than two
Policy documents
Consider as relevant:
Township Development Plan
(City of Wangaratta, 2019)
Bushfire Assessment
(City of Wangaratta, 2014)
Low Density
and Rural Residential Strategy
(Rural City of Wangaratta
Glenrowan Township Plan
11.01-1L-02
Proposed C83wang
Milawa Township
Policy application
This policy applies to all land identified in the Milawa Township plan.
To support development that enhances the rural character of Milawa.
General strategies
Upgrade pedestrian and cycle links.
Facilitate connectivity in subdivisions.
Require land to be adequately drained prior to rezoning or approval resulting
in intensification of development.
Direct future expansion of the township in an easterly direction to connect
with the Milawa Recreation Reserve.
Town Centre strategies – Precinct A
Create a township core along the Snow Road spine.
StrengthenthegatewaysiteatthecornerofSnowRoadandMilawa-BobinwarrahRoadbyactivating
street frontages.
Avoid direct access from Snow Road for new development.
Avoid car parking fronting Snow Road.
Low-density strategies – Precinct B, C, D, E(b) & F
Protect and reinforce the low density residential character of Precincts D
Support connected low-density development.
Support infill development in Precinct B.
Facilitate development that enhances connectivity within the precinct and
beyond, particularly north-south and east-west connections.
Avoid development that prevents future east/west connections beyond the
township boundary.
Improve connections between Milawa-Bobinawarrah Road (Factory Lane) and John
Mcaleese Park.
As development occurs in Precinct F and C, support smaller lots fronting
Milawa-Bobinawarrah Road (Factory Lane).
Support the establishment of a low density residential precinct in Precinct
E(b) with internal north-south and east-west connectivity.
Mixed use strategies – Precinct E(a)
Maintain the residential character of small lots activating
Milawa-Bobinawarrah Road (Factory Lane).
Reinforce the role of the Cheese Factory complex as an anchor location of the
Farming strategies – Precinct G
Retain the agricultural land use within the Precinct.
Design development (including subdivision) to not prejudice or adversely
impact the operation of existing businesses (such as agricultural
farm gates)
along the Snow Road.
Long Term Growth Area - Precinct H
Protect the primacy of agricultural uses in Precinct H until it is
considered and
required for rezoning to enable township
expansion towards and linking to the Milawa Recreation Reserve.
Design future subdivisions to limit direct access to the Snow Road and Oxley
Flats Road.
Policy guidelines
Consider as relevant:
Township Development Plan
(City of Wangaratta, 2016)
Low Density
and Rural Residential Strategy
(Rural City of Wangaratta
Township Plan
11.01-1L-03
Proposed C83wang
Oxley Township
Policy application
This policy applies to all land identified in the Oxley Township Plan and Low
Density and Rural Residential Strategy.
To support development that enhances the rural character of Oxley.
To enhance the amenity and accessibility to the King River.
General strategies
Support development that complements the scale and character of the
Design development to address the King River, including through the provision
of active frontages.
Support farm gate businesses and small scale tourist attractions that are
complementary to agriculture and farming.
Improve access, links and cycling connections to the King River and existing
sporting facilities, particularly from Snow Road.
Create an open space reserve along the King River reserve with a shared path
on public land.
Support the creation a shared path along Oxley Meadow Creek Road south of
Snow Road to the Oxley Recreation Reserve.
Town Centre strategies – Precinct A
Support Snow Road as the core business and tourism node in the township.
Facilitate re-subdivision and intensification of development of large
double-fronted and undeveloped sites.
Create pedestrian links from the Snow Road to the King River.
Low-density development strategies – Precinct B-E
Support low density development at a variety of lot sizes that respond to
servicing access.
Support site layout and design that allows for future intensification in
Precinct B and C.
Support subdivision design with activated front edge treatments along
Horseshoe Creek and public land interfaces in Precinct B.
Require sewer connection in Precinct C prior to any subdivision of land.
Prioritise development of lots closest to Macartney Street in Precinct C then
progressively moving south.
Support larger lot sizes in Precincts D and E as a buffer between residential
and adjoining farming uses.
As subdivision occurs in Precinct D, use open space contributions to acquire
land adjacent existing public land (and located in flood
plain areas) to
increase existing open space, along the King River.
Support road layouts, subdivision and site layouts in Precinct E that do not
preclude the potential for future road connections and
residential
development.
Farming Zone strategies – Precinct F(a) - North of the Snow
Maintain the existing agricultural activities and zoning north of the Snow
Road in Precinct F(a).
Low Density Development Strategies - Precinct F(b) - South of the Snow
Support low density subdivision of Precinct F, South of Snow Road with a
variety of lot sizes commencing at 0.2 hectares in the west
and transitioning to
lots in the East in
line with the applicable
Require the creation of a minimum
0 metre wide
landscaped presentation strip between the Snow Road and residential lots to
support the arrival experience to the township.
Provide a safe pedestrian crossing on Snow Road between the Precinct and
the pedestrian cycle link on the northern side of Snow Road.
Require sewer connection in Precinct F prior to any subdivision of land.
Prioritise development of lots closest to Macartney Street in Precinct C then
progressively moving south.
Support the protection of native vegetation within the precinct and design
road layouts to ensure retention as a priority.
Require an internal perimeter road around the development of the precinct to
support protection from bushfire and provide an amenity
buffer to adjoining
farmland and major road interfaces.
Design the alignment of the perimeter road around the precinct to retain and
celebrate native vegetation as a priority.
Design the any subdivision to ensure that all lots can achieve a
maximum BAL of 12.5.
Design any subdivision to ensure that all lots can achieve informed and
appropriate setbacks from bushfire hazard interfaces to ensure
development can achieve a radiant heat level of no greater than
Encourage the establishment of rural business in Precinct G.
Rural Living - West - Precinct H
Maintain the existing Rural Living nature of the area and avoid any further
subdivision of the area.
Support pedestrian and shared pathway connectivity between Precinct H and
Discourage residential buildings and group accommodation.
Maintain the existing agricultural use of the land
Policy guidelines
Consider as relevant:
Supporting 0.2
hectare minimum lot sizes in Precinct C.
Requiring 0.4
hectare minimum lot sizes in Precinct D and E where reticulated sewer is
Policy documents
Consider as relevant:
Township Development Plan
(City of Wangaratta, 2016)
Low Density
and Rural Residential Strategy
(Rural City of Wangaratta
Oxley Township Plan
11.01-1L-04
Snow Road between Oxley and Milawa
To maintain the close links between Milawa and Oxley.
Strengthen the community infrastructure and facilities network between Oxley
and Milawa.
Support the establishment of rural businesses such as farmgate sales between
Oxley and Milawa.
Avoid linear extensions of residential development between Oxley and
15.01 BUILT ENVIRONMENT
Urban design
To create urban environments that are safe, healthy, functional and enjoyable
and that contribute to a sense of place and cultural
Require development to respond to its context in terms of character, cultural
identity, natural features, surrounding landscape and
Ensure development contributes to community and cultural life by improving
the quality of living and working environments, facilitating
accessibility and
providing for inclusiveness.
Ensure the interface between the private and public realm protects and
enhances personal safety.
Ensure development supports public realm amenity and safe access to walking
and cycling environments and public transport.
Ensure that the design and location of publicly accessible private spaces,
including car parking areas, forecourts and walkways, is
of a high standard,
creates a safe environment for users and enables easy and efficient use.
Ensure that development provides landscaping that supports the amenity,
attractiveness and safety of the public realm.
Ensure that development, including signs, minimises detrimental impacts on
amenity, on the natural and built environment and on the
safety and efficiency
Promote good urban design along and abutting transport corridors.
Policy documents
Consider as relevant:
Urban Design
Guidelines for Victoria
(Department of Environment, Land, Water and
15.01-1L-01 Signs
To protect the visual amenity of localities and transport corridors by
avoiding visual disorder and clutter.
Support signage that is well proportioned, well located and responds to the
urban form and character of the area.
Encourage the appearance, size, illumination and other aspects of signs to
complement the development on which they are displayed
and the character of
their surrounds.
Limit signage in residential areas to protect residential amenity.
Bunting signs
Avoid use of bunting and flag signs (including for retails sales or business
identification), except for the short term promotion
of fairs, festivals or
other special events for a maximum of three months, with the signs removed at
the completion of the event.
Floodlit signs and internally illuminated signs
Allow floodlit signs only in locations where they do not form a confusing
background to normal regulatory traffic signs or signals.
Avoid light spill and detrimental impacts to nearby residences and the public
High wall signs
Locate high wall signs flush with the wall of a building.
Avoid high wall signs that project beyond the lines of a building.
Major promotion signs
Discourage major promotion signs as they are contrary to the rural character
of Wangaratta Regional City, townships and their surrounds
due to their size and
prominence.
Discourage major promotion signs on the Great Alpine Road, being a designated
tourist destination of national and international significance.
Avoid major promotion signs at gateway approaches, adjoining local and
regional tourist routes, or displayed on items of local and
state heritage
significance.
Require major promotion signs to be fixed to a building, wholly within its
boundaries and not project outside of the building footprint.
Promotion signs
Use promotion signs only to promote activities on land on which the sign is
Scale promotion signs so as not to dominate the site on which the sign is
Freestanding signs
Support only one freestanding sign associated with a development (except
where the size of the land is sufficient, or where the land
has frontage to two
or more streets).
Avoid freestanding signs of a height that projects above the roofline of the
adjacent buildings.
Animated and electronic signage
Avoid animated and electronic signage.
Reflective signs
Avoid reflective signage except where there are no visual impacts or
distractions to surrounding uses as a result of the sign.
Avoid reflective signs in the Heritage Overlay.
Policy document
Consider as relevant:
Comprehensive
Signs Policy
(Rural City of Wangaratta,
15.01-1L-02 Wangaratta
C82wang Strategy
Enhance the appearance of the municipality’s major gateways through
prominent and distinctive built form and active frontages,
urban design and
landscape treatments that are innovative, environmentally sustainable and
contribute to the amenity and visual appearance
of the locality.
Building design
To achieve building design and siting outcomes that contribute positively to
the local context, enhance the public realm and support
environmentally
sustainable development.
Ensure a comprehensive site analysis forms the starting point of the design
process and provides the basis for the consideration of
height, scale, massing
and energy performance of new development.
Ensure development responds and contributes to the strategic and cultural
context of its location.
Minimise the detrimental impact of development on neighbouring properties,
the public realm and the natural environment.
Improve the energy performance of buildings through siting and design
measures that encourage:
Passive design
responses that minimise the need for heating, cooling and lighting.
renewable energy generation and storage technology.
embodied energy materials.
Restrict the provision of reticulated
natural gas in new dwelling development.
Ensure the layout and design of development supports resource recovery,
including separation, storage and collection of waste, mixed
recycling, glass,
organics and e-waste.
Encourage use of recycled and reusable materials in building construction and
undertake adaptive reuse of buildings, where practical.
Encourage water efficiency and the use of rainwater, stormwater and recycled
Minimise stormwater discharge through site layout and landscaping measures
that support on-site infiltration and stormwater reuse.
Ensure the form, scale, and appearance of development enhances the function
and amenity of the public realm.
Ensure buildings and their interface with the public realm support personal
safety, perceptions of safety and property security.
Ensure development is designed to protect and enhance valued landmarks, views
and vistas.
Ensure development considers and responds to transport movement networks and
provides safe access and egress for pedestrians, cyclists
and vehicles.
Encourage development to retain existing vegetation.
Ensure development provides landscaping that responds to its site context,
enhances the built form, creates safe and attractive spaces
and supports cooling
and greening of urban areas.
Policy documents
Consider as relevant:
Urban Design
Guidelines for Victoria
(Department of Environment, Land, Water and
Planning, 2017)
Design Guidelines for Victoria
(Department of Environment, Land, Water and
Planning, 2021)
Management and Recycling in Multi-unit Developments
(Sustainability
Victoria, 2019)
15.01-2L-01
Building design in industrial areas
Design industrial development to provide common boundary treatments,
including screening, vegetation buffers, acoustic fencing and
building setbacks
between conflicting land uses.
Ensure industrial development adjoining sites of heritage significance are
compatible with the site's industrial heritage significance.
Design industrial development to protect any remnant native vegetation and
native fauna habitat within and adjacent to industrial
Provide landscaping that will screen buildings, structures and carparks.
Direct or baffle lighting to minimise light spillage.
Design buildings so the overall height is below the mature tree height line
where practicable.
Encourage external building cladding colours to be in muted tones with no
white colour or reflective type material used.
Encourage improvement to the appearance of all industrial areas, particularly
development along main roads and identified gateway
Design new industrial development to locate office components to the front of
the building and locate signs on the buildings.
Design new buildings in industrial areas to:
Complement the
scale of nearby buildings.
Support front
setbacks that are consistent with nearby buildings
Create clear
entrances to the street.
Avoid buildings that are
constructed of colorbond or metal cladding on land that fronts the following
major roads:
Osboldstone
Building/s that abut a residential zone must:
Incorporate a
setback from the lot boundary, a distance not less than half the height of the
proposed building plus 1.5 metres.
access to sunlight for adjacent dwellings and private secluded open
When considering an application to use, develop or subdivide
land and existing dwelling in an industrial zone, it is policy to:
excision of an existing dwelling from industrial land.
protection to the existing industrial uses, when considering the re-development
of adjoining or nearby dwellings.
expansion of dwellings towards the industrial uses.
Support the
conversion of dwellings to non-residential uses.
Consider the
strategic potential for the land to be used for other purposes, if identified in
the MPS when assessing the above matters.
Policy Documents
Consider as relevant:
Industrial Land Use Strategy, 2017
15.01-2L-02 Building
design in commercial areas
Encourage improvement to the appearance of all commercial areas, particularly
development along main roads and identified gateway
Design new commercial development to locate office components to the front of
the building and locate signage on buildings.
Design new buildings in commercial areas to:
Complement the
scale of nearby buildings.
Support front
setbacks that are consistent with nearby buildings
Create clear
entrances to the street.
Avoid buildings that are constructed of
colorbond or metal cladding on land that fronts the following major roads:
Osboldstone
Building/s that abut a residential zone must:
Incorporate a
setback from the lot boundary, a distance not less than half the height of the
proposed building plus 1.5 metres.
access to sunlight for adjacent dwellings and private secluded open
Policy Documents
Consider as relevant:
Industrial Land Use Strategy,
15.01-2L-03
Energy and resource efficiency
Encourage the use of passive sustainable design principles including road
and housing orientation, solar access, shading, natural
ventilation, thermal
mass and insulation within development.
Facilitate development that is carbon neutral.
Support passive solar design.
Support innovative and new approaches to achieving environmentally
sustainable development outcomes.
Subdivision design
To ensure the design of subdivisions achieves attractive, safe, accessible,
diverse and sustainable neighbourhoods.
In the development of new residential areas and in the redevelopment of
existing areas, subdivision should be designed to create liveable
sustainable communities by:
Creating compact
neighbourhoods that have walkable distances between activities.
activity centres in appropriate locations with a mix of uses and services and
access to public transport.
neighbourhood centres that include services to meet day to day needs.
Creating urban
places with a strong sense of place that are functional, safe and
attractive.
Providing a
range of lot sizes to suit a variety of dwelling and household types to meet the
needs and aspirations of different groups
landscaped streets and a network of open spaces to meet a variety of needs with
links to regional parks where possible.
Protecting and
enhancing habitat for native flora and fauna, and providing opportunities for
people to experience nature in urban
Facilitating an
urban structure where neighbourhoods are clustered to support larger activity
centres served by high quality public
dependency by allowing for:
- Convenient and
safe public transport.
attractive spaces and networks for walking and cycling.
- Subdivision
layouts that allow easy movement within and between neighbourhoods.
- A convenient
and safe road network.
exposure of sensitive uses to air and noise pollution from the transport
Being accessible
to people with disabilities.
Creating an
urban structure that:
Responds to
climate related hazards.
Incorporates
integrated water management, including sustainable irrigation of open
Minimises peak
demand on the electricity network.
Supports energy
efficiency and solar energy generation through urban layout and lot
orientation.
Supports waste
minimisation and increased resource recovery.
utilities and services that support the uptake of renewable energy technologies,
such as microgrids and energy storage systems,
including batteries.
all-electric lots.
Policy documents
Consider as relevant:
Urban Design
Guidelines for Victoria
(Department of Environment, Land, Water and
Planning, 2017)
15.01-3L-01 Subdivision
design in industrial areas
Policy application
This policy applies to all land zoned Industrial 1 and Industrial 3 Zone.
Avoid layouts which back onto open space and creek reserves.
Require subdivisions to be serviced by sealed roads.
Incorporate a road hierarchy that will accommodate the anticipated traffic
volume and vehicle types using a geometric layout.
Provide for convenience shops and open space in larger subdivisions.
Create lots that are regular in shape unless to avoid important natural
features, to protect and enhance significant natural systems.
Incorporate large remnant trees within areas of open space or road reserves
and provide street tree planting.
Create lots that enable buildings to be sited and aligned for solar
efficiency.
Support layouts and open space design that incorporates:
All services,
including underground electricity supply.
Road reserves
that provide sufficient space for through-traffic, medium strips, on-street
parking, garbage collection services, street
tree planting, nature strips and
design that incorporates Water Sensitive Design treatments, including gross
pollution traps and wetland filters where appropriate.
layouts that group area with shared parking access.
Separate the industrial areas from residential neighbourhoods by open space
or a main road.
Avoid the expansion of dwellings near industrial uses.
Policy guidelines
Consider as relevant:
Before deciding
on an application, the responsible authority will consider:
- The extent to
which the application meets the objectives and directions of the MPS and
Planning Policy Framework.
proposal contributes and relates to the surrounding area, in particular main
roads and gateway sites.
Policy documents
Consider as relevant:
Industrial Land Use Strategy, 2017.
15.01-3L-02 Subdivision
design in commercial areas
Policy application
This policy applies to all land affected by the Commercial 2 Zone.
Avoid layouts which back onto open space and creek reserves.
Require subdivisions to be serviced by sealed roads.
Incorporate a road hierarchy that will accommodate the anticipated traffic
volume and vehicle types using a geometric layout.
Provide for convenience shops and open space in larger subdivisions.
Create lots that are regular in shape unless to avoid important natural
features, to protect and enhance significant natural systems.
Incorporate large remnant trees within areas of open space or road reserves
and provide street tree planting.
Create lots that enable buildings to be sited and aligned for solar
efficiency.
Support layouts and open space design that incorporates:
All services, including underground electricity supply.
Road reserves that provide sufficient space for through-traffic, medium
strips, on-street parking, garbage collection services, street
tree planting,
nature strips and footpaths.
Stormwater design that incorporates Water Sensitive Design treatments,
including gross pollution traps and wetland filters where appropriate.
Provide layouts that group area with shared parking access.
Separate the commercial areas from residential neighbourhoods by open space
or a main road.
Policy guidelines
Consider as relevant:
Before deciding
on an application, the responsible authority will consider:
The extent to
which the application meets the objectives and directions of the MPS and
Planning Policy Framework.
How the proposal
contributes and relates to the surrounding area, in particular main roads and
gateway sites.
Policy documents
Consider as relevant:
Industrial Land Use Strategy, 2017.
15.01-3L Subdivision Design in Low Density Residential and Rural Living
Proposed C83wang Policy Application
This policy applies to land subject to the Low Density Residential Zone and
Rural Living Zone.
To ensure the design of subdivisions creates low density and rural living
communities that are attractive, safe, accessible, diverse
and sustainable.
General Strategies
Support subdivision and open space design that focuses on the creation of
people focused streets and layouts that promote
healthy environments.
Require subdivision design and layout to respond to the natural contours,
features and characteristics of the land.
Design the public realm that provides a high level of amenity, is diverse and
visually interesting.
Require subdivisions to respond to the current and future impacts of climate
change including fire and flooding.
Ensure the built environment, streets and public open spaces are designed to
minimise their contribution to the urban heat island
effect and to contribute to
urban cooling.
Design subdivision layouts to respond to adjoining and internal interface
issues, including major roads, agricultural activities,
infrastructure and
flight paths.
Lot Design & Layout
Design the layout of the subdivision to:
Create lots that
are regular in shape unless required to protect vegetation and avoid natural
Create lots and
building envelopes that are oriented for maximum passive solar efficiency and
suitably sized and dimensioned for future
buildings and services.
creation of battle axe lots.
Protect and
enhance riparian vegetation (waterway health), wetlands biodiversity and
landscape features to improve amenity.
Consider the use
of alternative water sources (public and private), including water tanks,
stormwater re-use and localised water systems.
Vegetation and
Landscaping
Require the retention and protection of existing trees, and to promote
further planting of new trees as a significant component of
local identity and
neighbourhood character.
Incorporate large remnant trees within areas of open space or road reserves
and provide compl
mentary street tree planting.
Design any landscaping to contain bush fire resilient species and consider
any on-going management requirements.
Design road layouts to support the establishment of canopy trees that can
mitigate the impacts of the urban heat island affect.
Infrastructure
Design subdivisions to incorporate perimeter roads to separate land uses
(such as accommodation) from the bushfire hazard (including
grasslands) to:
permanent, largely maintenance free fuel breaks.
opportunities for active surveillance.
Create two-way
through roads providing two directions of access and egress.
access and egress for fire suppression, emergency response and
evacuation.
Require each stage of subdivision to be developed
independent of future stages and to be surrounded by perimeter roads.
Maximise permeability of the street network.
Ensure adequate buffers are provided between future development and any
existing development so as to not increase the bushfire risk
to the existing
development.
ul-de-sacs, in particular ones that are long
and service many dwellings which direct road users towards the bushfire
Consider the design, location and impact of infrastructure on the character
and amenity of the subdivision, including electrical substations
Require a sewer servicing strategy to be provided to North East Water for
all new subdivisions of 3 or more lots in Low Density Residential
Zone, Schedule
1 and Low Density Residential Zone, Schedule 2.
Support subdivision layouts and open space design that incorporates:
All services,
including underground electricity supply.
design that incorporates Water Sensitive Urban Design treatments, including
gross pollution traps and wetland filters where
appropriate.
Bushfire Design Response
Require the preparation of a bushfire management plan for all subdivisions on
land designated as either Bushfire Prone Area or the
Bushfire Management
Require informed and appropriate setbacks from bushfire hazard interfaces
to ensure future development is exposed to radiant heat
no greater than
Require subdivisions to manage the bushfire risk to future development from
existing or proposed landscaping, public open space and
communal areas.
Provision is to be made for the strategic location and provision of Bushfire
Neighbourhood Safe Place if required in consultation
with relevant
authorities.
Support the provision of reticulated water and fire hydrants where
Consider the provision of static water storage on each lot proportional to
Support the provision of communal water storage to support suppression
activities – irrespective of the provision of reticulated
Support the provision of emergency service access to all static water
Low Density Strategies
Require all lots to be connected to reticulated sewerage and water if
Require subdivisions to be serviced by sealed roads.
Discourage low density residential development in areas where reticulated
sewerage is not available.
Design subdivisions to mitigate against the urban heat island affect by:
shelter for pedestrian and cyclist movement.
Providing places
with cooler microclimates which provide relief from hot conditions.
Provide shading
Irrigation of
streets and open space to cool the
Policy documents
Consider as relevant:
Low Density
and Rural Residential Strategy
(Rural City of Wangaratta,
Healthy neighbourhoods
To achieve neighbourhoods that foster healthy and active living and community
Design neighbourhoods that foster community interaction and make it easy for
people of all ages and abilities to live healthy lifestyles
and engage in
regular physical activity by providing:
Connected, safe,
pleasant and attractive walking and cycling networks that enable and promote
walking and cycling as a part of daily
Streets with
direct, safe and convenient access to destinations.
Conveniently
located public spaces for active recreation and leisure.
located public transport stops.
Amenities and
protection to support physical activity in all weather
conditions.
Policy documents
Consider as relevant:
Urban Design
Guidelines for Victoria
(Department of Environment, Land, Water and
Planning, 2017)
Neighbourhood character
To recognise, support and protect neighbourhood character, cultural identity,
and sense of place.
Support development that respects the existing neighbourhood character or
contributes to a preferred neighbourhood character.
Ensure the preferred neighbourhood character is consistent with medium and
higher density housing outcomes in areas identified for
increased housing.
Ensure development responds to its context and reinforces a sense of place
and the valued features and characteristics of the local
environment and place
by respecting the:
Pattern of local
urban structure and subdivision.
natural landscape character and significant vegetation.
Neighbourhood
character values and built form that reflect community
Design for rural areas
To ensure development respects valued areas of rural character.
Ensure that the siting, scale and appearance of development protects and
enhances rural character.
Protect the visual amenity of valued rural landscapes and character areas
along township approaches and sensitive tourist routes by
ensuring new
development is sympathetically located.
Site and design development to minimise visual impacts on surrounding natural
scenery and landscape features including ridgelines,
hill tops, waterways, lakes
and wetlands.
Design for rural areas
Policy application
This policy applies to all land in a Rural Zone.
Discourage the use of reflective or white coloured building, cladding or
roofing material.
Policy guideline
Consider as relevant:
reflective or white colours if they will be used to match the same materials on
existing buildings or
Proposed C83wang
SCHEDULE 8 TO CLAUSE 43.02 DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY
Shown on the planning scheme map as
MILAWA TRIANGLE LOW
DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
Proposed C83wang
Design objectives
To ensure that development positively contributes to the built environment
by providing high quality, attractive subdivision outcomes
that support the
establishment of a low density community that is attractive, safe, accessible,
and sustainable.
To ensure neighbourhood character is considered in the future development of
the Milawa Triangle.
To ensure residential development prioritises the retention of native and
significant vegetation to contribute to the character.
To ensure that new subdivisions are appropriately serviced with road and
stormwater drainage infrastructure.
Buildings and works
A permit is not required to construct a
building or construct or carry out works for the following:
An extension or
alteration to an existing dwelling.
outbuilding associated with a dwelling.
An extension or
alteration to an existing outbuilding.
Subdivision
A permit to subdivide land must meet the following
requirements:
Subdivision Design and layout
Proposed C83wang
All new lots
must be generally sized between 0.2 and 0.25 hectares.
All new lots
must be designed to have direct street frontage.
subdivision to avoid layouts that create battle-axe lots.
including any building envelopes to enable future buildings to be sited and
aligned for optimal passive solar efficiency.
Landscaping and
layout of any new subdivision to maximise the retention of existing native and
significant vegetation to ensure that they
continue to contribute to the
character of the area.
Incorporate
large remnant trees within areas of open space or road reserves and provide
complimentary street tree planting including
the use of bush fire resilient
Design road
layouts to support the establishment of canopy trees that can mitigate the
impacts of the urban heat island affect.
Tree protection zones must
be established during the construction phase of new subdivision to ensure the
protection of existing vegetation.
Infrastructure, Access &
Connectivity
subdivisions to provide and connect directly into the internal north-south and
East-West connections as outlined in Map 1
to this Schedule.
New road access
must be designed to promote and provide connectivity between existing roads
where possible, while minimizing impacts
on existing dwellings and associated
residential infrastructure.
Avoid direct lot
access to the Oxley Flats Road.
creation of Cul-de-sacs within any subdivision design.
subdivisions to provide pedestrian and cycling pathways internally within the
precinct and along the precincts Oxley Flats
and Kerrs Road frontage.
All lots must be
connected to reticulated sewerage and lots must be provided with access to
Bushfire Design
Require the
design of subdivisions to demonstrate and achieve:
- A bushfire
ready interface between the settlement area and any bushfire hazard for all lots
/ dwellings / and building envelopes
that has exposure to radiant heat of no
greater than 12.5KW/m2.
- The provision
of a perimeter road between the bushfire hazard and future development.
- The provision
of vegetation management requirements, if applicable, to ensure all dwellings
can achieve a low threat setback between
the settlement area and any bushfire
- The provision
of static water supplies to each lot in accordance with the requirements of
Table 4 to Clause 53.02-5 of the Planning
incorporation of strategic communal water supply (tank/s) or fire hydrants to
support bushfire suppression activities.
emergency vehicle access to each lot and static water supply in accordance with
the requirements of Table 4 and Table 5
to Clause 53.02-5.
Require staged
subdivision to implement a logical staging and maintenance plan that avoids
leapfrogging to reduce the level of bushfire
exposure of newly developed land
from undeveloped stages.
Ensure that the
design of development does not result in any increase in bushfire risk to
development.
Proposed C83wang
None specified.
Proposed C83wang
Application requirements
The following application requirements apply to an application for a permit
under Clause 43.02, in addition to those specified elsewhere
in the scheme and
must accompany an application, as appropriate, to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority:
A written report
that demonstrates how the design response of any subdivision meets the
requirements of this clause and any other
relevant policy within the Scheme,
where relevant.
management plan and report which demonstrates how the proposal meets the
requirements of this Schedule and creates a low
risk environment.
Proposed C83wang
Decision guidelines
The following decision guidelines apply to an application for a permit
under Clause 43.02, in addition to those specified in Clause
43.02 and elsewhere
in the scheme which must be considered, as appropriate, by the responsible
The ability of
the subdivision to contribute to the overall low density character of the
The ability of
the subdivision to provide for optimal solar access and orientation to all
The impact of
the subdivision on the character of the existing land use and development
The ability of
the subdivision to actively plan and design for bushfire risk to create a low
risk environment.
The ability of
the subdivision design to provide the opportunity for the retention of existing
native and significant vegetation,
including the ability for complementary
Proposed C83wang
SCHEDULE 9 TO CLAUSE 43.02 DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY
Shown on the planning scheme map as
OXLEY LOW DENSITY
RESIDENTIAL
Proposed C83wang
Design objectives
To support the expansion of the township of Oxley by providing lot sizes
consistent with the existing low density township character
and transitioning to
the surrounding farmland.
To ensure neighbourhood character is considered in the future development of
this precinct in Oxley.
To ensure that development of the precinct responds and respects key
interfaces including the major tourist route of the Snow Road
and surrounding
To ensure residential development prioritises the retention of native and
significant vegetation to contribute to the on-going character
and biodiversity
of the area.
To ensure that new subdivisions are adequately serviced with infrastructure
including road and stormwater drainage infrastructure.
Proposed C83wang
Proposed C83wang
Buildings and works
A permit is not required to construct a building or construct or carry out
works for the following:
An extension or
alteration to an existing dwelling.
outbuilding associated with a dwelling.
An extension or
alteration to an existing
outbuilding.
Subdivision
An application to subdivide land must meet the following requirements:
Subdivision Design and layout
Support a variety of lot sizes transitioning from 0.2 and 0.4 hectares in the
West to 1 hectare lots in the Eastern portion of the
site as outlined in Map 1
to this Schedule.
All new lots must be designed to have direct street frontage
Design subdivisions to avoid layouts that create battle-axe lots.
Landscaping and Vegetation
Design the layout of any new subdivision to maximise the retention of
existing native and significant vegetation to ensure that they
continue to
contribute to the character of the area.
Incorporate large remnant trees within areas of open space or road reserves
and provide complimentary street tree planting including
the use of bushfire
resilient species.
Design road layouts to support the establishment of canopy trees that can
mitigate the impacts of the urban heat island affect.
Tree protection zones must be established during the construction phase of
new subdivision to ensure the protection of existing vegetation.
Vegetation should be maintained to ensure bushfire risk does not increase
Snow Road and adjoining Farming land interfaces
Subdivision design must include the creation of a minimum 30 metre wide
landscaped presentation strip along the sites entire Snow
Road frontage,
measured to northern side of the future internal perimeter road.
The presentation strip must be designed and landscaped to support the arrival
experience to the township of Oxley, including the use
of bushfire resilient
Avoid the creation of vehicular access to the Snow Road and direct estate
access to the Oxley-Meadow Creek Road.
Infrastructure, Access and Connectivity
Require all lots to be connected to reticulated sewer and water.
Require an internal perimeter road around the development of the precinct to
support protection from both bushfire hazards (including
grasslands) and also
provide an amenity buffer to adjoining farmland and major road interfaces. This
permanent and largely maintenance free fuels breaks.
opportunities for active surveillance.
Create two-way
of access and egress.
access and egress for fire suppression, emergency response and evacuation.
Be designed
along with other internal roads to vary in alignment as required to retain and
celebrate native vegetation as a priority.
Cross-linking roads
should be provided within the subdivision to provide at least two ways in and
Avoid the creation of cul-de-sacs within any subdivision design.
New road access must be located so as to promote and provide for connectivity
between existing roads where possible, while minimising
impacts on existing
dwellings and associated residential infrastructure.
Require pedestrian and cycling links within the subdivision design including
around the estates perimeter road.
Bushfire Design
Require the design of subdivisions to demonstrate and achieve:
A bushfire ready
interface between the settlement area and any bushfire hazard for all lots /
dwellings / and building envelopes that
has exposure to radiant heat of no
greater than 12.5KW/m2. The provision of a perimeter road between a bushfire
hazard and future
development .
The provision of
vegetation management requirements, if applicable, to ensure all dwellings can
achieve a low threat setback between
the settlement area and any bushfire
The provision of
static water supplies to each lot in accordance with the requirements of Table 4
to Clause 53.02-5 of the Planning
incorporation of strategic communal water supply (tank/s) or fire hydrants to
support bushfire suppression activities.
Require emergency vehicle
access to each lot and static water supply in accordance with the requirements
of Table 4 and Table 5 to
Clause 53.02-5.
Require staged subdivision to implement a logical staging and maintenance
plan that avoids leapfrogging to reduce the level of bushfire
exposure of newly
developed land from undeveloped stages.
Ensure that the design of development does not result in any increase in
bushfire risk to existing development.
Proposed C83wang
None specified.
5.0 Application requirements
Proposed C83wang
The following application requirements apply to an
application for a permit under Clause 43.02, in addition to those specified
in the scheme and must accompany an application, as appropriate, to
the satisfaction of the responsible authority:
A written report
that demonstrates how the design response of any subdivision meets the
requirements of this clause.
management plan and report which demonstrates how the proposal meets the
requirements of this Schedule and creates a low
risk environment.
A landscape plan
prepared by a suitably qualified professional that outlines the proposed
landscaping treatments of all public land
including the Snow Road presentation
6.0 Decision guidelines
Proposed C83wang
The following decision guidelines apply to an
application for a permit under Clause 43.02, in addition to those specified in
43.02 and elsewhere in the scheme which must be considered, as
appropriate, by the responsible authority:
Whether the
subdivision design and layout provides adequate road frontage.
The ability of
the subdivision to contribute to the overall low density character of the
The ability of
the subdivision to provide for optimal solar access and orientation to all
The impact of
the subdivision on the character of the existing land use and development
The ability of
the subdivision to actively plan and design for bushfire risk to create a low
risk environment.
The ability of the subdivision design to provide
the opportunity for the retention of existing native and significant vegetation,
including the ability for complementary plantings.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (23 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter