URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:36:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RCB [2025] VMHT 2 (11 February 2025)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
. The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2025] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan hospital
Mode of hearing:
Videoconference
Tribunal members:
Magdalena Wysocka (Legal Member)
Jill Hosking (Psychiatrist Member)
Renee Harrison (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from the health service
With online video
Case manager
With online video
Marcus Ibeceta
Legal representative, Victoria Legal Aid
With online video
With online video from the health service
Grandmother
With online video from the health service
Observer, Victoria Legal Aid
With online video from another location
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal confirmed the
inpatient treatment order expiring on 27/05/2025
This statement of
After the hearing your legal representative requested a
written explanation of the Tribunal's decision. A copy of this statement of
reasons will be given to your treating team as well as to you and your legal
representative.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because your community
treatment order had been changed to an inpatient treatment order. The Tribunal
have a hearing to decide whether or not an order should remain in
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental
health and wellbeing principles (‘principles’).
Based on the
information provided in your hearing and our understanding of your
circumstances, the Tribunal identified the following
principles were
particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
autonomy- you told the Tribunal that you felt that you had no control to make
choices in relation to your treatment as
an inpatient.
Diversity of
care- your treating team was aiming to provide you with various forms of
treatment including nutrition, psychological
support and physical health
monitoring.
restriction- your legal representative said that an inpatient stay was not
necessary to continue with the next steps of your
treatment and would be onerous
because you would potentially miss out on school, which you were planning to
restart shortly.
carers- your mother, whom you live with, has been very involved in your care.
You and your mother were also caring for
your grandmother, although we heard at
the hearing that your grandmother was going to live with another relative soon.
Health needs-
you had been admitted to hospital on a number of previous occasions due to
medical instability and were at risk of various
medical complications.
Dignity of risk-
you told the Tribunal that you and your mother were well placed at home to deal
with any health complications if
immediate intervention was required.
Wellbeing of
young people- you have recently turned 18 and your mental health challenges have
impacted on your ability to continue
your schooling as well as other goals.
The Tribunal must also give proper consideration to your rights
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’). Compulsory treatment engages and limits a number
of human rights protected under the Charter including
from medical treatment without consent, and where a person is being treated in
hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your rights
protected under the Charter, and whether limits on them are reasonable, the
must thoroughly examine three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
Your treating team prepared a report for your
hearing (‘the report’) that they gave to you and to the Tribunal and
also provided some documents extracted from your file. Both you and your
treating team spoke to and answered questions from the Tribunal
in the hearing
and your mother spoke to the Tribunal as well. Your legal representative Marcus
also made submissions on your behalf.
This statement of reasons does not
summarise all that information, but the next section refers to the information
the Tribunal relied
on to make its decision and explains why.
Tribunal must have regard to your views and preferences. From what you told the
Tribunal and the materials we read, we understood
that you wanted to be
discharged from hospital because you were medically stable and felt that there
was nothing further that could
be achieved in your admission. You wanted to
continue your treatment in the community and preferred to be a voluntary
patient. You
wanted to be able to return to school at the beginning of this
year with your cohort.
The Tribunal must also have regard to the views
of your carer. From what your mother told the Tribunal and the materials we
the Tribunal understood that your mother supported your ongoing stay in
hospital if it was medically required. She felt you have
improved during your
admission and she has been able to have conversations with you with about things
to work and focus on when you
returned home. Your mum said that ultimately, she
wanted what was best for you.
4. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the four questions that need to be answered under the
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
The report sets out a history of your mental
health treatment and symptoms. In summary, it states that you have diagnoses
Anorexia Nervosa and Major Depressive Disorder. The symptoms that have
been observed by various treating teams involved in your care
include rigid
rules and rituals around eating, purging and binging, and significant weight
loss. The report also states that you
have in the past experienced low mood,
poor sleep and suicide attempts.
The Tribunal was satisfied on the basis
of the above that you have symptoms of a mental illness characterised by a
significant disturbance
in your thought and in your mood.
(b) Does your mental illness mean you need to be treated now,
to try and prevent your mental health or physical health seriously
deteriorating;
or to prevent serious harm to you or someone else?
Your legal representative Marcus told the
Tribunal that, as you were medically stable, you did not require immediate
treatment to
prevent either your mental or physical health from seriously
deteriorating or to prevent serious harm to yourself. However, you also
Tribunal that you understood the severity of your situation and knew that you
needed to continue monitoring your situation
and that you may possibly face
another hospital admission in the future.
The information provided from
your treating team is that your eating disorder has had a significant impact on
your physical health.
These include high risk of bone fractures due to
osteopenia, risk of cardiac issues, sudden death and coma. In the past few
you have required several admissions to address medical risks associated
with your eating disorder behaviours. The Tribunal also
heard from your mother
that when you have been discharged in the past, you would return to trying to
get your weight down again.
The report states that your community team
had been trying to manage your illness in the community for some time but that
been only minimal changes in your eating disorder behaviours or your
ability to go about your daily life. According to the report,
your eating
disorder behaviours take up significant amounts of your time and energy, impact
upon your sleep, and can make you very
distressed. There were concerns from your
treating team that your illness has impacted on your thought processes,
including your
ability to process information and engage in treatment. Your
doctor TD told us that this has improved since you have received treatment
The Tribunal was satisfied on the basis of the above
information that you needed treatment now to try and prevent both your mental
health and your physical health from seriously deteriorating.
(c) Will you receive immediate treatment if you are on a
treatment order?
Your treating team outlined a plan for your
ongoing treatment in hospital in the form of nutrition and psychological support
your eating disorder behaviours. Treatment would continue in the
community upon your discharge from hospital and you were expected
to transition
to a new community treating team.
The Tribunal was satisfied on the
information before it that immediate treatment would be provided to you if you
were on a treatment
(d) Is there a less restrictive means than a treatment order
that would enable you to receive immediate treatment?
The Tribunal understood that you did not believe
that a treatment order was required and that you wanted to continue your
voluntarily. Marcus said that you were willing to engage with the new
community treating team that you were soon going to transition
to and that you
also had the support of your long-term general practitioner, as well as your
mother and grandmother. You were motivated
to not return to hospital. You were
also enrolled to restart school shortly and it was suggested that your eating
disorder thoughts
and behaviours were unlikely to return when you were busy and
had a routine to stick to. Your mother also spoke about the various
that would be available at your new school.
The Tribunal considered all
of the above but also had to consider information from your treating team, which
indicated that it had
been challenging for your community treating team to shift
your views and behaviours, which is why they considered that an inpatient
admission was necessary in order for you to receive intensive support and
treatment. According to the report, there were also concerns
engagement and refusal to be weighed in the community. Although you said at one
stage during the hearing that
you would not seek discharge straight away if your
order was revoked and would be open to discussing this further with your
team, it was very clear from what you and Marcus told the Tribunal that
you did not consider it necessary to remain in hospital.
considered and weighed the information before it, including the significant
risks to your health, the Tribunal concluded that
there was no less restrictive
means that would enable you to receive immediate treatment other than a
treatment order.
5. Decision
Given the Tribunal decided that all of the
compulsory treatment criteria applied to you the Tribunal confirmed a treatment
Treatment in hospital or in the community
An inpatient
treatment order places the greatest limits on your rights protected under the
Charter. For this reason, the Act says
that the Tribunal can only make an
inpatient treatment order if it is satisfied that a person cannot be treated in
the community.
Your treating team said that community treatment had
minimal success in shifting your thoughts and behaviour regarding your illness.
This admission was a significant opportunity to try to achieve some weight
restoration, which had not been possible in the community,
and to work on
strategies to counteract your eating disorder behaviours. You were young and had
developed your eating disorder relatively
recently. There were significant
long-term risks to your quality of life and cognitive development if there were
no meaningful changes
to your eating disorder behaviours. TD told the Tribunal
that the ultimate goal of the admission was to try and help you build skills
challenge your behaviours and eating disorder cognition, which she anticipated
might take a couple more weeks. You and your legal
representative told the
Tribunal that inpatient treatment was not necessary as you were now medically
stable and that there was nothing
further that could be achieved in hospital.
The Tribunal decided that at the time of your hearing, your treatment
was not able to be provided in the community. The information
indicated that there had been significant challenges to providing you with
treatment in the community and your current
admission presented an opportunity
to break the cycle of repeated medical admissions and subsequent deterioration
in the community
on discharge. Therefore, the Tribunal decided it had to confirm
your inpatient treatment order.
Length of the Treatment
As your hearing was triggered by your community treatment order
being varied to an inpatient treatment order, the Tribunal did not
have to make
a decision about how long your order should last. The Act sets the duration of
your order as the amount of time remaining
on your order at the time of the
hearing. This means the duration of your order is unchanged and it will expire
on 27 May 2025.
Your treatment order cannot extend beyond 27 May
Your treating doctor must revoke your treatment order at any time
if they believe the treatment criteria no longer apply.
determination: 15-01-2025
[Signed by the legal member]
Magdalena Wysocka
Presiding member, on
behalf of the Tribunal division.
Date: 11 February 2025.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143 Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
Section 5 What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (522 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter