URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicRp/1996/84.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:46:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Del Campo v Uniting Church [1996] VicRp 84; [1996] 2 VR 525 (11 April 1996)
DEL CAMPO v UNITING CHURCH
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA COURT OF APPEAL
WINNEKE P, BROOKING and PHILLIPS JJA
10, 11 April 1996
The appellant, Heather Del Campo, aged 38, is a married woman. By a writ issued out of the County Court in October 1992 she alleged
that she injured her back whilst working as a nurses' assistant in the course of her employment with the respondent Uniting Church
of Australia. At all material times the respondent conducted the Lumeah Home for the Aged at 78 Bruce Street, Preston. It was at
these premises that the appellant alleged that she was injured on 4 March 1991 whilst she was endeavouring to manoeuvre a shower
chair in which an infirm patient was seated.
The appellant's writ was issued with a statement of claim annexed to it. She claimed damages for her injuries which she alleged were
caused by the negligence of the church or its servants or agents.
By leave granted on 28 March 1995 the appellant filed an amended statement of claim. The amended claim added to the original claim
by alleging a breach by the employer of the duties said to be imposed by the Occupational Health and Safety (Manual Handling) Regulations
The employer denied negligence and alleged contributory negligence.
The trial was conducted before a judge and jury in the Melbourne County Court over a number of days in March and April 1995. The
action was governed by the provisions of Pt4 of the
Accident Compensation Act 1985
. The relevant provisions of that Act imposed a "recovery limit" of $184,750:
During the course of the trial the issue of contributory negligence was withdrawn from the jury's consideration and the only two
issues which were left to the jury for its ultimate consideration were (a) whether any negligence or breach of statutory duty of
the respondent was a cause of the appellant's injuries; and (b) if so, what amount of damages ought to be awarded to the appellant.
The jury resolved those issues by finding that the respondent was negligent and by awarding damages to the appellant in the sum of
$70,000. The parties agreed upon a sum of $4000 as damages in the nature of interest and on 5 April 1995 the judge entered judgment
for the appellant in the sum of $74,000 and ordered the respondent to pay the appellant's costs on the appropriate scale.
By notice dated 2 May 1995 the appellant appealed against the verdict and judgment. Although a variety of grounds were stipulated
they have resolved themselves into two:
(a) that the jury's verdict as to damages is manifestly inadequate;
(b) that the learned trial judge misdirected the jury on material matters in relation to the manner in which they should assess damages.
No challenge has been made on this appeal by the respondent to the jury's finding of negligence. Thus the sole issue is whether the
jury's assessment of damages ought to be set aside. If this court determines that the jury's verdict as to damages should be set
aside, then Mr Balfe (senior counsel for the appellant) asks us to re-assess the damages on the basis of the material which was before
the jury, together with a further medical report from a Mr Brian Barrett which
was annexed to an affidavit of the appellant's solicitor. The medical report indicates that, in contradistinction to the medical
views proffered at the trial, the appellant has, since trial, undergone further surgery at the lumbo sacral level of her spine to
correct instability which was still existing at that level.
Whilst Mr Clark, who appeared for the respondent, was initially reluctant to join in Mr Balfe's request because the court had been
apprised of the "fresh material" which had been put before us, he eventually submitted that, if the court did allow the appeal and
a question arose as to whether the court should itself assess the damages, in those circumstances it should accept the "fresh material"
and re-assess damages on the basis of the material before the jury together with such "fresh material".
As we indicated to counsel at the outset of the appeal, the court would refuse for the reasons then given to accept this "fresh material"
upon the hearing of the appeal; but because both parties consent, I would be prepared to accept and act on that material in the event
only that this court allowed the appeal and considered a re-assessment of the damages. For the time being I shall put this matter
to one side.
I turn to the facts. The appellant, who was then aged about 34 years, commenced work as a nurses' assistant at the respondent's Lumeah
of her work was undoubtedly heavy and imposed strain upon her. She was, amongst other things, required to attend to and cater for
the needs of old and infirm patients who were unable to fend for themselves. This involved, at times, bathing the patients by placing
them in "shower chairs" and wheeling them from their rooms to an adjacent bathroom. It was in the course of transferring an elderly
patient in this manner on 4 March 1991 that the appellant claimed to have injured her back whilst manipulating the chair with its
heavy patient over a ridge which had been created by the juxtaposition of the linoleum in the room and the carpet in the hall.
Having regard to the way in which the appellant's claim was framed, the manner in which the case was conducted and the directions
which the learned judge gave to the jury, the finding which the jury made on the issue of negligence can only mean that they were
satisfied that there was a breach of duty on the part of the defendant on 4 March 1991 which caused injury to the appellant. The
finding, in this regard, assumes some significance because the case made by the appellant with respect to damages was, to some degree,
complicated by her medical history. The evidence in relation to this history came solely from the witnesses called by the appellant.
The respondent called no evidence in relation to the issue of damages, notwithstanding the concession made on its behalf that it
had caused the appellant to be medically examined by a number of medical specialists.
It was the appellant's case that she had sustained significant permanent injury as a result of the incident which she described as
having occurred on 4 March 1991. It was her case that the incident had ruptured a disc at the lumbo sacral junction of her spine
which had left her with continuing and permanent pain and disability precluding her from all active pursuits which she had hitherto
been able to enjoy and had further precluded her from pursuing not only her past employment but from any form of gainful employment
which involved physical movement. The evidence, which was given by her treating general practitioner, treating specialist surgeons,
a treating psychiatrist and an independent neurosurgeon (Professor Bradley) indeed presented a miserable picture. Since her
cessation of work she had undergone a number of conservative therapies leading ultimately in 1993 to a discogram and a spinal fusion
of her lumbo sacral joint. None of these treatments had provided any relief to her from her debilitating pain. Various views were
proffered as to the continuing cause of her pain which ranged from continued instability of the joint to disc damage at levels above
the lumbo sacral joint to psychogenic pain of a genuine nature but not founded upon any continuing organic basis.
If the appellant's case had been accepted at its face value then it would have been difficult, in my view, to accept the jury's assessment
of $70,000 as a realistic assessment of the worth of her injury.
However, as I have indicated, the matter was complicated by the full picture which the evidence disclosed of her medical history.
That evidence demonstrated that the plaintiff had been in a depreciated condition of health for some considerable period of time
following the birth of her son in December 1983. Following that event she had apparently suffered for a substantial period from what
was described as "low grade pain" in her lower back which had been overlaid by a depressive illness described as postnatal depression.
It appeared that this debilitated condition had continued until 1987. Thereafter it appeared that her condition had improved until,
in early 1989, she had determined to seek employment as a nurses' assistant at the respondent's nursing home in May 1989. Thereafter,
as I have already recounted, she continued to work, without a break, until 8 March 1991 when she sought further medical assistance
for what she described as debilitating pain which, as she put it, had commenced on 4 March when the incident involving the manipulation
of the patient in the "shower chair" had occurred.
This, however, was not the entire story. The evidence demonstrated that, in August 1989 (ie some three months after commencing work),
she had suffered a recurrence of pain in her lower back. X-rays, taken at that time, had demonstrated that she had a congenital deformity
in her lower spine known as pseudo-arthrosis, a condition by which she had developed a 6th lumbar vertebra at the expense of a fully
developed sacral spine. Some of the medical evidence suggested that this condition imposed additional strain at this area of the
spine capable of producing some arthritic change productive of a degree of pain. Notwithstanding, the x-ray pictures taken at this
time (ie August 1989) denied the existence of any narrowing of disc spaces or any apparent disc herniation. Those responsible for
the treatment of the plaintiff ordered conservative measures in the nature of therapy and back brace. She continued with her employment.
There her treatment and symptoms rested until the events of March 1991 took her back to the doctors. The plaintiff claimed that the
nature of the symptoms which she suffered following the events of 4 March 1991 were of a different character to the pain which she
had previously suffered. The history which she gave to some of her treating doctors following the incident of 4 March 1991 described
a re-emergence of her "low grade back pain" at some stage in February 1991. Furthermore she had described events which had occurred
on the days following 4 March, during her continued endeavour to work, events which she said had increased the pain which she had
experienced on 4 March. Although, during the course of this appeal, Mr Clark sought to place some significance on these latter events,
the jury's verdict that she had suffered a compensable injury on 4 March 1991 denies them in my view any significant evidential value.
Following the events which had occurred on 4 March 1991 the evidence revealed that the appellant had suffered muscle spasm in the
area of the lumbo
sacral junction. A CT scan performed in June 1991 demonstrated a broad based disc herniation at the lumbo sacral level impinging
upon the spinal theca. I have already described the continuing condition of the plaintiff leading up to the surgical intervention
in 1993 to stabilise the joint followed, in 1994, by the removal of the fixation plates and screws in an endeavour to reduce the
continuing painful symptoms.
Although the respondent led no evidence at the trial from the numerous medical specialists whom it had engaged to examine the appellant,
it none the less contended that the medical history, which I have described, demonstrated both a physical and psychological predisposition
in the appellant which rendered her a candidate for the injuries of which she complained and which justified the tribunal of fact
awarding an amount of damages for those injuries less than an amount which would otherwise be expected, absent those predisposing
factors. Mr Clark, on this appeal, contended that the jury was entitled to regard the injury claimed to have been suffered by the
appellant on 4 March 1991 as an aggravation or acceleration of a longstanding pre-existing degenerative condition in the spine or,
alternatively, was entitled to regard the injuries for which the appellant claimed damages as injuries and disabilities which she
was inevitably destined to encounter in the fullness of time. He submitted, correctly, that this court was bound to take a view of
the evidence most favourable to the respondent: see Australian Iron and Steel Ltd v Greenwood
[1962] HCA 42
(1962) 107 CLR 308
at 311. He pointed to various parts of the evidence which he submitted supported the conclusions for which he contended and submitted
that, in the light of that evidence, the jury's verdict of $70,000 was not perverse or unreasonable.
I am of the view that a consideration of the question whether the jury's verdict is unreasonable should be postponed pending a consideration
of the ground of appeal which challenges the learned trial judge's directions to the jury concerning the assessment of damages.
At the outset of this consideration I think that it ought to be said that the evidence in this case required careful directions from
the judge to the jury about the manner in which, having found that the negligence of the respondent caused compensable damage to
the appellant, they should go about their task of assessing that damage. This was a case in which the two parties concerned relied
upon the same body of evidential material for the purpose of inducing the tribunal to arrive at competing and contrary conclusions.
For the appellant it was contended that she, notwithstanding her underlying condition, was entitled to be fully compensated for the
resulting disabilities generated by the negligent act or omission of the respondent to which she had fallen victim on 4 March 1991.
In contradistinction, the respondent contended that the same body of evidence compelled a conclusion that the appellant should not
be so compensated because the condition in which she found herself as a consequence of the incident of 4 March was simply an acceleration
of a pre-existing degenerative condition or was a condition to which, in the ordinary course of events, she inevitably would have
come without the intervention of tortious conduct. These competing contentions created a tension between two principles which govern
the assessment of damages for injuries occasioned by tortious conduct. On the one hand the law says that a defendant is not to be
relieved of paying a full measure of compensation merely because the plaintiff was physically or psychogenically vulnerable when
he or she fell victim to the defendant's tortious conduct (this is the classical "eggshell skull" situation); on the other hand a
defendant is not to
be mulcted in the payment of excessive damages because the defendant's tortious conduct merely accelerated the results of some progressive
disease or hastened the inevitable.
The tension to which I have referred was pointed out by Windeyer J in Purkess v Crittendon
[1965] HCA 34
(1965) 114 CLR 164
at 170. His Honour said: If when the tort occurred the plaintiff was suffering from a progressive disease which, even if he had not
been tortiously hurt, would certainly and within some reasonably predictable time have disabled him in the same way as the tort did,
then the defendant's conduct has merely hastened the inevitable; and damages must be measured accordingly. But a plaintiff, tortiously
injured, who suffers thereafter in a way which he had not previously suffered, may in the absence of countervailing evidence rely
upon the prima facie conclusion that for his disabilities and sufferings the defendant is responsible. It is not incumbent on the
plaintiff to lead evidence to displace or discount the inference to which the facts would otherwise give rise. But he must prove
his case: and when the whole of the evidence is before the tribunal of fact the burden is on him to establish the measure of his
damages. The evidence may not show that the conduct of the defendant did more than accelerate misfortune. But of course, it will
not of course, avail a defendant to show that but for the plaintiff being in some way ailing when he was hurt his injuries would
have been less serious than they were. A tortfeasor gets no allowance because of the frailty of his victim.
In the same case Barwick CJ, Kitto and Taylor JJ at 168, whilst explaining the earlier decision in Watts v Rake
[1960] HCA 58
(1960) 108 CLR 158
said: It was, in effect, pointed out that it is not enough for the defendant merely to suggest the existence of a progressive pre-existing
condition in the plaintiff or a relationship between any such condition and the plaintiff's present incapacity. On the contrary it
was stressed that both the pre-existing condition and its future probable effects or its actual relationship to that incapacity must
be the subject of evidence ... which, if accepted, would establish with some reasonable measure of precision, what the pre-existing
condition was and what its future effects, both as to their nature and their future development and progress, were likely to be.
That being done, it is for the plaintiff upon the whole of the evidence to satisfy the tribunal of fact of the extent of the injury
caused by the defendant's negligence. I refer also to the case of Pastras v Commonwealth
[1967] VicRp 18
[1967] VR 161
It is clear from these decisions that, in a case such as the present, the jury needs to be clearly and carefully directed as to the
manner in which it should assume its task of resolving the competing contentions of the parties; the evidence, if any, which is available
to them for doing so and the competing onuses of proof (evidential and legal) which rest upon the parties in seeking to make good
their competing contentions. For my part, having listened to the careful and able arguments of Mr Clark, I have some considerable
doubt whether the passages in the evidence to which he referred the court are, in the light of the authorities, capable of supporting
the propositions for which he contended.
But I need not stay to consider whether that is so or not. I am firmly of the view that the directions of the learned trial judge
fall short of what was required in assisting the jury in the difficult task which had been posed for them. The directions which his
Honour gave to the jury as to the onus of proof in assessing damage were in very general terms, and did not differentiate between
the respective issues which had been raised. The references which his Honour made to the medical evidence were cursory and not directed
towards elucidating what, as I perceive it, was the central issue in contest between the parties. The critical passage in his Honour's
charge was as follows:
The defendant must take the plaintiff as he finds her, as is this case, and here you have heard evidence that there is an observable,
on X-ray, abnormality at the base of Mrs Del Campo's spine and in addition to that she has endured childbirth and suffered pain as
an aftermath of that and quite apart from the physical deformity from which she suffers which exposes her apparently to greater dangers
than someone who did not have that abnormality. You also know that in the 1980s she was diagnosed as being paranoid and underwent
treatment from two psychiatrists at the Austin Hospital and thus you have a particularly delicate situation in which you have a person
with an abnormality at the base of the spine and a person who has had psychiatric problems and you should not be surprised in those
circumstances that you find a reaction which might be thought to be worse than would occur in a normal person. That does not disentitle
her to damages, she is still entitled to have her damages assessed and awarded. You must nevertheless, whilst not ruling her out
from an award of damages on that basis, take into account that there are vicissitudes in our life as I said to you yesterday, in
relation to future problems. We all have our ups and our downs and it would be inappropriate in assessing the damages, if you disregarded
the distinct possibility in Mrs Del Campo's case that it would not take much to trigger off the sort of reaction which she had to
pain, this being pain, as it happens, emanating from the base of her spine where, as it happens, she has an abnormality. So you again
are called upon to exercise your sense of judgment, your proportion, but you must not disallow a claim for damages simply because
she was in a delicate state. The other thing that you must keep in mind is that simply because she had experienced back pain, according
to the history which the doctors obtained from her and which she told you about herself, in the past prior to this accident, does
not mean that she is not entitled to damages for back pain if you find that on the balance of probabilities you are satisfied that
what happened to her triggered off more pain in an area where she had been previously experiencing pain. People are entitled to have
damages for injuries which amount to no more than an aggravation or acceleration of a deteriorating condition from which they are
already suffering and if you thought the evidence indicated that that was the situation which occurred here, as distinct from being
the foundation cause, if I could put it that way, that does not mean she is not entitled to damages for the aggravation or acceleration
if you find that it is as low as that. This of course is a matter entirely for you, you are the people who must make a judgment as
to whether or not you are satisfied that all of the problem flowed from this incident or merely that it made a bad situation worse,
it is entirely a question for you, and here we turn to the question of expert witnesses because you have heard an inordinate amount
of evidence of opinion from experts in this case, principally doctors.
These directions, in my view, were more inclined to conceal rather than elucidate the central issue which had been raised for the
jury's consideration on the question of damages. As Mr Clark submitted, the directions were undoubtedly designed to explain and expand
upon the proposition that a defendant must take the plaintiff as he finds her. But the direction effectively in my view pre-empted
the jury's consideration of the central question of whether the appellant was entitled to be fully compensated for her injuries notwithstanding
her past medical history or whether that evidence dictated that such compensation should be diminished because of a relevant and
operative predisposing condition. By this direction the jury were told that the appellant's "delicate situation", both physically
and psychologically, required a reduction in damages on the basis that they were "vicissitudes" or "contingencies" of life. Even
if it was appropriate for the learned judge to describe the alleged predisposing factors as "vicissitudes", which I take leave to
doubt (see Wynn v NSW Insurance Ministerial Corp
[1995] HCA 53
(1995) 70 ALJR 147)
, it was not appropriate for him to pre-determine the issue raised upon the evidence in respect of which the respondent was contending
that there were, and the appellant was
contending that there were not, pre-existing and predisposing factors in the appellant's physical and psychological makeup which,
at law, required an assessment of compensation at less than full compensation. It was for the jury to decide on the evidence whether
the appellant's physical deformity exposed her to greater dangers than the normal person and, in particular, whether it relevantly
predisposed her to the type of injury for which she was claiming to be compensated. The same had to be determined in respect of what
his Honour called her "psychiatric problems". At least on one view of the evidence given by the only psychiatrist called, she had
none. These issues fell to be determined by the jury on the basis of appropriate directions fashioned in accordance with the authorities
to which I have referred.
In similar vein, the direction that the appellant was entitled to have, albeit diminished, damages for "an aggravation or acceleration
of a deteriorating condition" was unfavourable to her unless cast in the context of a full direction as to the competing contentions.
Nor, in my view, did the direction by the learned judge to the jury that the matter was entirely for them to make a judgment as to
whether "all of the problem flowed from this incident or merely made a bad situation worse" ameliorate the previous misdirections.
This was of little use to them unless they were given the sort of directions to which I have previously referred and their attention
directed to the relevant evidence which bore upon the competing contentions.
His Honour then told the jury that, "fortunately" for them, all the doctors "are pretty well unanimous about their opinion in this
case". As the debate on this appeal has shown, that might have been doing the doctors less than justice when it came to an assessment
of their evidence of the nature and extent of any underlying predisposition to the ultimate injury harboured by the appellant and
its relationship to that ultimate injury. It may be that, because the learned judge held the view which he expressed, he did not
descend to any detailed analysis of the evidence relevant to the issues raised.
Although his Honour said that he was "going to turn to questions relating to the evidence ... in order to endeavour to encapsulate
for you the issues which the parties have argued", he did not do so in relation to the issues which have been at the foundation of
this appeal. It may be that he felt that it was an unnecessary task because, as he said: I am doing this only because courts of superior
authority to this one have said that trial judges have a duty ... to endeavour to assist them by directing their minds to what we
could call the tactical issues ... which exist between the parties ... If I had my choice I would not be doing this at all because
I believe it encroaches upon your area ...
Whatever his Honour had in mind, he did not make any analysis of the evidence with a view to assisting the jury to come to a resolution
of the critical issues which underlay the competing contentions made by the parties. The jury was then left, in my view, without
the assistance which they should have had to enable them to resolve the question of whether the appellant had satisfied them on the
whole of the evidence that all of her injuries flowed from the tortious act of the defendant on 4 March or whether they could not
achieve that satisfaction because there was sufficient in the evidence relied upon by the defendant to establish with a reasonable
measure of precision that the plaintiff was suffering
from a pre-existing degenerative condition, and, if so, that it was of such a kind that its development and progress clearly related
it to the appellant's claimed disability.
I have said enough to indicate that in my view the directions given by the learned trial judge were insufficient to provide any adequate
assistance to the jury in respect of the central issues raised in relation to the assessment of damages. In the form which they took
they amounted, in my view, to a material misdirection which has led to a substantial miscarriage of justice to the appellant.
Accordingly the jury's verdict as to damages should be set aside and it is unnecessary to resolve the related ground of appeal as
to the unreasonableness of that verdict.
That leaves the question whether this court should re-assess the damages. I am in no doubt that it should. There is no question but
that this court has the discretionary power, under
Supreme Court Act
, to do so. Much has been said in recent months by the court as to whether and in what circumstances it should exercise the power:
see Backwell v AAA, (unreported, Court of Appeal, 20 March 1996); Electrolux Pty Ltd v Siniakis (unreported, Court of Appeal, 10
April 1996). In my view there are powerful practical considerations in this case as to why the court should re-assess the damages.
Firstly, as I have said, the medical evidence all came from doctors called by the appellant. There was no attack on the credit of
any of them and there was no issue raised which would prevent the court from forming a proper opinion on the amount of damages which
should be awarded.
Secondly, the appellant desires the court to re-assess her damages and the respondent does not oppose, provided that the affidavit
material to which I have referred is taken into account.
Thirdly and most importantly, it is in my view appropriate to assess the damages in the interests of ending litigation and saving
further expense. It would be most unfortunate if we were to remit this matter for a re-hearing when already the costs incurred must
be approaching the legitimate worth of the claim: cf Bratovich v Mitchell
[1968] VicRp 72
[1968] VR 556
; Precision Plastics Pty Ltd v Demir
[1975] HCA 27
(1975) 132 CLR 362
The relevant material relating to the appellant's condition has been traversed on this appeal. There is no doubt that she has suffered
much pain and loss of enjoyment of life during the five years which have elapsed since the accident. Her life during that time has
clearly been much depreciated and has, to a large extent, been in the hands of doctors and surgeons. She has undergone three major
bouts of surgery and has been forced to give up her work.
However it now appears that the recent surgery has for the first time given her relief from her painful symptoms and has increased
her mobility. Her prognosis is much brighter than it was when considered by the jury. It must also be remembered that, no matter
what has been said in relation to the plaintiff's previous medical history, she did have, at all material times prior to the injury,
what might be described as a "vulnerable back".
Doing the best that I can on the material available, I would propose that the damages be re-assessed in the sum of $100,000, and,
in accordance with the reasons that I have enunciated, I would propose that the appeal be allowed, the jury's verdict in so far as
it relates to damages be set aside, and in substitution therefor there be judgment entered in the appellant's favour in the sum of
$100,000 together with such sum for damages by way of interest as may be determined.
Brooking JA
Phillips JA
I also concur.
The formal order of the court will be that the appeal is allowed. The jury's verdict in so far as it relates to damages is set aside
and the judgment is set aside, and in substitution therefor there be judgment entered in the appellant's favour in the sum of $100,000
together with the sum of $4000 agreed damages in the nature of interest.
It is ordered that the respondent pay the appellant's costs of the trial on Scale D and the respondent pay the appellant's costs
of the appeal.
Appeal allowed.
Solicitors for the appellant: Novatsis and Alexander.
Solicitors for the respondent: Blake Dawson Waldron.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter