URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICCAT/1998/1311.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:30:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Michael Factor Architect v Stonnington CC Michael Factor Architect v Stonnington CC [1998] VICCAT 1311 (22 December 1998)
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NO. 1998/45932
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. 1337/97
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON 18 DECEMBER 1998
P.G. O'LEARY MEMBER
Applicant for Review/
Permit Applicant Michael Factor Architect
Responsible Authority Stonnington City Council
Respondents/Objectors S. Marshall and others
NATURE OF APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
(the Act) for a review of a decision to refuse to grant a permit.
Use land for two attached dwellings
24 Fulton Street, Armadale
Land and Dimensions
Frontage 9.5 metres, depth 20.12 metres, land area 191 square metres
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING
Stonnington Planning Scheme, Residential C Zone
GROUNDS OF REFUSAL
1. The proposal does not comply with the requirements of the Good Design
2. The proposal is contrary to the proper and orderly planning of the area.
3. The height, bulk and scale of the development is inappropriate for the
streetscape.
4. The car parking will overly dominate the streetscape.
GROUNDS OF APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
1. The proposed development is in accordance with sound planning principles.
2. The proposed development is appropriate in this locality having regard to
the density and nature of surrounding development.
3. The location of the car parking will not overly dominate the streetscape.
4. The height, bulk and scale of the development is appropriate and consistent
with nearby development in Aubray and Fulton Streets.
APPEARANCES
Mr. C. Bowden, Town Planner, represented the responsible authority.
Ms. G. McKenzie, Town Planner, represented the Applicant for Review/Permit
John Marshall represented S. Marshall.
Terry Marshall represented himself and D. Marshall.
A. Permezel represented Armadale Pre-School.
W.J. Venn represented himself.
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
On 1 July 1998, the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
"VCAT Act") and Tribunals and Licensing Authorities (Miscellaneous Amendments)
Act 1998 came into operation.
The transitional provisions in Section 312 and Clause 9 of Schedule 2 to the
Tribunals and Licensing Authorities (Miscellaneous Amendments)
Act apply to
these proceedings.
PRELIMINARY MATTERS
1. At the commencement of the hearing, Ms. McKenzie sought leave to table
revised plans of the proposed development. Ms. McKenzie
explained the proposed
changes and advised that these details were circulated to all parties prior to
the hearing. No objection
was raised by any party to the substitution of the
revised plans.
2. Ms. McKenzie also sought to clarify the name of the applicant. The
application for permit was made in the name of
"Michael Factor
. Ms. McKenzie sought to substitute the name of the applicant
for the owner of the land which is
"M. Kakaras"
3. I sought clarification of the permit sought in the application. The
application for permit referred to
attached houses"
. The reference should be
"to use two storey attached
Pursuant to Section 64 of Schedule 1 of the VCAT Act, permission
is granted to:
a) substitute revised plans dated November 1998 for the application for the
plans originally lodged with the application.
b) to substitute the name of the application for permit/application for review
"M. Kakaras",
c) to define the purpose of the application for permit as
"to use land for
two, two storey attached houses".
PLANNING CONTROLS AND POLICY
1. The subject site is zoned Residential C under the Stonnington Planning
Scheme. A permit is required pursuant to Clause 119-1.2
of the Scheme to use
land for two attached houses.
2. The purposes of the Residential C Zone are:
"* To recognise areas of residential development and encourage the
establishment of educational, recreational, religious and community
compatible with the area and responsive to local community needs.
* To provide the opportunity for a variety of residential densities and
dwelling types.
* To encourage higher residential densities in areas near rail transport
stations and stops, near centres of commercial and community
activity and near
areas shown as district centres on the strategic framework plan, having regard
. The nature of the area, including the amenity and residential
. The capacity of surrounding roads to carry any increase in traffic.
. The capacity of existing essential services.
. Whether the development will require improvements to the existing roads or
essential services.
* To ensure that if land is used for a residential building, dual occupancy
or a multi-unit development, adequate provision is made
for daylight, privacy
and landscaping and that the amenity of occupants of adjoining land is not
3. Clause 21 - The Good Design Guide for Medium-Density Housing, applies to the
assessment of this application and requires the responsible
authority to have
regard to the element objectives, criteria and techniques outlined in the
4. Clause 3-3A.1 of the State Section of the Planning Scheme outlines State
Policy for Housing, and includes the requirement for
increased medium density
housing to provide improved housing choice, make better use of existing
infrastructure and improve energy
efficient housing. In addition, use of the
Good Design Guide for Medium-Density Housing in application for medium density
is encouraged. The Good Design Guide is incorporated into the scheme
by virtue of Clause 3-3A.2.
5. Clauses 14-1 and 14-2 relate to Metropolitan Development, Regional Housing
and Urban Consolidation policies. These include a
requirement to encourage:
"A range of housing opportunities to meet diverse housing needs of the
community are provided and the principles of choice and affordability
promoted.".
6. The general guidelines for consideration of application for permit are
provided in Clause 16-2 of the Regional Section of the
Planning Scheme. This
clause requires the responsible authority to consider the following matters
before deciding on an application,
the conditions of a permit or approval of a
development plan:
"* If appropriate, the matters set out in Section 60 of the Act.
* The State, regional and municipal planning policies.
* The purpose of the zone, reserved land or control.
* Orderly planning of the area.
* Proximity of the land to any reserved land.
* Effect on the amenity of the neighbourhood.
* Any matters required to be considered in the zone, reserve or
7. Stonnington City Council has adopted a Residential Development Policy which
applies to consideration of multi-unit dwellings on
a site. This policy has
similar aims and objectives of the medium density housing guide.
8. The responsible authority exhibited its Municipal Strategic Statement in
October 1997. The MSS provides guidance on planning
policy and sets the
context for the new Stonnington Planning Scheme.
9. Stonnington City Council has prepared and exhibited a new planning scheme
which adopts the Victoria Planning Provisions. Under
the proposed new planning
scheme, the subject site will be situated in a Residential 1 Zone. The new
planning scheme has been exhibited,
submissions have been made to it and these
comments have been referred to an independent panel for assessment. At the
time of writing
the scheme had not been adopted by Stonnington City Council.
10. The new planning scheme also provides a number of local planning policies.
Planning Policy G2 deals with design of new development.
It sets out the
following objectives and guidelines:
To retain the existing diversity of building forms.
To encourage innovation and good design in the building of new
To ensure new development makes a positive contribution to the built form
and amenity of the area and is respectful to the existing
character and
streetscape.
Applications for use and development throughout the City should demonstrate
New buildings
are not significantly higher or lower than the surrounding
are oriented to match the alignment of existing buildings in the
setbacks, especially frontage setback, are consistent with those of
adjoining buildings (eg: buildings in retail areas are built to
parts of the building over 2 store and any roof gardens are set back
behind the facade to minimise impacts on the streetscape.
forms and materials used reflect and complement the character of nearby
buildings in the street.
design, height and location of any proposed new front fences, carports,
garages and landscaping complement both the building on the
site and the
streetscape (eg: fences are low, carports and garages are not generally located
in the frontage setback).
This application review relates to Stonnington City Council's refusal of
Planning Permit Application No.1337/97 for two attached
houses on one lot at 24
Fulton Street, Armadale. The proposal (as amended) involves erecting two, two
storey attached houses on
a site situated at the corner of Fulton and Aubrey
would comprise study, bathroom, WC, laundry and bedroom at ground
level. A car space is situated to the rear with direct access
from Aubrey
Road. A courtyard which is partly undercroft would be sited at the front of
the property facing Fulton Street. First
floor would comprise meals
area/kitchen/WC/ living area and a north-facing deck.
comprise study, bathroom, laundry, WC and bedroom at ground level. A small
courtyard is provided at the rear with access from
the bedroom. A car space
would be provided in the front with access to Fulton Street. The first floor
would comprise meals area,
kitchen, laundry and deck.
Total height of the proposed building would be 6.7 metres above ground
Site and Surrounds
The subject site has a frontage of 9.54 metres to Fulton Street and an abuttal
of 20.12 metres to Aubrey Road. The subject land
slopes from the rear
(southern side) to the front of the site (northern side). The site is
currently occupied by a single storey
attached house. Adjoining properties
comprise single storey attached house at 22 Fulton Street and a single storey
detached house
immediately behind in Aubrey Road. The southern side of Fulton
Street is predominantly single storey housing particularly west of
Aubrey Road.
Land opposite is Toorak Park Football and Cricket Ground. Land to the east of
Aubrey Road comprises single and two
storey dwellings. There has been recent
new multi unit development particularly on the east side of Aubrey Road.
Fulton Street has
two-way traffic and angle parking on its northern side with
various parking limits. On the southern side of Fulton Street, parking
prohibited. Aubrey Road is one-way heading north to south. No parking is
permitted at any time outside the subject site in Aubrey
Road. There is a
footpath outside the site in Fulton Street, but there is no footpath, kerb or
channel on the west side abutting
the subject site.
12. The application for permit was lodged with Stonnington City Council on 14
November 1997. The application previously showed two
bedrooms and a balcony
with ablution facilities at first floor level and living/kitchen facilities at
ground level. Two car parking
spaces were provided at the front with direct
access from Fulton Street. The application was advertised pursuant to
Planning and Environment Act
. Seven objections were
received to the application. On 3 April 1998, the responsible authority
refused the application for permit
on four grounds.
REASONS FOR ORDER
13. At the hearing I was provided with written and oral submissions,
photographs and plans depicting the proposal including the amended
objectors' properties and the locality in general. I undertook an inspection
of the site and the locality in general.
During the course of the hearing, an
issue about levels was raised by Mr. T. Marshall, I gave instructions for the
applicant to
provide clarification of levels and forwarded such to Mr. Marshall
for comment. This information was provided to the Tribunal on
24 December
1998. Having considered all of the matter put before me, I consider the
responsible authority's decision essentially
was correct. Under normal
circumstances I would dismiss the application for review, however I consider
that with a number of changes
to the proposed layout and elevations, as will be
outlined below, that the development can be approved.
Height and Intensity of Development
Concern was expressed by the responsible authority about the impact of the
proposed development on the Fulton Street streetscape
given that most housing
on the southern side of Fulton Street was single storey. I do not think the
height of the proposed building
at 6.7 metres is fatal in this instance,
however it needs to be acknowledge that the site is only 191 square metres in
area and there
are a number of site constraints such as its narrow width (9.5
metres), its limited ability to park vehicles outside the site and
relationship to adjoining and nearby single storey dwellings which places
limitations on its development potential. The site
constraints have
necessitated the applicants revising their layout plans to provide first floor
living areas which would improve
amenity for inhabitants of these dwellings and
provide views over Toorak Park. This in itself demonstrates how tight the
development is. There are also access constraints whereby the only
access to the rear courtyard is through the bedroom, and this
courtyard will be
in shadow for most part of the day. Similarly the only direct access to the
car space on Unit 1 is through the
bedroom. Ms. McKenzie advised that this
proposal was an innovative design and responded well to the site constraints
and opportunities.
I am not convinced about this argument. It appears that
the amended plans were provided following Ms. McKenzie's input. I consider
reflects a reaction to the Council's decision rather than anything remarkable
or innovative. It appears as if the applicants
have attempted to put too much
on a small site and I have come to the conclusion that the site would be suited
to either one three
bedroom house or two small dwellings such as one, one
bedroom dwelling (without a study) and one, one bedroom house with a study.
also consider the means of vehicular access to the site from the front is poor
and should not be approved, particularly when alternative
means of access is
available. I consider that a more appropriate treatment for the car parking
would be to place both car parking
spaces at the rear of the site with access
off Aubrey Road, this would probably be at the expense of the study at the rear
1 (and this would necessitate the relocation of bedrooms to the front
of the units). Whilst this would not necessarily produce a
traditional shaped
terrace style house, given the site constraints, I believe a more site
responsive design treatment is warranted
to justify erecting two, two storey
dwellings on a fairly modest sized lot. I also consider that more generous
ground level open
space with a northerly aspect should be provided.
Bulk and Mass
I also consider the bulk/mass of the two storey structure would unreasonably
dominate the neighbouring properties, particularly No.
22 Fulton Street. I
believe there are two options available to me, first is to reject the proposal
completely; the second is to
direct some changes as outlined in paragraph 21,
which would reduce the impact on adjoining properties. I will choose the
Car parking and the streetscape
The modified plans showed one car space in the front of Unit 2. Originally
there were two car spaces shown in the front setback
area. The revised plans
are an improvement and are clearly in recognition of the fourth ground of
refusal. The applicant referred
to other examples of dwellings (20 Fulton
Street, 2A, 2B, 4A and 4B Aubrey Road) which had parking in the front setback
differentiates these sites from the applicant's side is that they
have no alternative means of access. Nos. 2A and 2B Aubrey Road
fairly attractive streetscape, the front of the properties were larger than the
subject site and contain substantially
more landscaping than the applicant's
side. This tended to obscure the car parking areas and provide a fairly
attractive appearance.
Nos. 4A and 4B Aubrey Road provided two car spaces in
the front with little landscaping. I do not consider that 4A and 4B Aubrey
Road to be good examples to follow and should not be replicated in this
instance. No. 20 Fulton Street has a modest, lean-to carport
which does not
dominate the site. There are some other examples on the north-east corner of
Aubrey Road/Fulton Street which had
car parking in part of the front setback
area, however like 2A and 2B Aubrey Road, the drives did not dominate the site
rather there was a much greater amount of landscaping around the
front setback area to mask the carparking areas.
Vehicle Access
Concern was expressed by the Marshall's about vehicle access in Aubrey Road,
and in particularly manoeuvring space and safety aspects
relating to accessing
the courtyard space from Aubrey Road. I note there is a power pole on the
curve where Aubrey Road narrows.
The applicant has designed the access to the
courtyard to be wider than the standard 2.6 metre doorway width required in the
Design Guide. I consider the access to this car space, whilst not ideal,
is the most practical in this situation. I also consider
the car space to Unit
2 should be relocated so that it is alongside the courtyard car space. This
may necessitate reallocating the
car parking spaces, however I consider these
to be more appropriate on urban design grounds. This in itself would reduce
of Unit 1 so that Unit 1 would virtually only have a bedroom,
bathroom, WC and laundry at ground floor level.
Mr. Venn expressed concern about drainage problems experienced to the west of
the subject site in Fulton Street and expressed concern
that the proposed works
would result in increase in flooding. Given the site coverage and the likely
amount of hard paved surface
on the site, I consider there will be a marginal
increase in run-off from the site. I do not see this as a reason for refusing
application. It does however suggest there should be more garden beds and
less hard paved areas on the development site to facilitate
trees and shrubs.
I suggest the courtyards at the front of each unit should contain less hard
paved surface than that shown on the
plans. This matter should be addressed by
a properly prepared landscape plan.
Site Levels
During the review hearing, Mr. T. Marshall questioned the accuracy of levels of
the plans and doubted the proposed development would
be built to the 6.7 metres
height shown. Mr. Marshall was concerned that if the development went ahead,
variations would be required
which would increase the height of the building.
The plans tabled by Mr. Marshall showed that the wall height could in fact
7.165 metres. At the conclusion of the hearing, I directed the applicant
to provide further details of the site levels. Ms. McKenzie
forwarded a letter
to the Tribunal on the 22 December 1998 which stated in part:
"The architect, Mr Michael Factor has checked the calculations (using the
survey prepared by the Licence Surveyor) and confirms the
maximum wall height,
as submitted, will be 6.7 metres, at the north-west corner of the building.
The height of the wall at the southern
end of the building will be appropriate
6.2 metres (where it abuts Mrs Marshall's property)."
I consider this information to be acceptable if there is to be any variations
then it will need to be absorbed within the building
itself. I will address
this matter in the draft conditions.
Overlooking
There was some concern expressed by objectors about overlooking particularly to
the house at 6 Aubrey Road. Some overlooking will
be possible to 6 Aubrey Road
from stair windows. I note however that Aubrey Road is about 8 metres wide and
that what overlooking
will take place will be directed to the front yard of 6
Aubrey Road. There is also the potential from some overlooking from the
first floor meals rooms towards the front garden of 1 Aubrey Road. Most other
overlooking will be directed towards Toorak Park.
I consider the overlooking
to 6 Aubrey Road to be minor and would meet the criteria of the Good Design
Guide noting that privacy
considerations are directed at secluded open space
areas and habitable rooms.
Recommended Changes
I feel that a compromise design solution which incorporates the following
aspects will negate most offsite impacts and provide sufficient
flexibility for
the architect to redesign parts of the development utilising most of the
existing floor and elevation treatment.
I consider the following should be
undertaken:
a) delete the car space in the front of Unit 2 and relocate it to the rear of
the site with access from Aubrey Road. If necessary
car spaces for Units 1 and
2 may be altered so that direct access to each unit is achieved.
b) delete bedroom 1 in Unit 1 and replace it with the garage.
c) set the front ground floor units of Units 1 and 2 back at least 4 metres
from the Fulton Street boundary.
d) set the front of the first floor balconies back at least 3.5 metres from the
front boundary.
e) set the front of the first floor wall back at least 5.5 metres from the
Fulton Street boundary.
f) relocate the bedroom in each unit to the front of each dwelling.
g) maintain the rear first floor wall positions and the ground floor wall
position on Unit 2.
h) retain the rear open space to Unit 2.
i) retain the transparent front fence detail as shown on the perspective tabled
at the review hearing. If privacy is required then
it should be addressed by
planting a hedge or shrubs.
j) the courtyard areas in Units 1 and 2 to contain not more than 60% hard paved
INTERIM ORDER
The interim order of the Tribunal is that the Application for Review No.
1998/45932 is varied. I propose to direct that a permit
issue with draft
conditions on the permit. I also proposed to give all parties 14 days to
respond to these draft conditions (although
this is not an invitation to
introduce matters which were not previously addressed in the review
Condition 1 shall read:
1. This permit shall have no force or effect until three copies of an
amended plan of the layout and elevations of the development
submitted to and approved by the responsible authority. This plan must show
the layout of the site and elevations generally
in accordance with the plans
tabled at the review hearing, but amended to show the following:
a) deletion of the car space at the front of Unit 2 and relocation to the
rear of the site with access from Aubrey Road;
b) deletion of bedroom 1 in Unit 1 and replacement with a garage. Relocate
the bedroom to the front of the dwelling;
c) the ground floor wall of Units 1 and 2 set back at least 4 metres from
Fulton Street;
d) the first floor balconies set back at least 3.5 metres from the front
e) the first floor wall of Units 1 and 2 set back at least 5.5 metres from
Fulton Street
f) the elevation treatment showing the maximum height of the building at the
north-western corner of the site (abutting 22 Fulton
Street) being not more
than 6.7 metres above ground level at the front of the site abutting No.22
Fulton Street and not more than
6.2 metres above ground level at the rear of
g) the two front courtyards having a maximum hard paved surface area of
Notations to be shown:
i) maintain the rear first floor wall position on both units and the ground
floor wall position on Unit 2;
ii) retain the rear open space to Unit 2;
iii) retain the transparent front fence detail as shown on the perspective
table at the review hearing. If privacy is required then
it can be achieved by
planting a hedge or shrubs.
2. The use or development allowed by this permit and shown on the drawings
and/or schedules endorsed to accompany the permit shall
not be amended for any
reason without the consent of the responsible authority.
3. This permit will expire if one of the following circumstances
* The development and use is/are not started within two years of the date of
this permit.
* The development is not completed within four years of the date of this
The responsible authority may extend the periods referred to if a request is
made in writing before the permit expires or within three
afterwards.
4. The vehicular crossing shall be constructed to Council's standard
vehicular crossing specifications.
5. This permit shall have no effect until a landscaping plan indicating the
area or areas set aside for landscaping and a schedule
of all proposed trees,
shrubs and ground covers (including size at maturity and botanical names) is to
be submitted to and approved
by the responsible authority, and when approved,
such plan shall form part of the endorsed plan under this permit.
6. Before the use allowed by this permit starts, landscaping works as shown
on the endorsed plans must be completed to the satisfaction
of the responsible
authority and then maintained to the satisfaction of the responsible
9. The drainage of the site shall be to the requirements of the responsible
authority and the discharge of water from the land affected
by this permit
shall be controlled around its limits to prevent any discharge onto any
adjacent property or street other than by
means of an underground pipe
discharged to a point nominated to the satisfaction of the responsible
P.G. O'LEARY
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter