URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VRAT/2008/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Manning (HAR) - App 09 2008 [2008] VRAT 9 (22 July 2008)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
Appeal No 9 of
In the matter of an appeal
MS KERRYN MANNING
AGAINST THE CONVICTION AND PENALTY OF SIX WEEKS SUSPENSION IMPOSED BY THE
HARNESS RACING VICTORIA INDEPENDENT APPEALS PANEL FOR BREACHING
HARNESS RACING RULE 149(1)
JUDGE HICKS
, His Honour
Mr P. Beaumont,
Mr B. Pearce, Adviser
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT MELBOURNE ON TUESDAY
22 JULY 2008 AT 11.07 A.M.
MR T. FORREST QC appeared on behalf of Harness Racing Victoria
MR D. SHEALES appeared on behalf of Ms Manning.
(His Honour Judge Hicks)
D E C I S I O N
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal by Ms Kerryn Manning, licensed driver,
against the decision of the Independent Appeals Panel made on
26 June 2008.
The history: On 6 June 2008, harness racing stewards found Ms Kerryn
Manning, licensed harness racing driver guilty of breaching
Harness Racing
Victoria Rule 149(1), for a drive on Fox Street in Race 7, the Winchester Arms
Merv Dillon Tribute at the Charlton
harness race meeting on 26 May 2008.
Harness Racing Victoria Rule 149(1) states that a driver shall take all
reasonable and permissible measures during the course of
a race to ensure that
the horse driven by that driver is given full opportunity to win or obtain the
best possible placing in the
field. As a result of the stewards finding the
charge proven against Ms Kerryn Manning, she was suspended for a period of six
commencing on 6 June 2008.
Ms K. Manning then lodged an appeal to the Independent Appeals Panel
for Harness Racing Victoria. On 26 June 2008, the Independent
Appeals Panel,
Harness Racing Victoria heard the appeal and found the charge proven, dismissing
the appeal. It's against the decision
of the Independent Appeals Panel made on
26 June 2008 that Ms K. Manning now appeals to this Racing Appeals Tribunal.
The circumstances of the alleged offence. As stated, Ms K. Manning was
charged on 6 June 2008 with a breach of Harness Racing Victoria
Rule 149(1) for
a drive on Fox Street. The steward's outline for particulars. The first of
those four particulars related to the
start of the race where it was alleged
that after drawing a favourable barrier on the mobile, namely Barrier No.4 off
the front line,
the appellant restrained Fox Street and settled it at the rear
of the field rather than going forward from the barrier.
The second particular alleged that Ms K. Manning failed to make a
sufficient effort to maintain touch with the body of the field
once she'd gone
to the rear of the field, so to be best placed to improve her position inside
the final 1000 metres of the race.
The third particular alleged that over the final 400 metres, Ms K.
Manning failed to improve her position by placing her horse wider
on the track
when the opportunity presented so as to give it a better opportunity in the
The fourth particular alleged that Ms K. Manning failed to show
sufficient vigour inside the final 150 metres on Fox Street, to
ensure that the
horse was given full opportunity to win or obtain the best possible placing in
the field. The appellant has pleaded
not guilty to the charge. An appeal to
this Tribunal is by way of a re-hearing.
The law. The onus is on the stewards to prove on the balance of
probabilities that Ms K. Manning breached Rule 149(1). A regard
of breach of
this rule is a serious offence. The standard of proof to be applied is that
standard of proof referred to in Brigginshaw
v. Brigginshaw. And later
confirmed by the High Court in Redgvick v. Mackelroy. Whilst the standard is on
the balance of probabilities,
I must be reasonably satisfied that the stewards
have proven the charge.
It is not a mere matter of mechanical comparisons between competing
views, I'm bound and must consider the seriousness of the charge
and the gravity
of the consequences which may follow from a particular finding. Rule 149(1)
imposes an objective standard of care
that takes into account all the
circumstances including the explanation given by Ms K. Manning in her evidence
and in the evidence
of her witnesses.
In short, it includes an assessment of the totality of all the
evidence. It is well (indistinct) that a mere error of judgment
sufficient basis for finding that the rule has been breached. The test to be
applied is whether the driver is culpable.
The driver's conduct must be when
viewed objectively, blameworthy and worthy of punishment before the breach of
the rule is established.
It is well established that the tribunal would take into account the
views and explanations of the driver and the views and opinions
of the stewards.
However, neither of these factors are determinatives. In the end, the stewards
must prove that the driver when
viewed objectively, was culpable, blameworthy
and worthy of punishment. It is important to note that Rule 149(1) is a wide
in the sense it is not limited to giving the horse full opportunity just to
But also includes, giving the horse full opportunity to win or obtain
the best possible placing in the field. For example, in Race
7, as with all
races, TAB betting attaches to the first four horses in any race.
Mr Forrest QC who appeared on behalf of the stewards,
emphasised throughout
the tribunal hearing the words of Rule 149(1), including not only giving the
horse the full opportunity to
win but also giving the horse the full opportunity
to obtain the best possible placing in the field.
In this case, the driver was giving instructions to how the horse was
to be driven shortly prior to the race. As to the relevance
of driver's
instructions, the New South Wales Racing case of Rigari delivered on
29 September 2004. His Honour Judge Thorley stated
"Whilst the evidence of
any such driving instruction is relevant and plays an evidentiary part in
consideration of whatever charge
is at stake, the existence of any such driving
instructions does not detract from the obligation which the rule places directly
the driver".
His Honour Judge Nixon, chairman of the Racing Appeals Tribunal in the
State of Victoria in the case of Nikolic delivered on 14
October 2005 at p.121,
stated "Whilst obeying instructions may have provided some explanation as to why
a particular strategy is
taken or not taken by a jockey, circumstances can and
frequently do change during the race and those instructions in the jockey's
may have to be reviewed in the context of the race as it unfolded. And as the
board observed and I adopt, obeying instructions
does not necessarily provide an
answer to the question as whether viewed objectively, the measures or steps
taken by a rider were
reasonable or permissible, thereby satisfying the purpose
of a rule and the horses ridden in such a manner as to be given full opportunity
to win or obtain the best possible place in
the field."
In the end a driver's or jockey's instruction is a relevant evidentiary
consideration. But Rule 149(1) clearly places the obligation
and duty upon the
driver to give the horse driven by him or her full opportunity to win or obtain
the best possible placing in the
The evidence. The first particular. After drawing a favourable
barrier. Barrier 4, the horse had been restrained to settle towards
the rear of
the field. Is the first particular alleged. Fox Street was the $2.60 favourite
for the race in question. It had drawn
a favourable draw.
It was the view of the appellant that while she may not have known
prior to the race it was the favourite, she knew it was one of
the main chances
in the race. Ms Michelle Manning, the sister of the appellant, is the
trainer of Fox Street. The owner of the
horse was not called before this
Tribunal. On 26 May 2008, shortly after the race, an inquiry was opened by
Stewards into the driving
tactics applied by the appellant. The trainer was
also called before the Stewards. The trainer gave evidence that at 1.04 p.m.
that day she received instructions via her phone from a Russell Edwards as to
how the horse should be driven.
Ms Michelle Manning explained to the Stewards that Russell Edwards was
not the owner of the horse but a spokesperson for the owners
of the horse.
Ms Michelle Manning gave evidence as the trainer, that she received her
instructions from Mr Edwards, that despite
the favourable barrier, the horse
should be not used to go up forward, and that in fact the horse should be used
to go back at the
start. The basis, he said, for these instructions is the
horse has a tendency to pull and further to that if it gets to the front
early it tends not to try.
At the time of the drive on Monday, 26 May 2008, the appellant in this
matter, Ms Kerryn Manning, was one of Australia's leading
harness racing
drivers. She has won between approximately 800 to 1000 drives a year, and has
one several Australian driving premierships.
In short, she is not only an
experienced driver but she is an elite driver. In addition, she was well
familiar with the horse that
her sister trained, having driven the horse on at
least 12 previous starts prior to the race at Charlton. As one of the elite and
leading harness racing drivers in Australia, well familiar with the horse in
question, she was surprised at the instructions her
sister had given to her only
shortly prior the start of the race in question.
Ms Michelle Manning, in evidence before the Stewards on 26 May 2008,
stated that she gave the instructions to her sister not long
before the race.
She told the Stewards she did not know why she did not get to see her sister
much beforehand. Michelle Manning
stated to the Stewards her sister, the
driver, was, "Actually surprised we were going back". The appellant, when she
gave her evidence
before the Stewards on 26 May 2008 stated, "Like I said to
Michelle, once she said we were going back I said, 'Well we've got no
because it's a long way back'". It was the view of the appellant as one, if not
Australia's leading drivers, that driving the
horse in the fashion would give
the horse, "No hope".
When the Stewards opened their inquiry the first question they
addressed to the appellant was, "First of all, just your reasoning’s
going back at the start today". The appellant answered, "I was told by the
trainer, who was told by the owner", to which the
appellant responded, "Which I
disagree with but". Just before the Stewards showed her the film of the race in
question, the appellant
again said to the Stewards, "Once she said go back",
referring to her sister, "I said, 'Are you sure' and she said, 'Yes'".
It was clear to this most experienced and elite driver that she was
being queried by the Stewards as to her reasons for taking the
run she did.
From the very outset she maintained and throughout the Stewards Inquiry on 26
May 2008, the appellant maintained that
she disagreed with the way the horse
should be driven. The inquiry opened on 26 May 2008 and was then adjourned
until 6 June 2008
for further investigation. The appellant's view as to what
were the appropriate driving tactics to be used for the driving of Fox
Race 7 did not change in her two appearances before the Stewards. No
alternative view was ever put to the Stewards in
those two inquiries.
As stated, on 6 June 2008 there was a continuation of the inquiry as to
her drive. This was some ten days after the initial Stewards
Inquiry. Ms
Kerryn Manning the appellant, was well aware that the Stewards were continuing
their investigation into her drive and
the reasons for it. Again at the start
of the inquiry on that adjourned date she was asked by the Stewards whether she
had anything
she wished to raise out of the previous transcript to which she
replied, "No". Further, she was asked by Mr Murray, the Steward,
Stewards Transcript p.24, "Do you have anything further you wish to put forward
at this stage, anything you want to raise
prior to any questions?". Ms Manning,
the appellant, replied, "No, not really".
During the Stewards Inquiry on 6 June, the appellant was asked, had she
got annoyed with the instructions that she had been given
by the spokesperson
for the owners, via her sister. She stated, "Not really annoyed. I just
thought it was the wrong thing to do
from the draw, whereas I think if he'd gone
forward, I think he probably would have found the front. Like Grant would have
I think I would have worked into the death, and then knowing What
I don’t know that he would have won the race, using him early, but I think
he would have ran, I mean well closer
than he did. But I was just doing what I
was told to do so". Although the appellant well knew the horse, and the fact
that it may
pull, it was her opinion the horse should have been driven forward.
In my opinion I am satisfied to the requisite degree, that is that the
first particular alleged, namely giving up favourable Barrier
4, by restraining
the horse off the front line, and going to the rear of the field, the appellant
was of the view the horse in question
would have, to quote herself, "No hope
because it would be a long way back". I am satisfied to the requisite degree
that the appellant,
being such an experienced and elite driver, with full
knowledge of the horse in question and
full knowledge of the form of the horses around her, was fully aware
that this was the wrong thing to do as far as giving this horse,
one of the main
chances in the race, the full opportunity to win or obtain the best possible
placing in the field.
During cross examination by Mr Forrest QC appearing for the
Stewards in the Tribunal hearing before us, the appellant put forward
explanation that she did not put forward to the Stewards at either of the two
The additional explanation that she did not mention to the Stewards,
either on the day of the race in question, 26 May 2008, or
ten days later on 6
June 2008, words to the effect that she did - she said that once, however, she
had got onto the trap she had
time to think about the spokesperson's instruction
on behalf of the owners, and given to (indistinct) her sister, and considers
instruction to be a suitable way to now drive the horse. I state that I
reject completely such belated explanation given by the
appellant before this
Mr Sheales who appeared on her behalf stated that she was doing no more
than answering questions put to her by Stewards on both
occasions, and that she
was never asked her opinion about this aspect. In my opinion this is completely
artificial and extreme.
She was clearly asked on two occasions, both inquiries,
what her reasons were for driving the horse in the way she did. She continued
to maintain that she disagreed with the instructions she'd been given.
Further, this experienced and elite driver well knew the Stewards had
opened the inquiry into her drive, and she had been asked
Street and the reasons in particular as to why she drove the horse in the way
she did on both inquires. As
I state, the reason she gave on both days of the
inquiry was she disagreed with the instructions, and initially told the Stewards
she felt they had no hope of winning. In my opinion, she was given ample
opportunity by the Stewards to push forward her new version,
but prior to the
race she changed her mind and now did agree with the instructions given.
The appellant is no novice driver. She's no novice as far as Steward's
procedures of race tracks are concerned. It is abundantly
clear that her
providence and ability to put forward any explanation she so desires as to why
she drove the horse in the manner that
she did. In my view, the explanation
that it last gave before this tribunal was a belated attempt by the appellant,
and one that
I do not accept to explain why she did not adhere to a primary
responsibility as the driver, irrespective of instructions as to how
should be driven.
Mr Sheales, who appeared on behalf of the appellant also submitted in
this tribunal that, however, concerning the racing pattern
of the horse in
question, such instructions when viewed objectively were not unreasonable. On
the material placed before this tribunal,
whilst I'm at least prepared to state
there has been no exact pattern of racing, of either going forward or backwards
or behind as
far as Fox Street is concerned, nevertheless, Barrier 4 was a most
favourable barrier draw. It was in any view a good barrier (indistinct)
mobile in an 11 horse field.
Whilst care may have been needed to ensure the horse did not pull, it
was certainly, at least in the opinion of the appellant herself,
who knew the
horse well, that she could go forward without causing the horse to pull
excessively. Further, even if the horse was
not (indistinct) to try and take
the lead, or go to the death seat, the horse could have been at least eased out
of the mobile, and
not restrained in the manner it was, to ensure that it at
least had a chance of taking up a favourable position in the field. The
of restraining by the appellant on Fox Street at the start of the race was to
take a very solid hold on the horse and restrain
it quite significantly.
It went quickly back through the field and eventually settled last, a
position which the appellant well knew would give, as she
quoted to the
Stewards, the horse "no hope". I am satisfied to the requisite standard that
the driver, Ms Kerryn Manning, did not
adhere to a primary obligation, when the
facts are viewed objectively and taken as a whole, that as a driver, when she
Street to be restrained at the start, when she well knew that the
horse would then have no hope, I find that Ms Kerryn Manning did
not take all
reasonable, permissible measures during the course of the race to ensure the
horse that was driven by her was given
full opportunity to win or obtain the
best possible placing.
While (indistinct) clearly rest with the appellant, in that a driver,
indeed a jockey, in similar position regarding instructions
is sometimes caught
between the devil and the deep blue sea, between their driving or riding
instructions and their own views of
the matter, in my opinion when viewed
objectively, Ms Manning failed completely in her duties as a driver and has
breached Rule 149(1).
The second particular: As to the second particular, that the appellant
failed to make sufficient effort to maintain touch with
the body of the field,
1000 metre mark, I am of the view that clearly she did not
make a sufficient effort to maintain in touch with the body of the field.
However, in all the circumstance concerning the previous pattern and the way the
horse had raced previously, I am unable to say
to the requisite standard that
such act was culpable and blameworthy in respect to this particular.
The third particular: As to the third particular, that at the 400
metres of the race Ms Manning failed to improve wide on the track
opportunity presented. I am of the view that this can conveniently be split
into two aspects. The first aspect concerns
whether, prior to reaching the apex
of the turn, in fact prior to reaching the home turn at all, she should have
placed Fox Street
wide on the turn and commenced her run around the width of the
In my opinion, the submission of Mr Sheales who appeared on her behalf
has some validity, in that such a course would have given
the horse, in that
situation, at least five to six wide at the start of the turn and perhaps would
have caused the horse to race
considerably wider than it needed to do so. The
second aspect to this particular is what the driver should have done as the
started or commenced to start to come around the turn and entered the home
Mr Forrest QC for the Stewards submitted, "It is from the 200 metres
mark onwards, and when the horse is just entering the home
straight, that she
should have been looking to put the horse into the race." Mr Forrest QC
submitted that the horse had to do no
work during the race at all, and the horse
had to be put into the race. It had to be given a chance to do something in the
Before this tribunal, Ms Kerryn Manning, the appellant, gave evidence
that her explanations for not putting the horse into the race
earlier, when
entering the home straight, was that the horse was hanging so badly she could
not pull the horse to the outside.
Evidence was given before this tribunal by both the driver, the
appellant, and the trainer, her sister, that the horse was fitted
with a special
anti-hanging bit. Whilst I accept both the driver and trainer's evidence that
the horse in question had a special
bit, in my opinion the horse was hanging
ever so slightly, to be almost impossible to the naked eye to view on the video.
After hearing
all the evidence and viewing the video in question, I do not
accept Ms Kerryn Manning's explanation, but in my view when viewed objectively
the horse could have and should have been put into the race shortly after
entering the straight.
Not only was the horse restrained at the start of the race, but the
horse, which is was one of the main chances in the race, when
entering the home
straight, was at no stage put into that race to give it a full opportunity to
either win or obtain the best possible
placing as it entered that home straight.
I find the appellant breached with Rule 149(1) in respect of this
particular.
The fourth particular: The fourth particular was insufficient vigour
shown by the appellant upon the horse when finally it was
put into the race.
The horse was not put into the race until a relatively short period of time from
the winning post, approximately
80 to 100 metres at the most
from the winning post. The complaint of this particular was that when the horse
did get clear, little
vigour was shown on the horse. When at least the horse
was clear, the horse was struck with the whip only three times. Some ten
were allowed.
The appellant gave an explanation to the Stewards that she was
concerned that because of her previous fines and penalties imposed
upon her for
excessive use of the whip, that she exercised restraint in her vigour and use of
the whip. However, having seen her
use of the whip on the exact same day in a
previous race, I cannot agree with this assertion.
I am satisfied the driver, Ms Kerryn Manning, did not show a sufficient
vigour in the final stages of this race, to ensure the horse
opportunity, at least if not to win it, considering the late stage it was put in
the race, to at least obtain the best possible
It was noteworthy that only some two meters separated her horse from
the third horse at the finish line. There was to some extent
a blanket finish
across the track by several horses. The fourth horse was less than two meters
even in front, in my opinion Ms Kerryn
Manning did not use sufficient
vigour, I find she breached Rule 149(1) in relation to this in
particular.
Overall, I'm of the view that either singularly or in combination,
three of the four particulars, when viewed objectively have been
made out, Ms
Kerryn Manning breached Harness Racing Rule 149(1). In all the circumstances
when viewed objectively I find the Stewards
have proven to the requisite
standard that Ms Kerryn Manning, the driver of Fox Street, breached
Harness Racing Rule 149(1). This
decision is mine alone, and I note it has the
full and unanimous support from my colleagues and I will now hear submissions
regards to penalty.
(His Honour Judge Hicks)
D E C I S I O N
HIS HONOUR: In this matter as to the appropriate penalty. I have
considered the matter has been put on the appellant's behalf by
Mr Sheales and
also the matters have been put on the stewards behalf by Mr Dunshea.
Clearly I am of the view general deterrence must play an important and
significant role in any penalty which subscribes to this
breach of this
particular rule. The rule is designed to put the duty on the driver to make
sure the driver, whether he or she, performs
their obligations under that
particular rule. Ordinarily, in my opinion, six weeks suspension for a first
offence would be roughly
in the ballpark depending on, of course, the individual
on its particular facts relevant to that particular matter.
In this case, three substantive matters are being put forward as to why
that particular penalty should be reduced. The first was
the outstanding record
of the appellant in question and their outstanding reputation. The second
matter put forward is that they
were - her actions on this occasion were also
subject to her consideration of the driving instructions that she received. And
third matter put forward and of some significance, was the Breeder's Crown
Finals on 17 August of this year.
Each of these three matters are quite unusual factors. Certainly when
she was first suspended, the period of time of six weeks
did not take into
account the fact that she would be facing suspension during the Breeders Crown.
As I stated ordinarily, any driver
who breaches this rule for a first offence
can expect a substantial suspension. However, in the particular factors of this
I am of the view that penalty should be reviewed and reduced. Accordingly
the orders of this tribunal will be that she will be suspended
from this date
until midnight on Saturday 16 August 2008.
The Tribunal imposes a fine of $8000 and grants a stay of one month to
pay the fine. I order refund of the deposit.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (57.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter