URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2021/40.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Leisure Pty Ltd at Gravity Zone Seaford premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2021] VCGLR 40 (15 December 2021)
Decision and reasons
for decision
In the matter of an application by NASA Leisure Pty Ltd under
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act
for an internal review of a
decision to refuse to grant an application for a restaurant and cafe licence in
respect of the premises
located at 25 Oliphant Way, Seaford, trading as
Gravity Zone Seaford.
Commission:
Deirdre O’Donnell,
Deputy Chair
Ms Danielle Huntersmith, Commissioner
Mr Andrew Scott, Commissioner
Date of Hearing:
18 August 2021
Date of Decision:
15 December 2021
Date of Reasons:
15 December 2021
Appearances:
Mr Martin Towey, LGS Legal on behalf of the Applicant
Ms Karpaagam Shanmugam, Counsel Assisting the Commission
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the Delegate and, in substitution, grant a renewable limited licence subject
the conditions set out in Appendix A.
Deirdre O’Donnell
The Original Application
1. NASA Leisure Pty Ltd (
operates an indoor
entertainment complex offering various activities such as trampolining, laser
tag and virtual reality hologate,
and other activities. The entertainment
complex is located at 25 Oliphant Way, Seaford, trading as Gravity Zone Seaford
Entire Gravity Zone Complex
2. The Applicant currently holds a limited licence
no. 36139750 (
Limited Licence
), which authorises liquor to be supplied as
follows (in summary):
must only be supplied for pre-booked functions;
products are limited to no more than 15 lines at any one time;
products are to be supplied opened and a maximum of two (2) drinks per person;
must only be supplied at the end of any activities of a pre-booked function and
must always be supplied with food; and
hours are limited to Wednesday to Sunday between 12 noon and 3pm, and between
5pm and 9.30pm.
3. On 24 March 2020, the Applicant applied to the Victorian Commission for
Gambling and Liquor Regulation (
for a restaurant and
cafe licence (
Proposed Licence
) under the
Liquor Control Reform Act
Original Application
4. The Applicant sought the Proposed Licence to license the ‘Gravity
Zone Cafe’ (
) located on the mezzanine floor, for up to 60
patrons during restaurant and cafe ordinary trading hours.
5. On 1 April 2020, a copy of the Application was served on both Victoria
Police and the Frankston City Council (
), in accordance with
sections 33(1) and 33(2) of the LCR Act.
6. On 24 April 2020, Victoria Police informed the Commission that it did not
object to the grant of the Original Application. On 28
April 2020, the Council
informed the Commission that it did not object to the grant of the Original
Application.
7. On 19 June 2020, a delegate of the Commission (
) determined
to refuse to grant the Original Application for the following reasons (in
Cafe will operate in conjunction with the rest of the entertainment complex.
Therefore, the Applicant will not be able to satisfy
the predominant activity
requirement of a restaurant and cafe licence;
Cafe is run by the same operator as the rest of the entertainment complex. The
Delegate was not persuaded by the Applicant that
the recreation facilities,
conference/party rooms and the Cafe are separate business units; and
grant of the Proposed Licence would present a specific risk of supply of liquor
to a person under the age of 18 years. Further,
the Applicant’s alcohol
management plan had insufficient procedures and guidance to prevent supply to
Application for Internal Review
8. On 1 July 2020, the Applicant applied to the Commission for review of the
Original Decision (
Review Application
9. On 26 August 2020, a copy of the Review Application was served on the
Council and Victoria Police.
10. On 28 August 2020, the Council responded to the Commission and advised
that it did not object to the grant of the Review Application.
On the same day,
Victoria Police informed the Commission that it would like to change its
position in relation to the Original Decision
and wished to object to the Review
Application. Accordingly, Victoria Police was provided an opportunity to lodge
any relevant submissions
for the Commission to consider.
11. On 17 September 2020, Victoria Police provided
its submission in relation to the Review Application and stated if the Review
Application
were to be granted it had concerns that:
would allow for the unfettered access of minors to the Cafe during ordinary
trading hours;
would be a lack of sufficient controls to prevent secondary supply to underage
persons in an all ages entertainment venue; and
would be a normalisation of alcohol consumption for minors in an all ages
entertainment venue.
12. Further, Victoria
Police advised that it would withdraw its objection if the following condition
was endorsed on the Proposed
Licence regarding the Cafe:
“unaccompanied underage persons are not allowed on the licensed
Victoria Police Condition
13. On 2 October 2020, the Applicant agreed to have the Victoria Police
Condition endorsed on the Proposed Licence. On 29 October
2020, Victoria Police
advised that subject to the endorsement of the Victoria Police Condition, it
withdrew its objection to the
Review Application.
14. The Commission notes that it experienced some delay in progressing this
Review Application (in summary):
Commission received various written submissions from Mr Towey on behalf of the
Applicant between August 2020 and May 2021;
Commission requested that the Applicant provide videos and/or photographs of the
Entire Gravity Zone Complex for its consideration,
as a physical inspection of
the venue was not possible due to the COVID-19 (Stage 4 lockdown) restrictions.
A video of the complex
was provided to the Commission in November 2020;
Commission held a preliminary meeting in December 2020 to consider if further
information was required to progress the Review
Application. At this meeting,
the Commission considered that in light of the easing of the COVID-19 (Stage 4
lockdown) restrictions,
a visual inspection of the Entire Gravity Zone
would be beneficial. Accordingly, the Commissioners visited the
complex for the purpose of conducting a visual inspection on 24 April
the inspection of the premises and following further deliberations, the
Commission decided it would be assisted by hearing from
the Applicant in person,
and so held a public hearing by video conference on 18 August 2021
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
15. Division 2 of Part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications.
Under section 152, the decision made by the Delegate
in the Original Application
is a reviewable decision and the Applicant is an eligible person to apply for
the review of that decision.
The Review Application was made pursuant to section
153 of the LCR Act.
16. Pursuant to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with
respect to the Review Application is to make a fresh decision
a. affirms or varies the reviewable decision; or
b. sets aside the reviewable decision and substitutes another decision
that the Commission on review considers appropriate.
17. Under the LCR Act, an application for a licence may be contested or
uncontested. Pursuant to section 3(1), an uncontested application
an application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation of a
licence or BYO permit in respect of which no objection is received
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division for that
objection (or that period as extended under section
18. The Original Application is uncontested, as no objections were received
under Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in
that Division for that
objection (or that period as extended under section 174).
19. Accordingly, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original
decision maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Original
Application. In this case, the Commission must either:
the application, and if so, determine whether to do so subject to
to grant the
application
Exercising the internal review power
20. Section 9 of the
Victorian Commission for
Gambling and Liquor Regulation Act 2011
) requires the
Commission, in exercising its internal review function, to have regard to the
objects of the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines issued by the Minister
under section 5 of the VCGLR
21. The objects of the LCR Act are set out at
section 4(1) and provide that:
The objects of this Act are—
) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate
controls over the supply and consumption of liquor; and
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes
to, and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products;
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and
reducing risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
22. Section 4(2) of the LCR Act further
provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion,
must be exercised and
performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the
misuse and abuse of
23. In exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
consider all the information, material and evidence before the original decision
consider further information or
in respect of uncontested applications on review, have regard to any matter the
Commission considers relevant, make any enquiries
the Commission considers
appropriate but is not required to give any person an opportunity to be heard
concerning the application.
24. Under section 49 of the LCR Act, the Commission may impose any condition
it thinks fit on the grant of an application.
25. The Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in
section 44(2) of the LCR Act are relevant considerations,
the determination
of an uncontested application is ultimately to be made pursuant to section 44(1)
and section 157(1) at the discretion
of the Commission, with reference to the
objects of the LCR Act.
Conduct of an Inquiry
26. Section 34 of the VCGLR Act provides that subject to that Act, gambling
legislation or liquor legislation, the Commission may
conduct any inquiry in any
manner it considers appropriate. During the conduct of an inquiry, section 25(3)
of the VCGLR Act provides
that the Commission is not bound by the rules of
evidence, however, must comply with the rules of natural justice.
Material before the Commission
27. The Commission on review had before it, and considered, all materials
received by the Delegate. In addition, the Commission received
and considered
the following:
Decision and reasons of the Delegate, dated 19 June 2020;
Application
for Internal Review and submissions in support, submitted by Mr Towey on behalf
of the Applicant;
Commercial Lease and Deed of Assignment of Lease to the Applicant entity;
planning permit for the Premises (Permit No 99/2013) (
Planning Permit
venue management plan which addressed how minors will be managed, dated April
Venue Management Plan
red line plan, dated April 2021;
submissions and proposed set of conditions should the Review Application be
granted from Mr Towey on behalf of the Applicant,
dated 30 August 2021; and
submissions regarding the proposed supply of liquor from Mr Towey on behalf of
the Applicant, dated 16 September 2021.
28. At the Hearing, the Applicant was represented by Mr Towey. Mr Allan
Marsh, Director of the Applicant, was called as a witness
and gave oral evidence
at the Hearing.
Reasons for decision on review
Issues for determination on review
29. In deciding whether to affirm, vary or set aside the Original Decision
and in turn grant or refuse the Review Application, the
key issues to be
determined by the Commission in this matter are:
identification of the “premises” for the purpose of the Review
Application, i.e. is it the Cafe or the Entire Gravity
Zone Complex;
the “premises” are intended to be used primarily by people under the
age of 18 years for the purposes of section
22 of the LCR Act;
the answer to paragraph (b) is ‘yes’ whether the Commission is
prohibited from granting the Review Application;
the Commission is not prohibited from granting the Review Application, whether
the predominant activity carried out at all times
on the “premises”
is the preparation and serving of meals to be consumed on the licensed premises
as required for a restaurant
and café licence by section 9A of the LCR
the answer to paragraph (d) is ‘yes’, whether the Commission should
grant the Review Application, having regard to
the objects of the LCR Act and,
in particular, harm minimisation, which is the primary object; and
the answer to paragraph (d) is ‘no’, whether the Commission should
grant a renewable limited licence instead of a restaurant
and cafe licence,
having regard to the objects of the LCR Act and, in particular, harm
minimisation, which is the primary object.
30. Each of these issues is discussed in turn.
Identification of the “premises”
31. In order to make a determination on whether
licensing the “premises” would be prohibited under the LCR Act, the
must first consider whether the “premises” for the
purpose of the Review Application is the redline area or the Entire
Gravity Zone
32. The Commission refers to the decision of the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (
and is of the view that
reference to “premises” is different to, and distinct from, the term
“licensed premises”
as used in the LCR Act. In Gaghan, VCAT also
found that it is possible for a single site to comprise more than one premises,
on how the land is being used. In that case, VCAT found that the
petrol station and the restaurant were operating as sufficiently
different uses
on the land as to constitute different premises.
33. The decision of Gaghan was then referred to and followed in the case of
Danz Management
. In that case,
VCAT considered an application for an on-premises licence by the operator of an
entertainment centre for the cafe
that was collocated within the entertainment
centre. VCAT rejected the operator’s claim that the games area and the
area should be treated as different “premises”, and
ultimately found that the whole of the entertainment centre comprised
“premises” for the purposes of section 22(1)(ca).
34. At the Hearing, Mr Marsh gave evidence that the business as he sees it
“...has multiple areas or multiple businesses inside
the business and the
cafe operates independently of the rest of the facility.” He stated that
the Cafe “...is on a separate
level. It has a separate entrance. It has
separate toilets. It runs with separate staff, which are obviously dedicated to
and with a liquor licence, they would all obviously have RSAs,
etcetera, to be in that area.” He also stated that the Cafe
is intended to
be “...used for corporate functions, team building exercises, but also
generally for people to come and have
a meal, have food and have a drink with
that food, as an incidental part of their visit.”
35. Mr Marsh explained about how the mezzanine level operates separate to the
ground floor of the entertainment complex. He stated
that the ground floor is
where all the birthday functions take place and has up to seven function rooms,
with its own kitchen, toilets,
and separate staff. He also stated that the
mezzanine level is where the Cafe will be located. He noted that there is also
an external
seating area (outside the Cafe) on the mezzanine level which is not
proposed to be licensed.
36. At the Hearing, the Commission queried whether there is single lease for
the overall premises, or are the premises leased under
separate leases for
different areas. Mr Marsh confirmed that there is a single lease for the Entire
Gravity Zone Complex, and he
also explained that he has commercial freedom to
sublet the Cafe to a third party.
37. The Commission also queried whether the staff members in the Cafe located
on the mezzanine level and those on the ground floor
came under the same
management. Mr Marsh explained that there is a supervisor (called the
“party leader” or “party
supervisor”) on the ground
floor, who runs all the events and the kitchen. Further, there is also a duty
manager who is responsible
for the entire venue, including the management of
staff on both the ground floor and mezzanine. In respect of the laser tag area,
there is a dedicated supervisor who reports to the duty manager for the ground
floor. He also stated that the Cafe on the mezzanine
level is run by a separate
manager. However, Mr Marsh conceded that he is ultimately “accountable for
the entire venue at all
times” and that all of the businesses conducted at
the venue are owned and run by the same entity, being the Applicant.
38. Similar to the circumstances in Danz Management, the Commission notes
that the Applicant's lease and the planning permit apply
to the whole area; the
Cafe operates on the mezzanine floor in conjunction with the entertainment
complex; the entire site has a
common management and staff; and the Cafe and the
entertainment complex rely on common facilities and toilets. The Commission also
notes that in the present case, there is a single entrance to the Entire Gravity
Zone Complex providing access to both the entertainment
complex and the
39. The Commission also had regard to the fact that the Entire Gravity Zone
Complex is advertised on its website as a "an indoor entertainment
over 180 trampolines, ninja course, foam pit, laser tag, VR hologate,
multi-level kids playground & more!” and
is predominantly identified
as an entertainment complex rather than a cafe.
40. On the evidence provided, the Commission finds that the entire site is
associated with a single enterprise and in furtherance
of the Applicant's
business such that the Entire Gravity Zone Complex should be treated as the
"premises" for the purposes of considering
the Review Application
Section 22 of the LCR Act
41. Under section 22(1)(ca) of the LCR Act, the
Commission is prohibited from granting a licence for premises that, in the
of the Commission, are intended by the occupier of the Premises to be
primarily used by persons under the age of 18 years, unless
the Commission is
satisfied that the grant of a licence or permit would not present a specific
risk of supply of liquor to a person
under the age of 18
Whether the Premises are intended to be used primarily by
people under the age of 18 years
42. At the Hearing, questions were put to Mr Marsh
to try and establish the intended users of the Premises. In summary, Mr Marsh
the following evidence to the Commission:
venue is open when some minors would be present within the Premises. However,
some functions occur outside of normal trading hours,
for people under the age
of 18 years;
Cafe is the only area within the Premises intended to be used primarily by
adults but minors accompanied by adults are allowed
in the red line area;
soft play area is intended to be used by children under 5 years due to the
restrictions on height, and therefore intended to be
used primarily by minors;
trampolining and laser tag facilities are used by people under the age of 18
years due to the nature of these activities. However,
the Premises accommodates
laser tag leagues for adult groups and participants generally hire the entire
laser tag area for this purpose;
is a pro-zone, which is used for practising for ski events or snowboarding. It
has six spaces and is also used for people practising
for Olympic sports –
“serious trampoline people use that, not just people who want to bounce
around”; and
virtual reality hologate is intended to be used by persons both under and over
the age of 18 years (i.e., 50/50 split) due to
the advanced nature of this
43. Mr Marsh also gave evidence about the various revenue streams regarding
the business. He stated that the business’s revenue
is approximately made
up of the Cafe (30%), corporate functions (5%), birthday functions (20%),
trampoline area (30%), and the laser
tag and virtual reality hologate area
44. On inspecting the website, the Commission took into consideration the
following additional relevant points to make the assessment
of the intended
primary users of the Premises:
venue is marketed as having something for all ages “from the little ones
through to extreme sports fanatics and tech enthusiasts”;
can be made for all ages which indicate a broad customer base that uses the
Premises and the usage is reflective of the intended
use of the Premises;
under the age of 13 need to have an adult present when jumping; and
images and reviews on the website show a range of age groups and as given in
evidence by Mr Marsh, mostly a mixed demographic,
enjoying the various activity
zones within the Premises.
45. At the site visit, the Commissioners noted a variety of activities that
did not appear to be primarily intended for use by people
under the age of 18,
but rather for the use and enjoyment of adults. This includes the laser tag
area, virtual reality hologate area.
46. The Commission accepts that the Premises is similar in nature to the
venue that was considered in
Danz Management
. The general tenor of Mr
Marsh’s evidence is that the target market is not the under 18 market,
although there are some activities
at the Premises that are clearly for
children, but others would appeal to all ages.
47. The Commission is of the view that the activities within the Premises
have a broad appeal and has carefully considered a number
of factors including
the physical allocation of space for activities, numbers of patrons for and
revenue generation from each use
in determining whether the use was primarily by
those under or over 18 years. On balance, the evidence given in this matter is
indicative that the Premises is a mixed market, family entertainment
complex. Accordingly, the Commission finds that the Premises
is not primarily
used by people under 18 years for the following reasons:
approximately
30% of the business’s revenue comes from the Cafe, and this area is
generally used by adults;
activities at the Premises are targeted towards adults, or older children. For
example, the Premises accommodates laser tag
leagues for adult groups and
participants generally hire out the entire laser tag area for this purpose;
trampolining area is also often used by adults, as part of fitness training,
practice for competitive trampolining, general enjoyment
or with their
business offers bookings to family groups, sports groups and clubs, corporate
groups and fundraiser events, which indicate a broad
customer base that uses the
Premises and the usage is reflective of the intended use of the Premises;
often attend the Premises for the use and enjoyment of the activities, not
merely to supervise children, unlike the circumstances
the evidence given by the Applicant indicates the facilities at the Premises are
designed to cater to all age groups and
adults often attend the Premises to
participate in activities and not merely to supervise.
48. After considering all evidence before it, the Commission is of the
opinion that whilst some of the activities are designed to
cater for people
under 18, the Applicant, as occupier of the Premises, does not intend the
Premises to be primarily used by people
under the age of 18 years. Rather, the
Premises provides various activity zones which, looking at the Premises as a
whole, are intended
by the Applicant to cater to people of all ages. Therefore,
the prohibition imposed by section 22(1)(ca) of the LCR Act does not
Section 22(3A) of the LCR Act
49. The Commission notes that having found that the
Premises are not intended to be used primarily by people under 18, it is not
to make, and does not make, any determination in relation to section
22(3A) of the LCR Act.
Predominant activity carried out on the premises
50. Having been satisfied
that section 22 of the LCR Act does not prevent the Commission from granting a
licence, the Commission is
still required to have regard to section 9A of the
LCR Act. Under that provision, the Commission notes that a restaurant and cafe
licence authorises a licensee to supply liquor “for consumption on the
licensed premises where the predominant activity carried
out at all times on the
premises is the preparation and serving of meals to be consumed on the licensed
51. Having found that the “premises” in this context is a
reference to the Entire Gravity Zone Complex, the Commission
finds that the
predominant activity at the Premises is the operation of an entertainment
complex, with a secondary activity being
the food and beverage service from the
52. Consequently, the Commission is not satisfied, based on the Applicant's
evidence, that the predominant activity to be carried
out at all times on the
Premises is the preparation and serving of meals to be consumed on the licensed
Whether to grant or refuse a restaurant and cafe licence
having regard to the objects of the LCR Act
53. Having found that the “predominant
activity carried out at all times on the premises” is not the
“preparation
and serving of meals”, it follows that the Commission
finds that it must refuse to grant a restaurant and cafe licence with
the Premises.
Is there a different licence which the Applicant would find to
be consistent with its intended business activities?
54. Noting that the Application was for the grant of
a restaurant and cafe licence and the grant of that licence is refused, section
158 of the LCR Act authorises the Commission on review to grant a different
licence than that applied for if it refuses to grant
the desired licence.
55. At the Hearing, Mr Towey submitted that it became apparent to the
Applicant that its offering at the Premises, and the proposed
licensed Cafe
would be more suited to a renewable limited licence. Accordingly, Mr Towey
requested that the Commission use its ultimate
discretion and grant a renewable
limited licence. This was confirmed by written submissions from Mr Towey on
behalf of the Applicant,
dated 30 August 2021.
56. In such circumstances, the Commission considers below whether to grant a
renewable limited licence to the Applicant. It is noted
that the grant of a
renewable limited licence does not require the satisfaction of a predominant
activity test as applies to a restaurant
and cafe licence (as considered
Whether to grant or refuse a renewable limited licence having
regard to the objects of the LCR Act
57. Section 14 of the LCR Act provides that a
renewable limited licence “
authorises the licensee to supply liquor at
the times determined by the Commission and specified in the licence
However, unlike other categories of licence, limited licences are subject to the
additional restriction found at section
26 of the LCR Act, “
scale and scope of the supply of liquor the subject of the licence is limited in
the Scale and Scope Requirement
58. There are no statutory signposts which prescribe specific factors for the
Commission to consider in determining whether the Scale
and Scope Requirement is
met. On previous occasions the Commission has considered
the nature,
location, duration or frequency of the hours of operation of a licence in
as relevant to the Scale and Scope
Requirement.
59. Section 26(1) of the LCR Act gives the Commission a wide discretion to
determine, as a question of fact, whether the Scale and
Scope Requirement is
met. In the decision of
, VCAT considered that there was no warrant
for an interpretation that the limitation in question need to “contemplate
substantial
significant
restriction”,
however this
does not mean that the Commission cannot consider whether a limitation is
substantial
significant
in the exercise of its discretion to
determine whether the Scale and Scope Requirement is met.
60. The Applicant has offered the following
limitations on the renewable limited licence:
of liquor limited to no more than ten (10) lines comprising the following: two
wines, four beers, one cider; and three pre-mixed
trading on Monday to Sunday between 12 noon to 10pm (no trade on Christmas and
ANZAC day); and
of the following conditions on the licence:
and maintain a surveillance recording system;
all reasonable steps to conduct and supervise all aspects of the management of
the premises in accordance with the Venue Management
person who is under 18 years of age is only permitted on the licensed premises
in the company of a responsible adult;
must be available for purchase when liquor is being supplied. For completeness,
food does not have to be purchased by a patron
in order to buy and consume
liquor; and
and chairs must be placed in position on the licensed premises so as to be
available for at least 75% of the patrons attending
the premises at any one
61. The Commission has considered the limitations set out above, as well as
the size of the Cafe within the Premises. In this instance
the Commission is
satisfied that the Scale and Scope Requirement is met.
Objects of the Act
62. In determining this Review Application, the
Commission has had regard to the objects of the LCR Act and is also mindful of
need to ensure that appropriate regard be given to the harm minimisation
object, recognising that it is the primary object of the
63. The Commission notes that there has been no evidence that granting the
Review Application would detract from or be detrimental
to the amenity of the
area in which the Premises are situated. Further, granting the Review
Application would not be conducive to,
or encourage, the misuse or abuse of
alcohol because of the conditions and controls set out at paragraph
64. The Commission has also taken into account that the Council did not
object to the Review Application. However, as set out at paragraphs
above, Victoria Police advised that if
the Applicant agreed to have the Victoria Police Condition endorsed on the
licence it would
withdraw its objection.
65. The Commission notes that the Cafe, is not intended to be used primarily
by patrons under the age of 18. Further, the Applicant
has stated that the Cafe
will only have underage patrons if they are in the company of a responsible
adult during the period the
proposed supply of liquor is to occur, and the
Applicant has agreed to endorse the Victoria Police Condition on the Proposed
which ensures that unaccompanied minors do not enter the Cafe.
66. The Applicant submitted in its Venue Management Plan that the Premises
operates a wrist banding system where visitors to the Premises
entertainment options are wrist banded. The Applicant is committed to ensuring
that a wrist banded patron does not use the
Cafe and then re-enter the Premises
having been supplied liquor. The Cafe staff will remove the wristband from the
Cafe patron at
the point of service of liquor in the Cafe.
67. The Applicant is also committed to ensuring the safety of Cafe patrons
and staff. Accordingly, the Applicant has introduced a
CCTV system. The CCTV
system monitors the Cafe, and its recordings will be retained for 30 days and a
copy of this retained data
would be supplied to a member of Victoria Police or a
VCGLR Compliance Inspector on request.
68. The Applicant submitted that the grant of the proposed renewable limited
licence with the proposed conditions will not lead to
alcohol-related harms and
a grant of a licence is in keeping with the objects of the LCR Act. The
Applicant noted that at no time
during the internal review process has the
Applicant sought an underage approval. Furthermore, the Applicant is willing to
the Victoria Police Condition on the Proposed Licence.
69. The Commission requested a compliance check of the Premises in relation
to the Limited Licence the Applicant currently holds at
above. The check does not indicate any
compliance issues.
70. In all these circumstances, the Commission is satisfied that granting a
renewable limited licence for the Premises would be appropriate
regard to harm minimisation.
71. Accordingly, on considering all the evidence before it, the Commission is
satisfied that, together with the conditions imposed
at Appendix A, and an
approved venue management plan, the risk of the misuse and abuse of alcohol in
this instance will be minimised.
Decision on review
72. Based on the reasons detailed above and having regard to the objects of
the LCR Act, the Commission on review has determined to
set aside the Original
Decision and, in substitution, grant a renewable limited licence for the
Premises, subject to the conditions
as detailed in Appendix A.
The preceding 72 paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision
of Ms Deirdre O’Donnell (Deputy Chair), Ms Danielle
Huntersmith
(Commissioner) and Mr Andrew Scott (Commissioner).
This licence is a renewable limited licence and authorises the licensee to
supply liquor on the licensed premises for consumption
on the licensed premises
during the trading hours specified below.
Special conditions
This licence is subject to the following conditions:
(a) A person who is under 18 years of age is only permitted on the licensed
premises in the company of a responsible adult.
(b) Food must be available for purchase when liquor is being supplied. For the
avoidance of doubt, patrons may be supplied liquor
without food.
(c) Tables and chairs must be placed in position on the licensed premises so as
to be available for at least 75% of the patrons attending
the licensed premises
at any one time.
Supply of liquor
The supply of liquor must be limited to no more than ten (10) lines of liquor
comprising the following: wines (2 lines), beers (4
lines), cider (1 line) and
pre-mixed spirits (3 lines).
The licensee shall not cause or permit undue detriment to the amenity of the
area to arise out of, or in connection with the use of
the premises to which the
licence relates during or immediately after the trading hours authorised by this
Venue Management Plan
The licensee must take all reasonable steps to conduct and supervise all
aspects of the management of the premises in accordance with
Management Plan, as amended from time to time.
The licensee must advise the Commission in writing of any operational change
made to the Venue Management Plan.
The Venue Management Plan must be retained on the premises in the possession
of the licensee, nominee, manager or other person in
The Venue Management Plan must be available to an authorised member of
Victoria Police or a Gambling and Liquor Inspector if requested.
Security Cameras
The licensee must install and maintain a surveillance recording system that
is able to clearly identify individuals, display time
and date, and provide
continuous images of all areas where patrons are permitted including entrances
and exits, excluding toilets,
washrooms, change rooms and lactation rooms.
The surveillance recording system must operate whilst the restaurant is open
to the general public. A copy of the recorded images
must be retained for at
least one month and must be available upon request for immediate viewing or
removal by Victoria Police, or
a person authorised by the Commission.
Responsible Service of Alcohol
At all times staff selling, offering, or serving liquor are to have completed
an approved Responsible Service of Alcohol training
Maximum patron capacity
Overall maximum: 50 patrons
Trading hours
Good Friday and Anzac Day No trade
On any other day Between 12 noon and 10pm
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
LCR Act, sections 44, 49 and
LCR Act, section 44 and
VCGLR Act, section 9(3) and
See further
Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
, which confirms that harm minimisation is
the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act and therefore the primary
consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although not to the exclusion of
the other objects).
LCR Act, section 157(2).
LCR Act, section 157(3).
LCR Act, section 44(4).
Gaghan v LLC
[2000] VCAT
(30 September 2000)
Danz Management Pty Ltd v
Director of Liquor Licensing
[2010] VCAT 536
(4 May 2010)
LCR Act, section 22(3A)
provides factors that the Commission may consider in making its assessment under
section 22(1)(ca). These
include but are not limited to:
(a) whether the
proposed licence or permit authorises supply of liquor at a time when the
premises will not be used primarily by persons
under the age of 18 years; and
(b) whether the proposed licence or permit provides that any person under the
age of 18 years must
be accompanied by a responsible adult at all times during
which the proposed supply of liquor is to occur.
See decision
Fynix Pty Ltd at 36A Vickers Street, Sebastapol
(Liquor-internal review) [2016] VCGLR 19 (25 July 2016) At
Club 8 Pty Limited v
Director of Liquor Licensing (Occupational and Business Regulation
[2009] VCAT
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (52.7 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter