URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2025/695.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Vernon v The Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages [2025] VSC 695 (12 November 2025)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
AT MELBOURNE
JUDICIAL REVIEW AND
APPEALS LIST
S ECI 2024 06786
EVGENIYA VERNON
THE REGISTRAR OF BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES
First Respondent
NADJA FEDERICA LEGLER
Second Respondent
DATE OF HEARING
14 October 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT
12 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Vernon v The Registrar of Births, Deaths and
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VSC 695
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW — Application for leave to appeal from orders of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal affirming
a decision of Registrar of
Births, Deaths and Marriages to cancel registration of a relationship —
Whether Senior Member erred
in interpreting the requirement that a person in the
relationship ‘lives in the State’ —
Whether applicant
denied natural justice — Unreasonableness — Whether Senior Member
failed to have regard to presumption
of regularity — Power to amend
register of relationships —
Relationships Act 2008
— Application for leave to appeal dismissed.
APPEARANCES
For the Applicant
Velocity Legal
For the First Respondent
L Brown SC with
Victorian Government Solicitor’s Office
For the Second Respondent
C Tran with P Banerjee
FCW Lawyers
HIS HONOUR:
1 In 2020, the first respondent, the
Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages (‘Registrar’) accepted an
application by
the applicant, Evgeniya Vernon (‘Vernon’) to register
her relationship with Daniele Legler (‘Legler’) in
the relationships
register as a domestic relationship under the
Relationships Act 2008
Relationships Act
2 Legler died intestate in 2022. There is an
ongoing dispute between Legler’s five children, including the second
respondent,
Nadja Legler (‘Nadja’), and Vernon about the division of
his estate.
3 In 2023, in the context of the estate
dispute, the Registrar amended the relationships register by cancelling the
entry of the domestic
relationship between Vernon and Legler pursuant to
Relationships Act
(‘cancellation
decision’). Vernon applied to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (‘VCAT’) under
Relationships Act
review the cancellation decision. Nadja was joined to the proceeding as a
respondent. On 15 November 2024, a Senior Member of
VCAT affirmed the
cancellation decision (‘VCAT
decision’).
applied for leave to appeal the VCAT decision. There is a right to appeal only
on a question of law.
only be granted where the appeal has a real prospect of
have concluded for the following reasons that leave to appeal the VCAT decision
should be refused and the proceeding dismissed.
5 Vernon was born in the former USSR. She
came to Australia in 2004 with her husband who she divorced in 2010. She became
a permanent
resident of Australia in 2012 and an Australian citizen in 2015.
Vernon worked as a migration agent and owned a business which has
a registered
address in Victoria.
6 Legler was born in Italy. He
worked in Europe as an actor and later as an acting coach. There are three
children of Legler’s
first marriage, which ended in 1998. Legler married
for the second time in 2002. There are two children of that marriage, which
ended in 2015. Legler and his second wife lived in Melbourne for at least part
of their relationship. Legler’s second wife
and her children continued to
live in Byron Bay after the relationship
7 Legler owned a property in Lagos, Portugal
referred to in the proceeding as La Punta. He lived at that property for
at least part
of time from 2015 until his death in April 2022.
8 Vernon and Legler first met in Melbourne in 2016
and formed a relationship towards the end of that
9 Vernon was in Melbourne in February 2020 to
attend a course related to her business as a registered migration
10 On 12 February 2020, Vernon submitted an
application to the Registrar for registration of her relationship with Legler
Relationships Act
. On 13 February 2020, Vernon attended the
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registry (‘Registry’) and provided
the following documents in support of the application:
(a) Vernon’s Victorian
driver licence recording her address as 110 William Street,
(b) Vernon’s Australian
(c) Legler’s Victorian driver licence
recording his address as 110 William Street,
(d) Legler’s Millennium Bank ATM
(e) a certified copy of Legler’s Swiss
(f) Legler’s Westpac proof of
account balance dated 13 February;
(g) Legler’s Westpac bank statement
covering the period 14 January to 13 February 2020.
Legler submitted his part of the application online.
11 On 12 March 2020, the Registrar issued
a certificate under the
Relationships Act
for a domestic relationship
between Vernon and Legler to be entered on the
12 Legler died in Lagos, Portugal on 22
April 2022. La Punta was listed as Legler’s last usual place of
residence on the death
certificate issued by the Civil Registry Office of
13 On 23 May 2023, a delegate of the
Registrar wrote to Vernon to advise of the cancellation decision. The
delegate’s letter
Upon review, it has been established that the domestic relationship was
incorrectly registered on the basis of two defects.
section 7(a)
Relationships
that an application for the registration of a domestic relationship
be accompanied by a statutory declaration from each of the applicants verifying
the information prescribed in
section 7(a).
Upon further review, it has been identified that no statutory declarations were
provided by either yourself or Mr Legler as part
of the application. On that
basis, the application was non-compliant with a mandatory requirement under the
Relationships
] and should not have been registered at the
section 6(a)
Relationships
that one of the persons in the relevant relationship must live in the State of
Victoria in order to bring an application
under that provision. Your application
recorded both applicants’ residential addresses as 110 Williams Street,
Melbourne VIC
3000. Searches indicate that this address is not a residential
address, but the address of the Australian Club.
For the reasons given above, I have amended the Register by cancelling the entry
of the domestic relationship between you and Mr
Legler, in effect cancelling the
registration of the domestic relationship.
Relationships Act
Relationships Act
a statutory regime for the adjustment of property interests and the right to
maintenance between persons in a domestic
relationship.
As part of that
regime, the
Relationships Act
establishes a relationships register in
Victoria for the registration of domestic
relationships.
Relationships
defines domestic relationship to mean:
(a) a registered domestic relationship; or
(b) a relationship between two persons who are not married to each other but who
are living together as a couple on a genuine domestic
basis (irrespective of
16 Persons may apply under
Relationships
for registration of a domestic relationship
(a) one of the persons in the relationship lives in the State; and
(b) each of the persons in the relationship—
(i) is not married or in a registered relationship; and
(ii) is not in another relationship that could be registered under this Part.
17 The requirements of an application for
registration are set out in
Relationships
which relevantly provides that applications ‘must include or be
accompanied by’:
(a) a statutory declaration from each of the applicants verifying that the
(i) consents to the registration; and
(ii) is not married or in a registered relationship; and
(iii) is not in another relationship that could be registered under this Part[.]
18 The Registrar must maintain a register
of registered relationships. For that purpose the Registrar has power to
conduct inquiries
and to correct or amend the
19 The Registrar’s powers of inquiry
are governed by
Relationships
relevantly provides:
(1) The Registrar may conduct an inquiry to find out—
(a) particulars to verify information given for, or in connection with, an
application for registration of a relationship or revocation
of registration;
(b) whether particulars of a registered relationship have been correctly
recorded in the Relationships Register.
(2) The Registrar may, by notice given to a person who may be able to provide
information relevant to an inquiry under this section,
require the person to
answer specified questions or to provide other information within a time and in
a way specified in the notice.
20 Correction and amendment of the
relationships register is governed by
div 3 of the
Relationships Act
relevantly provides:
(1) The Registrar may correct or amend the Relationships Register—
(a) to reflect a finding made on inquiry under Division 2; or
(b) to bring an entry about a registered relationship into conformity with the
most reliable information available to the Registrar
of the registered
relationship.
(3) The Registrar corrects or amends the Relationships Register by adding or
cancelling an entry in the Register or by adding, altering
or deleting
particulars contained in an entry.
21 A person whose interests are affected
by a decision of the Registrar may apply to VCAT for review of the
VCAT Reasons
22 The Senior Member summarised his
findings and conclusions for making the VCAT decision as
the reasons which follow, I find that:
(a) Mr Legler was
living in Victoria at the Relevant
which is consistent with
- the Registration Application;
- findings made by Supreme Court of New South Wales in
The Estate of Daniele
Claudio Legler
Proceeding’) that Mr Legler was ‘quite settled’ at his
property in Portugal (known and referred to
in these reasons as ‘La
Punta’), which he regarded as ‘his home’.
(b) Ms Vernon was also
living in Victoria at the Relevant Time.
(c) Neither Mr Legler nor Ms Vernon produced a statutory declaration of the kind
required under the [
Relationships Act
this basis, it is clear the Registrar
have registered the
domestic relationship between Ms Vernon and Mr Legler. However, having done so,
the question is whether the preferable
decision is to cancel that registration
(i.e. in exercise of the discretion available to the Registrar).
the reasons which follow, I consider that the preferable decision is to cancel
the registration and, as such, I have affirmed
the Registrar’s
23 The reasons record the following
background to the cancellation decision and the application for
7 As discussed in more detail below, Ms Vernon and Mr Legler:
first met in
Melbourne in 2016 for business purposes;
relationship towards the end of that year; and
spent their time
together travelling internationally, particularly in Europe.
February 2020, just prior to the declaration of the COVID-19 pandemic, Ms Vernon
was in Melbourne for a short period to attend
a course related to her business
as a registered migration agent.
in Melbourne, Ms Vernon submitted an online application to the Registrar for
registration of the domestic relationship with
Mr Legler. The Registration
Application was automatically forwarded by email to Mr Legler to add his
details. Ms Vernon then attended
at the Registry office to provide certain
evidentiary material required (e.g. a copy of the driver’s licences for
herself and
Mr Legler).
Registrar accepted the application and, after the mandatory waiting period of 28
days, registered the relationship and issued
a relationship certificate on 12
March 2020 (‘DR Registration’).
Legler passed away on 22 April 2022. Since his death, Ms Vernon and the children
of Mr Legler’s two former marriages (including
the joined party, Ms Nadja
Legler) have been locked in acrimonious disputes in relation to his estate, both
in Australia (i.e. [
The Estate of Legler
]) and in Europe.
October 2022, Ms Legler’s solicitors wrote to the Registrar claiming that
a Victorian death certificate for Mr Legler, which
had been issued by the
Registrar on application of Ms Vernon, contained false information contrary to
the death certificate issued
in Portugal. Among the details claimed to be false
was Mr Legler’s ‘residential address’ at the time of his
This had been specified as 110 William Street, Melbourne (being the
address of the Australian Club), rather than La Punta. The Registrar
ultimately cancelled the death certificate later that month.
March 2023, Ms Legler’s solicitors filed an application in the Supreme
Court of Victoria seeking a declaration that there
was no ‘registrable
domestic relationship’ between Ms Vernon and Mr Legler and that the DR
Registration was
void ab initio
(i.e. from the start) (‘VSC
Application’). That application named the Registrar as first defendant.
the materials produced in accordance with
(‘s 49 Material’), the Registrar states that ‘receipt of
service [of the VSC application] prompted the Respondent
to make inquiries
regarding the relationship registration application ... and supporting
documents’.
already noted, the Registrar’s Decision — to cancel the registration
of the domestic relationship between Ms Vernon
and Mr Legler — was made on
23 May 2023.
she was entitled to do, Ms Vernon applied for review of the Registrar’s
Decision by application filed on 16 August 2023.
Ms Legler was joined as a party
to the proceeding by orders made on 13 November 2023.
the time the matter came on for hearing, the decision in [
The Estate of
] had been handed down, with Pike J finding that Ms Vernon was the de
facto spouse of Mr Legler at the time of his death, at least
for the purposes of
the relevant New South Wales Legislation. In the course of the decision, the
judge made certain findings as to
Ms Vernon’s credit and as to where she
and Mr Legler were domiciled and/or living at certain points in time. It will be
to come back to the use, if any, to be made of such
24 The Senior Member then referred to
relevant sections of the
Relationships Act
and outlined the evidence
given in the VCAT proceeding.
Vernon’s evidence
25 In the reasons, the Senior Member set
out evidence given by Vernon
Vernon states that her relationship with Mr Legler became personal from December
2016 and that, between 2017 and 2019, they spent
the majority of their time
travelling, particularly in Europe, as their relationship was
Vernon states that, while she does not have ‘one fixed place of
abode’, since 2017, she is ‘a Victorian resident
who has always
lived in Victoria’ and ‘retain[ed] a domicile here when [she is]
visiting overseas’. Further, she
states that she has ‘not adopted a
permanent place of abode outside of Victoria’, ‘always intended to
leased a storage unit for [her] household goods ... in Victoria’.
also maintained a Victorian driver’s licence since 2013. For much of that
time, and including at the Relevant Time,
the residential address recorded on
her licence has been 110 William Street, Melbourne, which is the location of The
Australian Club.
While that club is a ‘private gentlemen’s
club’, of which she could not be a member, she states that she has been
permitted by that club to use that address whenever it was required (i.e. when a
PO Box address would not suffice).
Vernon explains that she was in Melbourne between 5 and 22 February 2020 to
attend some migration law workshops, before returning
overseas. However,
‘due to the COVID-19 lockdowns’, she and Mr Legler were unable to
and December 2020. As a result, she obtained a
permit ‘to remain in Portugal with [Legler] during that
Vernon states that, after she submitted the Registration Application and had
received confirmation that Mr Legler had completed
his sections, she:
attended at the [...] Registry to provide the ‘divorce certificates and
Victorian Driver’s Licences for both
[Legler] and [herself]’;
returned, later
that day, with ‘certified copies of both [of their] passports and a bank
statement for [Legler]’; and
returned for a
third time on the same day with bank statements for Mr Legler showing
‘some transactions and funds in the account’
(as had been
requested).
She says that a [...] Registry staff member then informed her that
‘everything is complete’.
the extent relevant, Ms Vernon claims that she and Mr Legler have ‘relied
on the registration of [the] relationship both
in Australia and overseas’,
giving some examples of having done so.
Vernon claims to have ‘lived permanently’ in a unit in South Yarra
since June 2022.
26 The Senior Member referred to the
following evidence given by Vernon in cross-examination and made the following
finding adverse
to her credibility as a witness:
cross-examination, it emerged that:
Ms Vernon had
her clothes and personal papers at La Punta at the time of Mr Legler’s
passing in 2022 and, in proceedings instituted
to recover those items, she
claimed to be residing in Portugal;
continuously held a residence permit to live in Mallorca, Spain since at least
2014 and became a citizen of Spain in 2024;
she was the
owner of two cars registered in Spain; and
maintained her Russian citizenship and passport.
light of that evidence, which tends to suggest Ms Vernon makes claims as to her
residence and related matters which can vary depending
on the particular
situation she is confronting, I consider that her evidence should be treated
with some caution. That said, much
of the evidence in her witness statement is
corroborated by contemporaneous documentary material and, as such, still has
Statutory declarations
27 The Senior Member referred to a
submission by Vernon that the presumption of regularity, which was not rebutted
on the evidence
before VCAT, supported a conclusion that the statutory
declarations required under
Relationships Act
lodged with the Registrar in support the application for registration of the
relationship.
28 The reasons record Nadja’s
submission that Vernon had failed to produce a copy of any statutory
declaration, conceded she
did not know if Legler had provided a declaration in
support of the application, and that she was unable to recall if she had made
statutory declaration. The Senior Member referred to a submission by Nadja that
the presumption of regularity was rebutted in
29 The reasons record Vernon’s
submissions in reply that it was not for her to satisfy VCAT that the statutory
declarations
required by
Relationships Act
30 The Senior Member made the following
findings as to the statutory declarations:
is clear that, at the Relevant Time, Mr Legler was in Portugal. As such, the
only way in which he could have provided any statutory
declaration on or about
the date of the Registration Application would have been to do so electronically
(i.e. to scan and email
the original statutory declaration sworn or affirmed
before a relevant person).
Mr Legler had provided a statutory declaration, the [...] Registry would have a
copy of it and the Registrar would have been required
to include that in the
Material is voluminous and there is no evidence to suggest it is
incomplete. Further, no application was made by Ms Vernon to require
Registrar to produce any further documents under
section 49(3)
those circumstances, I consider it appropriate to infer that Mr Legler did not
provide a statutory declaration as required by section
Relationships Act
requires ‘each of the
applicants’ to provide a statutory declaration, it is unnecessary to make
any further findings
as to whether (or not) Ms Vernon provided
Lives in the State
31 The Senior Member noted that while
Legler specified the location of the Australia Club as his residential address
in the registration
application, he answered ‘no’ to the question of
whether he was residing in Victoria. The Senior Member concluded that
Legler’s representation that he was not living in Victoria at the relevant
time was supported by the decision of Pike J in
The Estate of
32 The Senior Member recorded
Vernon’s submission that the word ‘lives’ as used in
Relationships Act
should be given its ordinary meaning, and that
VCAT should adopt one of three suggested dictionary definitions as that meaning.
submitted she should be found to have lived in Victoria at the relevant
time based on any of those definitions.
Senior Member said:
Of the ordinary meanings put forward, I consider that the third definition
referenced by Ms Vernon, i.e. to make one’s home,
have one’s abode,
dwell or reside, is the most apt. That definition is consistent with:
the definition
proposed by the Registrar given the meaning of abode is ‘dwelling place;
one’s home’; and
the way the word
was applied in identifying a territorial connection to South Australia (albeit
under different legislation) in
reference to the applicant’s marital home).
34 The Senior Member discussed that
definition and construction of the ‘lives in the State’ requirement
as follows:
Importantly,
as Ms Vernon accepts, a home connotes something more permanent than a hotel or
other form of accommodation where a person
stays for a few nights on a visit to
a city or town. It follows that a person who is itinerant — i.e. travels
from place to
place — may have difficulty establishing that they live in
any particular location. I also agree with Ms Legler’s submission
person may live in more than one place provided they can establish a sufficient
connection with each place.
contrast, the other two definitions put forward by Ms Vernon relate to how a
person supports themselves in life. Due to that focus,
those definitions would
not necessarily assist in determining where a person lives. For instance, it is
entirely possible that a
person has their home in one place and earns their
living elsewhere (e.g. an international airline pilot).
is nothing in the definition to suggest that the notion of where a person lives
or has their home depends on some particular
property right (e.g. a freehold
interest or lease); rather, it seems to me to turn more on the
of the place. For example, if an adult child leaves Victoria to study interstate
or overseas but regularly returns to their parental
holidays, the parental home may well be accepted as the place where they live,
despite the child having
no particular legal right to reside there. Indeed that
is consistent with the decision in
. However, it may be otherwise
where the connection with a given place is more tenuous as the facts in
person’s intention — gauged objectively — to live in a
particular location may be a relevant factor but, as is
often said in the
context of determining a person’s principal place of residence (for state
tax purposes), is unlikely to be
determinative of the issue.
Ultimately,
as indicated in
, it is a question of fact, having regard to all
of the evidence available.
35 Earlier in
the reasons the Senior Member recorded the following submissions made by
in this case, Ms Legler joins with the Registrar in submitting that Ms Vernon
had a ‘real connection to Spain and Portugal’,
but a lesser and
insufficient connection to Victoria. Mr Tran noted that, while Ms Vernon leased
a storage unit in which she kept
her household goods, this was ‘not a
place that she could stay’. He also contrasted that with the clothing and
Ms Vernon kept in Portugal, noting that she went to the length of
engaging lawyers to seek the return of those items.
Legler highlights that pleadings prepared on Ms Vernon’s behalf for
proceedings in Portugal – to establish her rights
(as against
Ms Legler and her siblings) in respect of La Punta – ‘speak to
the extent and depth of her life in Portugal’.
For example, the pleadings
[Ms Vernon] and Daniele Legler
jointly decided, in June 2017, that [she] should come to live in Lagos [i.e. the
town in Portugal where
La Punta is located] with him.
And so it happened.
From that moment on, [Ms Vernon] and Daniele Legler moved their life in common
to Portugal, having established [La Punta] as their
family home.
Tran observed that it was ‘not possible for the lawyers to draft those
pleadings without talking to Ms
36 The Senior Member was not satisfied on
the evidence that Vernon lived in at the relevant time. The reasons given for
that conclusion
I accept Ms Vernon’s evidence that she lived in Victoria in 2015 and 2016
(and perhaps earlier), I consider that she ceased
to do so in 2017 when she and
Mr Legler made the (joint) decision to make their home at La Punta[.]
Ms Vernon may have subjectively intended to return to Victoria to live as soon
as she could, it is evident from the material
in the Tribunal Book that:
Legler’s home was in Portugal; and
required extensive travel, particularly in Europe.
such, so long as Ms Vernon wanted to maintain her relationship with Mr Legler,
she was never going to be able to return to Victoria
‘indefinitely’.
Objectively
gauged, Ms Vernon intentionally made her home in Portugal from 2017. Consistent
with that intention, Ms Vernon hired a
storage unit to keep some of her items
(which self-evidently were not essential for day to day living), while taking
her clothing
and important personal documents to Portugal. That she had to use
the address of The Australian Club for various correspondence speaks
limited ties to Victoria at the time.
course, I accept that — due to the pandemic — Ms Vernon and
Mr Legler could not return to Victoria between March and
December 2020. But
there is no objective evidence to suggest that they were intending to resume
living in Australia at that time,
as opposed to desiring to visit (e.g. so that
Mr Legler could spend some time with the children of his second marriage).
Relevantly,
when they could and did return to Australia:
the transactions
recorded in the bank statements included in the Tribunal Book suggest they spent
a fair amount of that time travelling
around other parts of Australia; and
there is no
objective evidence to support the assertion that they were ‘looking for a
property [to] purchase’ in Victoria
as claimed.
the Spanish residency permits and the two cars Ms Vernon had registered there
may suggest she also lived in Spain, I consider
the evidence to be insufficient
to draw such a conclusion. Further, given the Spanish passport was not obtained
until 2024 (four
years after the Relevant Time) and in circumstances where it is
unclear how often she visited or where she stayed when doing so,
consider the material on the Spanish government website — to the effect
that a person needs to reside in Spain for
at least 10 years to qualify for
Spanish citizenship — sheds sufficient light to found the inference that
Ms Vernon also lived
in Spain at the Relevant Time.
Ground 1: Did VCAT err in its construction of the meaning of the
expression ‘lives in the State’?
Submissions
37 The Senior Member erred by adopting
the dictionary definition of ‘live’, and by further limiting that
definition by
imposing requirements of permanence and the need for a specific
might live in the State if they stay in temporary accommodation for a few days
at a time provided that, overall, they live
in Victoria.
38 The intention of the provisions that introduce
the register for domestic relationships is to facilitate the rights of
non-married
couples in a domestic relationship. The requirement that one party
to the relationship live in Victoria was plainly not intended
to impose an
onerous hurdle on registration. That is confirmed by the Explanatory
Memorandum,
Relationships Amendment Bill 2015
(Vic), which states:
It is intended that the words “lives in the State” be given their
ordinary meaning. However, it is intended that a person
would need to show only
that they currently live in Victoria and would not have to satisfy a minimum
term of residency (either prior
to or following registration).
By requiring the need for a specific home the Senior Member adopted a
definition of ‘live’ that was inconsistent with
legislature’s intention.
39 Vernon’s evidence was that she
did not have a home or a fixed property and travelled intermittently to and from
during her relationship with Legler for periods of two to nine months.
As such, the Senior Member should not have placed weight on
the need for a
specific home but rather on Vernon’s evidence that:
(a) she intended to make her
‘home indefinitely in Victoria’;
2021, she and Legler looked for a property to purchase in Victoria;
(c) while in Victoria, she stayed at the Australia
Club, and in hotels, Airbnbs, and other rental accommodation;
(d) after Legler’s death, she lived
permanently in a unit in South Yarra; and
had substantial connections to Victoria, including:
a Victorian bank account;
a business that was her sole source of income in Victoria;
income tax returns through a Victorian accountant;
a storage unit in Victoria;
a member of the RACV Club;
a member of the Russian Ethnic Representative Council of Victoria;
in Victoria;
bank accounts, credit cards and insurance policies with Australian institutions;
representing
Australia internationally as an athlete.
40 The intention of the provisions that
introduce the register for domestic relationships and make it a condition that
one party to
the relationship lives in Victoria is to establish a sufficient
territorial connection between the relationship and Victoria.
41 It is not in contention that the Senior Member
determined ‘lives in the State’ should adopt its ordinary meaning.
It was open for the Senior Member to find on the evidence that Vernon did not
live in Victoria. Vernon’s complaint is not
that the Senior Member erred
in law, by misconstruing
Relationships Act
that the Senior Member erred in fact, by finding Vernon did not live in Victoria
at the time of her relationship with Legler.
42 The Senior Member did not construe
‘lives in’ to require Vernon to have a specific home in Victoria, or
those who do not have a home, who live in temporary homes or who live
itinerantly, from living in Victoria.
43 The Senior
Member did not err in adopting the dictionary definition of ‘lives
in’. The reality of Vernon’s complaint,
Relationships Act
should have been interpreted by the Senior Member to
mean she lived in Victoria at the time of her relationship with Legler.
it was open on the facts to determine, as the Senior Member did, that
Vernon did not live in Victoria at the relevant time.
44 I reject Vernon’s criticism of
the Senior Member’s use of a dictionary definition as being apt when
construing the
expression ‘lives in the State’ and in applying that
construction to the circumstances of the
45 The Senior Member accepted Vernon’s
submission that ‘lives in’, as used in
Relationships Act
, should be given its ordinary meaning. The Senior
Member then adopted one of three definitions proposed by Vernon as being
most apt’ to construction of
submissions on this application are inconsistent with the approach she urged the
Senior Member to adopt.
46 The verb
‘lives’ may be used to convey that a person or thing is alive or
existing or that a person or thing resides
at a specific place. It is the
latter meaning that applies in
Relationships Act
the phrase ‘lives in the State’ demonstrates Parliament was
concerned with where persons in a domestic relationship
live. A domestic
relationship may only be registered if the location at which one person in the
relationship lives is in the State.
47 The purposes
Relationships Act
include to establish a relationships register in
Victoria and to provide for the adjustment of property interests between
partners. For the
Relationships Act
to apply, there must be
some territorial link to Victoria. That link is established by the requirement
for registration that one
of the persons in a domestic relationship lives in the
48 Relevant contextual material supports the
construction of ‘lives in the State’ as being about the place or
where persons in a domestic relationship reside. In the second reading
speech to the
Relationships Act
, the Attorney-General
Registration will be available for couples in a registrable relationship where
both parties are adults, ordinarily resident in Victoria
and not married,
already in a registered relationship or in another relationship that could be
registered in Victoria.
Relationships Amendment Act
Amendment Act
’) reduced the requirement for
registration in
Relationships Act
such that it is necessary
that only one person in the relationship lives in Victoria. In the second
reading speech to the
Amendment Act
, the Attorney-General
In establishing the Relationships Register in 2008, Victoria followed the
Tasmanian approach, which was the only Australian relationship
registration
scheme at that time. As such, the
Relationships Act
requires both partners in
the relationship to be registered to be ordinarily resident or domiciled in
This requirement imposes an unnecessary barrier to relationship recognition in
Victoria. It is also now out of step with the majority
of other interstate
registration schemes that have since been established, which require only one
person in the relationship to live
or reside in the relevant state or territory.
The bill therefore makes it easier for couples to register their relationship in
Victoria by simply requiring one partner in the
relationship to live in
Relationships Act
was amended, the requirement for registration was that
each person in the relationship be ‘domiciled or ordinarily resident
the State’. The word ‘domiciled’ suggests having a permanent
suggests a state of affairs
that has persisted, albeit for an unspecified period of time. Read together,
the words used in
when it was first enacted conveyed a requirement that
was more onerous in the sense that a person’s residence in the State
needed to be established, enduring or persistent. That requirement was relaxed
Amendment Act
51 While the
Amendment Act
reduced the requirement for registration of a relationship,
it remains necessary that a person in the relationship resides in Victoria.
52 The definition used by the Senior Member is
directed to the place or location where a person lives. Words such as
‘abode’, ‘dwell’, and
‘residence’ do not import a concept of permanence or necessarily
a requirement of an established, enduring or persistent state of affairs.
A person may make a place their home or abode, or dwell
or reside in a place for
a limited period. The Senior Member was correct to observe that the definition
is apt to understanding
the meaning conveyed by ‘lives in the
53 The Senior Member did not make use
of the definition in a way that impermissibly restricted application of
Relationships Act
. The Senior Member did say that a stay of a few
nights would not be sufficient to connote a home. However, the reasons show
conclusion was based not only on the term of residence but also the
temporary nature of the accommodation and the intention that
the stay was a
visit. Further, Vernon agreed with the proposition.
54 The Senior Member’s observation about
itinerant persons is unsurprising and cannot be criticised. The Senior Member
not dismiss the possibility of an itinerant person establishing that they
live in Victoria. Clearly, much would depend on the circumstances.
who moved frequently from place to place, but almost always resided in Victoria,
would probably have little difficulty
establishing that they live in the State
but may not be able to establish that they live at a more specific location. A
person whose
itinerant travel is spread equally across every State and Territory
of Australia may have little difficulty proving they live in
Australia, but may
find it more difficult to establish that they live in a particular State or
Territory. However, proof may not
be difficult if the person is temporarily
itinerant in the sense that they are travelling around Australia for a period of
with the intention of returning to their home State at the end of
their travels.
55 The Senior Member’s finding
that a person may live in more than one place at the same time, and emphasis on
the character
of the place at which a person is said to live, and the
person’s connection with that place, shows a flexible approach to the
interpretation of
Relationships Act
. The Senior Member
reasoned that a sufficient connection may be established in the absence of the
person having a particular property
right, and may be supported by a
person’s intention, gauged objectively, to live in a particular location.
That flexible approach
was confirmed by the observation that whether a person
‘lives in the State’ is to be determined ‘having regard
of the available evidence’.
56 I reject
Vernon’s submissions that, when construing the phrase ‘lives in the
State’, the Senior Member impermissibly
imposed requirements of
permanence, or for a person to have a specific home or dwelling, and dismissed
the possibility of a person
staying in temporary accommodation establishing that
they live in the State. Those submissions are demonstrably inconsistent with
the Senior Member’s reasons.
57 I accept the
Registrar and Nadja’s submissions that Vernon’s real complaint is
that the Senior Member erred by finding
that she did not live in Victoria. That
finding was open to the Senior Member and is not susceptible to review on this
application
for leave to appeal.
58 Leave is refused
on ground 1.
Grounds 2–4: Did VCAT fail to accord natural justice to
Submissions
59 VCAT is bound by the rules of natural
justice. Although the rule in
Browne v Dunn
does not strictly apply to
VCAT proceedings, VCAT may breach procedural fairness by making a finding of
fact contrary to the evidence
of a witness where that finding was not put to
Senior Member erred by failing to accord Vernon natural justice in the conduct
of the VCAT hearing in three ways. First, by
finding that Vernon intentionally
made her home in Portugal from 2017 by relying on evidence that she hired a
storage unit in Victoria
for her personal belongings. Second, by having regard
The Estate of Legler,
which was not tendered by any party and in
circumstances where Vernon was deprived of the opportunity of making submissions
contents. Third, by failing to accept Vernon’s evidence that she
and Legler were looking for property in Victoria, which was
not challenged by
61 Regarding the storage unit, Vernon
was not afforded an opportunity to address the issue in evidence and it was not
put to her in
cross-examination that her maintaining a storage unit in Victoria
implied an intention to live in Portugal. It was procedurally
unfair for VCAT
to find, ‘objectively gauged’ this intention based on the evidence
of the storage unit in Victoria.
62 The parties
were provided an opportunity to identify the material that should be relied on,
prior to and during the VCAT proceeding.
The Estate of Legler
included in the Tribunal Book or Amended Tribunal Book and Vernon expressly
stated in the VCAT proceeding that it was not
in evidence despite the Registrar
seeking to rely on it. It was procedurally unfair for the Senior Member to rely
on it in deciding
that Vernon and Legler made their home in Portugal as it was
not in evidence or put to Vernon in cross-examination.
63 The failure to accept Vernon’s evidence
that she and Legler were looking for property to purchase in Victoria was
procedurally
unfair in circumstances where, had she been questioned about the
issue, she could have responded by providing objective details of
the searches
for a property. The Senior Member’s finding, which was directly contrary
to Vernon’s evidence, must have
depended on an implicit adverse assessment
of her credibility as a witness. That is a matter which should, in fairness,
put to Vernon so she could have the chance to explain why her evidence
should be believed.
64 The key issue in the proceeding was
whether Vernon was living in Victoria at the relevant time. Submissions were
made about the
relevance of Vernon’s storage unit to that issue. It was
open for the Senior Member to find that Vernon’s evidence about
storage unit did not bolster her case that she was living in Victoria. In any
event, the Senior Member was not obliged to give
a running commentary on, or a
preliminary evaluation of, Vernon’s
or to tell her how the
evidence she gave might be used in a way adverse to
65 It was obvious that the Senior Member might
conclude on the available material, including
The Estate of Legler
Legler was not living in Victoria at the relevant time. Further, any breach of
procedural fairness was not material in the
sense that the error did not deprive
Vernon of a realistic possibility of a different
66 The Senior Member’s treatment of
Vernon’s evidence about looking for a property to purchase was entirely
The Senior Member was not required to accept Vernon’s evidence
uncritically, particularly when it was not supported by other
objective evidence
and was contradicted by evidence that the Senior Member found to be more
persuasive.
67 The Registrar and Nadja’s
submissions to VCAT, to which no objection was taken, put the relevance of
Vernon’s storage
unit to her living arrangements squarely in issue. It
was not incumbent on the Senior Member to raise as a matter of procedural
fairness a proposed line of reasoning that relied on material before
was nothing impermissible in referring to
The Estate of Legler
the general background and context to this litigation. It was never any part of
Vernon’s case that Legler lived
in Victoria at the relevant time.
Accordingly, any error in relying on
The Estate of Legler
69 It was fair for the Senior Member to
note that no documentary evidence had been provided in support of Vernon’s
weight to be given to Vernon’s evidence on this point.
It was unnecessary
for the Senior Member to advert to the possibility that an adverse finding may
be made regarding Vernon’s
own evidence in circumstances where her credit
was squarely put in issue by the Registrar and Nadja.
70 Natural justice requires that a party
have a reasonable opportunity to present their case. A decision-maker should
ensure that
the critical issues and any adverse conclusions that may not be
obvious are identified.
However, a decision-maker is not obliged to point out deficiencies in a
party’s case,
or to make a
party aware of their thought processes or provisional
A decision-maker is not
obliged to accept evidence given by a party that is not directly challenged in
cross-examination. It
may be rejected on the basis that it is contrary to
facts otherwise established. The evidence may effectively be challenged given
the way in which the hearing was conducted, or by an attack on the reliability
of that party’s evidence. Rebutting evidence
may not be necessary in
order to reject what amounts to little more than an
71 Legal error will only be established if it is
shown that a breach of procedural fairness was
Storage unit
72 A central issue in the VCAT proceeding
was whether Vernon lived in Victoria at the relevant time. There was a
substantial body
of evidence before the Senior Member going to that issue.
73 Vernon relied on her evidence that she
maintained a storage unit in support of her case that she lived in Victoria.
74 The Registrar and Nadja made separate
submissions to the Senior Member that the evidence showed Vernon had a strong
and real connection
to Portugal and Spain, and a lesser and insufficient
connection to Victoria. They submitted that the storage unit evidence supported
their case that at the relevant time, Vernon did not live in Victoria.
Accordingly, Vernon was on notice of the respondents’
submission that
maintaining a storage unit in Victoria did not support her case that she lived
in the State and was consistent with
her living in Portugal and/or Spain.
75 Further, Vernon’s credibility was directly
challenged by the respondents.
76 The Senior Member
was not obliged to accept Vernon’s submission about the relevance of the
storage unit evidence, or to expose
thinking processes or provisional views
available in
relation to the central issue. In the circumstances, there was no
lack of procedural fairness associated with the finding of the
Senior Member
that taking personal items essential for day-to-day living to Portugal while
storing non-essential items in Victoria
was consistent with Vernon’s
intention to make Portugal her home from 2017.
an affidavit made in this proceeding Vernon said that had she been asked about
the storage unit in the VCAT proceeding she would
have explained that she rented
it because she needed a safe place to store her belongings and client files.
Had that evidence been
given at the VCAT hearing, it would have made no
difference to the reasoning of the Senior Member. If my primary conclusion is
then I would determine that the failure to question Vernon about the
storage unit was not material to the outcome of the VCAT proceeding.
The Estate of Legler
78 It was Vernon who originally put
The Estate of Legler
before VCAT. In final submissions, the Registrar
sought to rely on adverse findings made by Pike J as to Vernon’s credit.
Vernon submitted to the Senior Member that the decision should not be relied on
because it was not in evidence and the adverse findings
had not been put to her
in cross examination.
79 The Senior Member said in
the reasons:
The Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence and may inform itself on any
matter as it sees fit. However, apart from the finding
as to Mr Legler living in
Portugal at the Relevant Time (which is consistent with the Registration
Application), I do not consider
that the findings in that case are particularly
relevant to the current proceeding. This is particularly so given it is evident
the statutory questions and the evidence before Pike J differ considerably
from the question and evidence before this Tribunal.
It is evident from the above paragraph,
and from the summary of findings set out in paragraph [22] above, that the
Senior Member only
The Estate of Legler
to confirm what Legler
said in the registration application, that he was not living in Victoria at the
80 The respondent’s case at VCAT was
that from 2017 to the date of his death in 2022, Legler lived in Portugal at La
Vernon had the opportunity to respond to that case. It was not part of
Vernon’s case at VCAT that Legler lived in Victoria
at the relevant time.
81 The Senior Member’s finding about where
Legler lived was open on the evidence before VCAT and was not contested by
As is plain from paragraph [112] of the reasons, the Senior
Member’s conclusion that Legler’s home was in Portugal was
evidence in the Tribunal Book.
82 The Senior
Member’s very limited reliance on
The Estate of Legler
decision was
not material in the sense that it did not deprive Vernon of a realistic
possibility of a different outcome.
Looking for property in Victoria
83 It was a matter for Vernon to
determine what evidence she sought to rely on in the VCAT proceeding to
establish that at the relevant
time she lived in Victoria. In relation to a
number of matters, Vernon relied not just on what she said but also on documents
she produced to support her case.
84 Vernon did
not put before VCAT any documentary or other evidence to support, in an
objective way, her assertion that in the relevant
period she and Legler were
looking for a property to purchase in Victoria.
85 The Registrar and Nadja put Vernon’s
credibility squarely in issue in the VCAT proceeding. It is evident from
[44] and [45] of the Senior Member’s reasons, set out in
paragraph [26] above, that the Registrar and Nadja’s attack
on Vernon was
successful. That adverse finding is not in issue in this
86 By attacking Vernon’s credibility
and relying on evidence supporting their case that Legler and Vernon had chosen
in Portugal, the Registrar and Nadja effectively sought to contradict
Vernon’s evidence that she and Legler were intending
to purchase property
in Victoria.
87 In the circumstances, the Senior
Member was not obliged to accept Vernon’s evidence about looking for a
property in Victoria,
or to give Vernon notice before rejecting that evidence.
The Senior Member adopted the orthodox approach of weighing the evidence
considering whether it was sufficient to establish the facts in issue to their
satisfaction. That approach did not involve a
failure to accord Vernon
procedural fairness.
88 Leave is refused on grounds
Grounds 5–6: Unreasonableness
Submissions
89 The Senior Member’s finding that
Vernon ‘was never going to be able to return to Victoria
“indefinitely”’
was illogical because:
(a) it relied on an
assumption for which there was no basis that if Legler wanted to live in
Portugal and Vernon wanted to live in
Victoria it necessarily followed that it
would be Vernon, not Legler, who would have to
compromise;
(b) it relied on an assumption that it
was more likely Vernon would compromise her work arrangements when the opposite
was more likely; and
(c) it relied on an
assumption that Legler and Vernon would not engage in a long distance
relationship when they had in fact done
so for considerable past
There was no evident or intelligible justification for the Senior Member to
treat the relationship between Vernon and Legler as a
basis to conclude that
Vernon could not have lived in Victoria at the time the relationship was
registered.
90 The Senior Member’s finding that
Vernon had claimed in the Portuguese proceedings to be residing in Portugal was
for the following reasons:
(a) Vernon gave unchallenged
evidence that she was not asked by her Portuguese lawyers where she lived, that
she had given those lawyers
full authority to act for her, and that she did not
read Portuguese. In those circumstances, a claim made about where Vernon
contained in court documents prepared by the Portuguese lawyers could
have no probative value in assessing whether Vernon did in
fact live in
(b) The more likely inference was that the
Portuguese lawyers simply inferred from Vernon’s instructions that she and
were in a relationship from 2017 and that Vernon had resided with Legler
for the whole of that relationship.
91 Having regard to the evidence about
the nature of the relationship between Vernon and Legler, it was open to the
Senior Member
to conclude that if she wished to maintain the relationship,
Vernon was not going to be able to return to Victoria
indefinitely.
92 It can be inferred that the Senior
Member did not accept Vernon’s explanation that statements made in
documents filed in
the Portuguese proceedings had diminished probative value.
The Senior Member was entitled to rely on the Portuguese court documents
persuasive evidence for the purposes of fact
93 The Senior Member did not accept in
unqualified terms Vernon’s evidence that she had always intended to make
her home indefinitely
in Victoria. The path of reasoning to that conclusion was
clear, intelligible and reasonable.
plainly open to VCAT to place reliance on the content of court documents filed
on behalf of Vernon in the Portuguese proceedings.
What was alleged in those
documents was corroborated by other evidence, not least of which was the
substantial evidence that Legler
lived at La Punta and Vernon’s case
that they were in a relationship. It was open to the Senior Member not to
accept Vernon’s
explanation about the contents of the Portuguese court
fair reading of the Senior Member’s reasons shows that the Senior Member
considered but rejected Vernon’s explanation
for the content of the
Portuguese court documents. Even if this were not the case, each piece of
evidence before VCAT was not a
mandatory relevant consideration, and the Senior
Member was not required to give a sub-set of reasons for why Vernon’s
explanation
96 For there to be jurisdictional error
on the basis of unreasonableness, the impugned finding must be ‘one at
which no rational
or logical decision-maker could arrive on the same
Indefinite return to Victoria
97 In paragraph [39] of the reasons, set
out in paragraph [25] above, the Senior Member recorded Vernon’s evidence
‘always intended to make [her] home indefinitely in
Victoria’. The impugned finding in paragraph [113] of the reasons
rejection of that evidence, focusing on the word ‘indefinitely’.
That rejection is to be understood in the context
of findings by the Senior
Member that Legler and Vernon had decided in 2017 to make La Punta their
was for Legler and Vernon to spend
considerable time living or travelling together; and Legler’s home was in
Portugal and his
work required extensive travel, particularly in Europe. In the
context of those findings, it was open to the Senior Member to reason
maintaining her relationship with Legler meant Vernon was not going to be able
to live indefinitely in Victoria.
98 The Senior
Member’s findings about this issue did not involve baseless assumptions
issues to do with their place of
residence and the impact this would have on where and how they would each
conduct their work. The
Senior Member was entitled to rely on findings about
the pattern of Vernon and Legler’s lives since they commenced their
relationship
in 2017 as the basis for the inference about what would occur if
the relationship continued. The basis for the conclusion that so
long as the
relationship continued, Vernon would not be able to return to Victoria
indefinitely is sufficiently set out in the reasons.
The conclusion was open on
the evidence.
Portuguese court documents
99 Vernon’s evidence about where
she lived was expressly contradicted by a document filed on her behalf by
lawyers that she
engaged in the Portuguese proceedings.
100 The Portuguese court document contains a
detailed history of relevant parts of Vernon’s life and relationship with
The document is signed by Vernon. It is a statement made on
Vernon’s behalf in a proceeding aimed at establishing her rights
respect of La Punta. The document had probative value in the VCAT
proceeding.
101 The Senior Member was entitled to
rely on the Portuguese court document as evidence of where Vernon lived at the
relevant time.
Given the adverse finding as to Vernon’s credibility, the
Senior Member was entitled to prefer the evidence in the Portuguese
document to Vernon’s uncorroborated assertion that she was not responsible
for or aware of the document’s content.
A fair reading of the reasons
leads to the inference that the Senior Member took this logical path of
102 It was not mandatory for the Senior
Member to expressly consider in the reasons everything that was said by Vernon
in evidence
before VCAT, or to say why that evidence was rejected. The basis
for the Senior Member rejecting Vernon’s evidence about where
was sufficiently expressed in the reasons.
is refused on grounds 5–6.
104 Vernon’s
application to review the cancellation decision could not succeed unless she
Relationships Act
. Accordingly, my
conclusions on grounds 1-6 are sufficient to dispose of the application and
appeal. However, I will proceed to
consider the remaining grounds and the
parties’ submissions.
Ground 7: Did the Senior Member fail to have regard to the presumption
of regularity?
Submissions
105 The Senior Member found that the
Registrar accepted the application made by Vernon and registered the
relationship between her
and Legler. The
Relationships Act
requires that
an application be accompanied by a statutory declaration from each of the
applicants.
Colin Hunter,
operations manager at the Registrar’s office, gave evidence that Registry
staff would register a relationship
if the application satisfied the statutory
criteria. Vernon’s uncontradicted evidence was that she was told by
Registry staff
that everything to do with the registration application was
‘complete’. Given the presumption of regularity and the
evidence, the Senior Member erred by finding that Legler did not submit the
required statutory declaration.
106 The Senior
Member in fact applied the opposite presumption, presuming that, if a statutory
declaration had been provided, the
Registry would have a copy of it and would
have filed it in the VCAT proceeding.
Registry documents show that three staff members dealt with Vernon’s
application to register the relationship. None
of those staff members were
called to say whether a statutory declaration was provided by Legler, and no
explanation was given for
their absence. The Senior Member should have inferred
that their evidence would not have assisted the
108 The Senior Member’s reasoning,
that because Vernon had not asked the Registrar for a copy of the statutory
declaration it
should be inferred that Legler did not provide one, is
irrational.
109 A ground for the Registrar cancelling
the relationship was that Legler had not made the required statutory
declaration. Vernon
was therefore put on notice of an issue she needed to
confront in the review of the cancellation decision. However, Vernon provided
no positive evidence to VCAT that the required statutory declaration was
provided by Legler in support of the application.
110 A proper reading of the reasons shows
that the Senior Member considered the presumption to have been rebutted. That
finding was
open in circumstances where:
(a) Hunter’s evidence
did not include any history or prospect of documents being lost by the
(b) Vernon’s evidence was that she
did not know whether Legler had provided a statutory declaration;
(c) the Registrar did not lodge any statutory
declarations with VCAT in circumstances where it was required by s 49(1)(b)
to lodge with VCAT the documents relevant to the
cancellation decision.
111 There was no error by the Senior
Member in not drawing a
Jones v Dunkel
inference as a result of a
Registrar’s failure to call any staff members who dealt with the
application. There was no evidence
those persons still worked with the
Registrar. Further, whether the deceased provided a statutory declaration was
nothing more than
conjecture. The absence of evidence on that point could not
be papered over by a
Jones v Dunkel
112 The evidentiary weight borne by the
presumption of regularity will vary according to the proved
circumstances.
Senior Member accurately summarised the parties’ competing submissions as
to the presumption of regularity and what
was established by the evidence. It
is reasonable to infer that the Senior Member considered the presumption of
regularity in the
context of the evidence that was relevant to whether a
declaration was provided by Legler.
114 The Senior
Member reasoned as follows:
(a) because he was in
Portugal at the time the registration application was made, Legler could only
have provided the statutory declaration
to the Registrar
electronically;
(b) there was nothing in the
voluminous material filed in the VCAT proceeding by the Registrar in accordance
with the obligations
in s 49 of the
to suggest that the
required statutory declaration was provided by Legler;
(c) there is no reason to suppose the s 49 material
is incomplete; and
(d) in those circumstances, it
was appropriate to conclude Legler did not provide a statutory declaration as
required by
Relationships Act
115 It was a matter for the Senior Member
to weigh the evidence before VCAT in order to determine what facts were
established. The
only evidence supporting a finding that the declaration had
been provided by Legler was an inference based on what ordinarily happens
course of assessment of a registration application by the Registry. The Senior
Member was entitled to conclude that inference
bore little weight in
circumstances where there was no positive evidence that the declaration has been
provided, no reason to suspect
that the voluminous material provided by the
Registrar was not comprehensive and there was nothing in that material to
suggest the
declaration had been provided.
accept Nadja’s submission that the Senior Member was not obliged to draw a
Jones v Dunkel
inference. In any event, such an inference could not be
used to fill a gap in the evidence as to the provision of a statutory
declaration
117 Leave is refused on
118 I note that the Registrar is the
statutory authority with responsibility for maintaining the relationships
register. A basis
for the cancellation decision was the Registrar’s
conclusion based on the most reliable information available, that Legler
provide a statutory declaration. In other words the Registrar concluded, in
performance of the statutory function, that
registration of the relationship was
not done regularly. That evidence significantly undermines the presumption of
regularity on
which Vernon relied.
Ground 8: Did VCAT give adequate reasons for concluding that Vernon
failed to submit a statutory declaration?
119 I accept the Registrar and
Nadja’s submissions that the summary of findings in the opening of the
reasons recorded the reference
to Vernon having not produced a statutory
declaration in error. It was clear from the reasons that the Senior Member
found it ‘unnecessary’
to determine if Vernon had produced a
statutory declaration.
120 Vernon’s provision
of a statutory declaration, or lack thereof, bears no weight on the VCAT
decision. It formed no aspect
of the Senior Member’s reasoning.
121 Vernon concedes that a finding in relation to
ground 8 is immaterial unless she succeeds on other grounds. I accept the
submissions
of the Registrar and Nadja that the success of this ground of appeal
is immaterial. Leave is refused on ground 8.
Ground 9: Did VCAT err in failing to consider whether it was necessary
to amend the Register?
122 Vernon concedes she can only succeed
on ground 9 if she first succeeds on one or more of ground 1-6. She said that
if she failed
on the ‘lives in the State’ issue, she did not press
ground 9. In the circumstances, I will say very little about this
123 The Registrar relied on the power in
Relationships Act
to make the cancellation
decision. The Senior Member concluded that the broad discretionary power
conferred by the provision was
not limited to cases going to the existence of a
relationship and entitled the Registrar to cancel a registration because of
non-compliance
with the requirements in
to provide a statutory
declaration. The Senior Member determined it was appropriate to exercise the
discretion in
and on that basis affirmed the cancellation
124 Vernon submitted that
ss 19(1)(a)
and (b) of the
Relationships Act
must both have work to
do, and that if
were to be interpreted broadly, as the Senior
Member had done, then findings by the Registrar of an inquiry under
would, self-evidently, be information available to the Registrar and
would be otiose. She submitted that the power in
to correct the relationships register was limited to the
particulars recorded in the register and did not extend to consideration
whether statutory declarations were provided or required to support an
application to register.
125 A purpose of the
Relationships Act
is to establish and maintain a relationships
Parliament’s
intention that the register be correct and accurate is clear from the
Registrar’s powers to require further
information relevant to an
application for registration,
conduct an inquiry,
correct and amend the
inquiry may only be conducted under
Relationships Act
‘to verify information given for, or in connection with, an
application’ and as to whether particulars of a registered
relationship
have been correctly recorded. The power in
to correct the register
is limited to the purposes for which an inquiry may be conducted under
127 The power in
Relationships Act
is broader. It allows the Registrar (and VCAT on
an application for review) to correct the register at any time to ensure that it
conforms with the most reliable information available. The power is directed to
assessment of the reliability of information available
to the Registrar. It is
not concerned with the application process or correction of administrative
128 I did not hear full argument on the
ground because the concession by Vernon made it unnecessary. My provisional
view, for the
above reasons, is that the Senior Member is correct in the
interpretation and application of
Relationships
129 Had it been necessary I would have
refused leave on ground 9.
130 Vernon’s case fails on grounds
1–6. If Vernon was successful on either or all of grounds 7, 8 and/or 9,
be immaterial to the outcome of this appeal. Regardless, Vernon has not
succeeded on these grounds.
131 Leave to appeal the
VCAT decision is refused and the proceeding is
132 I will hear from the parties as to
the form of orders.
Vernon v Registrar of
Births, Deaths and Marriages (Review and Regulation)
[2024] VCAT 1090
Member Tang AM).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Ibid s 148(2A).
Relationships Act 2008
Relationships Act
Citations omitted.
The Senior Member defines
relevant time as February 2020, when Vernon submitted the registration
application. This definition is
adopted in these reasons.
[2024] NSWSC 726
The Estate of Legler
Citations omitted.
Citations omitted.
Citations omitted.
Caldwell v Caldwell
& Georgeson
[1946] SAStRp 32
[1946] SASR 185
Citations omitted.
Dale O’Sullivan v
City of Camberwell (1991/01913)
[1991] VICCAT 72
Citations omitted.
Citations omitted.
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 6 December 2007, 4394 (Rob Hulls,
Attorney-General).
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 7 October 2015, 4554 (Martin Pakula,
Attorney-General).
Mount Atkinson Holdings
Pty Ltd v Landfill Operations Pty Ltd & Ors
[2020] VSC 345
, 65-6 [216]
(Garde J) (‘
Mount Atkinson
SZBEL v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
(2006) 228 CLR 152
Rafidi v Commonwealth
Bank of Australia
[2020] FCAFC 26
, 6 [17] (‘
Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship v SZGUR
[2011] HCA 1
(2011) 241 CLR 594
Commissioner for Australian Capital Territory v
Alphaone Pty Ltd
[1994] FCA 1074
(1994) 49 FCR 576
McClelland v Burning Palms Surf Life Saving Club
[2002] NSWSC 470
(2002) 191 ALR 759
[140] (Campbell J) (‘
McClelland’).
Selvadurai v Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1994) 34 ALD 347
Mount Atkinson
Mount Atkinson
21) 68 [223].
Citations omitted.
SZSQL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] FCA 294
Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs v RGKY
[2022] FCAFC 177
47-8 [109] (Farrell and Halley JJ).
Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship v SZMDS
(2010) 240 CLR 611
, 647–8, [130] (Crennan and
Relationships Act
Johnson v Director of
Consumer Affairs Victoria
[2011] 34 VAR 447
, 19 [60] (Kyrou J).
Relationships Act
4) ss 4, 17.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (500 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter