URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1636.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CDPP v Asplet [2025] VCC 1636 (11 November 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
Case No. CR-25-00490
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
CODY ASPLET
HER HONOUR JUDGE BRECKWEG
DATE OF HEARING
17 September 2025
DATE OF SENTENCE
11 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
CDPP v Asplet
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1636
REASONS FOR
Subject: SENTENCE- Criminal Law
Catchwords: using a carriage service to advertise child abuse material -
using a carriage service to transmit child abuse material
and cause child abuse
material to be transmitted to himself - use a carriage service to cause offence
- using a carriage service
to access child abuse material – Bestiality -
possess or control child abuse material obtained or accessed using a carriage
service - Paedophilic Disorder - Zoophilia
Legislation Cited:
Criminal Code
Cases Cited:
[2003] VSCA 155
(2003) 6 VR 543
[2003] 1 Cr
[2017] QCA 7
DPP (Cth) v Garside
[2016] VSCA
R v De Leeuw
[2015] NSWCCA 183
R v Richard
[2011] NSWSC
Heels v The King
[20254] VSCA 133;
[2011] NTCCA 14
Meadows v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 290
[2019] QCA 15
[2008] VSCA 268
(2008) 192 A Crim R 76
(a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 35
DPP (Cth) v Knipe
R v Verdins; Buckley; Vo
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269
Sentence: Total effective Global Sentence is 5 years
imprisonment; non parole period of 3 years and 2 months imprisonment; 5 days
presentence detention; sex offender registration for life; 6AAA declaration
– total effective head sentence of 6½ years’
imprisonment with
a non-parole period of 4 years.
APPEARANCES
For the DPP
Mr S. Hogan
Solicitor for the Director of Public Prosecutions (C'th)
For the Accused
Mr M. Sturges
Ms H. Fredericksen
HER HONOUR:
Introduction
Asplet, you have pleaded guilty to:
carriage service to advertise child abuse material
Transmitting child abuse material and causing child
abuse material to be transmitted to yourself
Use a carriage service to cause offence
Use a carriage service to access child abuse material
Use a carriage service to access child abuse material
(second charge)
Possess or control child abuse material obtained or
accessed using a carriage service.
charge carries a maximum penalty of 15 years' imprisonment apart from Charges 3
and 5 which are punishable by a maximum penalty
of five years 'imprisonment.
Circumstances of the offending
agreed facts of your offending are set out in the Summary of Prosecution Opening
(Exhibit A). As an overview, between January
2022 and May 2024, you engaged in
advertising, possessing and accessing child abuse material, and transmitting and
causing child
abuse material to be transmitted to you. You also committed the
offences of bestiality and the offence of using a carriage service
offence. You mainly used the Telegram application with username
'southerntiger95' to share and receive child abuse material.
a search warrant at your residence, police seized your Apple iPhone Pro Max 13
mobile which, when it was forensically examined,
revealed the offending.
Charge 1 – Advertise child abuse material
analysis of your iPhone revealed that between 7 January 2022 and 14 May 2024,
you used the X (formerly Twitter) application
to advertise child abuse material.
You did this by reposting images or videos originally posted to your public X
profile, 'southerntigerrr'
by other users, to all your followers and you made
the material available to any other user who viewed your profile.
the charge period you reposted one video and four images of child abuse
material. This included a video you reposted on around
7 January 2022 that
depicted an adult male engaged in sexual penetrative activity with a male child
aged approximately 12 to 15 and
an image you reposted around 13 June 2022
depicting an adult male engaged in sexually penetrative activity with a child
aged between
the age of 10 and 15. Text was placed on the image, stating
'Warning this person is horny', 'Send cumshot videos with sound'.
the time of your arrest on 14 May 2024, all the material remained readily
Charge 2 – Use carriage service to transmit
child abuse material, and cause child abuse material to be transmitted to
of your Telegram account revealed that you had privately communicated with
several other users and during those conversations,
you transmitted child abuse
material to them in the form of text, images, and videos and caused them to
transmit child abuse material
to you. These conversations often covered topics
such as a user's sexual preferences, the age and gender of children they were
attracted to, and the type of material they could provide you or were
requesting from you, which included rape, and 'no limits'.
the lengthy period of 19 October 2022 to 12 April 2024, you had communications
different Telegram users. On most occasions, once contact was
established with another user either you or the other user would
ask to swap
child abuse videos or images. For example, you started a
conversation with Telegram user 'D L' and immediately advised them that
interested in 'yng' (or young) material and asked whether they had any videos to
share. You also commenced a conversation
with another user by asking if he was a
'perv' and had videos to trade.
other cases, you or the other party would advise each other of the
of material you were most interested in for instance you told Telegram User 503
that you were interested in the sexual abuse of children,
including violence
against infants. You told one user that your preferred age ranges were '10 and
under' and advised another that
you were interested in 'no limits stuff'. On 4
June 2023, you started a conversation with Telegram User 'Alister' and advised
that your interests were 'yng and beast', being children and bestiality.
You later started a conversation with another user
asking if they had 'Yng necro' (being material involving deceased children).
confirmation, you requested the material be sent to you.
the charge period you also commented on the content of some videos you traded
with others which included highlighting your
favourite ones. The trading of
child abuse material was often accompanied by highly sexually depraved written
commentary where you
and the other user described your deviant sexual fantasies
and what you would like to do to a child. Much of this involved descriptions
inflicting gross sexual violence on children.
the 38 users you communicated with, five involved communications via written or
text-based child abuse material and no images or videos were transmitted by
or to you. In the case of one user, you sent one cartoon
image. Of the remaining
32 users you communicated with, you sent around
child abuse images and
approximately
videos to those users. You caused to be
transmitted to yourself, or received,
child abuse videos and
child abuse images in exchange.
material contained a wide variety of depraved and abhorrent depictions of
children including children aged between infants and
14 years, engaging in
sexual activity with adults, children being raped and during one written
conversation you discussed attending
a children's hospital and engaging in
sexual activity with the children there. On another occasion in a conversation
with the same
user he sent you three child abuse videos with one titled 'New
Compilation of Rare Baby Toddler 0Yo'. You responded, 'God I can't
wait till I'm
left alone with a baby' and then transmitted one image and seven videos
depicting child abuse material. You and that
user also discussed watching videos
in which children are physically tortured. You expressed an interest in
travelling to a third
world country to find an infant to inflict severe sexual
violence upon and you both boasted that you could live a normal life while
Charge 3 – Use carriage service to cause
of your Telegram account revealed that between 4 July 2023 and 14 March 2024 you
privately conversed with other users during
which you transmitted a variety of
offensive material to them including material with elements of bestiality or
necrophilia. You
offensive videos to nine users that featured
adult males engaged in sexual activity with animals. In certain videos, the
were either mutilated or deceased.
instance, on 23 July 2023, you commenced a conversation with Telegram User
'Wiktor' and immediately asked if he was interested
in 'hard zoo' before
advising that you had 'no limits'. On 31 July 2023, you transmitted 33 offensive
videos to this user, depicting
adult males engaging in sexual activity with
animals. As a further example, from 22 November 2023 until 2 May 2024, you sent
'BB' 35 offensive videos depicting adult males engaging in sexual
activity with animals, including instances where animals were killed
Charge 4 – Use carriage service to access child abuse
21 July and on 28 August 2023, you used Telegram to access child abuse material
that was transmitted to you by others, but which
you had not expressly
requested. On 21 July, you commenced a conversation with the user of a
since-deleted Telegram account who sent
who sent you
child abuse
material video depicting a male anally penetrating a male child aged between
three and five. On receipt, you said 'One
of my favourite vids'.
20 August 2023, you conversed with Telegram User 'King RJ' who sent you
child abuse material videos and
image depicting children
aged between infants and 10 years old. In response to receiving this material
you stated, 'Love a good reaction
29 November 2023 you transmitted a video of you engaged in an act of bestiality
with your own dog. In this video, you forced your
penis into the dog's mouth.
Charge 6 – Access child abuse material
of your X (Twitter) account revealed that you had accessed child abuse material
by viewing and 'liking' posts containing
child abuse material that had been
published by other users on X. Between 1 December 2023 and 15 March 2024 you
images depicting child abuse material, posted by various
users on X. The images were CGI/anime generated child abuse and in one image
'Jocks & Tots' is written on the bottom right
Charge 7 – Possess or control child abuse
images depicting child abuse material were found on your
iPhone. The material was predominantly sexual images of male children, infants
to young teenagers, solo or engaged in sexual acts with adults. Other files
depicted the offensive material referred to earlier.
circumstances
have one older brother and three half siblings. Your parents separated when you
were a toddler, and you were raised by your mother,
with weekend visits with
your father. Both your parents ultimately remarried and had further children.
You told Dr Barth you had
self-esteem issues and felt neglected by your family.
You lived with your mother until you were 14 and went to reside with your
You lived with your father for four years and left when you got a job
working for your stepfather.
terms of your education, you completed Year 12 with below average results and
after beginning a degree in education you formed
the view that further education
was not for you. You have worked in several reception or administrative type
had your first sexual experience when you were 16 and met an older male via
social media but the experience was confusing and
upsetting for you because the
male was forceful and aggressive. From around 18, you began meeting with men and
participating in positive
casual sexual encounters.
were raped when you were 21 by a friend when you were intoxicated. He ignored
your pleas for him to stop. You required several
surgeries after this incident.
have had three main intimate relationships in your life. Most recently, you were
in a relationship leading you to move from NSW
to Victoria. You lived together
in Victoria for around 18 months, and you worked in property management, but you
ended the relationship
as it was verbally and physically abusive and you
returned to NSW. You have been residing with your father and stepmother and
for their business in an administrative capacity. You have disclosed the
offending to your parents and your stepmother. Your family
remains supportive of
Character references
mother Toni-lea Koutsioukis, provided a character reference on your behalf. She
wrote that you have always had many friends,
and you never had any issues at
school, which has made your offending hard for her to accept. She said she was
aware of the charges
against you and that you have been open about answering any
questions she has asked. She believes the counselling you have been undertaking
has helped you tremendously and that you understand how vital it is. She will
continue to support you and help you for as long as
stepmother Michelle Asplet also provided a character reference for you. She said
you were a great kid, always thoughtful and
caring. She is aware of the charges
against you, and she will continue to support you to make better life choices
and reestablish
yourself within the community. She said you remain very sorry
and remorseful for your actions.
Sentencing Principles
have set out the sentencing principles governing the objective seriousness of
offending involving child abuse material but I will
not repeat those
have also had regard to the matters applicable in sentencing for Commonwealth
Section 16A(1)
provides that a court must impose a sentence that is of appropriate severity in
all the circumstances of the offending and
sets out a non-exhaustive
list of factors that
be taken into account as far as these are
relevant and known to the Court. I have had regard to the following factors set
16A(2)(a) Nature and circumstances
of the offenc
your counsel accepted during the plea, your offending is very serious - indeed,
horrendous and abhorrent.
have pleaded guilty to seven (7) charges that cover seven (7) different types of
offending namely, advertising, transmitting,
possessing and accessing child
abuse material and causing this material to be transmitted to yourself. You also
committed the offence
of bestiality and used a carriage service to cause offence
on multiple occasions.
charges except Charges 5 and 7 are 'rolled up' charges encompassing more than
one separate act of criminality. Because most of
the charges (except Charge 4)
reflect many instances of offending, each capable of constituting a separate
offence, the criminality
involved in the charges is greater than with a charge
involving only one episode of criminal
2 is especially serious given it covers an 18-month period and is a rolled-up
charge encompassing a significant number of separate
instances of transmitting a
large amount of child abuse material or causing it to be transmitted to yourself
involving 38 individual
transmitted hundreds of child abuse videos to multiple other users thereby being
an active and not simply passive participant
in the child abuse market. You also
requested and received material. By your actions you were actively contributing
to the expansion
of the market.
transmitting material to others there was also the potential for the material to
be even more widely distributed by those receiving
maximum penalty for most charges is 15 years' imprisonment which is an
unequivocal indicator of the seriousness of those charges
in the view of
Parliament.
offending was not isolated or sporadic but occurred in regular intervals over a
period of over two years between January 2022
and May 2024. Your offending was
not opportunistic and involved a degree of planning.
I summarised at the beginning of these remarks, the content of the material
involved in the central charges is highly sexualised,
abhorrent and disgusting
and some of the material was exceptionally depraved. There was also a clear
interconnection between the
child abuse material you were dealing with and
themes of serious violence, death and cruelty.
dealings with the material and your communications were clearly for sexual
gratification and you have been diagnosed with paedophilic
disorder. The
contents of the material in my view clearly supports this diagnosis.
different child victims were depicted in the material and each of those children
is presumed to have suffered harm.
written communications you sent to and exchanged with others that constituted
written child abuse material, featured abhorrent
violent fantasies with common
themes of inflicting gross sexual abuse and violence on children as young as
babies. Apart from a few
occasions, your written exchanges were also accompanied
by the transmission of child abuse videos or images.
terms of your written child abuse material, I am cognisant however, that despite
repeated references in your communications to
vile acts being committed against
children, there were no children actually harmed or sexually abused because of
this aspect of your
offending. As held in
Heels v The
the fact that an actual
child is not harmed or sexually abused is a relevant factor in assessing the
objective gravity of offending
involving child abuse material. That is not to
say that such offending involving written fantasies is not serious. Text-based
abuse material exchanged with others for sexual gratification
the tendency to normalise or encourage child sexual abuse'
, to encourage
reciprocal communications or victim
participation
, relegates children
to objects, undermines society's abhorrence of child sexual abuse and ignores
the harm that the fantasised activities
causes real child
As stated in
, written child abuse
material is not victimless and it may fuel a demand for material involving real
Plea of guilty
pleaded guilty to the charge at the first available opportunity, being at the
first committal mention of the matter. Your plea
warrants a clear reduction in
the sentence to be imposed to reflect its utilitarian value in saving the
community the time and expense
of a trial and witnesses from having to give
evidence, and to reflect its demonstration of acceptance of responsibility,
willingness
to facilitate the course of justice and remorse.
your case, I am satisfied that you have also demonstrated some remorse for your
offending over that reflected by your plea alone.
Your contrition for the
offending is evident from the remorse you have expressed to your mother and
stepmother, your offer to assist
police, and you told Dr Barth you felt shame
and disgust at your offending.
16A(2)(j) Specific Deterrence
16A(2)(k) Need for Adequate Punishment
Community Protection
have had regard to the need to deter you personally from further offending of
this type. I note that you have no prior convictions,
you have gained some
insight into your offending, and you have willingly accepted and engaged in
treatment but this must be balanced
against the fact that your offending
occurred over 26 months, your risk of reoffending is medium to high and you
still have significant
work to do in developing insight into your offending in
the context of your paedophilia and zoophilia diagnoses. In those circumstances,
the weight to be given to specific deterrence is high.
have also had regard to the requirement that I denounce your offending and
ensure you are adequately punished for your offending.
In your case, community
protection is a prominent sentencing consideration given your diagnosis of a
Paedophilic Disorder
and your need
for further intensive treatment.
16A(2)(ja) General
deterrence is the primary sentencing consideration for offending involving child
abuse material given the prevalence and ready
availability of this material and
the need to protect children from child sexual
Where general deterrence is
primary, personal mitigatory factors such as prior good character, age,
prospects of rehabilitation et
cetera, must therefore be given less weight than
might otherwise be
16A(2)(m) Character,
antecedents, age, means and physical or mental condition
were aged between 23 and 26 at the time of the offending and are now 27 years
old. You were relatively young when you commenced
offending, but you were not a
child nor were you a youthful offender. Given your diagnoses and the nature of
your offending I do
not think it can be said that it was the result of youthful
immaturity. So, whilst I do have regard to your age, I do not give it
deal of weight. Having said that, I am mindful that you are at the time of
sentencing a young person with a long future ahead
so I will ensure the sentence
I impose is not 'crushing'.
have no prior convictions and no subsequent or outstanding matters.
have had regard to the contents of a psychological report from Dr Barth who said
your sexuality is
'...unequivocally disordered'
and diagnosed you with
Paedophilic Disorder – Non-Exclusive Type and 'Other Specified Paraphilic
Disorder – Zoophilia'.
Dr Barth said you told him you had started engaging
with pornography during your mid-teens. You told Dr Barth that after your rape
you had trouble having sexual intercourse and stopped having sexual
relationships which led to you leaning more on sexual chats with
and pornography.
on-line activities became more problematic as you engaged in extensive
sexualised chats with men mainly on Telegram and you moved
from 'mainstream
homoerotic material' to more deviant material such as sadomasochistic material.
The content of your on-line chats
with other men, according to Dr Barth,
developed a recurring theme of dominance and power with you becoming more
aroused by depictions
of great power and/or physical size differences between
protagonists. This ultimately culminated in your interest in child abuse
material and bestiality, and you would discuss your sexual fantasies with other
users and send and receive child abuse and other
also admitted to Dr Barth that you enjoyed the attention you received from
others because you were able to access 'taboo' material
and the more you had the
more highly you were regarded in the on-line community. This led to you
accessing more deviant and depraved
material and you became set on creating 'no
limits' material of extreme deviance to please other users. You also admitted
found the sharing of 'taboo' material personally exciting.
said that you had never had treatment or counselling following your rape and
instead have attempted to regain feelings of adequacy
and self-worth back by
seeking approval via sexual attention from men. You told Dr Barth you ceased
accessing any pornography upon
your arrest.
Barth opined further that you have depression and anxiety, and their symptoms
cause you 'a noticeable degree of distress' although
he concluded that they fall
within normal limits for an individual in your situation and do not rise to the
level of a psychological
disorder. The symptoms are generated, he said, by
feelings of guilt for the offending, concern about your legal predicament and
questioning of your own adequacy.
Barth concluded that your offending went simply beyond 'role playing' or sharing
material for excitement or to win friends but
indicated the presence of
multifaceted psychological deviance. Your repeated accessing of material
involving very young children
and animals, your use of the material to
masturbate, your creation of very extreme written material which would feature a
of aberrant sexual acts and your engagement in sexual activity with
your pet dog reveals 'entrenched deviant sexuality'.
Barth noted your commitment in participating in treatment with Dr Handley to
start addressing your psychosexual problems. However,
he considered the gravity
of your offending means you will require multi-faceted offence-specific
treatment, and you still require
work on developing insight into your offending,
because whilst improving, it remains underdeveloped. This was especially in
of you developing insight into, or acknowledging, the sexual arousal you
felt from viewing the material as opposed to attributing
your offending solely
on a desire to please others.
was not argued that you have any diagnosed psychological disorder such that
limbs 1 to 4 of
R v Verdins; Buckley;
apply to reduce your
moral culpability for the offending or the weight to be given to the principles
of general and specific deterrence.
I assess your moral culpability for the
offending as high, and your counsel did not submit that any lower assessment was
appropriate.
In terms of your diagnosis of paedophilia, to the extent that it
be a reason to reduce your moral culpability, I note what was
said recently in
DPP (C’th) v
Thus, even if an offender’s moral culpability can be reduced because
of a paedophilic disorder, that diagnosis cannot reduce
the objective gravity of
the offending or the need for paramount emphasis on general deterrence in the
sentencing exercise. And,
the need for specific deterrence and protection of the
community will almost inevitably outweigh any mitigation arising from a reduced
moral culpability.
did not understand there to be reliance on
limbs 5 and 6 nor does
there appear to be an evidentiary basis for any reduction given your mental
condition and your scores for
symptoms of depression, anxiety, and stress were
in the normal range and showed a very low level of self-reported distress given
your social and legal situation.
have also had regard to the reports provided by your treating psychologist
Mr Peter Handley dated 8 September 2025 and 13 October
2025. You have
undertaken 25 treatment sessions with Mr Handley since your arrest which is
very much to your credit. You have developed
a relapse prevention plan, and you
are working on processing your life events. Mr Handley stated that you were open
to discussions
involving sensitive topics, committed to treatment and building a
prosocial life, and you had made good progress. He opined however
that you still
require work as your level of insight into your offending, whilst improved, is
still developing and there remains
a risk that you will be triggered back into a
dysfunctional state associated with your offending, particularly in response to
such as relationship difficulties and/or boredom. He concluded that
you would benefit from specialised sex offender treatment to
treat your past
pattern of sexual arousal to extreme sexual violence, your history of trauma and
relationship difficulties and to
manage ongoing risks.
his addendum report of 13 October 2025, Mr Handley addressed my queries about
what treatment you had engaged in specifically for
your paedophilic and
zoophilic disorders and to address your underlying interest in child abuse
material especially material involving
severe violence. Mr Handley stated that
your treatment has addressed psychological issues underpinning your paedophilic
but it has been multifaceted and focussed on underlying psychological
drivers rather than paedophilia in isolation. Treatment has
been directed
towards factors that have made you susceptible to paraphilic interests and
relapse prevention. Your zoophilic arousal
has also been addressed in the
context of understanding your vulnerability to needing to please others in the
on-line environment
and to maintain status in that deviant subculture.
violence featured in your offending has been a central topic of your discussion
in your treatment and treatment has been directed
towards risk factors and your
core vulnerabilities to violent ideation and to the development of skills to
meet your underlying needs
and to strengthen your prosocial self. Treatment has
been focussed on how you became normalised to extreme violence after repeated
exposure and how you sought to gain a sense of power by engaging in sadism due
to your own experience of rape and subjugation in
family and dating
relationships. The effects on victims and the harmful effects of sexual violence
are being explored as is the development
of skills to meet your underlying needs
without resorting to violent sexual
16A(2)(n) Prospects of rehabilitation
your case, your offending covered a relatively long period, and Dr Barth
assessed you as presenting with a moderate–high
risk of reoffending. Dr
Barth opined however that you have gained insight regarding the gravity of your
offending, and your risk
of offending will reduce if you continue sex offender
specific treatment.
also have the support of your family, you have had 25 professional treatment
sessions with Dr Handley and as Dr Barth noted, you
are intelligent and have an
employment history. Dr Barth continued that while you still have quite some way
to go with treatment,
it is typically a lengthy therapeutic process, and you
have sought out treatment and actively engaged in it. Mr Handley stated that
severity of the material involved in your offending could not be overstated, but
you are still young, engaging in treatment,
have family support and prosocial
future plans so your future prognosis is good if you continue with treatment.
You are a young person
with no priors, and assuming your risk factors are
addressed, and you continue with treatment, I assess you as having fair to good
prospects of rehabilitation.
have had regard to
of the Act which provides when sentencing for
a Commonwealth child sex offence (here Charges 1, 2 4, 6 and 7), in
addition to any
other matters, I must have regard to the objective of
rehabilitating you and I do so. You have engaged in many treatment sessions
your credit and, whilst you still have quite a way to go in developing an
understanding of the effects of your offending and accepting
responsibility for
what you have done, your continued rehabilitation must be given weight. It is
not the case however that this objective
operates to swamp the primacy to be
given to principles of general and specific deterrence and the need to protect
the community
and it must operate in view of the need to impose a sentence which
adequately reflects the seriousness of your
Totality and cumulation/concurrency
of the Act provides a presumption in favour of full cumulation between
sentences imposed for Commonwealth child sex offences, although
permits the court not to impose full cumulation if, in all the circumstances,
this will still result in appropriately severe sentences.
I will not impose
complete cumulation in respect of the charges to which the presumption applies
as to do so would breach the principle
of totality and I am able to construct a
sentence of appropriate severity without needing to impose wholly cumulative
without the presumption, or where it does not apply, I would impose a modest
degree of cumulation between the sentences imposed
to reflect the different and
discrete types of offending and where the offence type is the same, to reflect
the different instances
or variations of that offending. I do so mindful of the
principles of totality and proportionality and the need to avoid imposing
crushing sentence. I am also cognisant that there is significant overlap between
Charges 2 and 6 – where you accessed material
by 'liking' child abuse
material that had been posted by others - and this arose from the Charge 2
is also an overlap between Charge 2 and the possession Charge 7 as a significant
amount of the material possessed was also transmitted
in Charge 2. This does not
preclude any cumulation though because, again, the offences are distinct in
nature, have different elements
and involve separate acts of criminality. One
offence involves you obtaining child abuse material in the first place plus your
in sending child abuse material onto many others. The other charge
involves your decision to save or keep the child abuse material.
Comparative sentences
was provided with a schedule of intermediate appellate sentences. Whilst these
are of assistance in illustrating the relevant sentencing
principles, they are
of limited utility in the present sentencing exercise. As frequently occurs in
cases involving a multitude of
different offence types and charges, each with
differing charges, features and levels of severity, and differing subjective
factors, it is very difficult to find cases of sufficient factual
similarity to be of any real assistance.
Submissions on
prosecution submitted that the objective seriousness of your offending is such
that a total effective head sentence should be
imposed which requires the
imposition of a
non-parole period – that is, a sentence with a head
sentence of imprisonment exceeding three
counsel submitted that I should impose a total effective sentence that would see
your release on a recognisance release order.
A recognisance release order may
only be imposed if the total effective sentence does not exceed three years'
imprisonment.
It was accepted
however that some part of the term of imprisonment imposed would need to be
served before your release with conditions
imposed to address your ongoing need
for treatment and support in the community.
have done my best to balance the very serious nature of your offending and the
strong need for general and specific deterrence,
protection of the community,
just punishment and denunciation with your provisionally good prospects of
rehabilitation, your committed
engagement and progress with treatment, your
relatively young age, lack of prior convictions, and the need to promote your
rehabilitation.
On balance, I consider your offending is far too serious, and
the need to promote general deterrence and protection of the community
to permit a head sentence that would allow for your release on a Recognisance
Release Order after serving a portion of
the term of imprisonment imposed.
Please stand.
the single State charge, Charge 5, you are convicted and sentenced to nine
months' imprisonment. That sentence commences today,
11 November 2025.
Commonwealth Charge 2, you are convicted and sentenced to three years'
imprisonment. This is the base Commonwealth sentence. I
direct that the sentence
commences six months after the commencement of the State sentence.
Charge 1, you are convicted and sentenced to six months' imprisonment. I direct
that that sentence commences three months prior
to the expiration of the
sentence imposed on Charge 2.
Charge 3, you are convicted and sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment. I direct
the sentence commences six months prior to the expiration
of the sentence
imposed on Charge 1.
Charge 4, you are convicted and sentenced to six months' imprisonment. I direct
that the sentence commences four months prior to
the expiration of the sentence
imposed on Charge 3.
Charge 6, you are convicted and sentenced to three months' imprisonment. I
direct the sentence commences three months prior to
the expiration of the
sentence imposed on Charge 4.
Charge 7, you are convicted and sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment. I direct
that sentence commences six months prior to the
expiration of the sentence
imposed on Charge 6.
total effective State sentence is nine months' imprisonment.
total effective Commonwealth sentence is four and a half years' imprisonment. I
set a non-parole period for the Commonwealth offending
of two years and eight
the partial cumulation/concurrency ordered between the State and Commonwealth
charges, the overall total effective sentence is
five years'
imprisonment.
total effective non-parole period is
three years and two months'
imprisonment.
declare pursuant to
Sentencing Act
(Vic), that you have
served five days' pre-sentence detention, excluding today.
you have been convicted of three or more Class 2 offences listed in Schedule 2
Sex Offenders Registration Act
(Vic), you are required to
comply with reporting obligations for
Sentencing Act
(Vic), but for your plea of guilty, I
would have imposed a total effective head sentence of six and a half years'
imprisonment with
a non-parole period of four years and two months.
we could please remove Mr Asplet. Thank you.
R v Richard
[2011] NSWSC
, at [65(f)];
R v De Leeuw
[2015] NSWCCA 183
[2024] VSCA 133
[2018] NSWCCA
Meadows v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 290
The Queen v Hancock
[2011] NTCCA 14
[2019] QCA 15
(2008) 73 NSWLR 10
[2008] NSWSC 1292
DPP (Cth) v Knipe
DPP (Cth) v Garside
[2016] VSCA 74
DPP (Cth) v Zarb
[2014] VSCA 347
R v De Leeuw
[2015] NSWCCA 183
DPP (Cth) v Knipe
Heathcote (a pseudonym)
[2014] VSCA 35
[2008] VSCA 268
(2008) 192 A Crim R 76
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269.
[2025] VSCA 228
Crimes Act 1914
s 34(1)(c)(i)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (350 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter