URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VLPT/2005/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:32:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Law Institute of Victoria Limited V Kerridge [2005] VLPT 5 (30 November 2005)
[2005] VLPT 5
Tribunal reference: T0612 of 2005
address, and reference Mr Warwick Norman Kerridge
practitioner: Legal Practitioner
Charge referred by: Law Institute of Victoria
RPA reference: J Mazaris VLR/05/275
Name and address
of complainant: Law Institute of Victoria Limited
470 Bourke Street
Melbourne 3000
Magistrates’ Court No :
brought before the Full Tribunal by the Law Institute of Victoria
Limited against
WARWICK NORMAN KERRIDGE
(“the legal
practitioner”)
REASONS OF FULL TRIBUNAL OF LEGAL PROFESSION TRIBUNAL
FOR DECISION GIVEN ON
30 NOVEMBER 2005
(Section 409 Legal
Practice Act)
1. The legal practitioner pleaded guilty to a charge, brought by the Law
Institute of Victoria Limited (“LIV”), of misconduct
as defined in
section 137(b) of the Act in that the conduct was unconnected with legal
practice but would justify a finding that
the legal practitioner is not of good
character and/or is otherwise unsuited to engage in legal practice.
2. The legal practitioner is currently incarcerated at Dhurringile Prison and
asked that the Tribunal excuse him from appearing at
the hearing before the Full
Tribunal on 21 November 2005 and accept written submissions in relation to
penalty. Those submissions
were contained in a letter to LIV dated 11 July 2005
and formal written submissions dated 17 November 2005. LIV appeared and was
represented by Mr. Randall of counsel.
3. On 26 April 2005 the legal practitioner, having pleaded guilty to each count,
was convicted in the County Court of Victoria on
one count of defrauding the
Commonwealth contrary to section 29D of the
Crimes Act 1914
, and one count of
dishonestly causing a loss to the Commonwealth contrary to section 135.4(5) of
the Criminal Code 1995.
4. The legal practitioner was sentenced by Judge Bourke in the County Court to a
total effective sentence of twenty four months imprisonment,
to be released on a
recognisance of $6,000 to be of good behaviour for four years on serving eight
months of the sentence that day
5. In delivering his reason for sentence the learned sentencing judge made
certain findings of fact, which we respectfully adopt.
6. The scheme in which the legal practitioner took part defrauded the
Commonwealth of about seventeen and a half million dollars
in excise and customs
duty. It involved the setting up of a business, Worldwide Duty Free, which
purported to import and sell cigarettes
and liquor to travellers. The real
purpose of the business was to purchase the goods free of taxes and duties and
sell them so free
on the local market. The scheme ran from March 1999 to
September 2001.
7. Elements of the scheme included:
(a) a facade of sales
(b) the movement of moneys overseas and then back to Australia to maintain the
pretence; and
(c) the elaborate and false construction of orders from and sales
8. The legal practitioner was one of a number of persons charged and convicted
in respect of the scheme.
9. The legal practitioner’s involvement in the scheme, which was at first
an innocent one, began in mid 2000 when he worked
as a corporate solicitor and
strategic adviser with the Strategic Group, a financial business. He provided
assistance with advice
and other work to several participants in the scheme, in
particular in relation to a purportedly proposed public float of Worldwide
10. By the end of 2000 the legal practitioner was at least suspicious that the
company was involved in a criminal enterprise and
by February 2001 he knew the
nature of the fraud but nevertheless continued to assist it in various ways
including financial and
corporate structure advice, the transfer of profits
off-shore, the creation of false orders and assistance in the movement of funds.
In particular the legal practitioner deposited just over $1,000,000 into the
Australian bank account of Worldwide Duty Free, creating
the impression that
these moneys were the proceeds of overseas sales, and moved about $740,000 in
cash, being the profits of the
illegal tobacco sales in Australia, through his
own bank account into the account of the business. He received approximately
or 1.5% of the funds that he caused to be banked.
11. In sentencing the legal practitioner, the learned sentencing judge took into
account a number of factors, both aggravating and
mitigating, which are also
relevant to our decision.
12. The aggravating factors were:
(a) the very serious criminality of the
enterprise;
(b) the significance of the legal practitioner’s role
(c) that he was a practising solicitor during a part of his
involvement with it; and;
(d) a previous offending, for which in 1994 the legal practitioner was placed on
a five-year good behaviour bond without conviction
by the Supreme Court of
Victoria, and in relation to which he was charged and convicted of professional
misconduct and his practising
certificate suspended.
13. The mitigating factors were:
(a) the plea of
(b) evidence of genuine remorse;
(c) the personal and
financial circumstances that existed at the time of offending;
(d) that the legal practitioner presently and at the time of the offending was
likely to have suffered from a depressive illness
or psychological
(e) that the legal practitioner was not without substantial good qualities, as
shown by the character evidence tendered on his behalf;
(f) the fact that the consequences of the offending and a jail sentence,
including the likely loss of his legal career, will be harsh
for the legal
practitioner; and
(g) the duration of his participation was less than the others involved (this
was relevant to the comparative sentences imposed).
14. The submissions made on behalf of LIV were in essence that:
(a) the legal practitioner has been convicted of a serious indictable offence
involving dishonesty and has been incarcerated in respect
(b) he has previously been found guilty of an indictable offence involving
dishonesty, in the Supreme Court in 1994, and received
a five year good
behaviour bond;
(c) his practising certificate was suspended for 18 months from 30 June 2005
(the order of the Solicitors Board and reasons for decision
dated 24 May 1994
were produced);
(d) the legal practitioner has been engaged in a very serious example of conduct
that would justify the finding that he is not of
good character and is unsuited
to legal practice: and
(e) the appropriate penalty is to cancel his practising certificate for at least
10 years and refer him to the Supreme Court with
a recommendation that he be
struck off the roll of practitioners.
15. The legal practitioner, in his submissions, accepted that it may be the
finding of the Tribunal that he is not a fit and proper
person to hold a
practising certificate of any kind for some time. He submitted that 5 years
suspension was appropriate. He asked,
nevertheless, that the Tribunal not seek
to remove his name from the roll of practitioners and take into account the
factors raised
by him including:
(a) the plea of guilty, in the Court and
to the charge before the Tribunal;
(b) the testimonials given on his
behalf in the County Court;
(c) the learned sentencing judge’s remarks in relation to the prospects of
rehabilitation;
(d) that the conduct the subject of the conviction was not in the course of
legal practice and the legal practitioner would have
defended the matter fully
if he had had the resources to do so;
(e) the fact that the combination of poor investments decisions, matrimonial
breakdown and the sentence imposed in the County Court
have brought about
financial ruin, and that an additional penalty closing off any prospect of the
legal practitioner engaging in
any form of legal practice would be an additional
serious penalty disproportionate to the penalty imposed by the learned
16. The legal practitioner has expressed regret that his actions have been
highly imprudent and have not met the standards required
either of the legal
profession or personally of his family or himself.
17. In considering the question of penalty the Full Tribunal has been assisted
by the submissions of the parties and by a transcript
of the plea on behalf of
the legal practitioner made in the County Court by Mr Paul Duggan on his behalf
and the sentencing remarks
and findings of Judge Bourke. We have not had the
benefit of the testimonials referred to by the legal practitioner and by the
sentencing judge. LIV requested these and other documents from Mr
Duggan, with the legal practitioner’s consent but has not
received them.
Nevertheless we accept the learned sentencing judge’s conclusion that
these testimonials show the legal practitioner
to be a person otherwise
possessing good qualities.
18. We have also had the benefit of the order and reasons for decision of the
Solicitors’ Board, dated 24 May 1994, which provide
information as to the
prior offending and the penalty imposed by the Board.
19. The Solicitors’ Board found the solicitor guilty of misconduct and
guilty of conduct in relation to his practice of the
law that shows he is not a
fit and proper person to practise as a solicitor on his own account or in
partnership. The legal practitioner’s
practising certificate was
cancelled as from 30 June 1994 and he was not entitled to apply for an
employee’s practising certificate
until after the expiration of eighteen
months from that date. By the order of the Board, he was also not entitled to
apply for a
principal’s practising certificate until the expiration of
five years from that date.
20. The matters before the Board went beyond the matter in respect of which the
legal practitioner came before the Supreme Court.
The charge before the Supreme
Court was that of dishonestly obtaining the sum of $7,441.20 from a client by
falsely representing
that a bill of costs, on the letterhead of the firm of
which the legal practitioner was an employee, was a genuine bill of costs
the firm and creating a false receipt. The events giving rise to the charge took
place in 1992.
21. The Board found that the legal practitioner had diverted the proceeds of the
false billing to his own benefit. The Board also
found that the legal
practitioner had lied to the Federal Court while in sole practice, and had
independently and covertly taken
instructions from clients of a firm for whom he
worked, for his own benefit. They referred, however, to his honesty and
in the matter before them.
22. The legal practitioner was 43 years of age in April this year. He and his
twin brother are the youngest of six children in a
family of high achievers.
Medical evidence before the County Court, accepted by the learned sentencing
judge, was to the effect
that in the context of his family he has always felt
inadequate, and that he had suffered either from a significant depressive
or an adjustment disorder with significantly depressed mood over a
number of years.
23. The legal practitioner married in 1986 but separated from his wife in 2003.
They have three children, who were aged 15,12 and
8 in April of this year. He
studied and graduated in law through the articled clerks’ course in Sydney
and has held a variety
of practising certificates; employee, corporate and
principal. After the cancellation of his practising certificate in 1994, the
Legal Practice Board records produced to us indicate that he did not reapply for
a practising certificate until June 2000. He held
a corporate practising
certificate from June 2000 to June 2001, and again from February 2003 to June
2003. His last practising certificate,
currently suspended by the LIV, was a
principal’s certificate obtained in October 2004.
24. The legal practitioner has been convicted of a serious indictable offence
and was involved in a scheme that defrauded the Commonwealth
Government of
approximately seventeen and a half million dollars. While the legal
practitioner disputes that his involvement in
the scheme was in his capacity as
a lawyer, for at least part of the time of his involvement he held a practising
certificate and
was an officer of the court. He has been sentenced to a period
of imprisonment for his participation in this serious crime.
25. We find that the legal practitioner has engaged in conduct that clearly
justifies a finding that he is not of good character
and is otherwise unsuited
to engage in legal practice. It is appropriate, and the legal practitioner
accepts, that he should be
prevented from practising as a lawyer for a
substantial period of time and our unanimous view, taking into account the
matters set
out above, is that his practising certificate should be suspended
for a period of 10 years.
26. We have considered whether it is also appropriate to make a recommendation
to the Supreme Court that his name be struck off the
roll of practitioners.
There are certainly grounds for doing so including the serious nature of the
crime he committed and the fact
that he has previously been found guilty of an
offence involving dishonesty. Our concern is that not only has the legal
practitioner
re-offended but his conduct has escalated to an even more serious
level and again involves dishonesty. There are strong grounds
for making the
recommendation in the interests of protection of the public.
27. We are mindful of the opinion of the learned sentencing judge that there
were prospects for rehabilitation. Our role, however,
is different to that of
His Honour, and we did not understand His Honour to be referring to
rehabilitation in other than the general
sense. We have taken into account, to
our knowledge, all that the legal practitioner has provided to us, in
deliberating on this
matter. We are also mindful of a duty on our part to
maintain the high standards of an honourable profession. We also have a duty
impose a penalty which will deter other persons from being tempted to engage in
dishonest or improper behaviour. We have considered
the issue of rehabilitation
carefully but on balance, and in the interim of the long term protection of the
public, our decision
is to make a recommendation to the Supreme Court that the
legal practitioner be struck off the roll of practitioners.
The orders of the Tribunal:
1. That the legal practitioner be suspended for a period of ten years, until 26
April 2015, from obtaining a practising certificate.
2. The legal practitioner be referred to the Supreme Court with a recommendation
that his name be struck off the roll of legal practitioners.
3. That the legal practitioner pay the sum of $8,380.00 to the LIV. Stay of 6
months for payment of costs. Liberty to apply for
further stay of costs.
.........................................................................
Chairperson
of Legal Profession Tribunal
1. Copies of this document will be provided by the Tribunal to the legal
practitioner, the legal practitioner’s recognised
professional
association, the Legal Ombudsman, the complainant and the Legal Practice
2. More information about the operation of the Tribunal can be found on the
Tribunal’s website at
www.legalpt.vic.gov.au
Tribunal reference: T0612 of 2005
Name, address, and
reference Warwick Norman Kerridge
of legal practitioner: Dhurringile
Locked Bag No 1
MURCHISON VIC 3610
Charge referred by: Law Institute of
Victoria Limited
DX 350 Melbourne
RPA reference: J Mazaris
Magistrate Court No :
CONCERNING A CHARGE
brought before the Full Tribunal by the Law Institute of Victoria Limited
against Warwick Norman Kerridge (“the legal practitioner”).
ORDER OF FULL TRIBUNAL
HEARING BEFORE: Full Tribunal constituted by His Honour Judge Dee Q.C.
(Chairperson) and Ms E Wentworth and Mr M Lipson (Members)
HEARING: 21 November 2005 and 30 November 2005
DATE OF ORDER: 30
November 2005
SECTION(S) OF LEGAL PRACTICE
ACT UNDER WHICH HEARD: 157
ATTENDANCES: Mr G M Randall appeared on behalf of the Law Institute of
Victoria Limited.
There was no appearance by or on behalf
of the legal practitioner.
THE FULL TRIBUNAL
PROFESSION TRIBUNAL
having found the legal practitioner guilty of misconduct
as defined in section 137(b) of the Act in that the conduct was unconnected
legal practice but would justify a finding that the legal practitioner is not of
good character and/or is otherwise unsuited
to engage in legal practice in that
he was engaged in a conspiracy to defraud the Commonwealth of excise and customs
ORDERS THAT:
1. That the legal practitioner be suspended for a period of ten years, until 26
April 2015, from obtaining a practising certificate.
2. The legal practitioner be referred to the Supreme Court with a recommendation
that his name be struck off the roll of legal practitioners.
3. That the legal practitioner pay the sum of $8,380.00 to the LIV. Stay of 6
months for payment of costs. Liberty to apply for
further stay of
.......................................................................
Chairperson
of Legal Profession Tribunal
I CERTIFY that this order, signed by me and stamped with the seal of
the Legal Profession Tribunal, correctly and fully sets out the
order made by
the Full Tribunal of the Legal Profession Tribunal on 30 November
.............................................................
of Legal Profession Tribunal
1. Copies of this document will be provided by the Tribunal to the legal
practitioner, the legal practitioner’s recognised
professional
association, the Legal Ombudsman, the complainant, and the Legal Practice
2. Any party may appeal against this order to the Court of Appeal, but only on a
question of law: Legal Practice Act section 170.
3. The Registrar will file a certified copy of this order in the Magistrates'
Court at Melbourne: Legal Practice Act section 164(1)(b).
When filed, this
order will become an order of the Magistrates' Court for the purposes of
enforcement: Legal Practice Act section
4. More information about the operation of the Tribunal can be found on the
Tribunal’s website at
www.legalpt.vic.gov.au
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter