URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2025/698.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jiang v E Scaunich Nominees Pty Ltd (No 2) [2025] VSC 698 (14 November 2025)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
AT MELBOURNE
S ECI 2024 01966
Plaintiff/Defendant
by Counterclaim
E SCAUNICH NOMINEES PTY LTD
(ACN 005 315
060) as Trustee of the E & FA Scaunich Unit Trust No 2 (ABN 18 147 866
First Defendant/Plaintiff by Counterclaim
JONES LANG LASALLE (VIC) PTY LTD
(ACN 004 582 423)
Second Defendant
DATE OF HEARING
16 October 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT
14 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Jiang v E Scaunich Nominees Pty Ltd (No 2)
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VSC 698
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE – Appeal from determination of Judicial
Registrar – Joinder – Amendment of pleadings –
Property Law
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
G Costello KC with
S Frauenfelder
Colin Biggers & Paisley
For the First Defendant
C Shaw KC with
Thomson Geer Lawyers
For the Second Defendant
No appearance
HER HONOUR:
1 This is an appeal from a determination
made by the Court, constituted by a Judicial Registrar, in respect of an
application for
joinder and the amendment of
2 The proceeding concerns a contract for
the sale of land dated 3 April 2023 between the plaintiff, Ming Jiang, as
purchaser, and
the first defendant, as vendor. The property is a substantial
building in Queen Street, Melbourne. The purchase price under the
contract was
$27.5 million, with settlement due on 2 April 2024. Ming Jiang paid a deposit
of $5.5 million but, prior to settlement,
served a notice of rescission dated
6 March 2024. The notice alleged a number of matters including that the
vendor knowingly concealed
material facts in relation to the condition of the
building, the presence of hazardous material, the rental income of the building,
and issues with elevators, air conditioning, and the like. Ming Jiang has made a
number of claims against the vendor and, as part
of his relief, seeks orders in
the proceeding for the return of his deposit.
April 2024, the vendor served a notice of default and rescission. The
vendor’s position is that there was no knowing
concealment of facts and
that the process for the sale included the making available of an electronic
data room to which Ming Jiang
had access. The vendor has counterclaimed for
damages, alleging that Ming Jiang has failed to pay the balance of the purchase
and complete the contract of sale.
have also been made against the second defendant, the agent appointed to market
and sell the property. The second defendant
took no part in the appeal and
advised the Court that it neither consented to nor opposed the
5 By summons filed on 7 May 2025, the vendor
sought orders which would permit it to amend its counterclaim to include a claim
Property Law Act
and to join
Ming Jiang‘s mother, Rong Dai, as the second defendant by counterclaim in
this proceeding. It does so after ascertaining
through discovery that Ming
Jiang sold a property in Madden Street, Balwyn North, to Rong Dai. The vendor
says the Madden Street
property was the only property owned by Ming Jiang in
Victoria, that he sold it six days after he failed to settle his purchase of
Queen Street property, and that he sold it for $880,000 less than its market
value. The vendor contends that the Madden Street
property was alienated with
the intent to defraud Ming Jiang’s creditors within the meaning of
Property Law Act 1958
. As such the transfer of the
Madden Street property should be declared void and set
6 On 29 May 2025, Burgess JR dismissed
the application for joinder and the amendment of pleadings. By notice of appeal
filed 11 June
2025, the vendor seeks to appeal against that determination. The
appeal is to be conducted by way of hearing
vendor relied on affidavits by Fabian Scaunich, made 5 March 2025, and Norman
Samuel Fryde, made 5 May 2025. Ming Jiang relies
on his affidavit made 24 March
2025 and the affidavits of Rong Dai made 24 March 2025, Kylie Trinh made 21 May
2025, and Simon Adrian
Francis made 9 October 2025.
Legal principles
8 Other than in one respect, there was no
dispute between the parties as to the applicable legal
principles.
9 In respect of the amendment of
(a) pleadings are a means to ensure that the real issues of controversy are
raised in a way that is procedurally fair to both plaintiff
and defendant,
allowing each to properly prepare and articulate their case, on clear notice of
allegations and defences. On this
basis, absent extraordinary circumstances,
leave to amend will be granted;
(b) the fact that an amendment has no real prospect of
success at trial will be a highly relevant factor. While the Court will not
engage in an examination of the merits of the foreshadowed case, an amendment
will not be allowed if it is futile because it is obviously
bad in law or would
be liable to be struck out due to defects as a pleading;
(c) the Court must engage with
’s provisions in balancing the competing interests of
the parties and those of the administration of justice more generally;
(d) other considerations include:
i. whether the amendment will cause substantial
extent of wasted costs to be incurred;
iii. whether the amendment will cause irreparable
unfair prejudice;
management concerns arising from the stage in the proceeding when the amendment
is sought, including efficient use of the Court’s
time and whether
inefficiencies may arise from vacation or adjournment of trials;
v. public confidence in the judicial system;
explanation given for seeking the amendment at the stage when it is
10 In respect of joinder under
r 9.06(b)(ii) of the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2025
(the ‘Rules’), the elements are as follows:
(i) that there are two entities namely the person to be added as a party and a
party to the proceedings;
(ii) between the two entities there may exist a question arising out of or
relating to or connected with any claim in the proceeding;
(iii) it is just and convenient to determine that question between the proposed
party and the other party as well as between the
parties to the
proceeding.
11 Relevant factors include the
(a) whether there would be common evidence, common questions of fact and law;
(b) the public interest and the need to avoid multiplicity of proceedings;
(c) unfairness or prejudice to any party, understood in the context of the
court’s powers to manage the proceeding so as to
address or minimise any
prejudicial consequences;
(d) delay is relevant but is not decisive and should be explained to enable a
rational assessment of competing considerations;
(e) unless the claim against the proposed defendant is obviously bad in law or
futile, the merits of the claim are not a decisive
consideration. The court
would not refuse to allow an amendment because it raised a claim that ought not
to succeed, for this will
be an issue at
12 In respect of joinder under
r 9.06(b)(i) of the Rules, the test contains two alternatives, namely:
(a) persons who ought to have
been joined as a party because their presence is required to enable the
proceeding to continue; and
(b) persons whose
presence before the Court is necessary as their presence will aid in achieving
finality and avoiding a multiplicity
proceedings.
13 A person is a necessary party where
the Court is invited to make, or proposes to make, orders that will directly
affect their rights
or liabilities.
Submissions
14 In support of the application for
amendment, the vendor submitted that there were no extraordinary circumstances
standing in the
way of joinder because:
(a) the vendor’s
proposed s 172 claim has a
prima facie
(b) the proposed amendment has been sought
promptly after the vendor’s solicitors identified underlying facts and
then obtained
expert evidence to ensure that there was a proper basis for the
proposed claim;
(c) the proceeding has not yet been
listed for trial and the amendment will not cause substantial delay, significant
wasted costs
or irreparable unfair prejudice;
(d) there are no case management concerns and
the amendment would not lessen public confidence in the judicial
15 In support of the application for
joinder, the vendor submitted that if the amendment is allowed, it must follow
that Rong Dai
is joined pursuant to r 9.06(b)(i) of the Rules because she
becomes a necessary party.
16 Further, the vendor
submitted that Rong Dai ought to be joined pursuant to r 9.06(b)(ii) of the
Rules because the vendor has a
prima facie
s 172 claim, connected to
or related to its existing claim, which is just and convenient to be determined
as part of this proceeding.
In this regard the vendor relied on:
(a) the existence of common
(b) the risk of inconsistent findings
should the claims be determined in separate
proceedings;
(c) the public interest in avoiding a
multiplicity of proceedings;
(d) the existing
proceeding being at a relatively early stage;
(e) the absence of unfairness or
17 Ming Jiang submitted that the joinder
and amendment application should be dismissed because:
(a) multiple layers of
contingency make the s 172 claim speculative and unlikely to ever
practically arise, exposing Ming Jiang as
plaintiff to significant unnecessary
delay and costs;
(b) the s 172 claim raises
substantial new factual and legal issues that will cause delay by adding for
simultaneous resolution a
claim that should only be tried if it
(c) the additional claim would require hard
swearing evidence through interpreters about whether Ming Jiang intended to
defraud the
vendor by transferring the Madden Street property to Rong Dai, and
complex issues about whether the disposition caused any prejudice
given the Ming
Jiang’s lack of equity in the
(d) Rong Dai will require an interpreter,
which alone would likely prolong the trial by multiple
(e) having regard to the lack of utility in
the claim (as Ming Jiang has no equity in the Madden Street property), the
amendment appears
to be an unnecessary step designed to intimidate Ming Jiang
and Rong Dai.
Court’s approach to determining the application
18 The one area of dispute in respect of
the principles of law related to the order in which the applications should be
and whether the applications should be granted absent extraordinary
circumstances.
19 The vendor submitted that the
Court should first determine the amendment application with reference to the
principle that ‘absent
extraordinary circumstances, leave to amend will be
The Court should
then turn to the question of joinder. But, if leave to amend were granted,
plainly, the joinder of Rong Dai becomes
20 Ming Jiang submitted that the
authorities referring to extraordinary circumstances were in the context of
amendment generally,
whereas here the more important consideration was the
question of joinder. In that sense, both applications should be considered
the same time with the proper focus being whether the joinder and consequential
amendment was just and convenient.
21 I accept the
submission of Ming Jiang that it is not appropriate to separately consider the
applications for joinder and amendment.
I am of the opinion that the
applications are intertwined. The practical reality is that if the amendment
application were granted,
joinder would need to sensibly follow. Accordingly,
as part of the Court’s consideration of the amendment application, the
Court is entitled to consider, not just the competing interests of the existing
parties and the administration of justice more generally,
but the flow on effect
and any competing interests of Rong Dai.
reference in the authorities to the need for extraordinary circumstances is in
the context of ensuring that the real issues
of controversy between existing
parties are clearly articulated and determined in a procedurally fair way.
Where an amendment to
pleadings effectively necessitates the joinder of an
additional party, who would not otherwise be a necessary party, additional
considerations
may influence the outcome of the
application.
23 As stated by Elliott J:
The power to grant leave to a party to amend a pleading is a discretionary
power. The nature and importance of the proposed amendments
must be considered.
This consideration must be weighed against case management considerations such
as cost, delay and the potential
for unfair prejudice to other parties to the
proceeding, the court and other litigants that might arise if the proposed
is allowed.
Whether leave for amendment and joinder should be granted
24 I am satisfied that a factor in favour
of both amendment and joinder is that the vendor has a
prima facie
s 172 claim that has some connection to the vendor’s counterclaim.
The Madden Street property was transferred to Rong Dai
for an amount
significantly less than the valuation provided by CBRE Residential Valuations
at a time when the vendor
was, at least, an impending future creditor of Ming
25 I am also satisfied that a number of
factors favour both amendment and joinder. In particular, there has not been any
delay in the bringing of those applications and the proceeding has not
yet reached a stage where joinder and amendment would be inappropriate.
Further, it is likely that there will be some common evidence between the
existing claims and the proposed s 172 claim. It is likely
that Rong Dai
will be a relevant witness for both. In this regard I bear in mind the timing
of the transfer of the Madden Street
property and the proposed finance
arrangements for the purchase of the Queen Street property. Those proposed
finance arrangements
included reference to a mortgage over the Madden Street
property and the provision of a personal guarantee by Rong Dai. This
commonality
points in favour of granting the application for amendment and
26 It is difficult at this point to
determine the likelihood of inconsistent findings. The possibility cannot be
ruled out, but I
am not persuaded that the risk is sufficiently significant to
influence the outcome of the application.
the applications are simply an intimidatory tactic is tied to the question of
utility. The question of utility, in particular
whether Ming Jiang ever had any
equity in the Madden Street property as a result of a November 2021 loan
agreement and mortgage in
favour of Rong Dai, is not something that can be
determined in this application. It is certainly not the case that the issue is
clear cut, noting competing arguments and potential evidence on this issue. In
those circumstances I do not accept Ming Jiang’s
submission that
‘having regard to the lack of utility in the claim, the amendment appears
to be an unnecessary step designed
to intimidate’.
28 As to the considerations that weigh against the
Court permitting amendment and joinder, of significance is the risk of adding
expense and court resources to a proceeding in respect of a claim that may
never come to fruition.
29 The decision of
International Pty Ltd v Guan
is instructive in that regard, where Attiwill J determined that a Supreme
Court proceeding in which s 172 relief was sought should
be stayed until
the resolution or determination of claims brought in a VCAT proceeding.
Attiwill J stated that:
In the event that Rysze’s claims against Mr Guan in the VCAT proceedings
are unsuccessful there will be no utility in the proceeding
in this Court.
Significant time and legal costs will be incurred by the parties, including the
defendants, in the proceeding in this Court in continuing
to prepare for and
appear at a trial. Those costs may be wasted if Rysze’s claims against Mr
Guan in the VCAT proceeding are
unsuccessful.
30 It is difficult to determine how much
longer a court hearing would be if the s 172 claim were added. Without
amendment and joinder
the parties estimate the duration of any trial as being
around 10 days.
31 Relying on the principles that
are applicable to a s 172 claim as set out in
Argyle Building Services
Pty Ltd v Franek
submitted that this is a simple claim. It only needs to be shown that Ming
Jiang had an intention to hinder or delay
creditors. There is no requirement of
malice against a particular creditor and it is a misapprehension to suggest that
the introduction
of the s 172 claim will turn the case into a hard swearing
fraud case. As such, the s 172 claim is likely to only add hours to the
case. It will simply involve some additional evidence and cross examination of
Ming Jiang and Rong Dai together with some valuation
32 Ming Jiang submitted that the s 172 claim
was a complicated matter involving a property transaction between a mother and
son, requiring
the examination of the affairs of a very wealthy family. In the
circumstances it could add a week to the trial. This is particularly
Rong Dai does not speak English and would require an interpreter, not just when
giving evidence, but to assist her to appear
33 The additional length of the trial is
probably somewhere between the two estimates. But, perhaps of more relevance is
existing proceeding already has a number of layers of complexity.
There are multiple parties and multiple allegations. There are
contested issues
of fact, such as what occurred at meetings. The proceeding will involve a
consideration of substantive questions
of law, such as whether the interactions
of the provisions of the
Land Act 1958
Consumer Law and Fair Trading Act 2012
create a private right of
34 The High Court in
Services Australia Ltd v Australian National University
noted that it is
relevant to consider whether any unnecessary delay arising from amendment would
create prejudice unable to be repaired
by an order for
Namberry Craft Pty
Ltd v Watson
, Vickery J identified that the ‘inconvenience and
stress caused to individuals’ may be irreparable, irrespective of any
award for costs.
If Rong Dai
were added as a party, she would be added to a proceeding in which, for the most
part, she has no direct interest.
This would inevitably involve stress,
inconvenience and costs, leading to the sort of irreparable prejudice
contemplated by these
35 Balancing the
competing considerations, I conclude that both the application for amendment and
the application for joinder should
be refused.
permit the application for amendment would be to permit a premature claim to
proceed, resulting in utilisation of court time
and the expenditure of costs
which may turn out not to have been necessary.
permit the application for amendment and consequential joinder would necessitate
Rong Dai being added to an already complicated
proceeding, thereby resulting in
significant cost to her and irreparable
38 To permit the
claim to be
determined in this proceeding is not just and convenient.
Disposition
39 The appeal will be dismissed. I will
hear the parties on the appropriate form of orders and as to costs.
Supreme Court General
(Civil Procedure) Rules 2025
, r 84.05(4).
Australian and Pacific
Investment Corporation Pty Ltd v Jeshing Property Management Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2025] VSC 358
Cosgrave J), citing
Pentridge Village Pty
Ltd (in liq) v Capital Finance Australia Ltd (No 2)
[2020] VSC 284 (Connock
J) [13]-[19] (citations omitted).
Anjin No 13 Pty Ltd v
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd
[2009] VSC 371
(2009) 26 VR 148
, 153 [27] (Vickery J),
Tatterson v Wirtanen (as Executrix of the Estate of Wirtanen)
[1998] VSC 88
, [30] (Gillard J).
Lee v Korean Society of
[2015] VSC 262
, [10] (Dixon J), citing
Main Property Group Pty
Ltd & Ors v Pelligra & Sons Pty Ltd & Ors
[2007] VSC 43
[20]-[28] (Bell J).
S Pirrie Equities Pty Ltd v
Venetian Media Group Pty Ltd
(2023) 73 VR 521
, 543 [80] (Elliott J).
Chickabo Pty Ltd v Zphere
Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2019] VSC 580
, [44],[48] (Sifris J).
Pentridge Village Pty Ltd
(in liq) v Capital Finance Australia Ltd (No 2)
[2020] VSC 284
(Connock J), quoting
ABL Nominees Pty Ltd v Mackenzie (No 2)
, [17]-[22] (Derham AsJ).
S Pirrie Equities Pty Ltd v
Venetian Media Group Pty Ltd
(2023) 73 VR 521
, 531 [36] (Elliott J)
(citations omitted).
Expert Report of Julian
Valmorbida dated 4 February 2025, relied on by the vendor.
[2021] VSC 706.
Rysze International Pty
[2021] VSC 706
, [78], [87] (Attiwill J).
[2020] VSCA 196
(Kyrou, McLeish and Niall JJA).
Aon Risk Services
Australia Ltd v Australian National University
[2009] HCA 27
(2009) 239 CLR 175
Namberry Craft Pty Ltd v
[2011] VSC 136
[38] (Vickery J).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (317 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter