URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/vic/VicSAC/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:23:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sentencing Occupational Health and Safety Offences in Victoria: Report and Recommendations [2025] VicSAC 1; (26 February 2025)
Sentencing Occupational Health and Safety Offences in Victoria: Report and
Recommendations
Sentencing Advisory Council, February 2025
Acknowledgement of Country
Sentencing Advisory Council acknowledges the Traditional Owners of the lands and
waters on which we live and work, and we pay
our respects to them, their culture
and their Elders past and present.
Contributors
Simu, Dr Paul McGorrery, Melanie Hull
Data analysis
Zsombor Bathy
Sentencing Advisory Council
Council Directors
Professor Marilyn McMahon,
Fiona Dowsley, David Glynn, Anoushka Jeronimus, Dr Jana Katerinskaja, Anne
O’Brien ,Paul Smallwood,
Wendy Steendam, Dr Danny Sullivan, Nathan Watt,
Stan Winford
Chief Executive Officer
Dr Paul McGorrery
Acknowledgments
The evidence base
supporting the findings and recommendations in this report would not have been
possible without the contributions
of the many individuals and organisations
that shared their views with the Council. We would like to thank everyone who
participated
in meetings throughout this project, from our initial
identification of key issues and potential reforms, through to roundtable
consultations
on our draft recommendations. We thank again those organisations
that provided data on sentencing outcomes and fine payment, including
Services Victoria, Fines Victoria and WorkSafe Victoria. Without this data we
would not have had the necessary evidence to
support many of the reforms. The
Council would also like to thank Engage Victoria for facilitating the
Council’s online survey.
Finally, we thank the Victorian community for its
sincere engagement with the project, and each individual who took the time to
thoughtfully
respond to the online survey, or share their views at our in-person
community conversation events. Each of these contributions has
enabled the
Council to establish the evidence base that answers the terms of reference
provided by the Victorian Government.
This report contains material that discusses work-related harms, including
cases in which people have been exposed to a risk of, and/or
experienced,
serious injury, serious illness and death. We acknowledge the often enduring
hardship that results from work-related
The Sentencing Advisory
Council is an independent statutory agency established in the
Sentencing Act
(Vic). Our mission is to bridge the gap between the community, the
courts and the government by informing, educating and advising
on sentencing.
Our functions include:
statistical information
on sentencing;
on sentencing and sharing it with interested persons;
public opinion
on sentencing matters; and
advising the
Attorney-General
on sentencing matters.
A note on terminology
For simplicity, in this
report we use the term
to broadly refer to all non-natural
persons, including companies registered under the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth), incorporated and unincorporated associations, public entities and
charitable organisations.
In Chapter 3, we recommend a number of reforms to
health and safety
undertakings
, including renaming them as
health and safety
. For clarity, throughout the report we use the terminology of
health and safety undertakings as that is what these sentencing outcomes
currently called.
Terms of reference
On 5 January 2024, we
received the following request for advice pursuant to
section 108C
Sentencing Act 1991
The Sentencing Advisory Council (the Council) is asked to review and report on
the sentencing of offences contrary to the
Occupational Health and Safety Act
and make any recommendations for reform that it considers
appropriate.
In undertaking this review, the Council should:
examine current
sentencing practices for occupational health and safety offences in Victoria,
consult with
stakeholders and the broader Victorian community in relation to any issues
associated with the sentencing of occupational
health and safety offences,
consider whether
current sentencing practices align with community expectations,
consider the
role of injured workers and the families of deceased workers in the sentencing
of occupational health and safety offences,
examine the
enforcement of sentencing orders, especially court fines.
We were asked to
deliver our report to the Attorney-General and the Minister for WorkSafe and the
TAC by 31 December 2024.
Executive summary and recommendations
In January 2024, the
Victorian Government asked for this Council’s advice in relation to the
sentencing of occupational health
and safety (OHS) offences in Victoria. We were
asked to examine current sentencing practices, understand whether those
practices align with community expectations, investigate payment
rates of fines for OHS offences, understand the experience of injured
and their families in sentencing proceedings, and make any relevant
recommendations for reform. It is the first time that
the sentencing of OHS
offences has been reviewed in Victoria since the
Occupational Health and
Safety Act 2004
(Vic) (‘the
’) came into operation
on 1 July 2005, following the 2004
Maxwell Review
This report and the recommendations contained within it represent almost two
years of work by the Council. During that time, we’ve
collected data from
multiple agencies, published a
Statistical Report
detailing sentencing
outcomes in OHS cases over the 16-year period after the
operation, published a
Consultation Paper
inviting written submissions on
a number of topics related to the sentencing of OHS offences, conducted a
community survey via Engage
Victoria, facilitated eight in-person community
consultation events around Victoria, and met with dozens of stakeholders who so
made time to meet with us, shared their insights, and trusted us to
authentically represent their views in trying to achieve real
Stakeholders included members of the legal profession, unions, employer
associations and people affected by workplace incidents.
While our remit has been to review the sentencing of OHS offences generally,
our primary focus has been the sentencing of companies
that breach their duties
to ensure their workplaces, and the conduct of their undertakings, are safe and
without risks to the health
and safety of others. Our statistical review showed
that breach of duty offences make up two-thirds of all OHS offences sentenced
Victoria, and that companies represent 83% of OHS offenders. As a result, many
of our recommendations are driven more towards
reforming the sentencing of
offences committed by companies involving breaches of duties, and less towards
the sentencing of other
offences in the
, such as failing to
notify WorkSafe Victoria (‘WorkSafe’) of an incident, or assaulting
a WorkSafe inspector.
Our consultations, review of case law, and statistical analysis have led us
to make a number of key findings, on which our recommendations
injured in workplace incidents, people exposed to risks in workplaces, and the
families of deceased workers are not always
able to fully and meaningfully
participate in sentencing proceedings for OHS offences.
sentencing practices for OHS offences are not aligned with community
expectations, are not aligned with recent changes
to penalties in the model work
health and safety laws (‘model laws’), are not consistent with
sentencing practices in
other regulatory contexts, and are not capable of
adequately achieving the purposes of sentencing. There is a need to utilise
and alternative sentencing orders more frequently, and for fines in
some cases to increase substantially, especially in cases involving
year, there is almost $2.5 million in unpaid court fines for OHS offences.
Collectively, these findings lead us to make 12 recommendations for
reform. We have grouped them as recommendations relating to (1)
victims and
other affected persons, (2) changes in sentencing practices, and (3) fine
payment and distribution.
Victims and other affected persons
The regulatory scheme relating to health and safety
in the workplace is a risk-based one. That is, the aim of regulating workplace
health and safety is to ensure that risks are identified, managed, reduced
and/or eliminated
someone gets hurt. But people
in workplaces all too often. And sometimes a person or company will be
prosecuted for an OHS offence that contributed to
that harm. There are even more
people who are
to risks to health and safety, but who
aren’t actually injured. Also affected are the friends and family of
people who are
killed or seriously injured at work. If there is an apparent
relationship between the risk caused and the harm suffered, or if someone
been exposed to a risk but has not been harmed, those people affected should not
be prevented from participating in the sentencing
process. Their participation
can assist the court in determining an appropriate sentence by providing a
better understanding of the
actual or potential consequences of the risks
involved. Additionally, allowing participation in the sentencing process better
an appropriate sense of procedural justice to those affected.
People affected by workplace risks, though, currently face two major
impediments to fully participating in the sentencing process.
Allowing affected persons in OHS cases to make impact
The first impediment relates to victim impact
statements, which are provided to the sentencing court by victims to describe
how criminal
offending has affected them. In Victoria, victim impact statements
can only be made by people who have been harmed as a ‘direct
of an offence. This can become especially complex in OHS cases because most OHS
offences involve failing to reduce
or eliminate a
, and it can often
be difficult to establish a clear line of causation between a specific risk and
someone being actually harmed.
As a result, people who have been affected by
workplace risks are sometimes prohibited from making victim impact statements
it was not possible to prove they were harmed as a ‘direct
result’ of the offence. This can, for example, occur when
multiple potential causes of the harm, only one of which was the risk for which
the duty-holder was prosecuted. In our
view, the current test for admissibility
of a victim impact statement is not well-suited to OHS cases, and some people
who have clearly
been affected by a workplace risk or incident are being
precluded from sharing their experiences with the sentencing court.
We therefore recommend that the government amend the
Occupational Health
and Safety Act 2004
(Vic) to provide a framework for, and enable the
admissibility of,
impact statements
that can be made by
in OHS cases. This would include not only people who are injured in
workplace incidents but also a broader category of people who
have been affected
by the offending but who would not meet the narrow definition of
‘victim’ in the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) (‘the
Sentencing Act
’). We especially intend the definition of
‘affected person’ to include people who have been exposed to risks
a workplace (without being injured), as well as people harmed in a workplace
(and their families) where there is an apparent relationship
between the risk
and their harm. These impact statements would be similar to those in the
Environment Protection Act 2017
(Vic) but incorporate more of the
legislative framework about the permissible form, relevance and contents of
victim impact statements
Sentencing Act
. The one feature of the
Sentencing Act
framework that we would not propose be carried over is the
limitation on which components of an impact statement an affected person
permitted to read aloud in court. Given that a court may already receive a
version of an impact statement without prior removal of those
parts which are inadmissible, we see no reason why the author of an
statement should be prevented from reading it aloud without it being edited.
Recommendation 1: Impact statements in OHS cases
The Victorian Government should amend the
Occupational Health and Safety
(Vic) to create a framework that allows affected persons to make
impact statements in sentencing proceedings involving OHS offences.
Allowing affected persons in OHS cases to participate in
restorative justice conferences
The second aspect of the sentencing process where we
see a need for change is the introduction of restorative justice conferences.
There has been growing interest in the potential role of restorative justice
processes in addition to, or as an alternative to, criminal
justice processes.
These conferences – which typically only occur after months of preparatory
work with all the parties –
involve people who have caused harm (and their
support persons) meeting with the people who have been harmed (and their support
to talk about the offending and how it has affected them. Often, they
will also discuss what those who caused harm will do differently
What we heard throughout our consultations is that, after some workplace
incidents, the criminal process can be especially protracted
– sometimes
taking years – and the offender and the person(s) affected by their
offending are discouraged from contacting
one another while legal proceedings
are underway. This means that there can be significant delays for those who want
to repair their
relationship, which is especially difficult for tightknit
workplaces. Even for those who don’t want an ongoing relationship,
restorative justice process can be a healing one. It provides people affected by
workplace incidents the opportunity to share,
with those responsible, how the
offending has affected them. They can also have a conversation about how things
will change to avoid
similar incidents in the future.
While the use of restorative justice conferences alongside criminal
proceedings is still a relatively new concept in Victoria, we
see great promise
in their expanded use. There are, though, a number of key features we see as
critical. First, there should be a
legislative framework that governs the
process, as there is in the Australian Capital Territory. Second, the process
should only
proceed if both the offender and any affected persons provide fully
informed consent. This means an experienced facilitator would
need to explain
the process to them, confirm their genuine willingness to participate, and
ensure they understand how the process
may affect any sentence to be imposed.
Third, there would need to be appropriate limits on the disclosure and use of
what is said
in restorative justice conferences. The sentencing court should be
informed about the level of the offender’s participation,
as evidence of
remorse remains a relevant consideration in sentencing. But any record of
discussions should be prohibited from use
in other legal proceedings, and there
should be restrictions on public disclosures that can be made (for example, to
the media).
Recommendation 2: A framework for restorative justice conferences
The Victorian Government should amend the
Occupational Health and Safety
(Vic) to provide a framework for restorative justice conferences to
occur in cases involving offences contrary to that Act.
Given this would be one of the first formal frameworks for the use of
restorative justice conferences in criminal proceedings in Victoria,
we also see
merit in establishing a continuous cycle of feedback from the outset. This would
enable interim and final evaluations
to be conducted within two and four years,
respectively, of introduction. These evaluations will be crucial to
understanding the
success or otherwise of restorative justice conferences in OHS
cases, whether there are improvements required, and potentially even
there is scope to expand their availability to other criminal proceedings.
Recommendation 3: Pilot and evaluate restorative justice
conferences
The Victorian Government should establish a program trialling the use of
restorative justice conferences in cases involving offences
contrary to the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
(Vic), and ensure a system is in
place for continuous feedback that results in interim and final evaluations
being completed within
two and four years, respectively.
Changes to sentencing practices
The majority of our recommendations relate to
changing sentencing practices for OHS offences. These recommendations stem from
analysis of court data on sentencing outcomes, our review of case law about
how courts sentence OHS offences, our consultation with
stakeholders about how
OHS offences are sentenced and, perhaps most importantly, our consultation with
the Victorian community to
understand their expectations about how OHS offences
should be sentenced. One of the ways we gauged the community’s
expectations
was to host in-person events. These involved providing participants
with background information on sentencing law and the OHS regulatory
providing details of a real-life OHS case (with details changed for anonymity),
and asking participants to sentence the case
themselves. We then shared the
actual sentence in the case and asked participants whether they felt it was
appropriate.
From this work, a few points can be surmised:
Fines are the
predominant outcome of OHS prosecutions. Courts sentencing OHS offences rarely
impose orders such as health and safety
undertakings or adverse publicity
orders. In contrast, stakeholders and the community would clearly prefer to see
more frequent use
of such orders in OHS cases.
Like numerous
past reviews, our review has also found that fines for OHS offences are too low,
both because they do not align with
community expectations and because they are
often not capable of achieving the purposes of sentencing. That said, fines for
companies that breach their duties in ways that do not result in a
fatality are only somewhat lower than they should be, while fines
companies whose behaviour results in a fatality are far too low.
There are a
number of sentencing considerations that become especially complex in the
context of both non-human offenders (companies)
and OHS offences. These include
the extent to which sentencing outcomes should be calibrated to the size of a
company, the extent
to which the fact that someone was injured or killed in a
workplace incident should be a relevant sentencing consideration, and what
the ‘character’ of a company – both before and after an OHS
offence – should play in sentencing.
The below recommendations
are all geared towards increasing the use of sentencing orders other than fines
in OHS cases, increasing
fine amounts in OHS cases – especially in cases
involving larger companies – and improving consistency by providing
Increasing the use of sentencing orders other than
We found that over 90% of sentencing outcomes in OHS
cases are fines. In the remaining 10%, the vast majority are undertakings
under either the
Sentencing Act
with the only additional condition in the cases we reviewed being to make a
charitable donation. In effect, almost every company
received a financial
penalty of some sort, and not much else. But there is great potential for the
use of other sentencing orders,
either on their own or in addition to fines.
If health and safety undertakings are to be utilised more often, some
consequential amendments to section 137 of the
are required to
make those undertakings more versatile and effective. These amendments include
reframing undertakings as health and
safety ‘orders’, making
improvement projects an available special condition of those orders (rather than
a separate order
under another provision), and making the maximum fine for
breaching a health and safety order the same as the maximum fine for breaching
an enforceable undertaking.
Recommendation 4: Reforming health and safety undertakings
The Victorian Government should amend the
Occupational Health and Safety
section 136
(orders to undertake improvement projects);
section 137
to remove the need for offenders to give an undertaking, and rename
these as ‘health and safety orders’;
section 137(1)
to allow health and safety orders to run for a period of up to
five years;
section 137(3)
to clarify that the special conditions listed can be imposed on
offender, not just employers;
section 137(3)
to include a further special condition ‘to undertake a
specified project for the general improvement of occupational health,
welfare within the period specified in the order’; and
section 138(c)
to specify that the maximum penalty for contravening a health and
safety order is 2,500 penalty units for a body corporate, and 500
penalty units
for an individual.
We know from the use of
enforceable
undertakings
– a pre-sentencing option where WorkSafe agrees not to
proceed with a prosecution if a company accepts certain conditions –
the financial cost of implementing ‘above-and-beyond’ safety
measures will often be very similar to, or even greater
than, the cost of any
fine that might be imposed. However, enforceable undertakings have the added
advantage of making that workplace,
and potentially other workplaces, safer in
the process. While health and safety undertakings are already available as a
order after a successful prosecution under the
simply aren’t used very often. We recommend that WorkSafe develop a policy
that both encourages increased use of such
orders and assists courts to frame
the attached conditions.
Recommendation 5: Increased use of health and safety undertakings
WorkSafe Victoria should develop a policy relating to health and safety
undertakings pursuant to
section 137
Occupational Health and Safety
(Vic) that (a) specifies criteria for deciding whether to recommend
that a sentencing court consider imposing an undertaking, including
conditions of such an undertaking, and (b) encourages the increased use of
undertakings in appropriate cases.
For the last 20 years, courts sentencing OHS offences in Victoria have had
the power to make what is known as an ‘adverse publicity
which requires the offender to publish – using certain content, and via a
certain medium – the details
of their offending. In the context of
offending by companies, these orders have the potential to achieve significant
deterrent and
punitive aims (as a result of the reputational damage inherent in
such orders), as well as promote broader awareness about health
issues in a particular industry. There has, however, only been one such order
made in the last two decades: the owners
of a horse-racing facility were
required to publish in a horse-racing magazine the details of an incident where
a jockey was killed
while training in poorly lit conditions. In our community
consultation events, 70% of participants indicated that they would have
an adverse publicity order in their allocated case study, especially those
sentencing the large company, given its wider
reputation. We see considerable
underutilised potential in the use of these orders. We recommend that WorkSafe
develop a policy that
both encourages prosecutors to advocate for adverse
publicity orders in more OHS cases and provides guidance about the content of
the notice and the medium of publication that prosecutors might propose to the
Recommendation 6: Increased use of adverse publicity orders
WorkSafe Victoria should develop a policy relating to adverse publicity
orders pursuant to
section 135
Occupational Health and Safety Act
(Vic) that (a) specifies criteria for deciding whether to recommend
that a sentencing court consider making an adverse publicity
order, including
the content and medium of the information to be publicised, and (b) encourages
the increased use of adverse publicity
orders in appropriate cases.
Increase the maximum penalty to account for worst-case
If courts are to begin calibrating fine amounts to
the size of the company, the current maximum penalty for companies for the most
commonly sentenced breach of duty offences (just under $1.8 million) is not
capable of adequately accommodating the potential fines
that would need to be
imposed in cases involving especially egregious offending by large entities.
More than half of the community
consultation participants sentencing the large
company, which had two charges in the case study, allowing for a maximum fine of
million, imposed that exact amount. This suggests that participants felt
constrained by the current maximum. Indeed, 86% of participants
in our community
consultation events said they felt the maximum fine should be $10 million, $100
million, or (as it is in England
and Wales) unlimited. For comparison, the
maximum penalty for industrial manslaughter in Victoria is almost $20 million,
the maximum
penalty for category 1 offences in the model laws is just over $10
million, and the maximum penalty for offences by companies in
contexts (such as misleading and deceptive conduct) is $10 million, or
potentially even higher. In light of the comparable
maximum penalties for
companies in many other contexts, especially in the model laws, and the clear
results of our community consultation,
we recommend that the maximum penalty for
companies breaching their health and safety duties be increased to 50,000
penalty units
(almost $10 million), with a corresponding increase for
individuals to 10,000 penalty units. This maximum is intended to capture
full range of culpability and offence seriousness in breach of duty offences,
including what are currently category 1, 2 and
3 offences in the model laws.
Recommendation 7: Maximum penalties for breach of duty offences
The Victorian Government should increase the maximum
penalties for
breaches of health and safety duties under the
Occupational Health and Safety
50,000 penalty
units for body corporates for offences contrary to
sections 21
10,000 penalty
units for individuals for offences contrary to
sections 21
Repeal and replace the
reckless endangerment
If the maximum penalties for breach of duty offences
are increased to 50,000 penalty units for companies and 10,000 penalty units
individuals, there is a residual need to consider the continued relevance of the
offence. Originally introduced as a compromise to the
introduction of an industrial manslaughter offence (which Victoria now has),
offence currently carries a maximum penalty of 20,000 penalty units
for companies, and 1,800 penalty units and/or five years’
imprisonment for
individuals. The offence involves recklessly engaging in conduct that places or
may place another person in danger
of serious injury. It is almost identical to
the offence of reckless conduct endangering serious injury in
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) (‘the
’). However, the
also contains the offence of reckless conduct endangering
(section 23)
, which carries a maximum penalty of 10 years’
imprisonment.
To reconcile the inconsistencies this offence causes in (a) the revised
offence and penalty hierarchy we have proposed by increasing
the maximum fine
for breach of duty offences, (b) the apparent exclusion of ‘serious
illness’ from its application, (c)
limiting its application to risks
‘at a workplace’ when many work-related risks can occur outside the
workplace, (d)
the awkward application of a recklessness
companies, (e) the newly-revised maximum of 10 years’ imprisonment for
category 1 offences in the model laws, and (f) the
enhanced maximum for reckless
conduct endangering
(as opposed to serious injury) under the
, we propose that
be repealed and replaced with a
revised version. The new
offence would:
reckless conduct that places or may place another person in danger of death,
serious injury, or serious illness;
only apply to
individuals, not companies (meaning companies that would currently be prosecuted
for reckless conduct endangering serious
injury would instead be prosecuted for
breaching the applicable duty, and the new maximum fine would be high enough to
account for
that greater level of culpability); and
maximum fine for individuals who breach their duties of 10,000 penalty units,
but also carry a maximum of 10 years’
imprisonment.
that the current offence was only sentenced seven times in the 16 years to 2021,
we don’t anticipate that the revised
version will apply to many additional
Recommendation 8: Reckless endangerment offence
The Victorian Government should replace
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
(Vic) with a provision specifying a maximum
penalty of 10 years’ imprisonment, in addition to or instead of the
(revised) maximum
fine of 10,000 penalty units, for individuals who recklessly
contravene a health and safety duty under the Act in a way that places,
place, another person in danger of death, serious injury or serious illness.
The relevance of death, injury or illness in sentencing OHS
In theory, the fact that someone has died, been
injured or been made ill as a result of a workplace risk eventuating should be
relatively little relevance in sentencing for OHS offences, because the wrong
is the creation of the risk. The fact that no-one has
died, been injured or been
made ill will often be a matter of sheer luck. Conversely, there is a risk of
hindsight bias if the fact
that someone
hurt is used as conclusive
evidence of the likelihood of that risk eventuating. However, despite this being
the premise of the regulatory
scheme, the community expects the fact that
someone was harmed in a workplace to be a relevant sentencing consideration for
OHS offences.
And indeed, court data shows that it already is. Our data
demonstrates that courts routinely impose much higher fines in cases where
has been a fatality than in cases where there hasn’t.
There is no simple solution to this conundrum, but one is required. It is not
feasible for the law to continue saying it is doing
one thing, when in fact the
opposite is occurring. Our proposed solution is that there should be guidance
OHS offences should take into account the fact that
someone has been harmed at work through a
legislated sentencing
. This is discussed in more detail below.
The relevance of the size of the company in sentencing OHS
Sentencing Act
courts to take into account the financial circumstances of an offender in
deciding how much to fine them. To date, this has
had an almost exclusively
mitigatory effect on sentencing outcomes: smaller companies, and companies on
the brink of financial ruin,
have received discounted penalties. Very rarely do
courts impose
fines on larger and financially stable companies.
There are, however, good reasons to do so. Most prominently, it is difficult to
achieve some of the purposes of sentencing – just punishment (ensuring the
fine has a ‘real sting’ to it) and deterrence
of the offender and
other large companies – if fine amounts are not
size of the company. In both written submissions and community consultation,
there was considerable support for more clearly
requiring courts to impose
higher fines on larger companies. This was not because smaller companies do not
have the same health and
safety obligations – everyone has the right to be
safe, regardless of their employer’s resources – but because
the only way to ensure that fines are sufficiently punitive, and that the
potential consequences of inadequate safety protocols
are capable of
incentivising real change where it is necessary.
Again, our solution to this issue is the introduction of a legislated
sentencing guideline, which would provide greater guidance to
sentencing courts
in Victoria about how to sentence OHS offences committed by companies of
different sizes, including by providing
sentencing ranges calibrated to the size
of the company.
The relevance of a company’s ‘character’
in sentencing OHS offences
The saying goes that companies have ‘no soul
to damn, no body to kick’, and this makes it difficult to translate to
the traditional concepts of sentencing that apply to people.
Nevertheless, we do anthropomorphise companies in some ways, because
actions are reflective of the collective will of those responsible for their
management. For example, this is why we acknowledge
their efforts at
rehabilitation in the wake of workplace incidents, and why we acknowledge
expressions of genuine remorse. One of
the more complex considerations in
sentencing companies is their ‘character’, both before and after a
workplace incident
(or risk). During our consultations, we heard considerable
scepticism about some companies making (tax-deductible) charitable donations
community organisations in the wake of a workplace incident. People saw these
donations as reputational damage control and an
attempt to receive a reduced
sentence. Without ascribing malintent to the companies that do take such
measures, there is a need –
as the Office of Public Prosecutions outlined
in their submission – for greater guidance about the relevance of
‘character’
in sentencing companies for OHS offences. In written
submissions and in community consultation, the overwhelming view we heard was
that a company’s character should remain a relevant consideration but
should always be subsidiary to the objective seriousness
of the offence and the
need for deterrence. This consideration should also be limited to the
company’s OHS track record, both
before and after the offending in
Our view is that the most appropriate solution is to provide courts with
clearer guidance on the relevance of the company’s
character, in addition
to the relevance of harm and the size of the company, and to do so within the
confines of a
legislated sentencing guideline
Recording convictions against companies
Courts sentencing offenders in Victoria have a
discretion to record a conviction, which is separate to and distinct from a
of guilt. For companies, which make up 83% of OHS offenders, the
consequences of recording a conviction appear less serious than
individuals; however, we heard that the negative effect on reputation, either
with consumers and staff, or among peers
in the industry, was of significant
concern for many defendants. We found that around 56% of sentenced OHS offenders
do not have
a conviction recorded. Community consultation participants and
stakeholders identified a range of factors relevant to determining
conviction should be recorded. These included the seriousness of the offending,
the offender’s prior convictions
or OHS history, as well as the effect of
the conviction on the offender’s economic wellbeing and future prospects.
that the discretion to record a conviction is one of significance and
that the most appropriate reform to achieve greater consistency
and transparency
in that decision without interfering with judicial discretion is to develop a
legislated sentencing guideline
that provides courts with guidance with
respect to OHS offenders that are companies.
Introduce a legislated sentencing guideline for OHS
Our major proposal in this report is to introduce an
Australian-first, and potentially a world-first,
legislated sentencing
. This would involve crafting an offence-based sentencing guideline
similar to those currently produced by the Sentencing Council
for England and
Wales, but rather than taking legal force when published by a body external to
the legislature, it would only come
into effect when enacted in legislation.
Effectively, this would involve creating a new part of, or schedule to, the
that does several things: (1) it would specify sentencing ranges
– including types of orders as well as fine amounts –
that courts
should follow in OHS cases, based on the culpability of the offender, the
seriousness of their offending and, where the
offender is a company, the size of
the company, (2) it would provide guidance about how courts should assess those
various factors
to identify the applicable range, including, for example, the
extent to which it is relevant that someone was killed, injured or
suffered an
illness as a result of the duty-holder’s breach, (3) courts would be
required to follow the guideline but would
retain discretion to depart from it
if following the guideline would be contrary to the interests of justice and
they explain their
reasons for doing so and (4) the guideline would apply to all
OHS cases sentenced after its commencement, and sentencing practices
commencement would no longer be a relevant consideration. These features are all
consistent with our 2018 recommendations
constitutional features of sentencing guidelines in Victoria, if a sentencing
council were to be established.
Our proposal is that the Victorian Government ask the Council to develop that
guideline in consultation with all relevant stakeholders,
including employer
representatives, employee representatives, the legal profession and the wider
community. Our intent is that the
guideline would cover all of the breach of
duty offences in sections 21 to 31, the (revised) reckless endangerment offence
32, and the workplace manslaughter offence in section 39G of the
, and would cover both individual and body corporate offenders.
Given the novel nature of a legislated sentencing guideline, it will
be critical
to have regular input by staff from the Office of the Chief Parliamentary
Counsel, given their expertise in drafting
legislation. A copy of the draft
guideline would then be provided to the Victorian Government, along with an
explanatory report,
for consideration and possible enactment by parliament.
Overall, we believe this proposal addresses most of the key issues raised by
stakeholders. It will ensure a more consistent approach
considerations in OHS cases, such as a company’s prior character, the
recording of convictions, the size of the
company, and the relevance of actual
harm occurring. It will also drive a seismic shift in sentencing practices,
which is especially
required in cases involving larger companies, resulting in
greater use of sentencing orders other than fines, increasing fine amounts
appropriate cases and decompressing the current range of outcomes.
Recommendation 9: A legislated sentencing guideline
The Victorian Government should ask the Sentencing Advisory Council to
develop and consult on a draft sentencing guideline for inclusion
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
(Vic) when sentencing offences
contrary to that Act.
Key features of the guideline would include:
the guideline
would apply to all breach of duty offences
(sections 21
), as well as the
reckless endangerment
(section 32)
and workplace manslaughter
(section 39G)
the guideline
would apply to all offences sentenced after enactment;
the guideline
would provide a range of sentencing outcomes based on various characteristics of
the offending and the offender;
for the purpose
section 5(2)(b)
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic), courts applying the
guideline would only be permitted to have regard to sentences imposed for an OHS
offence pursuant to the
courts would be
required to follow the guideline but would be permitted to depart from the
guideline if following it would be contrary
to the interests of justice, and
they explain their reasons for doing so;
the guideline
would include guidance about how courts should approach specific factors in
sentencing OHS offences, such as the offender’s
culpability, the objective
seriousness of the offence, the offender’s financial circumstances, any
injury, illness or harm
caused by the
offence, and the offender’s
Fine payment and distribution
Our terms of reference also asked us to investigate
the enforcement of sentencing orders for OHS offences, in particular, the
of fines. Using data provided by multiple agencies, we found that most
fines are fully paid (67%), some are partly paid (6% –
mostly involving
ongoing payment plans), and 27% of fines for OHS offences are not paid at all,
amounting to almost $2.5 million
in unpaid fines each year. We also found that
the most common factor, by far, associated with the non-payment of fines was
deregistration
of the offender company, either since the offence or since
sentencing. Given the ephemeral nature of many corporate entities –
of which are only set up for the purpose of a specific project, others of which
fade away only to be replaced by another entity
with a strikingly similar
make-up of staff, plant, ownership and functions – we consider it
necessary to make a number of reforms
to ensure that there is more genuine
accountability for the payment of fines imposed for breaches of health and
safety duties.
Directing all monies collected for OHS offences to
Our first recommendation about fines paid for OHS
offences relates to where the money should be distributed when it is collected.
There is a provision in the
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation
(Vic) that arguably directs the monies collected from any OHS fines
to WorkSafe’s WorkCover Authority Fund. It is not, however,
an unambiguous
provision, and we heard that some fines for OHS offences are directed to
consolidated revenue (in Victoria, ‘the
Consolidated Fund’), rather
than to WorkSafe. Our recommendation, which would codify the most common
practice, and which was
supported by all stakeholders commenting on the topic,
is to revise the
to include a provision more clearly directing
all monies from OHS fines to WorkSafe.
Recommendation 10: Distribution of paid court fines
The Victorian Government should amend the
Occupational Health and Safety
(Vic) to more clearly specify that all court fines paid for OHS
offences are to be paid into the WorkCover Authority Fund.
Enhancing director accountability for fines imposed on
Since its inception, Fines Victoria has had the
power to issue ‘declared director’ notices to directors of companies
have received fines. These notices render the director jointly and
severally liable for the fine imposed on the company, functionally
piercing the
corporate veil. After the director receives that notice, they have 28 days to
challenge it in court by contending that
either they were not involved in the
management of the company at the time of the offence (for good reason, such as
illness) or they
took all appropriate steps (or there were none they could take)
to ensure the company paid the fine imposed. If a director does not
successfully
challenge the declared director notice, they are then liable to pay the fine
themselves.
Prior to 2024, Fines Victoria had not issued any declared director notices
for fines imposed either in OHS cases or in other cases.
As of 2024, however,
they have now issued four such notices. Our recommendation is not to reform the
legislation relating to declared
director notices. While they appear to be a
largely workable set of provisions, more experience issuing these notices may be
before an assessment can be made as to whether the provisions are
adequate and appropriate. Instead, we recommend that Fines Victoria
undertake an
initial, and then annual, review of all unpaid fines for OHS offences, and
decide whether it would be appropriate to
issue any declared director notices.
While noting the resources required to undertake these reviews, we nevertheless
feel this is
especially appropriate in the context of enforcing OHS fines
because they are currently the largest fines imposed by sentencing courts
Victoria. We have already discussed this recommendation with Fines Victoria,
which had no objections to undertaking these regular
Recommendation 11: Declared director provisions
Fines Victoria should, initially and then annually, review all unpaid court
fines imposed on body corporates for offences contrary
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
(Vic), and consider whether to serve a declared
director notice on any relevant persons.
Successor liability for companies that are substantially
similar to deregistered companies
One of the most prominent concerns we heard in
consultation was that some companies that receive fines for OHS offences are
deregistered,
either before or after sentencing, without the fine having been
paid. A new version of the same company emerges soon after, commonly
‘phoenixing’. The corporate structure should not be misused to allow
unsafe work practices to occur without
consequence. Our proposal to address this
behaviour is to introduce a concept known in the United States as
‘successor liability’.
This involves a company being held
financially accountable for the liabilities of a deregistered entity if it is a
mere continuation
of that predecessor company. Most commonly used in mergers and
acquisitions law in the United States, successor liability has a number
non-exhaustive criteria that will point to whether the company is a mere
continuation (known as the
factors) such as continuity in
management personnel, directors, staff, work product, corporate identity and
geographical location
We see great potential in the Director of Fines Victoria being given the
power to declare a company a successor company, similar to
the declared director
provisions in the
Fines Reform Act 2014
(Vic). The company would then be
liable for the fines imposed on its predecessor, but it would also have the
ability to challenge
the notice in court within 28 days, to make a case that
they are not, in fact, a mere continuation. Given there is almost $2.5 million
in unpaid fines for OHS offences each year, which would likely increase if all
the reforms in this report are implemented, and given
the factor most commonly
associated with non-payment of fines for OHS offences was a company having been
deregistered, we believe
this legislative reform to the
Fines Reform Act
has the potential to significantly improve accountability for OHS offences.
However, the introduction of successor liability would
have broad application to
fines imposed on companies for criminal offences generally, not just OHS
offences, and could potentially
even be utilised for civil liabilities. We
therefore recommend the issue be the subject of its own targeted inquiry
conducted by
the Victorian Law Reform Commission.
Recommendation 12: Successor liability
The Victorian Government should provide the Victorian Law Reform Commission
with terms of reference seeking its advice about whether
to introduce a
legislative framework for successor liability for corporations and other legal
entities in Victoria, and if so, what
the key features of that framework should
Recommendations we didn’t make
Some questions and issues, raised by stakeholders
and discussed in our
Consultation Paper
, did not result in
recommendations for reform. We nevertheless address those topics for
completeness and to put the above reforms
in their full context.
A number of stakeholders supported the increased use of court-ordered
diversion in OHS cases, given the potential for more positive
OHS-related
outcomes, particularly in cases involving lower-level offending. However,
WorkSafe advised us that they are in the process
of creating more equitable
access to enforceable undertakings for smaller organisations, with enforceable
undertakings effectively
being a form of pre-court diversion. We consider this a
more appropriate form of diversion, as it occurs earlier in the process,
such we do not make any recommendations about actively increasing the use of
diversion in OHS cases.
We also considered whether WorkSafe should be seeking compensation orders in
more OHS cases, which had support of numerous stakeholders.
There is, however,
in OHS cases a complex legal framework that inhibits the availability of
compensation orders under the
Sentencing Act
for people who may otherwise
be entitled to compensation under other legislation (such as through a WorkCover
or TAC claim). Moreover,
WorkSafe may be conflicted in the process, given they
also administer the workers’ compensation scheme. Ultimately, we were
persuaded that there are few cases where compensation orders could usefully be
sought by WorkSafe on behalf of injured or deceased
persons, and we do not
propose any reforms in this space.
Finally, a number of stakeholders raised other types of sentencing orders, in
particular: monetary benefit orders, company dissolution
orders and director
disqualification orders. We have considered each of these potential options in
the context of the overall feedback
concluded that these sorts of reforms are better considered as part of a broader
review of the
sentencing of companies, rather than as part of a review of the
sentencing of OHS offences.
Concluding remarks
Over the last two years we’ve met with many
people and organisations in relation to this project, ranging from legal
professionals
to union officials to employer representatives. We have found that
everyone has a shared vision for a future where there are fewer
safety risks arising from work. Our package of 12 recommendations is designed to
collectively achieve this shared purpose,
whether it be through enabling fine
amounts that truly incentivise behavioural change within organisations,
facilitating injured
workers and their families to meet with employers to ensure
risks don’t reoccur, encouraging the use of a wider range of sentencing
orders focused on improving safety practices within organisations and broader
industries, or ensuring genuine accountability for
companies that create
workplace risks.
The entire OHS regulatory system is appropriately aimed at reducing risks, so
it may seem strange that changing how we
to workplace risks can
change their prevalence in the future. But, in our view, accountability
prevention, and we see potential in these reforms driving real change
in workplace safety culture in Victoria.
Introduction
1.1 This report
represents the final stage of the first review of sentencing practices for
occupational health and safety (OHS) offences
in Victoria since the commencement
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
(Vic) (‘the
’). The report is the result of an extensive program of data
analysis, research and consultation, and it addresses the terms
of reference we
received from the Victorian Government in January 2024. In it, we make 12
recommendations for reform.
Terms of reference
5 January 2024, the Victorian Government asked the Sentencing Advisory Council
for its advice about the sentencing of OHS offences
in Victoria. Those terms of
reference are outlined below.
Terms of reference
The Sentencing Advisory Council (the Council) is asked to review and report
on the sentencing of offences contrary to the
Occupational Health and Safety
and make any recommendations for reform that it considers
appropriate.
In undertaking this review, the Council should:
examine current
sentencing practices for occupational health and safety offences in Victoria,
consult with
stakeholders and the broader Victorian community in relation to any issues
associated with the sentencing of occupational
health and safety offences,
consider whether
current sentencing practices align with community expectations,
consider the
role of injured workers and the families of deceased workers in the sentencing
of occupational health and safety offences,
examine the
enforcement of sentencing orders, especially court fines.
1.3 We were
asked to deliver this report to the Attorney-General and the Minister for
WorkSafe and the TAC by 31 December 2024.
Phases of the project
project was conducted in a number of stages, including preliminary consultation
(in 2023), data analysis and case law review
(in late 2023), publication of a
Statistical Report
Consultation Paper
(in early 2024),
community and stakeholder consultation (also in early 2024), consultation with
key stakeholders on draft recommendations
(in late 2024) and, finally,
publication of this report (in early 2025).
1.5 The findings
and recommendations in this report are built on a body of evidence made up of an
extensive and iterative process
of data analysis, research and consultation,
with both stakeholders and the community.
Preliminary consultation
first stage of this project involved preliminary consultation. In mid-2023,
Council staff met with key stakeholders involved
in the sentencing of OHS
offences – prosecutors, defence lawyers, judicial officers, employer
representatives, employee representatives,
and people affected by OHS incidents
– to identify the key issues we should consider. We took an iterative
approach to identifying
relevant stakeholders; at each meeting, we asked if
there were other organisations or individuals we should meet. In total, we met
with 27 organisations and individuals between June and September 2023 (see
Appendix 1).
Data analysis and case law review
undertaking that preliminary consultation, we also undertook the data analysis
that was published in the
Statistical Report
, as well as the case law
review that informed many aspects of the
Consultation Paper
involved examining court data relating to all cases in which an OHS offence was
sentenced in Victoria from 1 July 2005 to 30
June 2021 (the reference period)
and, where possible, linking it up with:
provided or published by WorkSafe Victoria (‘WorkSafe’) (prosecution
result summaries
County Court appeal outcomes);
judgments (on AustLII);
unpublished
sentencing remarks (provided to the Council on a regular basis by the higher
courts); and
fine payment
data (from WorkSafe, Fines Victoria and the courts).
Publication of Statistical Report and Consultation
1.8 Following
data analysis, the case law review and preliminary consultation, we released a
Statistical Report
Consultation Paper
. The two publications
were complementary, with the
Statistical Report
designed to provide
evidence for those responding to the questions in the
Consultation Paper
Consultation Paper
asked 19 questions to gather community and
stakeholder views about key issues relating to the sentencing of OHS offences.
that the key issues identified could be grouped into three themes: the
role of victims and affected persons in the sentencing of
OHS offences, the
appropriateness of sentencing practices for OHS offences, and accountability for
penalties imposed for OHS offences.
Community and stakeholder consultation
publication of the
Statistical Report
Consultation Paper
enabled us to commence the next phase of the project, community
consultation:
February and March 2024, we conducted eight community consultation sessions
throughout Victoria (including five sessions
in regional Victoria) with
interested members of the public. We asked participants to sentence a real-life
OHS case themselves, to
gauge community expectations regarding the sentencing of
OHS offences (see Appendix 2 for an overview of our methodology).
Between February
and May 2024, we accepted written submissions from the Victorian community and
key stakeholders on the key issues
and questions raised in the
Consultation
Between February
and May 2024, we hosted a public online survey on Engage Victoria (the Victorian
Government’s online consultation
platform), inviting members of the
Victorian community to share their views on the key issues relating to the
sentencing of OHS offences.
The survey asked nine multiple-choice questions and
also offered respondents the opportunity to elaborate on each
Developing and testing draft recommendations
we had finalised our community and stakeholder consultation, we developed a
series of draft recommendations, focusing especially
on the reforms for which
there was widespread support and an apparent need for reform. We then hosted a
series of roundtables and
individual meetings with key stakeholders, including
all organisations that had made a written submission, to test the workability
those reforms. Following invaluable feedback we received during those meetings,
we made appropriate revisions to our recommendations.
Report and recommendations
report details our finalised recommendations, the support they received, and the
rationale for each of them. The report
with recommendations was provided to the
Attorney-General and Minister for WorkSafe and the TAC (Transport Accident
Commission) prior
to 31 December 2024, and was then published on our website in
early 2025.
Our approach to making recommendations
developing the recommendations in this report, we have been guided by a number
of principles, described below. These have
emerged from our specific
consultations for this project, as well as general principles that the Council
applies in every project.
Evidence-based
recommendations
: The recommendations in this report are the product of our
analysis of data and case law on sentencing outcomes, appeal outcomes,
rates, and available sentencing remarks, as well as the results of our
consultation with the community and key stakeholders.
Each conclusion drawn and
recommendation for reform made is accompanied by supporting evidence. Where we
heard anecdotal evidence
of an issue, we sought other forms of evidence to
corroborate. Where multiple reform options were available, we have preferred the
option we believe was most supported by the evidence.
Stakeholder-driven
The input of key stakeholders in this space has been crucial to this
project’s success. Through the iterative process of consultation
above, we have tried to focus on the issues of most significance to those who
work in, or are affected by, the sentencing
of OHS offences. The recommendations
in this report have been tested with people directly and indirectly affected by
the reforms
that those recommendations will bring about, to ensure we have
understood as much as possible how those reforms will play out in
practice, and
whether there could be any unintended consequences. For some issues,
stakeholders were divided on the best course of
action. In those instances, we
have tried to authentically present the various perspectives raised, and explain
the balancing exercise
that led to our conclusion on the issue.
: Our statutory functions, outlined in the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic), all relate to sentencing-related
matters. In that context, we
have limited our attention to issues that involve sentencing in some way. Topics
such as charging decisions,
investigations by WorkSafe, and whether there are
processes that should occur after sentencing that are unrelated to criminal
proceedings,
are outside our scope and remit.
Awareness of
sentencing in context
: While maintaining a focus on sentencing, we are aware
that sentencing forms part of a broader regulatory system. Sentenced OHS cases
represent a small fraction of instances of non-compliance with OHS laws in
Victoria, and a very small fraction of workplaces in Victoria.
Promoting the
objects of the
: In developing our recommendations, we have
prioritised those that promote the objects of the
, in particular,
to secure the health, safety and welfare of employees and other persons at work,
and to eliminate risks to employees
and others. We have sought to do this by
crafting reforms that will result in safer workplaces.
: As we noted in the
Consultation Paper
, this is not the
first review of the sentencing of OHS offences. Over the last three decades, a
number of such reviews have made
very consistent recommendations for sentencing
reform, including more imaginative use of alternative sentencing orders, and
fines for OHS offences. In contrast to those recommendations, our
Statistical Report
found that over the last 20 years, there has been
little use of sentencing orders other than fines, and fine amounts in Victoria
have stagnated, if not declined, and become compressed within certain ranges. If
there is a need for change, and we believe there
is, we have considered it
necessary to adopt an open mind, and develop innovative ideas that might be
capable of changing sentencing
practices to more closely align with the purposes
of sentencing and community expectations. This approach is reflected in the
of the recommendations, which in some cases involve novel innovations
that are firsts in Australia, if not internationally.
Harmonisation
with the model work health and safety laws
: Victoria is currently the only
state or territory in the country not to have adopted the model work health and
safety laws (‘model
laws’) that were first created in 2008. Many
stakeholders we spoke to advocated for Victoria to harmonise with the model
either entirely or in specific contexts. Such considerations are beyond
the scope of our review, which is focused on sentencing.
There are, however, a
number of recommendations where we have chosen a particular path because it
would harmonise Victoria’s
approach with that currently taken in the model
laws, and there is an undeniable appeal to workplace health and safety laws
consistent across the country. But there are also areas where we have
chosen to diverge from the model laws. Where we have done so,
it is because the
evidence and stakeholders suggested that this was the preferred
Structure of this report
report is divided into five chapters. In addition to this introductory
presents the Council’s recommendations for reform regarding the role of
victims and affected persons (including injured
workers and the families of
deceased workers) in the sentencing of OHS offences.
discusses the results of the Council’s examination of the appropriateness
of current sentencing practices for OHS
offences with respect to the purposes of
sentencing, as well as the results of our consultation to gauge community
expectations,
and presents our recommendations to reform sentencing practices
for OHS offences.
presents our recommendations relating to ensuring accountability for penalties
imposed for OHS offences, in particular,
improving payment rates for court
discusses a number of reforms that we considered but chose
and explains our rationale for each. In our view, it is just as important to
explain the recommendations we are not making,
as those that we have, especially
when they relate to topics on which we expressly sought stakeholder and
community views.
role of victims and other affected persons in OHS cases
2.1 This chapter
considers the role of injured workers and families of deceased workers in the
sentencing of occupational health and
safety (OHS) offences. This includes ways
to improve the means by which people affected by workplace risks are able to
communicate
to the court how the offending has affected them, as well as
introducing restorative justice processes that can run alongside the
Victim impact statements
Victoria, as in a number of other
victims of crime can
victim impact statement
during sentencing
proceedings.
These are typically
written or verbal summaries of how the offending has affected them. Victim
impact statements tend to serve two
purposes: first, informing the court about
the consequences of the crime, and second, offering victims a meaningful way to
participate
proceedings.
cases, we heard that there are currently two major obstacles to people affected
by OHS offences being able to make a victim
impact statement:
victim impact statements can only be made by a person who has suffered harm as
direct result
but most OHS offences are
risk-based offences that do not require the prosecution to prove the offence
caused harm. As a result,
there can be challenges in establishing the
admissibility of victim impact statements in OHS cases (if they are even
prepared in
the first place).
where a victim impact statement is to be read aloud in court, only the
admissible parts of the statement can be read aloud
(requiring the court to
first rule on the statement’s
admissibility).
legislative reforms in 2018,
victim impact statement is
read aloud in court, and just submitted in
writing, the court does not have to specify which components are admissible or
heard from a number of people affected by workplace risks how
distressing it was to have their statement redacted and edited if they
avail themselves of the right to read it aloud.
The importance of victim impact statements
impact statements have an important practical and symbolic function in the
criminal justice process. Victims and other people
affected by criminal
offending can be left feeling excluded from the process, in part because of the
adversarial nature of criminal
prosecutions by the state. For this reason (after
lengthy advocacy by victims’ rights
), several reforms have been
introduced in Victoria over the last few decades to enhance the role of
One of the most important
reforms was the introduction of victim impact statements in 1994, as a mechanism
to promote greater victim
participation in the sentencing
Victim impact
statements provide a formal platform for victims and their families and friends
to communicate to the court the physical,
psychological, financial and social
impacts of a crime on their
Both the process of
writing a victim impact statement, and subsequently presenting it to the court,
can contribute invaluably to
a victim’s healing process, by making them
feel heard and validated.
consultation, WorkSafe Victoria (‘WorkSafe’) provided us with an
illustrative example of an OHS case in which a
victim made a victim impact
statement to the court (Case Study
It demonstrates the
importance of victim impact statements in OHS cases specifically, their positive
effects, and their role in facilitating
the victim’s participation in the
criminal justice process.
Case Study 1: Magistrates’ Court
case involving a victim impact statement
[The injured person] and his mother who accompanied him at court were happy
with the result. [The injured person] chose to have the
VIS read by the
Magistrate as he wasn’t comfortable with it being read aloud in an open
court. During sentencing, [the Magistrate]
addressed [the injured person] and
commended him for his positive attitude towards recovery and noted that his VIS
is one of the
most genuine, succinct and to the point statements he has seen in
his career. It looked like the whole process of the matter being
sentenced brought a sense of closure and relief to them given the trauma they
have gone through and the personal relationship
they share with the director.
They visibly interacted with the director and his family outside the court
Email from WorkSafe Victoria (15 November 2024)
Broadening the eligibility to make an impact
prosecutions frequently occur because there has been a workplace incident in
which someone has been injured, after which WorkSafe
has investigated the
incident and found a failing in health and safety practices. In many of these
cases, the OHS offence (the risk)
will have been the cause of the injured
person’s injuries. But for someone to qualify as a ‘victim’
who can make
a victim impact statement, they must have been harmed as a
direct result
of the offence, and that causation must be established by
the criminal standard of proof (beyond reasonable doubt). If, for whatever
reason, it is not possible to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the injury
(or illness or fatality) was a ‘direct result’
of the OHS offence,
they will not qualify as a victim who can make a victim impact
Consultation Paper
, we identified several OHS cases in Victoria where
courts had refused to take victim impact statements into account because
could not be established between the offender’s breach of duty
and any injury or fatality.
example, in
DPP v Cool Dynamics Refrigeration Pty Ltd
, an employee was
killed when his work van, which contained a number of flammable gases, exploded.
However, because the exact mode
of ignition and the specific gases that exploded
could not be determined, the company’s breach of duty contrary to the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
’) in that case was not considered a causative breach. As a result,
the court ruled that friends and family of the deceased
‘victims’ for the purposes of the
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing Act
) and could not tender victim impact
statements.
remains a live and frequently encountered issue for courts sentencing OHS
offences. In May 2024, the County Court found that
it had to reject victim
impact statements tendered by family and friends of a child who drowned while on
a school excursion to a
The offender in the case
was found to have failed to reduce the risk by failing to provide the swimming
pool with details of the
students’ swimming abilities. The court found
that it was bound to reject those statements because the parents of the deceased
child could not be considered ‘victims’ of the OHS offence, as it
was not established that the loss they suffered was
result’ of the offence, which involved a failure to provide the management
of a swimming pool with information
The court found that:
[t]his criterion clearly limits the use of victim impact statement material in
sentencing for OHS offences when there is, as in this
case, a concession that
the death ... was not ‘caused’ by the ... breach. It was not alleged
or proven that the breach
of duty caused actual harm such as the death ... or
was an operative cause of it. I understand that there is a common practice that
victim impact statement material is received without objection even though there
is no causal connection in some OHS prosecutions.
Perhaps this is reflective of
the recognition of the value that the material has in the social rehabilitation
of victims. However,
as the term ‘victim’ is currently defined under
the Act and with the objection taken as to the admissibility of the material,
regard the victim impact statement material in this case as inadmissible.
more recently in November 2024, the County Court was again in a position where
it had to reject the prepared victim impact statements
of surviving family
members because they did not satisfy the legal test of having suffered harm
‘as a direct result’
of the offence. In doing so, the court
acknowledged that, to the family of the deceased and others, ‘this must
seem to be a
highly technical legal issue which ignores the human dimension of
the family’s grief’, and commented that ‘the
definition of “victim” in the
Sentencing Act 1991
is not well
suited to OHS offences given their risk-based
character’.
Consultation Paper
and survey,
we asked whether
stakeholders and the community supported expanding or clarifying the
circumstances in which victim impact statements
can be made in OHS
Stakeholder views
was strong support from stakeholders for broadening the eligibility criteria for
making victim impact statements in OHS
2.12 Of the 64
survey responses, 81% agreed that there is a need to broaden the circumstances
in which a victim impact statement can
Additionally,
all but three
stakeholders who
addressed the topic in their submissions supported expanding the circumstances
in which a victim impact statement
can be made in an OHS
For example, the Workplace
Incidents Consultative Committee, the Victorian Trades Hall Council, and the
Office of Public Prosecutions
The current system severely undervalues the experience of victims and the
impacts on them of both the initial incident and reliving
it through court
proceedings ... families suffer enormously putting these statements together and
then find that they have almost
no impact on the proceedings or sentencing
decisions. There needs to be much clearer guidance on the purpose of Victim
Impact Statements,
including what is in or out of scope for inclusion, so
victims can make an informed decision about whether they want to submit a
Impact Statement.
(Submission 17 (Workplace Incidents Consultative
Committee))
The current definition of a victim is too limiting, it only considers
‘victims’ people who have suffered as a direct
result of the
offence. The definition must be expanded to include families, coworkers, union
representatives and indirect victims,
in order to provide ... the justice system
a better grasp of the severity of the breach and its impact on the worker, their
the workplace and the community.
(Submission 8 (Victorian Trades Hall
From the OPP’s perspective, it is very difficult to explain to family
members of a deceased person that they are not, or may
not be, classified as
‘victims’ under the legislation and that the prosecution cannot
tender their Victim Impact Statements.
More importantly though, it is extremely
difficult for family members, in circumstances where they have suffered such a
to understand that they do not meet the legal definition of
(Submission 3 (Office of Public Prosecutions))
2.14 Conversely,
there were a number of employer groups who were of the view that it is
unnecessary to broaden the circumstances in
which a victim impact statement can
be made in OHS cases, primarily because it could risk spurious claims of harm
and causation to
The nexus between the harm to the victim having to be a direct result of the
offence should remain unchanged and remain at the discretion
of the court to
determine for individual circumstances ... to ensure that other
‘victims’ with perhaps spurious claims
cannot compromise the
effective dealing of natural justice in sentencing. HIA considers that there is
no need to broaden the sentencing
factors to facilitate victim impact
statements.
(Submission 1 (Housing Industry Association))
VCEA acknowledges the role of VIS in informing the court about the impact of the
crime on victims but cautions against any risk of
their being used in pursuit of
unfair or unjustified sentences. We wish to emphasize that the weight given to
[a] VIS is, and should
be, at the discretion of the sentencing judge, along with
other relevant factors and used as part of the “instinctive
in the sentencing process. VCEA argues that the existing
jurisprudence relating to the use of Victim Impact Statements remains current
and reflects community expectations.
(Submission 11 (Victorian Congress of
Employer Associations))
As OHS offences are generally risk-based and not outcome-based, victim impact
statements are generally not appropriate (and do not
assist) the court in
determining whether an OHS offence has occurred. A sentencing court does however
take into account the impact
of the offending on victims, through victim impact
statements, in circumstances where an offence has occurred and it is established
that the person has been harmed as a direct result of the offending.
(Submission 15 (Victorian Automotive Chamber of Commerce))
2.15 Of those
stakeholders who did support clarifying or broadening the admissibility of
victim impact statements, some options proposed
the definition of ‘victim’ in either the
Sentencing Act
to remove the ‘direct result’ requirement in OHS
an avoidance-of-doubt provision in the
Sentencing Act
definition of
‘victim’ to ensure all affected persons in OHS cases are allowed to
make a victim impact
introducing
a specific form of ‘impact statement’ in OHS
guidance and resources to people affected by OHS offences about the
admissibility and use of victim impact statements by
a review of the various submissions, our preliminary view was that the
introduction of a new
impact statement
would be the
most desirable option to resolve the barriers faced by people affected by
workplace risks in being able to make impact
statements in appropriate cases. We
therefore took that draft proposal to stakeholders to seek their views, and they
expressed strong
support, including from the Workplace Incidents Consultative
For example:
[t]his is probably the one opportunity in a very legalistic system where
families actually [have] an opportunity to humanize the
person who died, and to
be able to tell a little story about that person’s life. While it may not
mean much in the actual court
process, it means an awful lot to the family to be
able to say that in court.
(Participant at Stakeholder Roundtable (12 August
[w]e had this particular problem emerging in relation to [a] prosecution ... We
had 30 people who were seriously affected [and] ...
wanted, in the prosecution
... to have their voices heard. And the ... Court welcomed their making a
statement, or 30 of them made
a statement, but [the court] couldn’t
consider it as part of the evidence for the purposes of the fine. So, I think it
a voice to people who are injured or who witness something, and I think
it’s an incredibly important step forward.
(Participant at Stakeholder
Roundtable (12 August 2024))
I completely agree about the need for further clarity here, and obviously ...
this has been a problem in a number of cases ... I
was involved in a case that
concerned a really terrible fatality [and] [t]here [were] a whole lot of people
at the workplace who
were affected by that incident, not just people who knew
the deceased, but people who were then concerned about their own safety
forward, there was a union who was obviously affected as well, and arguably, I
think a provision like this would allow all
of those people to make a statement.
(Participant at OHS Barrister Roundtable (16 August 2024))
The Council’s view
the extensive stakeholder support for broadening the admissibility of victim
impact statements in OHS cases, we recommend
an entirely new form of impact
statement be introduced into the
. The other options offered
– such as introducing a bespoke definition of ‘victim’ in OHS
contexts – would,
in our view, create unnecessary confusion. And simply
offering training and education would not address the barriers many affected
persons would continue to face. Legislative reform is required.
provisions in the
Environment Protection Act 2017
(Vic) (‘the
Environment Protection Act
’) provide a useful, recent example of a
new form of ‘impact statement’ in a risk-based regulatory regime. In
proceedings for offences against that Act, a person or organisation may
make a statement to the court for the purpose of assisting
the court to
determine the sentence that should be imposed for those offences, and if any
other orders should be made.
That Act provides that such statements may include any information relevant
the impact of
the offence on the environment;
the risk of harm
to human health or the environment caused by the offence;
any injury, loss
or damage caused by the offence; or
the impact of
the offence on any person, organisation or community.
2.19 There are
two important features of impact statements under the
Environment Protection
that we believe should be adopted in the OHS context. First, the class
of persons that can make an impact statement is not limited
to people harmed as
a ‘direct result’ of the offence. Second, such statements can be
made in instances where the offending
of harm, not just
where harm eventuated.
‘impact statement’ provision in the
would, however,
need to be supported by a more comprehensive framework. At the moment, there is
very little specificity around the
permissible use of the contents of impact
statements made under the
Environment Protection Act
, and no detail about
the mediums by which such statements can be made. For this reason, while we are
of the view that there is a
need to introduce similar impact statements in the
, we also believe there are various features of the victim impact
statement provisions in the
Sentencing Act
that should be incorporated as
well, including:
defining the permissible contents of impact
statements;
impact statements to be tendered or read aloud in court by the author or
prosecution;
how the contents of impact statements might be relevant to
sentencing;
impact statements to include and refer to medical
allowing the
offender to cross-examine the author of an impact statement in appropriate
2.21 The other
point we would emphasise is that it will be critical to define the class of
persons who can make these impact statements
in OHS cases. Our view is that
‘affected persons’ should be allowed to make impact statements,
which should be defined
to incorporate a relatively broad range of people and
scenarios affected by OHS offending. It should, in particular, be capable of
enabling the following people to make impact statements:
employees or
others who are harmed at (or by) a workplace, where there are multiple potential
causes of their harm, but the prosecuted
risk is one of them;
family members
of deceased workers who have been harmed at (or by) a workplace, where there are
multiple potential causes of their
harm, but the prosecuted risk is one of them;
employees and
others who have been exposed to a risk at (or by) a workplace, even if harm did
not eventuate.
2.22 With those
categories of people in mind, our proposed definition of ‘affected
person’, which we tested with stakeholders,
affected person
includes any person who is a victim of the offence,
anyone who has been exposed to a risk to health or safety as a result of the
and any other person the court is satisfied has been affected by the
definition of an affected person is clearly broader than that of
‘victim’ in the
Sentencing Act
. Take, for instance, the
example provided by WorkSafe in its submission, in which an employee, while
using a ladder, fell from a
height and was killed. The offending company was
charged with breaching its duty to reduce the risk of a fall from height by
the roof edge unsecured and unprotected. However, because no-one saw the
employee fall, it could not be proven beyond reasonable
doubt that the
inadequate fall protection caused their death, rather than some other
contributing factor, such as the ladder failing.
In this case, there could be a
number of bases upon which the person killed may not meet the definition of
‘victim’ which
would therefore preclude their family and friends
from making victim impact statements: (1) the offender may argue that they
the risk of falls from height (as opposed to
it), such that even if the offender had complied with their
duty, the risk may still have eventuated, (2) the offender may argue that
were multiple potential causes of the fall, so it isn’t clear that the
employee’s death was a ‘direct result’
of the prosecuted risk,
and (3) the offender may argue that they have been prosecuted for having
inadequate fall protection systems,
rather than for causing the death of the
the narrow definition of ‘victim’ in the
Sentencing Act
family, friends and co-workers of the deceased employee would likely be
prohibited from submitting a victim impact statement
to the court due to the
inability to establish a clear causative link between the breach of duty and the
harm. Under our proposed
definition of ‘affected person’, that would
no longer be the case. The deceased was exposed to a risk to health and safety
as a result of the offence (in particular, the risk of fall from height due to
inadequate fall protection), and they are incapable
of making the statement
themselves because they are
so we would expect
that their family and friends could submit impact statements in their
2.25 We envisage
this new form of impact statement operating alongside victim impact statements
Sentencing Act
. In many OHS cases, both types of statements may
be relevant, depending on the circumstances and the persons affected in the
However, we are of the view that there should be no hierarchy of
importance between the two, and therefore no implication that either
statement should inherently be given greater weight by a sentencing court. For
example, the fact that the new impact statements
allow a wide range of persons to make a statement should not mean that such a
statement should be given less weight than a victim
impact statement made by
someone who satisfies the eligibility criteria under the
Sentencing Act
For the avoidance of doubt, it may need to be specified in legislation that
courts must assess victim impact statements and impact
statements purely on
their content, and not by reference to the type of statement made.
2.26 In summary,
we are of the view that there is a need to enable a broader range of people to
make impact statements in OHS cases,
beyond those who have been harmed as a
‘direct result’ of the OHS offence. These are risk-based offences,
and the ability
of affected persons to participate in the sentencing process
should be premised on the risk-based nature of those offences. To achieve
we believe there should be a bespoke set of legislative provisions in the
to guide the admissibility and content of those impact statements. To
that end, we have proposed a definition of ‘affected persons’
we believe would achieve that broader applicability, though that definition will
likely benefit from the input of the Office
of the Chief Parliamentary
Recommendation 1: Impact Statements in OHS Cases
The Victorian Government should amend the
Occupational Health and Safety
(Vic) to create a framework that allows affected persons to make
impact statements in sentencing proceedings involving OHS offences.
Restorative justice conferences in OHS cases
Consultation Paper
, in response to significant interest in the topic
from stakeholders during preliminary consultation, we asked whether restorative
justice conferences would be appropriate and useful in OHS cases. Given the
significant support we heard during preliminary consultation,
responses, in written submissions, and in subsequent consultation on our draft
recommendations, we are firmly of the view
that there is a need to enable
restorative justice conferences to occur alongside OHS prosecutions. These
conferences have the potential
to address a number of unmet needs of injured
workers and their families, enable offenders to better understand how to prevent
risks occurring in the future, and begin to repair relationships that
are too often fractured in the aftermath of a workplace health
What are restorative justice conferences?
2.28 Restorative
justice conferences are a subcategory of what have come to be known as
‘restorative processes’, which
the United Nations has defined as:
any process in which the victim and the offender, and, where appropriate, any
other individuals or community members affected by
a crime, participate together
actively in the resolution of matters arising from the crime, generally with the
other words, restorative justice conferences involve gathering persons affected
by offending to help ‘in determining how
best to repair the harm’
In an OHS context, this
includes not only when actual injuries, illnesses or fatalities arise from
workplace incidents but also when
people are exposed to risks to their health
and safety.
primary aim of a restorative justice conferencing process is to facilitate a
meaningful dialogue between the offender, victim(s)
and any other affected
It is, however, also
common for one of the outcomes of a restorative justice process to be the
creation of a restorative justice
agreement, which specifies actions that the
offender has agreed to undertake. These actions can include, for example:
around changes and innovations in work health and safety systems and employment
arrangements;
compensation
and restitution agreements;
agreements to
provide ongoing support to families.
something as simple as an apology can be an incredibly meaningful outcome of
restorative justice conferences.
The Law Institute of Victoria said that for many victims and affected persons,
receiving an apology from the person or body that
caused harm to them, or their
loved one, can go a long way towards recovery and healing:
The LIV also acknowledges the transformative power that apologies – if
provided – may provide, which may potentially
be of greater value to a
victim or a victim’s family than a fine.
(Submission 12 (Law Institute
of Victoria))
addition to offering both victims and offenders the opportunity to meaningfully
heal from the consequences of the offending, the
general consensus from research
on restorative justice conferences for individuals (though none yet involving
corporate offenders)
is that they can also offer significant cost benefits due
to their potential to reduce future offending by participating
Arguably, this could
be especially pronounced in the context of OHS offences given that most
offenders are companies,
are more susceptible to rationality and behavioural change than
individuals.
date, there have been relatively few attempts to formalise restorative justice
conferences in criminal proceedings in
There are, however,
some contexts in which they are available – several of which operate
independently to the criminal justice
system – such as:
all criminal proceedings in the Australian Capital
environmental
offences in Victoria
South Wales;
violence offences in Victoria (not
legislated);
offences in Victoria (not
legislated);
pre-sentence
group conferences for children in
the growth of restorative justice conferences as an option alongside criminal
proceedings in Australia, we were interested in
stakeholder views on whether
conferences should be made available in the specific context of OHS offences. We
spoke to stakeholders
on the topic in our community survey, and posed a specific question in our
Consultation
Stakeholder views
was extremely strong support from stakeholders for making restorative justice
conferences available in OHS cases. Where
there was opposition, it was to the
features of such conferences, not to the fundamental question of whether
conferences should be
available at all.
the 64 online survey responses, 77% supported the introduction of restorative
justice conferences.
of the written submissions that addressed the topic, all but
favoured the introduction of
restorative justice conferences in OHS
For example:
VCEA welcomes opportunities for ... potentially innovative options to correct
breaches and encourage safer, more cooperative work
practices, including through
restorative justice initiatives ... Restorative justice approaches can promote a
culture where individuals
and organisations take responsibility for their
actions and address any potential harm caused to others[.]
(Submission 11
(Victorian Congress of Employer Associations))
[t]he LIV considers that restorative justice conferences would be appropriate
and useful in OHS cases, and ... notes that the flexible
nature of restorative
justice conferences may offer therapeutic benefit, where a range of styles can
be applied, tailored to individual
(Submission 12 (Law Institute of
[i]n the wake of traumatic workplace deaths ... the evidence suggests that the
family members of the deceased often have a range
of information and justice
needs that are poorly met by existing legal responses. Delays, constraints on
sharing information and
the absence of a voice for families in relation to the
death of their loved one are particular sources of difficulty in these cases,
and where the parties are willing, restorative justice conferences are likely to
be particularly valuable.
(Submission 18 (Australian Centre for Justice
Innovation, Monash University))
existing processes do not provide people with the opportunity to explain to
employers the impact the incident has had on their lives,
to receive apologies
from employers, or to have input into prevention measures that might ensure no
one else has to go through what
they have endured.
(Submission 16 (RMIT
Centre for Innovative Justice))
[c]onferencing could also provide an offender with the ability to express
remorse and have an open conversation with the family or
worker by reflecting on
the incident. Many employers are deeply impacted by deaths in their workplace
and want an opportunity to
express their sorrow about the incident, which
conferencing could help facilitate.
(Submission 21 (WorkSafe Victoria))
was limited opposition to the introduction of restorative justice conferencing
for OHS cases. The Australian Manufacturing Workers’
Union was primarily
concerned with the potential re-traumatisation of victims or affected persons if
they were to meet with the offender
duty-holder.
And the Victorian
Automotive Chamber of Commerce opposed the use of conferencing as adjunct to the
enforcement of OHS offences, instead
preferring its use as an
alternative
to prosecution.
stakeholders also commented on what they saw as important features of
restorative justice conferences, including that:
participation
would need to be voluntary;
participation should be capable of constituting a mitigating factor in
sentencing, but refusal to participate or not fully
participating should not be
considered an aggravating factor in
sentencing;
approach that is informed primarily by the needs of affected persons (often
known as a victim-centred approach) would need to be
taken both prior to and
during conferencing;
communications
between affected persons and offenders during conferencing should remain
confidential (with limited
exceptions);
could defer sentencing to allow conferencing to
appropriately
skilled third-party convenors should facilitate
conferences.
features of restorative justice conferencing raised by stakeholders in
submissions are largely consistent with those recommended
by the Victorian Law
Reform Commission in 2016,
again in 2021.
Centre for Innovative Justice Summary Report
2017, WorkSafe requested that the RMIT University Centre for Innovative Justice
(‘the CIJ’) conduct in-depth research
on the potential utility of
restorative justice conferences in the context of WorkSafe’s claims and
enforcement processes.
With permission from WorkSafe, the CIJ’s submission
to our review annexed a summary report from that
Given the research
involved and the utility and applicability of the CIJ’s findings, we
summarise that report below.
2.42 The CIJ
conducted interviews and workshops with numerous stakeholders, including injured
workers, bereaved families, trade union
members, employer groups, academics, and
WorkSafe, to identify the justice needs of victims and families of injured or
deceased workers
that are often unable to be met by the traditional justice
process. Some of these justice needs included:
expressing the
emotional impact of a workplace incident;
support and validation from the offender (where they are the victim’s
apologies or remorse from the offender;
understanding
why and how the incident occurred, and what actions will be taken to rectify the
offender held accountable for the incident;
restoring or
maintaining relationships with co-workers and the employer;
ensuring that
the incident will not occur again, and health and safety practices are improved
in the workplace; and
closure and healing.
2.43 The CIJ
sought to understand how restorative justice conferencing could address some of
these unmet justice needs. The CIJ recommended,
among other things, that
WorkSafe establish a pilot restorative justice conferencing program and outlined
a number of key features,
many of which align with those we heard from
stakeholders:
the process must
be flexible, in order to maintain a victim-centred focus, meaning flexibility in
the timing of the conference, and
in the number and format of conferences in
participation
must be voluntary and premised on informed consent from all parties, meaning
they are fully informed about the process
and the potential outcomes of the
process (because the positive benefits of conferences can be lost if there are
unexpected consequences
due to a lack of information), noting that restorative
justice conferencing will not be appropriate in all cases;
there should be
legislative limitations on what information can be disclosed by the parties
during and after the conferencing process,
with the only exceptions being (a) to
inform the court about the offender’s participation for the purposes of
informing the
sentencing exercise, and (b) when the parties agree otherwise; and
the process
should be facilitated by a body other than WorkSafe, to limit any perceived
conflicts of interest or barriers to participation.
The Council’s view
strongly agree with the overwhelming view expressed by stakeholders –
during consultation, in survey responses and in written
submissions – that
a restorative justice conferencing framework should be made available for
affected persons and offenders
in OHS cases. These conferences have the
potential to meet the unmet justice needs of
repair broken
relationships, and improve safety outcomes in the
anticipate a conference occurring in the majority of cases. Given there are only
OHS offences each year, the resource
implications of introducing restorative justice conferences for these types of
cases should
be relatively limited.
Key features of restorative justice conferences in OHS
from stakeholder submissions and
consultation,
conferencing frameworks both in Australia and
internationally,
recommendations made by the Victorian Law Reform
we are of the view that
there are a number of key features to restorative justice conferences that
should be included in the legislative
provisions establishing those conferences
(see Table 1).
Table 1: Key features of restorative justice
conferences
Description
Who should be eligible to participate in conferencing?
Conferencing should include persons affected by an OHS offence (see our
proposed definition of ‘affected person’ above
at [2.22]), the
offender (or, in the case of a corporate offender, an appropriate
representative) and any support persons for the
affected persons and/or
It may also be useful to have the WorkSafe inspector
involved in the matter attend.
All participants must provide (ongoing) informed consent
There would need to be informed consent from the outset, and ongoing
discussions with all parties about continued consent. First,
qualified person would need to explain the process to affected persons so that
they can make an informed choice whether
to participate in the process at
This initial preparatory work could potentially be undertaken
by one of WorkSafe’s family liaison officers, who have undertaken
in restorative practices. Then, once the process begins, the skilled convenor
– someone independent of WorkSafe –
would need to engage in regular
discussions with both affected persons and the offender about the process, the
potential outcomes
and their right to stop participating at any
This should operate as a safeguard against any potential
disingenuous participation by offenders, while also ensuring affected persons
feel comfortable withdrawing from the process if it is not suitable for them.
There should be limits on the information that can be disclosed by
participants
To ensure frank and free participation by all persons involved, conferences
must be undertaken on the basis that nothing discussed
during the process can be
used as evidence in any associated legal proceedings, and that discussions also
cannot be disclosed to
any third parties (including the media) unless the
parties agree otherwise. The one exception would be – if the process
as a pre-sentencing exercise – that the convenor would prepare a
report for the sentencing court about the parties’ participation,
as any possible restorative justice agreements that were settled upon.
Participation in restorative justice conferencing can be relevant to
If an offender genuinely participates in restorative justice conferencing,
their participation should be relevant to the sentencing
court in assessing
their level of remorse and prospects of rehabilitation,
potentially also inform the court’s determination of conditions attached
to a health and safety undertaking.
The court would be informed
pre-sentence report) prepared
by the convenor. Importantly though, where an
offender elects not to participate, this should not be considered an aggravating
at sentencing.
Conferences should be facilitated by expert convenors, and the
administrator of the program should be independent
There is a particular skillset required to convene and facilitate
restorative justice conferences. This work should be undertaken
by people who
are trained in those skills, and who are entirely independent of the
participants.
The work of administering restorative justice conferencing
– receiving referrals, identifying appropriate convenors, administering
the scheme, etc. – should be undertaken by a government agency other than
the courts and WorkSafe, or by a government-funded
non-government organisation
to ensure there are no perceived conflicts of interest. The administrator should
also be an agency with
experience in restorative justice processes, and with the
ability and resources to offer conferences in both regional and metropolitan
One potential option would be the Victim Services, Support
and Reform team at the Department of Justice and Community Safety
Australian Association for Restorative Justice described this broad level of
participation by ‘communities of care’
as the strongest factor in
predicting successful restorative justice conferences that provide healing for
affected persons and promote
tangible change post-conferencing. In OHS cases,
this would focus on creating safer and healthier workplaces: Meeting with
Association for Restorative Justice (6 August 2024); Submission 2
(Australian Association for Restorative Justice).
Swinburne University study on restorative justice conferencing, prepared for the
Children’s Court of Victoria, found that
a strong factor linked to reduced
recidivism existed where the investigating police informant involved with the
offence, as well
as primary and secondary victims, attended conferencing: Robert
Bonett et al., ‘Group Conferencing Is Associated with Lower
Repeated Recidivism Among Higher-Risk Youth and There Are Enhanced Effects Based
on Who Attended the Conference’ (2024)
Youth Violence and
Juvenile Justice
Australian Association for Restorative Justice told us that the first
conversation a victim or affected person has informing them
of their right to
participate in conferencing is a pivotal moment in their understanding of the
purposes, potential outcomes (including
on sentencing, if conferencing is to
occur pre-sentencing) and process. Without a clear understanding of these
features, a victim
or affected person cannot provide
participate in conferencing: Meeting with Australian Association for Restorative
Justice (6 August 2024).
with Australian Association for Restorative Justice (6 August 2024); Meeting
with RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice (8 August
2024); Stakeholder Roundtable
(12 August 2024); OHS Barrister Roundtable (16 August 2024); Meeting with
Workplace Incidents Consultative
Committee (21 August 2024).
well established that courts will consider an offender’s genuine remorse
as a mitigating factor:
Phillips v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 140.
example, in both the ACT and New Zealand, the conference convenor can provide a
copy of a restorative justice agreement to the
sentencing court:
(Restorative Justice) Act 2004
Sentencing Act 2002
(NZ) ss 8(j), 10.
is important to ensure that offenders participate in a conference voluntarily
and with informed consent. See, for example,
Crimes (Restorative Justice) Act
ss 25(f)(ii)
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
s 34(1)(h).
2 (Australian Association for Restorative Justice); Meeting with Australian
Association for Restorative Justice (6 August
their approach to restorative justice, see Department of Justice and Community
Safety, ‘About Victim-centred Restorative
(justice.vic.gov.au, 2024).
Should restorative justice conferences be available prior to
sentencing?
we took our proposed features of a restorative justice conferencing framework in
OHS cases to stakeholders, there was overwhelming
support for most of the
features. However, the feature on which views were most divided was the timing
of such conferences: should
they be able to occur
to sentencing, or
should they only be available after the sentencing process has finished? The
concern some stakeholders raised with
pre-sentencing conferences was the
potential for offenders to view participation as a mechanism to reduce their
sentence, and engage
in the process for disingenuous
For example, a member
of the Workplace Incidents Consultative Committee commented:
the only concern I would have [with pre-sentence conferencing] is that a lawyer
might say to the company, if you go in, tell them
[you’re] really sorry,
we might be able to reduce this sentence by 25%. That’s just my only
concern ... that people may
see, the minority may do that to say there’s a
reduction in their sentence, to try and save money.
(Meeting with Workplace
Incidents Consultative Committee (21 August 2024))
2.47 While we
acknowledge these concerns, it is our view that restorative justice conferences
should nonetheless be available as a
pre-sentencing option in OHS cases.
Pre-sentence restorative justice conferencing offers a number of distinct
benefits for affected
persons and offenders, including:
giving victims a
greater voice and role in the sentencing process;
reducing delay
in relationship reparation for affected persons and offenders;
allowing the
court to make a more informed assessment of remorse;
a level of oversight of the restorative justice process if it occurs during a
period of sentence deferral;
appropriate cases, enabling restorative justice agreements to inform the
conditions of potential sentencing
are mindful of the concerns raised by some stakeholders about the potential for
insincere participation in conferencing by offenders
who try and participate
solely to reduce the severity of their sentence. However, we are of the view
that the safeguards built into
the conferencing framework, particularly the
requirements for rigorous preparation and informed (and ongoing) consent from
both parties,
adequately address those
To be clear, we are not
suggesting that restorative justice conferences should not
available after sentencing has concluded. It may well be that they should also
be available outside the criminal process, and there
was considerable
stakeholder support for such an option. However, such a recommendation would be
beyond the sentencing-focused remit
of this review.
What would a restorative justice process look like?
is useful to consider an illustration of what a restorative justice process
would look like in practice, having regard to
the key features discussed above.
Case Study 2 is a representative example from New Zealand, where restorative
justice conferencing
regularly occurs as part of OHS prosecutions, and courts
sentencing OHS offenders refer to those processes in sentencing. The case
highlights the potential value of restorative justice conferencing in cases
involving continuing relationships between offenders
and those harmed by
offending. It also demonstrates many of the key features discussed above,
including pre-sentence conferencing,
ongoing informed and mutual consent from
both parties to participate in the process, the reaching of agreements during
conferencing,
and the nature of participation being taken into account in
sentencing.
Case Study 2: An example of restorative justice
conferencing in New Zealand
In New Zealand, restorative justice conferencing regularly occurs as part of
OHS prosecutions, and courts sentencing OHS offenders
often refer to those
processes in sentencing. One case involved a meat-packing plant operator.
Employees were tasked with, among
other things, operating and cleaning a meat
grinding machine at the plant. The company pleaded guilty to allowing a
dangerous work
practice involving staff cleaning moving parts in the machine
without using an interlock guard. On one occasion, an employee placed
inside the machine while it was still on and got his fingers caught, amputating
four of his fingers.
The employee and a representative of the company agreed to participate in a
restorative justice conference prior to sentencing. In
the sentencing judgment,
the court didn’t mention the process leading up to the conference, but it
can be assumed that an expert
facilitator liaised with the participants over a
period of time prior to conferencing to describe the process and set
expectations.
During the conference, the employee described the pain, loss of independence,
social isolation and embarrassment he experienced as
a result of the injury, and
subsequent difficulties in caring for his young son and elderly parents. The
company then extended an
apology to the victim, and agreed to pay $60,000 in
reparation for emotional harm and to cover the cost of a prosthetic hand. The
company also committed to provide whatever support he needed to remain employed
with the company in an alternative role.
During sentencing, the court took into account the company’s
participation in the restorative justice conference and noted that
the company
had done everything it said it would during the conference. The court
acknowledged the company’s ‘high level
of remorse and
reparation’, in part evidenced by their genuine participation in a
restorative justice conference and fulfilment
of the restorative justice
agreement. The company ultimately received a fine of almost $200,000 out of a
possible maximum fine of
$1.5 million.
WorkSafe New Zealand v Hellers Limited
[2020] NZDC 18926
Who would enforce restorative justice agreements?
stakeholders raised questions about whether restorative justice agreements would
be monitored and enforced, and if so,
In the Australian Capital
Territory, the Director-General has the power to monitor, and follow up on, an
offender’s compliance
with any agreement that emerges from restorative
justice conferencing, but there are no enforcement mechanisms or additional
for non-compliance.
Given the primary aim of conferencing is to create an environment for a healing
dialogue, and given that if there is an agreement
it should be one entered into
voluntarily, we do not propose that there be specific enforcement or penalty
provisions for non-compliance.
If, however, aspects of a restorative justice
agreement were incorporated as conditions of a health and safety undertaking,
conditions would become binding as conditions of the sentencing order.
Breaches of the order would then render the offender liable
to contravention
proceedings, which may result in both a separate penalty for contravention and
being resentenced for the original
charges. In any event, keeping affected
persons appraised of the enforceability of any agreement reached will be
important to ensuring
their ongoing informed consent to
participate.
Recommendation 2: A framework for restorative
justice conferences
The Victorian Government should amend the
Occupational Health and Safety
(Vic) to provide a framework for restorative justice conferences to
occur in cases involving offences contrary to that Act.
Establishing and monitoring a restorative justice conferencing
completeness, we recommend that the government establish a pilot program of
restorative justice conferences in OHS cases. In addition,
given the potential
utility for restorative justice processes in cases involving other types of
offending (not just OHS offences),
and the importance of ensuring the intended
framework is actually fit for purpose, we believe it is necessary that a system
data and feedback on that pilot program be in place from the outset.
This will enable continuous improvements to occur, as well as
interim and final
evaluations – which we propose be finalised within two and four years
– to be conducted. In consultation,
all stakeholders were supportive of
ensuring that any pilot of restorative justice conferences in OHS cases be
monitored and evaluated.
Recommendation 3: Pilot and evaluate restorative justice
conferences
The Victorian Government should establish a program trialling the use of
restorative justice conferences in cases involving offences
contrary to the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
(Vic), and ensure a system is in
place for continuous feedback that results in interim and final evaluations
being completed within
two and four years, respectively.
sentencing practices for OHS offences
3.1 The focus of
this chapter is on sentencing outcomes for OHS offences: given what we know
sentencing outcomes need to change, and
if so, what reforms are necessary to achieve that change? In addition to
summarising what
stakeholders told us in consultation and in written
submissions, this chapter reports on the results of our community consultation
process, which aimed to gauge the community’s expectations about
sentencing practices for OHS offences. As a result of our
statistical analysis
and consultation, we are of the view that there is a need for a number of
reforms to the sentencing of OHS offences.
These reforms are necessary to ensure
that sentencing practices more closely align with community expectations and are
better able
to achieve the purposes of sentencing specified in the
(Vic) (‘the
Sentencing Act
Contextualising sentenced OHS offences
examining sentencing practices, it is important to first contextualise the
nature of sentenced OHS offences. There are hundreds
of thousands of workplaces
operating in Victoria at any given time. WorkSafe Victoria
(‘WorkSafe’) conducts over 40,000
inspections every year. From those
inspections, WorkSafe issues almost 10,000 improvement and prohibition notices
each year. And
WorkSafe prosecutes just over 100 companies and individuals
annually for OHS offences.
suggests that the vast majority of workplaces are reasonably safe, and for those
that have apparent deficits, WorkSafe more
frequently takes action other than
prosecution (such as issuing an improvement or prohibition notice). In turn,
it’s important
to emphasise that the cases involving OHS offences that are
sentenced are not representative of Victorian workplaces. Instead, either
represent the worst instances of poor OHS practices, especially where someone
has been injured or killed, or alternatively they
represent key areas of focus
for WorkSafe, such as the recent emphasis on the risks of falls from
also note that the majority of businesses are small and medium-sized
enterprises. According to data published by the Australian
Statistics,
as at June 2024
there were 2,662,211 businesses operating across Australia. Just 0.2% of those
businesses employed 200 staff or more,
and just 2.6% employed 20 staff or more.
Conversely, 97% of businesses across Australia employed fewer than 20 staff.
Indeed, 62%
of businesses do not employ anyone at all. This is important
contextual information because, while some of our proposed reforms are
to ensure sentencing outcomes are better calibrated to the size of the company
for larger entities, most companies are not
large companies.
What are current sentencing practices for OHS offences?
term ‘current sentencing practices’ in the
Sentencing Act
refers to how a particular type of offence, offending or offender is
currently being sentenced. Are prison sentences becoming longer,
as we have seen
for offences such as incest and
Or are, perhaps, court
outcomes for children increasingly prioritising rehabilitation, as can be seen
through the increased use of
diversion in the Children’s
In theory, courts should
strive to achieve a measure of consistency between cases by referring to current
sentencing practices when
deciding an appropriate sentence in any given
As the Court of Appeal has
observed, this will usually require courts to consider ‘both ... relevant
sentencing statistics’
and ‘sentencing decisions in comparable
3.5 Our terms of
reference asked us to examine whether current sentencing practices for OHS
offences align with community expectations.
Before seeking the community’s
views, our first task was to understand what sentencing practices for OHS
offences currently
are in Victoria. Using court data on sentencing outcomes,
prosecution result summaries published on WorkSafe’s website (especially
cases sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court), sentencing remarks published
by the higher courts (especially the County Court),
and appeal judgments
published by the Court of Appeal, we sought to present a comprehensive picture
of current sentencing practices
Consultation Paper
Statistical Report
. The court data, higher courts sentencing remarks and
appeal judgments covered the 16-year period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2021
(the most recent data we had available at the time). The prosecution result
summaries have been available since January 2012.
3.6 Some of our
key findings about current sentencing practices included:
most OHS cases
are sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court (88%), in part because fine
amounts currently imposed for OHS offences
are typically well within the
individuals and $494,000 for companies);
most offenders
sentenced for OHS offences were corporations (83%) (maximum penalties are higher
for companies than for individuals);
the most common
OHS offences sentenced are breaches of health and safety duties by
(67%), which currently carry a maximum penalty of 9,000 penalty units for
corporations (about $1.78 million) and 1,800 penalty units
for individuals
(about $356,000);
most common sentence imposed in OHS cases is a fine (90% of cases involving
companies, and 72% of cases involving
individuals);
next most common sentence was an
undertaking,
undertakings required the offender to make a charitable donation;
the 58 cases in which an individual received a penalty other than a fine, 40
undertakings,
10 diversion
plans, four community orders, three wholly suspended sentences of imprisonment,
and just one immediate term of imprisonment
were imposed;
sentenced in the higher courts involved a fatality (82%), compared to just 4% of
cases in the Magistrates’ Court,
and companies typically received much
higher fine amounts where there was a fatality in the case (for example, 45% of
fines in cases
involving fatalities were $200,000 or more, compared to less than
1% of fines in cases that did
involve a fatality);
amounts in the higher courts tended to
over time, from a median
fine of $135,000 for companies during the first half of our reference period to
$250,000 during the second
amounts in the Magistrates’ Court tended to
from a median fine of $40,000 for companies during the first half of our
reference period to $20,000 during the second
half – given the increasing
value of penalty units in that timeframe, this represents a 70% decline in fine
values in the decade
2019–20 the median fine for an employer company breaching a health and
safety duty in the Magistrates’ Court (125 penalty
units, or $20,653)
represented 5% of the court’s jurisdictional limit and 1.4% of the maximum
the majority of
sentence appeals from the Magistrates’ Court and the County Court were
initiated by the Director of Public Prosecutions,
who was successful in 21 of 24
appeals in the County Court (with an average 260% increase in the
fine amount), and five of nine Court of Appeal cases; and
there has only
been one adverse publicity order made since the
came into effect
in 2004, and it was in early 2023.
the time we published our
Consultation Paper
, there had not been any
cases sentenced involving Victoria’s new workplace manslaughter offence
(which came into effect in
July 2020). The maximum penalty for that offence is
25 years’ imprisonment for an individual, or 100,000 penalty units for
corporation (which, in 2024–25, amounts to about $19.8
A few weeks after we
published our
Consultation Paper
, the Supreme Court sentenced
Victoria’s first workplace manslaughter offence in a case involving a
forklift incident.
The director
of the offending company received a two-year community correction order with 200
hours of unpaid community work, and
the company received a $1.3 million fine
(which was about 7% of the maximum penalty for the offence).
Current sentencing practices in psychosocial risk
is a further topic relating to current sentencing practices that we did not
address in our
Consultation Paper
but should be mentioned here: in
particular, sentencing practices for
psychosocial risks
in the workplace,
being those risks that primarily place employees in danger of psychological
harm. These can range from employers
failing to provide adequate emotional
support systems in a workplace, to engaging in (or at least failing to prevent)
sexual harassment
or prolonged workplace
3.9 In 2011, in
response to the
the Victorian
Government introduced legislation expressly designed to criminalise workplace
More recently, the
government consulted on the proposed introduction of new
Occupational Health
and Safety (Psychological Health)
Regulations
There does,
though, appear to have been few OHS prosecutions against employers or others for
workplace bullying, or for generally
failing to reasonably protect against
psychosocial risks.
prosecutions are, however, beginning to occur more
frequently:
October 2023, Court Services Victoria was fined $380,000 (the maximum fine
available in the Magistrates’ Court at
the time) with conviction for
allowing risks to the psychological health of employees in the Coroners Court.
These risks were due
to ‘exposure to traumatic materials, role conflict,
workloads, work demands, poor workplace relationships and inappropriate
workplace behaviours ... including allegations of bullying, favouritism and
cronyism, verbal abuse, derogatory comments, intimidation,
invasions of privacy
and perceived threats to future progression’, which resulted in a staff
member being ‘diagnosed
with [a] work related major depressive
disorder’ and being ‘found deceased in her home as a result of
November 2023, a number of café franchisee organisations received fines
of $40,000 and $110,000 for failing to provide an
avenue for reporting sexual
harassment (which had been occurring at those locations for seven
and the manager
responsible for the behaviour received a $40,000 fine with
conviction.
December 2023, the sole director of a glass manufacturing company received a
$60,000 fine for workplace bullying behaviour that
included, among other things,
taping an apprentice ‘to a crane topless and suspended above the
ground’, slapping him,
and filming the incident, which was then circulated
on social media.
in December 2023, a catering company was fined $10,000 after its head chef was
found to have bullied two 17-year-old apprentices,
including telling one of them
‘to slit his own wrists and to drink boiling oil’ and
‘tap[ing] cabbage leaves to
[his] head during work shifts’. The head
chef received a separate $4,000
July 2024, a heating and cooling installation company received a $10,000 fine
without conviction for having no policies, procedures,
reporting processes or
risk control measures related to workplace bullying. Over a period of time, an
apprentice had been subjected
to, among other things, physical assaults
(‘being spat on ... placed in headlocks ... shot at with a nail gun ...
from a noose’), ‘sexually harassing comments and
actions’, taunts that his biological father was not alive, and
‘having a bucket of water mixed with paint thrown over [him] during a cold
Despite the court
considering the company’s departure from its duty to provide a safe
workplace to be ‘mid-range’
and the apprentice being
‘vulnerable due to age and lack of experience’, the $10,000 fine
imposed represented just 0.6%
of the maximum penalty (almost $1.7 million) and
2.2% of the Magistrates’ Court’s jurisdictional limit (about
fair to say that sentencing practices in cases involving psychosocial risks
already seem to have fallen into step
with those in more traditional OHS cases
involving risks to physical safety. The fine amounts are typically well below
are somewhat inconsistent, and are only higher in cases with a
fatality. If sentencing practices in OHS cases more generally are
to be changed
– and as discussed below, we believe they should be – it will be
important to ensure that sentencing practices
in cases involving psychosocial
risks are changed as well, commensurate with the seriousness of the
Current sentencing practices in other regulatory
is also helpful to consider sentencing practices and civil penalties in other
regulatory contexts, in part because there seem
to be rather disparate
approaches to civil and criminal penalties for regulatory offending.
Criminal penalties in EPA and NHVR cases
offences in the
Environment Protection Act 2017
(Vic) are designed to
reduce or eliminate risks to health or the environment, and those offences are
enforced by the Environment Protection
There are also
offences in the
Heavy Vehicle National Law
designed to reduce or
eliminate risks arising from the use of heavy vehicles. That law applies in most
Australian jurisdictions, with
the National Heavy Vehicle Regulator (NHVR)
responsible for enforcement. Much like the model work health and safety laws
laws’), the
Heavy Vehicle National Law
‘categories’ of general duty offences, for which the maximum fines
are $500,000, $1.5 million and $3
to WorkSafe publishing on its website prosecution result summaries of matters
sentenced in the summary jurisdiction, the EPA
maintains a set of prosecution
summaries on its website,
the NHVR maintains a comparative sentencing table on its
These summaries show
that there are some similarities in sentencing practices across regulatory
prosecutions, but also some important
differences. The most prominent similarity
among them all is that fines for breaches of duties that place others at risk
be less than $100,000. In one NVHR case, however, the offending company
received a $1.2 million fine for 37 category 3 offences (the
least serious
offence category) for allowing drivers of heavy vehicles to continue driving
despite knowing that those drivers had
exceeded the maximum number of driving
hours to avoid fatigue-related risks.
in both the EPA and NHVR cases, there appears to be greater utilisation of
non-fine penalties that place behavioural obligations
on offenders. There are a
number of EPA cases where, rather than being required to simply make a donation
to the Court Fund, the
offender has been required to fund a particular project.
For example, in recent proceedings, the South Gippsland Region Water Corporation
was ordered to fund $50,000 towards a project that would fence off waterways
from stock to improve the conditions of a local creek,
as well as provide weed
control and revegetation of the surrounding
In another case,
building developers were required to spend half a million dollars undertaking an
audit and remediation works on
soil at a building site in Melbourne, with any
remaining funds to be given to a charity of the EPA’s
There have also been
a number of NHVR cases in which the offending company has received a
‘supervisory intervention order’,
with conditions such as developing
a speed management policy, requiring all drivers to use electronic work diaries,
providing fatigue
management training to all drivers and staff, improving
various safety practices and appointing a consultant to monitor compliance
those improved practices for a period of time, carrying out scheduled vehicle
servicing every six months by a qualified mechanic,
and providing the NHVR with
evidence of compliance with these conditions.
in EPA cases, in particular, adverse publicity orders have become common in
recent years, with various companies being required
to publish the details of
their offending in publications such as the
Geelong Advertiser
Bellarine Times
Surf Coast Times
newspaper in Wangaratta, and the
South Gippsland Sentinel
We note that these
are all newspapers, whereas we envisage use of a broader range of publication
media if adverse publicity orders
are to be made more frequently in OHS cases,
particularly given the changing ways in which people consume information,
largely online
and via social
3.17 In effect,
in both EPA and NHVR cases, there seems to be greater use of a wider range of
sentencing orders that have the potential
to better achieve the various purposes
of sentencing, especially deterrence.
Community expectations of sentencing OHS offences
3.18 Having
established what current sentencing practices are in the context of OHS
offences, we next gauged community expectations,
to better understand whether
those expectations are aligned with those sentencing practices. We did this in a
number of ways:
we met with a
number of individuals and organisations in preliminary consultation meetings to
gauge initial views about sentencing
specific questions in the
Consultation Paper
seeking respondents’
views on sentencing practices – in particular, whether sentencing orders
other than fines should
be used more frequently in OHS cases (Question 13), and
whether there is a need to increase fine amounts for OHS offences (Question
we conducted an
online survey via Engage Victoria that asked respondents about their views on
current sentencing practices –
in particular, whether sentencing options
other than fines should be used more often in OHS cases (Survey Question 5), and
there is a need to change the values of fines imposed for OHS offences
in Victoria (Survey Question 6); and
we conducted
eight community consultation events across Victoria, at which we provided
participants with real-life case studies of
OHS offences and asked them to
decide what sentence they felt was appropriate, as well as what they thought
of the sentence actually imposed in the
Community expectations: community consultation
3.19 Appendix
2 provides a full description of our approach to these community consultation
events. In brief, at each session we asked
participants to sentence one of two
real-life cases involving OHS offences: one involved a small company dealing in
solar panel installation,
which placed two of its workers at risk of falling
from height by not having adequate fall protection measures (‘Daylight
the other involved a large national construction company whose
breaches contributed to the death of a subcontractor who fell from
an elevated
work platform (‘Brick & Mortar’).
3.20 At each
session, we told participants about the circumstances of the offending and its
consequences, the circumstances of the
offender, the applicable maximum penalty,
and the available sentence types. We then asked participants to sentence the
case and share
their views as to what constituted an appropriate sentence. We
asked participants what sentence type they would impose and, if it
was a fine,
the amount they would impose, whether they would impose an adverse publicity
order, and whether they would record a conviction.
We then revealed the penalty
that the court actually imposed in the case, and asked participants to comment
on the appropriateness
of that penalty as well as the maximum penalty available.
Importantly, we also asked participants how much weight they gave to certain
factors in each case study, namely the level of the risk, the fact that no-one
was harmed or that someone was killed, the criminal
history of the offender, the
size and financial circumstances of the offending company, the steps taken by
the offender after their
offending, and the fact that the offender pleaded
guilty (which they did in both case studies).
3.21 While we
note that the community consultation events represent 50 participants’
responses, some important and consistent
findings emerged from those events:
across both case
studies, 62% of participants would have imposed a health and safety undertaking
(HSU), either on its own or in addition
to a fine, frequently with conditions to
undertake specific educational or improvement projects. By way of comparison,
just 10% of
actual OHS cases currently result in an undertaking of some sort,
and the only condition is usually to make a charitable donation
rather than
engage in any behavioural conditions (Figures 1 and 2);
participants who sentenced the case involving a large company and a fatality,
the average fine imposed was $2.8 million,
almost six times more than the actual
fine imposed ($475,000) – 58% imposed the maximum allowed ($3.5 million),
and the lowest
fine among all 36 participants was $600,000, which was still more
than the actual fine imposed (Figure 4);
the 14 participants who sentenced the case involving a small company and no
injuries, the average fine imposed was $113,000, which
was partly attributable
to two outliers at one event
– most participants (nine) imposed a sentence of $100,000 or less (Figure
upon hearing the
sentence actually imposed in the relevant case, most of the 14 participants in
the Daylight Solar case study thought
the $35,000 fine was ‘about
right’ (six) or ‘a little too low’ (five), and relatively few
participants thought
it was ‘much too low’ (three) (Figure 5);
in contrast, the
vast majority of the 36 participants in the Brick & Mortar case study felt
the fine was ‘much too low’
(30), another five thought it was
‘a little too low’, and only one thought it was ‘about
right’ (Figure 6);
of all participants
have recorded a conviction, with a much higher rate in the case study involving
the large company and a fatality (97%, or 34
out of 35), compared to just 50% of
participants in the other case study (seven out of 14); and
participants would have imposed an adverse publicity order, whereas only two
such orders have been imposed in Victoria
in the last 20
Figure 1: Community consultation responses
(sentence type, Daylight Solar)
What sentence type would you impose? Daylight Solar Pty Ltd (14
participants)
Fine and health and safety undertaking
Health and safety undertaking only
Figure 2: Community consultation responses (sentence type, Brick &
What sentence type would you impose? Brick & Mortar Pty Ltd (36
participants)
Fine and health and safety undertaking
Health and safety undertaking only
Figure 3: Community consultation responses (fine amount, Daylight
How much would you fine Daylight Solar Pty Ltd? (12
participants)
Less than $50,000 (actual fine: $35,000)
$50,000 to less than $250,000
$250,000 or more
Figure 4: Community consultation responses (fine amount, Brick &
How would you sentence Brick & Mortar Pty Ltd? (33
participants)
Less than $50,000
$50,000 to less than $250,000
$250,000 to less than $500,000 (actual fine $475,000)
$500,000 to less than $1 million
$1 million to less than $2 million
$2 million to less than $3 million
$3 million or more
Figure 5: Community consultation responses (appropriateness of sentence,
Daylight Solar)
Was the sentence appropriate ($35,000 fine)? Daylight Solar Pty Ltd (14
participants)
A little too low
Much too low
Figure 6: Community consultation responses (appropriateness of sentence,
Brick & Mortar)
Was the sentence appropriate ($475,000 fine)? Brick & Mortar Pty Ltd
(36 participants)
A little too low
Much too low
Daylight Solar Pty Ltd
chose the case of Daylight Solar Pty Ltd (‘Daylight Solar’) for a
case study because the fine was larger than most
penalties imposed in the
Magistrates’ Court for risk-only breaches of health and safety duties.
That choice was designed to
test whether even a relatively high fine by current
standards met with community expectations. As we found in the
Statistical
, fine amounts in the Magistrates’ Court declined over time to a
median of $20,000 by 2019–20, and fines of $10,000 or
3.23 The median
fine imposed by participants sentencing Daylight Solar was $52,500, which is 50%
higher than the $35,000 actually
imposed, and well above most fine amounts in
the summary jurisdiction. These results suggest that fine amounts for smaller
whose behaviour does not result in an injury do not accord with
community expectations. That said, participants also seemed to see
more value in
health and safety undertakings for the small company, with most telling us that
they saw more benefit in requiring
some ‘above-and-beyond’ safety
improvements rather than simply imposing a fine as punishment. For instance:
I just think that the fine isn’t effective when they’re already in a
loss, the undertaking to me is something that we
don’t do anywhere near
enough in Victoria.
(Community Consultation Participant, Ballarat (19
February 2024))
I would prefer ... [if] the employees of that company were put through the
appropriate ... training ... [t]he other thing is, with
the fine, if you fine
them too heavily, they’ll ... just [p]hoenix, which is a sad reality. And
I’m not sure ... whether
the fine is going to change the behaviour.
(Community Consultation Participant, Morwell (21 February 2024))
I feel that I have seen companies put a lot of additional effort into compliance
with their ... undertakings, I feel that it can
create an industry uplift in
terms of... training or some sort of program or awareness. And I’d rather
see the money go to
something like that[.]
(Community Consultation
Participant, Geelong (28 February 2024))
[Y]ou don’t want to have an extraordinarily huge fine because you got ...
other people that are relying on employment. So there’s
a social utility
cost associated. If you go and fine them, all of a sudden ... people ... are out
of a job because the employer can’t
afford the fine. There’s got to
be a bit of balance there. And an undertaking – everything in the OHS Act,
are in the industry is huge. Because that education piece goes
towards the
prevention piece. So, ‘look at me, I’ve been made an example, I got
fined’. That’s the education
... that’s important to get out
there to prevent those breaches happening in the first place.
Consultation Participant, Ballarat (19 February 2024))
It actually takes more effort to do an [undertaking] than it does to just pay a
$35,000 fine.
(Community Consultation Participant, Ballarat (19 February
Brick & Mortar Pty Ltd
Participants
sentencing Brick & Mortar Pty Ltd (‘Brick & Mortar’) saw
more value in imposing a fine on the company,
either on its own or in
combination with a health and safety undertaking, which some participants
referred to as a
Participants told us that the fine was necessary to express condemnation and
achieve just punishment, while the undertaking was geared
towards rehabilitative
and deterrent objectives. Indeed, 68% of participants across both case studies
a fine and an undertaking. Participants explained why they
believed an undertaking would be appropriate in this case:
The undertaking could cost a lot more time. Hopefully that might make them sit
up and think.
(Community Consultation Participant, Geelong (28 February
That would improve the safety of the site by enforcing the undertaking. For
businesses like this, the amount you’re talking
money. They can budget for that ... [t]he undertaking would be a better option
because you can actually force
them to spend a considerable amount more ... in
enforcing better safety procedures.
(Community Consultation Participant,
Bendigo (26 February 2024))
Fines in companies that size tend to be absorbed quite quickly. I think you
could have more controls when putting in place an undertaking,
and probably
achieve ... greater deterrence to an organisation.
(Community Consultation
Participant, Geelong (28 February 2024))
3.25 As to the
undertaking, some of the conditions
shared with us included being of good
behaviour, having OHS practices audited, apologising to the injured worker or
their family,
publishing an announcement in the newspaper, participating in
restorative justice, compensating the family of the deceased worker,
presentations to other organisations, and requiring staff and management to
participate in OHS training.
3.26 Remarkably,
not one participant imposed a fine as low as the actual fine imposed on Brick
& Mortar in that case ($475,000),
with the lowest fine imposed by a
participant being $600,000. These results strongly suggest that sentencing
practices in cases involving
larger companies, and in cases where someone has
been seriously injured as a result of the breach of duty, are significantly out
of alignment with community expectations:
The whole point of sentencing is to deter it from happening again. [The maximum
penalty] is too low for a company that size.
(Community Consultation
Participant, Bendigo (26 February 2024))
Community expectations: survey results
can be seen in Figures 7 and 8, the majority of survey participants felt that
sentencing options other than fines should be
used more often in OHS cases (82%)
and that the values of fines currently being imposed are too low
Figure 7: Survey responses (sentencing options)
Should sentencing options other than fines be used more often in OHS
cases? (64 participants)
Figure 8: Survey responses (fine amounts)
Is there a need to change the values of fines for OHS
Fines are too low
Fines are about right
Fines are too high
Use of types of sentencing orders
comments, survey participants explained that they would advocate for greater use
of alternative sentencing orders (other than
fines) because of a perception that
fines either were ineffective in deterring OHS breaches or were
counterproductive to positive
OHS outcomes:
Fines are meaningless to so many businesses. They just factor them in as part of
the risk. There need to be actual impactful consequences.
(Survey Participant
(female, 35–44))
Fines are clearly not working (and that’s when they’re actually
paid). If there was more fear around the consequences
of OHS breaches, then they
might be taken more seriously by those in charge.
(Survey Participant
(female, 25–34))
Fining a small or medium sized company for a safety breach is completely
counterproductive and makes it even harder for them to meet
safety requirements.
Improving safety is costly, even if it is just downtime required for training
staff. Instead of paying fines,
companies should be allowed to direct this money
into improving safety.
(Survey Participant (gender unspecified,
Financial penalties are not enough, we should look at all options available ...
to ensure that the offence does not happen again.
I believe that other
sentencing options should be the priority with the addition of a financial
penalty added as an additional penalty.
(Survey Participant (male,
3.29 One survey
participant appeared to have first-hand experience of their employer receiving
an undertaking:
It positively affected many people, whilst placing an appropriate burden on the
organisation. Undertakings can be a creative way
to build capacity within an
organisation or community, whilst fines may further restrict, or even bankrupt a
company, with [a] potentially
larger impact on the community.
Participant (male, 45–54))
survey participants also offered their views about the potential conditions of
health and safety undertakings. These included
mandatory education, engagement
of an OHS consultant, and mandatory employment of particular staff (such as
in-house safety managers).
A number of participants said they would expressly
advocate against charitable donations as conditions of sentencing orders in OHS
cases, in part because ‘they can use it as PR to make themselves look
3.31 Some of the
other sanctions mentioned by survey participants included imprisonment, adverse
publicity orders, special project
orders and personal liability of some form for
directors and other individuals:
The mere fact that an OHS offender is imprisoned will serve as a huge deterrent
to others engaging in the same conduct.
(Survey Participant (male,
For many companies and directors a financial penalty is not as punitive as
damage to a reputation. I would like the courts to consider
other options and
combine these with a fine.
(Survey Participant (male, 55–64))
The alternative sentencing options in the OHS Act are underused ... special
project orders under the alternative sentencing options
should be considered.
(Survey Participant (female, 45–54))
Fines and good behaviour orders aren’t going far enough. [There is a n]eed
to force improvements, and where there are very
serious issues and/or persistent
conduct, consider imprisonment and disqualifying personnel or the business from
being able to work/operate.
(Survey Participant (female, 25–34))
A fine could be a miniscule sentence for a large/ASX organisation. Personal
accountability for the responsible offenders may create
more of a commitment to
employee and community safety.
(Survey Participant (female, 25–34))
contrast, respondents who felt that a greater use of other sentencing options
was not needed considered that the threat of
fines was the most effective means
of incentivising compliance with OHS laws:
The ‘hip pocket’ nerve speaks all languages. If employers know they
need to pay a substantial fine for their actions
they will usually ‘lift
their game’.
(Survey Participant (gender unspecified,
[F]ines should be heavier in certain circumstances to really hit
offenders’ hip pockets when they deliberately ignore the safety
wellbeing of their workers.
(Survey Participant (gender unspecified,
Values of fines for OHS offences
respondents who were of the view that fines were too low were especially
concerned about fines imposed on companies:
The fines appear to be severe enough for individuals, less so for companies.
(Survey Participant (male, 35–44))
The max is high but usually doesn’t go near that. There should be more use
of the higher penalties, especially for companies.
(Survey Participant (male,
If it is a company or corporation ... they need much larger fines. For
individuals the fines seem okay. But if you think about ...
the difference
between individual fines and company fines the compan[ies] are getting off way
(Survey Participant (female, 25–34))
3.34 The most
common explanation for why respondents felt fines were too low was a perception
that fine amounts did not correspond
to the financial circumstances of offenders
(specifically companies):
Fines should be respective to the size of the business.
(Survey Participant
(male, 35–44))
Fines should take into account the resources available to the company and the
efforts they typically make to ensure safety in the
Participant (gender unspecified, 45–54))
Fines can be detrimental for small companies and rightfully so, but for larger
companies they are a slap on the wrist.
(Survey Participant (male,
When I see in the media a company that has a multi-million-dollar turnover
slapped with a small fine I wonder if it is really a sentence?
My understanding
is that a sentence is to punish for a safety breach. Small fines to companies
that are quite financially strong
don’t really appear to punish or deter.
(Survey Participant (male, 55–64))
If the penalty needs to be financial, it should be a percentage of a
company’s income.
(Survey Participant (male, 55–64))
When I see the amount that some companies are fined I shake my head at the
amount imposed, in many cases it is a week or month’s
earnings for the
business, this is not enough. Employers need to understand that if they hurt
someone or kill someone they could
possibly lose their business due to the fine
imposed, this would make them put more effort into keeping their people safe.
(Survey Participant (male, 55–64))
3.35 Others felt
that values of fines were not proportionate to the severity of the offending,
and could not achieve any meaningful
level of deterrence or punishment,
particularly in light of the available maximum penalty:
[F]or certain situations fines are not high enough and people just pay them and
(Survey Participant (gender unspecified, 25–34))
The fines are far too low, especially when illegal workplace conduct leads to
the death or work ceasing injury of an employee.
(Survey Participant (male,
They are not enough of a punishment or deterrent.
(Survey Participant (male,
The victims of life altering injuries will never feel they are vindicated or
heard if the fines aren’t prohibitive.
(Survey Participant (female,
Why is the average for a fatality so low when the maximum could be $1.7
(Survey Participant (female, 35–44))
Although the range of the fines seems fair, the maximum fine is rarely imposed.
In particular when there are injuries, sometimes
[this] could be insulting
[considering] the fine imposed in cases when workers have lost limbs or would
live with a permanent disability.
(Survey Participant (female,
were a handful of respondents who thought fine values were either set at
appropriate levels or set too high. One said that the
high rate at which fines
aren’t paid is indicative that they are too
another pointed to the
current challenging economic conditions as a reason to avoid higher
Stakeholder views: written submissions
majority of written submissions expressed a view that fine amounts for OHS
offences are too low.
primary motivations for advocating an increase in the values of fines imposed
for OHS offences were a perception that doing so
would increase the deterrent
value of those fines and to better ensure the punishment was proportionate to
the offending. For instance:
[f]ines in OHS sentencing are so low that employers who fail in their duties to
protect their workers can afford to kill, injure,
or maim their employees
without real deterrent. Fines have not only stagnated in the past decade, but
they have gone backwards. From
2005–2013, the average fine for companies
in the Magistrates’ Court was $40,000, compared to the average fine in the
period of 2013–2021 of only $20,000. This drop is further intensified when
considering the rate of inflation during this period
... Fines for OHS offences
must be increased across the board, to ensure appropriate punishment, deter
would-be offenders, and meet
community expectations. Countless reviews into OHS
sentencing have found that the level of fines historically handed down for
of the OHS Act do not act as an adequate deterrent.
(Submission 8
(Victorian Trades Hall Council))
In our experience, client families often do not agree with the level of fines
and are confused as to why courts hand down ‘lenient’
sentences in
their situation ... Uniting is in agreement with the widely accepted view that:
“Fines for OHS offences are too
low to change companies’
behaviour” and, as a consequence, does little to deter the same offender
or others from engaging
in similar conduct. Our position is based on
Uniting’s experience delivering the GriefWork program and the concerns
by the many bereaved families we assist in their recovery from grief and
loss ... When sentencing for OHS offences are too low and
families do not see
their expectation for justice being served, they are at risk of being
re-traumatised by what they see as offenders
getting off lightly.
(Submission
9 (Uniting Vic.Tas))
The AMWU identifies a need to increase fine amounts for OHS ... offences in
certain cases. This could be particularly important in
cases where the
violations have resulted in serious injuries or fatalities. Increasing fines in
these situations may serve as a stronger
deterrent and emphasize the
significance of maintaining a safe work environment.
(Submission 6
(Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union))
Law Institute of Victoria also suggested that fines would seem to need to
increase, particularly in specific cases, ‘such
as severe breaches ...
[and] for larger scale organisations (to achieve a deterrent
all organisations, however, shared the view that there was a need to increase
fine amounts. The Victorian Automotive Chamber of
Commerce wrote that ‘the
courts already have a broad discretion in determining appropriate sentencing
outcomes, consistent
with overarching sentencing principles – and in
VACC’s view, generally get it
Similarly, the
Housing Industry Association said that increasing fine amounts for OHS offences
was ‘not justified’ because
current fine amounts, which are
routinely only a fraction of the available maximum, show that ‘there is
already wide scope
for the courts to impose higher fines if they consider it
appropriate to do so’.
The Victorian Congress of Employer Associations wrote that ‘[t]here is no
basis to conclude that even higher penalties ...
[are] merited or
necessary’.
was an even stronger majority of views, including from both unions and employer
representatives, that there should be greater
use of sentencing orders other
than fines.
The motivation
for advocating increased use of other sentencing orders, especially health and
safety undertakings with behavioural-type
conditions, was that these sentencing
orders would have tangible benefits to health and safety outcomes, either for an
organisation
or for a broader industry. For example:
we believe other orders should be used more frequently, particularly OHS
undertakings ... We think other types of orders are a key
component of
supporting industry to break the plateau, and indeed in Victoria the increase,
in negative OHS outcomes seen in recent
(Submission 19 (Australian
Institute of Health and Safety))
options for better outcomes could be courts having the power to issue a mix of
sentencing orders. This could be a combination of
orders that, together with a
fine, amount to a more substantial sentence. An example might be verified
investments in rectifications
necessary to make the workplace safe, plus
repairing the social harm through compensation or relevant good works in their
or in the community in which they have a presence.
(Submission 9
(Uniting Vic.Tas))
Ai Group is of the view that these alternatives to sentencing provide much
greater opportunities to improve health and safety outcomes[.]
(Submission 4
(Australian Industry Group))
HIA is supportive of rehabilitation of the offender, rather than a fine, and
that ... should take precedence over other sentencing
options. HIA considers
that rehabilitation through adjourned undertakings and health and safety
undertakings in lieu of other sentencing
options should be used more frequently.
(Submission 1 (Housing Industry Association))
it is arguable that our apparent and heavy reliance on what appears to be a
“financial only” penalty punishment regime,
under our OHS
legislative framework, is not only inadequate, but it miserably fails ... the
primary purpose of OHS prosecution ...
[which is] deterrence.
(Submission 5
(Construction, Forestry and Maritime Employees Union))
[injured workers and the families of deceased workers] believed the sentences
imposed by the court, usually fines, were an inadequate
response, and not
sufficient to send a strong enough message to industry, or to ensure the
necessary changes would be made in the
workplace. They felt that fines could be
readily absorbed by a business, and did not necessarily lead to any genuine
insight on the
employer’s part about the full impact of the incident or
the importance of maintaining safe work practices.
(Submission 16 (RMIT
Centre for Innovative Justice))
was no opposition to the increased use of alternative sentencing orders in OHS
cases (that is, orders other than fines). The
Victorian Automotive Chamber of
Commerce and Victorian Congress of Employer Associations did, however, note that
‘[j]udicial
officers already have the discretion to apply various
sentencing options’ under the
Their view suggests
that there is no need for legislative reform to the available orders, but no
comment was made on their current
The Council’s view: there is a need to change sentencing
balance of feedback presented above shows that there is substantial community
dissatisfaction with current sentencing practices
for OHS offences, with respect
to both the range of orders being utilised to deal with offending and the
severity of fine amounts
when fines are imposed.
3.43 Based on
this feedback, we have reached the view that sentencing practices for OHS
offences, in particular, breach of duty offences
involving companies (especially
larger companies), are inadequate, in that current sentencing practices fail to
consider the potential
to achieve more positive OHS outcomes with non-fine
sentencing orders, fail to appropriately punish offending in a proportionate
manner, and are not capable of achieving meaningful deterrence.
conclusions, we note, are not new. As we said in our
Consultation
sentencing practices for OHS offences have been the subject of
a number of reviews over the past 30
Those past reviews
have consistently found that:
amounts have stubbornly remained at levels that are unlikely to deter unsafe
work practices;
should make greater use of sentencing options other than
penalties for OHS offences are too
3.45 Our review
has shown that these views remain prevalent among the community and key
stakeholders. We approached our recommendations
can be appropriately reformed mindful that past recommendations have not
significantly changed sentencing
practices, suggesting that there is a need for
innovative reform ideas. The changes that we believe are necessary include:
increased use of
sentencing orders other than fines;
a higher maximum
penalty for breach of duty offences to accommodate worst-case instances of those
clearer guidance
to sentencing OHS offending;
clearer guidance
clearer guidance
sentencing OHS offending;
an increase in
fine amounts in OHS cases generally, but especially in cases involving more
serious offending by larger companies;
mechanisms that
ensure courts are informed about the financial circumstances of companies so
that they can calibrate the penalty imposed
to the company’s
3.46 In the
Consultation Paper
, we proposed a number of possible mechanisms for
changing sentencing practices, including:
increasing the
maximum penalties for OHS offences;
introducing
mandatory or presumptive sentences for OHS offences;
introducing
standard sentences for OHS offences;
the Director of
Public Prosecutions or Attorney-General seeking a guideline judgment from the
Court of Appeal;
the Court of
Appeal issuing an ‘uplift’ judgment;
establishing a
sentencing guidelines council that could develop sentencing guidelines that
courts would take into account; and
introducing
a legislated sentencing guideline into the
further noted that a number of these potential reforms were likely to be
ineffective, not practically workable, or lacking stakeholder
support. Those
included mandatory sentences, the introduction of standard sentences for OHS
offences, a guideline or uplift judgment
from the Court of Appeal, and the
establishment of a sentencing guidelines
The stakeholder
3.48 Ultimately,
we have come to the view that the package of reforms required to change
sentencing practices for OHS offences includes:
making some
legislative revisions to the health and safety undertaking provisions of the
introducing policies that provide guidance around, and encourage (via sentencing
submissions) increased use of, health and
safety undertakings as well as adverse
publicity orders;
increasing the
maximum penalties for breach of duty offences, in part to reflect community
views on the seriousness of these offences,
and also to ensure that courts have
wider discretion;
revising the
section 32 reckless endangerment offence to ensure consistency and clarity in
the offence and penalty hierarchy; and
introducing an
Australian-first legislated sentencing guideline to transform how Victorian
courts sentence OHS offences.
3.49 We address
each of these in turn below.
Rethinking health and safety undertakings
health and safety undertaking is a type of sentencing order available under
section 137 of the
. It allows a court sentencing an offender for
an OHS offence to adjourn the case for up to two years in return for the
offender giving
an undertaking to fulfil certain conditions. Health and safety
undertakings require the offender not to commit further OHS offences,
fulfil any special conditions set by the
3.51 Health and
safety undertakings were introduced as part of the
as a result of
Occupational Health and Safety Act
), in which Maxwell wrote that:
[T]he availability of undertakings as a sentencing option in OHS prosecutions
should not be confined to “lower order”
breaches. The conditions
imposed in undertakings have the potential to significantly improve standards by
requiring dutyholders to
adopt a systematic approach to health and safety. The
main advantage of health and safety undertakings is that the terms of the
undertaking
can be tailored to suit the particular circumstances and can bring
or at least
encourage future compliance with the
3.52 Before
proceeding, we note that health and safety undertakings share significant
similarities with two other kinds of ‘undertakings’:
undertakings and enforceable undertakings. It’s important to mention both
because they offer useful points of comparison,
and because health and safety
undertakings are a distinct sentencing order.
undertakings are a sentencing order available under the
They require the
offender to be of good behaviour for the duration of the order, and may also
require the offender to comply with
certain additional conditions, such as
making a charitable donation or participating in a rehabilitation program. The
differences
between adjourned undertakings and health and safety undertakings
are (1) health and safety undertakings are only available for OHS
whereas adjourned undertakings are available for all offences, (2) health and
safety undertakings have a maximum adjournment
period of two years, whereas for
adjourned undertakings it is five years, and (3) the maximum penalty for
companies contravening
health and safety undertakings is 50 penalty units
(currently just under $10,000), compared to 10 penalty units for contraventions
of adjourned undertakings (currently just under
Enforceable
undertakings are agreements entered into between WorkSafe and those who are
alleged to have contravened the
regulations.
They involve the
person or company giving an undertaking to comply with certain conditions over a
specified period of time. Enforceable
undertakings can be entered into either
before or during criminal proceedings. If they are entered into during criminal
proceedings,
those proceedings are discontinued, and can only be reinstated if
the person fails to comply with the
undertaking.
The differences
between enforceable undertakings and health and safety undertakings include (1)
there is no specified maximum duration
for enforceable undertakings, whereas it
is two years for health and safety undertakings, (2) health and safety
undertakings are
sentencing orders of the court, whereas enforceable
undertakings are effectively a diversionary initiative outside the court
meaning there is no finding of guilt, and (3) the maximum penalty for
companies contravening an enforceable undertaking is 2,500
penalty units
(currently just under $500,000), which is 50 times higher than the maximum
penalty for contravening a health and safety
undertaking (50 penalty units, or
currently just under
Prevalence of undertakings in OHS cases
Statistical Report
, we found that
undertakings
were imposed in
11% of all OHS cases.
were especially prevalent in the Magistrates’ Court, where they were
imposed in 7% of cases involving companies, and 16%
of cases involving
individuals.
They were less
prevalent in the higher courts (just 1% of
3.56 While it is
possible to impose a fine
in addition to
an undertaking, there were no
cases in the 16-year period to 30 June 2021 in which a court sentenced an OHS
offender to both an undertaking
and a fine.
Conditions of undertakings in OHS cases
is no exhaustive list of conditions that a court can attach to a health and
safety undertaking; however, some examples in the
engaging a consultant to assist with OHS matters, developing and implementing a
systematic approach to managing risks to
health or safety, and arranging an
audit of the offender’s compliance with the health and safety
undertaking.
While there is
broad discretion to impose these sorts of behavioural conditions on OHS
offenders, we found in our
Consultation Paper
that undertakings in OHS
cases almost exclusively involve a single additional condition of making a
donation to a charity or to the
Court Fund, which is used for charitable
Comparing with enforceable undertakings
way of comparison with health and safety undertakings, enforceable undertakings
entered into with WorkSafe involve far more
imaginative conditions that are
driven towards improving safety outcomes in an organisation or industry. Some
common conditions in
the 62 available enforceable undertakings that have been
entered into since the
came into effect include:
an OHS manager (usually on a full-time
a third party for a specified period to conduct OHS audits, and to review and
develop policies and
procedures;
donations to OHS peak
a safety campaign, such as one involving distribution of brochures to business
and residential premises within a five-kilometre
radius of the person’s
into a sponsorship agreement with a charity or not-for-profit organisation to
organise pre-workforce seminars that educate
youth about safe work
context-specific safety devices, such as industrial
Durations of undertakings in OHS cases
of the undertakings imposed in OHS cases had a specified duration of between
more than six months and 12 months (71%) (Figure
9). The vast majority of these
undertakings had a duration of precisely 12
All of the 15 cases
in which the undertaking spanned 18–24 months involved corporate
offenders. We note, however, that the
durations of these orders are likely to
have been driven by the conditions of the undertaking. Given that the only
conditions of
undertakings in OHS cases tend to require the offender to be of
good behaviour and make a charitable donation, there would likely
be no need for
longer undertakings. If, however, there is a shift towards more behavioural
conditions in undertakings, it may be
necessary to allow longer periods for
offenders to fully comply with those conditions.
Durations of undertakings imposed in OHS cases, July 2005–June 2021 (135
Number of cases
More than 18 months to 24 months
More than 12 months to 18 months
More than 6 months to 12 months
6 months or less
Orders to undertake improvement projects
form of sentencing order currently available in OHS cases is an order under
section 136 of the
to undertake improvement projects. This
section allows a court to ‘make an order requiring the offender to
undertake a specified
project for the general improvement of occupational
health, safety and welfare within the period specified in the
The court may
not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that the costs of
complying would not exceed the maximum
penalty that the court could otherwise
came into effect, orders to undertake improvement projects have almost never
been utilised in sentencing OHS offenders in Victoria.
this year, the County Court, on its own motion, considered imposing an order to
undertake an improvement
The offender, a
self-employed plasterer, had failed to ensure that a Safe Work Method Statement
was in place for high-risk construction
work being undertaken by a labourer. The
labourer in that case fell from a height and died from their injuries. The
proposed order
involved the offender attending TAFE colleges to share the story
of the offending and his subsequent prosecution. The intent of such
would have been to ‘contribute to general deterrence by spreading the
message about the importance of workplace
offender’s ‘real life experience’ was considered to be
‘invaluable’ in shaping the minds of other
young people who were
themselves about to form part of the industry, and therefore able to influence
work safety.
However, while
the offender was willing to undertake such a project, the prosecution opposed
it, advocating instead for a community
correction order or a substantial fine
with conviction.
concluded that, in the absence of support from WorkSafe, the state’s OHS
regulator, such an improvement project would
The Council’s view
was strong stakeholder support for increased use of health and safety
undertakings in OHS cases, including from legal professionals,
employer representatives. There was also substantial use of such orders in our
community consultation events, with participants
clarifying that they would
impose behavioural conditions on such orders, not simply charitable donation
conditions. We agree with
the resounding feedback from experts and the
community. Health and safety undertakings have an untapped potential to
contribute to
more positive OHS outcomes in the future, and fundamentally align
with the underlying objectives of the
In addition, the
wide range of possible conditions of a health and safety undertaking means that
a health and safety undertaking
can achieve various sentencing purposes,
including just punishment, deterrence, rehabilitation and/or community
protection. Moreover,
the imposition of a health and safety undertaking does not
prevent the court from imposing a combination sentence, involving both
and safety undertaking and a fine.
3.63 Why, then,
are health and safety undertakings so underutilised? We believe there are a
number of reasons:
First, in the
community consultation sessions we heard consistent concerns that undertakings
simply put the offender in the position
that they should have been in prior to
the OHS offence. As a result, there is a perception that health and safety
undertakings are
penalty than a fine is. This is a valid
concern, which is why the prosecution and courts should be mindful to ensure
that any conditions
of a health and safety undertaking imposed in an OHS case
are ‘above and beyond’ whatever steps the offender should have
so as to not contravene the
Second, none of
the parties involved in criminal proceedings for OHS offences have been
advocating for the use of such orders. Given
the potential costs of implementing
special conditions of health and safety undertakings, and noting the current
values of fines
imposed for OHS offences, there is currently very little
incentive for an OHS offender to suggest an undertaking to the court as
sentencing order. An undertaking would almost certainly be more expensive and
onerous for the offender than whatever fine
might be imposed. Further, the
courts should not be expected to develop and craft conditions that will improve
safety practices in
an organisation or industry; it would be unreasonable to
expect judicial officers to have the expertise to do so. Instead, the
responsibility
for defining the nature of a health and safety undertaking and
its conditions, as well as discussing the draft undertaking with the
and the court, should rest with WorkSafe, as Victoria’s expert safety
regulator and prosecutor. It is possible that
some of the barriers to WorkSafe
advocating for such orders are the relatively short maximum duration (two years)
to carry out more
complex activities and the relatively minor penalty for
contravention (50 penalty units – although the offender is also liable
be resentenced for their original offending).
and significantly, health and safety undertakings cannot be imposed without the
offender’s consent. This is because it
can only be imposed if the offender
‘giv[es] an undertaking’. While the term
undertaking
defined in the
, section 137 was intentionally designed to
cross-references
adjourned undertaking provisions of the
Sentencing Act
, which defines
undertaking
as ‘a written undertaking by the
3.64 We believe
there are a number of reforms that could overcome these barriers and better
incentivise the use of health and safety
undertakings in a wider range of OHS
cases. In part, this would require fine amounts in OHS cases to increase
substantially to ensure
that fines do not continue to be far less expensive and
onerous sentencing outcomes than undertakings in OHS cases. Our proposals
addressing this, namely through increases in maximum penalties and the
introduction of a legislated sentencing guideline, are
discussed below. More
specifically though, there are a number of legislative revisions that we believe
would be necessary to better
enable the use of health and safety undertakings.
Just as importantly, we believe WorkSafe should develop a policy that ensures
prosecutors actively advocate for health and safety undertakings with
behavioural conditions in OHS cases.
Removing the requirement of offender consent
a number of other contexts, there is no precondition for offender consent prior
to courts imposing sentencing orders with behavioural
conditions for regulatory
offending. These include various orders under the
Environment Protection Act
orders under the model laws adopted in other Australian
orders to undertake improvement projects under section 136 of the
3.66 We see no
reason why health and safety undertakings in Victoria uniquely allow companies
to simply refuse to be subject to such
an order. We are of the view that the
requirement for an offender to give consent should be removed from health and
safety undertakings.
Removing this significant barrier to their imposition would
likely lead to an increase in their use. It may also lead to greater
sophistication in their conditions, by incentivising prosecutors to make
submissions to sentencing courts about the potential conditions
of such orders.
The conditions would, of course, still need to be considered feasible. Given
this proposed change, we also suggest
that health and safety
undertakings
be renamed as health and safety
The maximum duration of a health and safety undertaking
noted above, health and safety undertakings have a maximum duration of two
years. This is much shorter than the five-year duration
recommended in the
Maxwell Review
also much shorter than the five-year duration allowed for adjourned undertakings
It is not clear why
the maximum term is just two years. Given that we envisage a wider use of health
and safety undertakings, with
conditions that may take time to implement, we
believe it is appropriate to align the maximum duration of these orders with the
duration of adjourned undertakings (and community correction
, consistent with the recommendation in the
Special conditions of health and safety undertakings
noted above (at [3.60]–[3.61]), in addition to allowing courts to impose
health and safety undertakings as sentencing
outcomes in OHS cases, the
allows courts to make orders to undertake improvement projects. There is
significant overlap between orders to undertake improvement
projects and health
and safety undertakings, especially given that the special conditions of
undertakings can include any conditions
the court deems appropriate, including
orders to undertake improvement projects. We see no reason to maintain two
distinct sentencing
orders, and would instead recommend that specific orders to
undertake improvement projects be removed as an option, and that those
should instead be treated as special conditions of health and safety
undertakings in appropriate cases. In particular, we
recommend repealing section
and revising section 137(3) to specify that health and
safety undertakings can include a condition to undertake a specified project
the general improvement of occupational health, safety and welfare (using the
same language that currently appears in section
also believe the non-exhaustive list of special conditions in section 137(3)
needs a further minor revision; it is curiously limited
to ‘an offender
’ (emphasis added). We see no reason why the
potential conditions listed could not also apply to other offenders sentenced
OHS offences, such as managers or controllers
of a workplace,
self-employed persons
or designers
of plant or equipment. This
change would be consistent with the original draft of this provision in the
Maxwell Review
(which only specified ‘the offender’, not
‘the employer’)
and more importantly would provide clarity about the intended application of
those potential conditions.
Revising penalties for contravention of health and safety
undertakings
138(c) of the
sets a maximum penalty of 50 penalty units (less
than $10,000) for companies that contravene a health and safety undertaking, and
10 penalty units (just under $2,000) for
individuals.
also adopts various provisions in the
Sentencing Act
relating to
contraventions,
section 83AT
Sentencing Act
, which specifies that if a person is
found guilty of contravening an undertaking, the court can cancel the original
sentence and
resentence them
accordingly.
companies and individuals who do not comply with a health and safety undertaking
risk being resentenced to a more severe
sentence, in addition to whatever
penalty might be imposed for the contravention offence.
3.71 The maximum
penalty for a contravention offence should be capable of ensuring compliance
with the original order. For large companies,
the potential threat of
resentencing is significant, but it is difficult to see how they would view the
maximum fine of less than
$10,000 for a contravention offence as any real
3.72 By way of
contrast, the maximum penalty for contravening an enforceable undertaking is
much higher than that for contravening
a health and safety undertaking, at 2,500
penalty units (almost $500,000) for companies and 500 penalty units (almost
$100,000) for
individuals. We see no reason why contraventions of enforceable
undertakings – which can also result in criminal proceedings
reinstituted – should carry potential penalties that are so much more
severe than the penalties for contraventions of
health and safety undertakings,
particularly given the latter are court orders. We therefore recommend revising
section 138
to align the maximum penalty for contraventions of health and safety
undertakings with the maximum fine for contravening an enforceable
undertaking.
Recommendation 4: Reforming health and safety
undertakings
The Victorian Government should amend the
Occupational Health and Safety
(orders to undertake improvement projects);
to remove the need for offenders to give an undertaking, and rename these as
‘health and safety orders’;
to allow health and safety orders to run for a period of up to five
to clarify that the special conditions listed can be imposed on any
offender, not just employers;
to include a further special condition ‘to undertake a specified
project for the general improvement of occupational health,
safety and welfare
within the period specified in the order’; and
to specify that the maximum penalty for contravening a health and safety
order is 2,500 penalty units for a body corporate, and 500
penalty units for an
individual.
Increased use of health and safety undertakings
discussed above (at [3.44]–[3.45]), there was widespread support for
health and safety undertakings being used more
often in OHS cases, both as an
alternative to fines, and as an order imposed in addition to a fine. This was
apparent in survey responses,
community consultation results, and written
submissions from stakeholders. Having canvassed the legislative reforms to the
and safety undertaking provisions, we now consider how to bring about
increased use of undertakings in appropriate cases.
the roles of the various parties in court, we believe WorkSafe is in the best
position to advocate for undertakings in appropriate
cases, including the
recommended conditions of those undertakings. WorkSafe is a seasoned prosecuting
agency, with expertise in workplace
health and safety, the ability to make
sentencing submissions to the court, and experience in negotiating conditions of
enforceable
undertakings. Indeed, in its submission, WorkSafe noted that its
knowledge of conditions of enforceable undertakings, which it routinely
negotiates, would likely ‘be beneficial ... when considering ... health
and safety undertaking
conditions’.
currently has a number of policies relating to its role as an enforcement
agency. These include policies on enforceable
undertakings,
and OHS compliance
and enforcement more
There is, however,
currently no dedicated policy on health and safety undertakings. We believe a
policy on this topic would have
the potential to (a) encourage prosecutors to
make submissions, in appropriate cases, that an undertaking would be
appropriate, (b)
provide defendants and others with transparency about the
criteria that WorkSafe will apply when considering whether to seek an
undertaking,
and even (c) include guidance about the potential conditions of
undertakings. We therefore recommend such a policy be developed,
and published
on WorkSafe’s website.
Recommendation 5: Increased use of
health and safety undertakings
WorkSafe Victoria should develop a policy relating to health and safety
undertakings pursuant to
section 137
Occupational Health and Safety
(Vic) that (a) specifies criteria for deciding whether to recommend
that a sentencing court consider imposing an undertaking, including
conditions of such an undertaking, and (b) encourages the increased use of
undertakings in appropriate cases.
Resourcing implications for monitoring health and safety
undertakings
legislative functions include monitoring compliance with sentencing orders such
as health and safety
undertakings.
We are mindful
that a greater use of health and safety undertakings would translate to an
increased workload for WorkSafe, which
would have resourcing implications.
Equally though, the package of reforms proposed in this report will result in
larger fines, and
higher payment rates for fines, which, consistent with our
recommendation below (and consistent with the vast majority of cases presently),
would all go into the WorkCover Authority Fund. As a whole, we would expect the
resource implications of this monitoring to be outweighed
by the increased
revenue we anticipate from our package of reforms.
Increased use of adverse publicity orders
publicity orders are a sentencing order available under section 135 of the
. An adverse publicity order requires an offender to publicise the
offence, its consequences, the penalty imposed and any other relevant
the general public and/or to a specified person or class of persons. In addition
to the content of the publicity, the
order can specify
that publicity
is to be achieved, in particular, the medium through which that information is
to be disseminated. Adverse publicity
orders can be made on the court’s
own initiative, or on the application of the
prosecutor.
publicity orders were introduced following a recommendation in the 2004
Maxwell Review
, and they were modelled on the New South Wales legislation
in effect at the time.
turn, the 2008 National Review into OHS laws (which led to the model laws
currently adopted in every jurisdiction other than Victoria)
recommended that
adverse publicity orders be one of the sentencing options available to courts
sentencing OHS offences across
it is relatively common for adverse publicity orders to be available in a range
of jurisdictions and legal contexts, particularly
in respect of offences
committed by companies. Adverse publicity orders for OHS offences are available
not only in all Australian
other nations, including New
They are also
available in areas such as consumer
protection,
environmental
protection,
and trade and
Research on the effectiveness of adverse publicity
Court-ordered
publicity dates back to at least the nineteenth
Academic research
has identified a number of possible uses of adverse publicity as a form of
criminal sanction against companies.
First, adverse publicity orders broaden
available sentencing options to promote flexibility in sentencing. Second,
adverse publicity
orders may be a means of inflicting financial damage through
reputational damage that impacts on economic
Third and perhaps
most significantly, adverse publicity bears on corporate prestige in a way that
monetary penalties cannot, potentially
achieving an enhanced form of deterrence
and punishment.
adverse publicity may be another tool for educating industry and the wider
community about OHS-related risk, the requirements
of the law, and the criminal
justice response to
particularly in
growing industries and for newly emerging risks to health and
Maxwell Review
noted that ‘employers – particularly
medium-sized and large employers – are placing increasing importance on
establishing
a reputation as “a safe
employer”’.
Review referred to research findings that, ‘for larger organisations,
corporate image and credibility ranked second as
a motivator behind
regulation-related
motivators’.
2001 KPMG survey of 400 managers, which found that, while other factors –
such as moral responsibility, regulatory
requirements and commercial factors
– carried greater weight in their decision-making, 86% of managers
nevertheless agreed
that their safety record affected their personal
reputation.
2020 study considered the effect of adverse publicity within a particular
The study found
that the publication of violations of health and safety laws had measurable
positive effects on specific deterrence.
Publication of violations also improved
general deterrence, in that publication led to other facilities improving their
compliance, especially those in the same
geographic location
This effect was amplified in workplaces that had strong worker representation
and bargaining power, which enabled workers to leverage
that adverse publicity.
Adverse publicity was also found to be an important and strong complement to the
deterrent effect of inspections
by the regulator, especially within a defined
Current use of adverse publicity orders
noted in our
Consultation Paper
that adverse publicity orders were
extremely rare in OHS cases in Victoria, with just a single case resulting in an
adverse publicity
order between the commencement of the
and the publication of the
Consultation Paper
That case involved a
fatality and serious injury during training at a horse-racing club. The court
made an adverse publicity order
on its own motion, and specified content that
needed to be published in an edition of an industry-specific horse-racing
then, there has been one other adverse publicity order imposed in the County
Court, in the case of
DPP v Yarra Valley Park Lane Holiday Park Pty Ltd
in November 2024.
involved a commercial caravan park at which a falling tree branch struck and
killed a patron sleeping in one of the park’s
campsites. The County Court
commented that courts, in appropriate cases, ‘should play an active role
in ensuring that the results
of cases are generally known to promote general
deterrence by requiring offenders themselves to publicise the
3.85 The order
required the offending company to publish a notice in an online newsletter
administered by the peak body for the Victorian
camping industry. Figure 10
contains the full wording of the notice.
Figure 10: Adverse
publicity order imposed in
DPP v Yarra Valley Park Lane Holiday Park Pty
[2024] VCC 1863
ADVERSE PUBLICITY ORDER PURSUANT TO
OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND
SAFETY ACT 2004
DPP v Yarra Valley PARK LANE HOLIDAY PARK PTY LTD
On 13 March 2021, Benjamin Murphy was camping in a tent at the Big 4 Yarra
Valley Holiday Park in Healesville (
). The Park, which was a
workplace under the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
), was operated by Yarra Valley Park Lane Holiday Park Pty Ltd
Yarra Valley
). Mr Murphy’s campsite was surrounded by large trees.
During the night, a tree branch broke off one of those trees and fell
ground landing on the tent. Mr Murphy, who was asleep, sustained fatal injuries
in the accident.
The circumstances of the accident were investigated by WorkSafe Victoria. As
a result of that investigation, on 28 April 2022 Yarra
Valley was charged with
an offence against s 26 of the OHS Act. Section 26 of the OHS Act requires a
person in control of a workplace
to ensure, so far as reasonably practicable,
that the workplace is safe and without risks to health.
The charge brought against Yarra Valley alleged that there was a risk at the
Park that a large tree branch or tree limb (or both)
could break from a tree,
fall to the ground and seriously injure or kill a person below. In order to
control the risk, Yarra Valley
was charged that it (a) should have engaged an
arborist to undertake an annual assessment of the trees at the Park and (b)
have followed any recommendations made by the arborist.
Yarra Valley contested the charge. Following a three week trial in August
2024, Yarra Valley was found guilty of the charge by a County
Court of Victoria
jury. The jury concluded that Yarra Valley had failed to comply with its duty
under s 26 of the OHS Act as the
manager of the Park to take all reasonably
practicable steps to ensure that the Park was safe and without risks to
On 22 November 2024, the County Court of Victoria fined Yarra Valley $475,000
with conviction and ordered it to publicise the offence
and the penalty imposed
in the form of this Notice.
The Court was not satisfied that Yarra Valley’s breach of the OHS Act
caused the death of Mr Murphy.
3.86 While the
parties did not oppose the making of an order, they disputed its wording. The
prosecution argued that the order should
refer to (a) the incident that led to
the fatality and the subsequent investigation and prosecution, (b) the remorse
on the part
of the offender and (c) the financial and reputational damage to the
offender resulting from the trial and penalty. The defence,
in turn, argued that
any reference to the incident would suggest that the offender was responsible
the death (which the evidence did not establish beyond
reasonable doubt), and that any expression of remorse would be inappropriate,
given the offender pleaded not guilty and went to trial.
3.87 The court
ultimately concluded that it was necessary for the notice to refer to the
incident (in the beginning paragraph of the
notice) to provide essential context
for readers, while separately clarifying that the court found that the
offender’s breach
did not, at law, cause the death of the camper. The
court also accepted that any expression of remorse would, in the circumstances,
‘lack any genuineness’. Finally, the notice did not refer to
financial or reputational damage, as the court did not receive
any evidence on
Terms of enforceable undertakings
adverse publicity orders seem to be extremely rare as a sentencing order in OHS
cases, there have been some enforceable
undertakings that have contained
conditions akin to adverse publicity orders. For example:
an advertisement regarding the company’s contravention in local newspapers
as well as in an industry-specific
newsletter;
and publishing articles in industry association newsletters and regional
newspapers regarding specific risk scenarios,
including the dangers associated
with working at height
working with plant;
content regarding the importance of water safety, and disseminating it to
schools and other public bodies via online/digital
publications and
and delivering a scalable presentation to secondary-school students, on the cusp
of entering the workforce, about the nature
of workplace risks;
the terms of the enforceable undertaking to be disseminated among, and read by,
all employees of the defendant
Adverse publicity orders in New South Wales OHS cases
adverse publicity orders are still not common, there have been a number of
recent examples of these orders in OHS cases in New
In those cases, the
prosecution applied for the order and proposed the content for publication. This
content typically includes the
offender’s name, the offences in the case,
the circumstances of the offending, and the penalty imposed. Just as
importantly,
the prosecution also specified the intended medium of the
publication, including in
industry-specific
publications.
The prosecution
also explained to the court why they considered that an adverse publicity order
would be appropriate,
they chose the particular medium for publication.
3.90 Courts in
New South Wales have indicated that adverse publicity orders can be made on two
main grounds: either promotion of the
objects of the
Work Health and Safety
(NSW) or promotion of the purposes of sentencing, in particular,
deterrence and denunciation. For example, in
SafeWork NSW v Investa Asset
Management Pty Ltd
, the court wrote that:
I am satisfied that the adverse publicity order is warranted in this case for
the following reasons. First, the objects of the Act
include protecting workers
through the elimination or minimisation of risks arising from work ... and
securing compliance with the
Act through effective and appropriate compliance
and enforcement measures. One way of promoting those objects is to publicise how
risks can be eliminated and where a risk exists, how the enforcement measures in
the Act operate to deal with [an offender].
Second, the purposes of sentencing include deterrence and denunciation of the
conduct of the offender. General deterrence cannot
be achieved without some
publication of the sentencing outcomes for similar offences. The proposed
adverse publicity order is specifically
targeted [at] a class of persons who are
in a position to commit similar offences, by failing to ensure that plant such
as [a building
maintenance unit] is maintained in accordance with the Australian
Standard. Further, the adverse publicity order will denounce conduct
offender. This is important in the ordinary way and also to indicate that in a
strict liability offence even a comprehensive
system needs to be reviewed to
ensure that important safety measures do not slip through the
SafeWork NSW v Saunders Civilbuild Pty Ltd [No 2]
, the court said that
an adverse publicity order was warranted because it furthered the objectives of
both sentencing and OHS legislation
in New South Wales, the cost involved was
relatively modest, and it would be helpful for details of the company’s
‘to reach a wider
is also at least one example from New South Wales in which a court refused to
impose an adverse publicity
The court in that case
considered that the wording of the notice, while consistent with previous
adverse publicity orders, was ‘too
formal and may not be readily
understood by its target audience’, which was readers of two local
regional newspapers.
court also said that publishing a notice in the local newspapers was
‘unlikely to reach the target audience in a way sufficient
to further the
objectives of the Act or the purposes of
sentencing’.
Community consultation responses
our community consultation events, we asked participants whether, in sentencing
their case, they would impose an adverse publicity
order. Overall, 70% of
participants chose to impose an adverse publicity order in the case they were
asked to sentence (Figure 11).
All of these participants imposed the order
to another penalty (such as a fine or an undertaking), as they did
not believe that the adverse publicity order by itself could wholly
their primary penalty.
Figure 11: Community consultation
responses (adverse publicity orders)
Would you make an adverse publicity order? (50 participants)
Participants
Daylight Solar
Brick & Mortar
3.94 Interestingly,
the rate of use of adverse publicity orders by participants was higher in the
case involving the large national
company (75%), compared to the small company
(57%). The size of the company and the scale of its operations were cited as
particularly
relevant factors in participants’ decision-making process in
both cases, with the implication being that larger entities have
prominent reputation that may be meaningfully penalised through an adverse
publicity order:
I think for a big company, the fine is barely a drop in the bucket, but what
they will care about is the publicity, and having to
put something in the
newspaper, saying we killed a worker, we did the wrong thing. I think
that’s going to be much more concerning
to their management, directors and
shareholders than anything else a court can impose.
(Community Consultation
Participant, Shepparton (23 February 2024))
I’d just stick with the undertaking and get more social utility out of
that in this instance than an [adverse publicity order]
... An [adverse
publicity order] is more for the reputational risk, for big companies.
(Community Consultation Participant, Ballarat (19 February 2024))
asked what the primary purpose of sentencing should be in OHS cases, 43% of
participants nominated general deterrence, 27% nominated
specific deterrence,
12% nominated denunciation and 18% nominated one of punishment, community
protection, or rehabilitation of the
offender (6%
participants viewed adverse publicity orders as aimed at achieving the purposes
of just punishment and community protection:
A fine’s a blunt instrument, and in large part comes down to capacity to
pay. But if it comes down to reputational damage,
adverse publicity orders can
address that. It can also be a restorative justice opportunity to educate [and]
give back if properly
targeted. It can be an opportunity to creatively make
workplaces safer.
(Community Consultation Participant, Melbourne (22 March
For me ... the reason I [chose an] adverse [publicity order] is purely that I
would actually be encouraging anyone not to work there
ever, because it’s
quite obvious that they don’t care about safety and their people. If
they’ve done it before
... I just think that I’d be saying, well, do
you really want to work for this company?
(Community Consultation
Participant, Shepparton (23 February 2024))
I think something where they can actually find out something about this company
quite easily would be a good way for other companies
to engage companies with
... better ethics.
(Community Consultation Participant, Bendigo (26 February
In the case of somebody looking for a subcontractor to perform tasks - put the
notice wherever they would find an advertised contractor.
Consultation Participant, Bendigo (26 February 2024))
3.97 However,
others focused on other potential outcomes, particularly in respect of achieving
positive awareness about OHS-related
issues, and the rehabilitation of
It can be a positive message.
(Community Consultation Participant, Ballarat
(19 February 2024))
It has the potential to be really educational. What would [the offender] want to
say if you were trying to convince others to be
[safer] ... so, someone who
would work with the company in writing that, and probably someone with some
counselling experience, because
once it goes out there – family, friends,
and everybody sees it, and people deal with it differently, and you don’t
it to cause more harm. You want it to be a good experience and a positive
experience. So I really think that it has potential.
(Community Consultation
Participant, Shepparton (23 February 2024))
[M]ake [the offender] take out a half-page ad in the relevant paper and show
that they were in the wrong ... not a ‘name and
shame’ as such.
Just, this happened and here it is.
(Community Consultation Participant,
Morwell (21 February 2024))
I’d like the idea of putting an ad in the paper or just, you know, putting
something out there, what they’ve done to
improve, like we’ve been
caught doing this, and this is what we’ve done to improve, [it]
doesn’t have to be a negative
(Community Consultation
Participant, Morwell (21 February 2024))
If it’s available you may as well use it. I think it’s got to be a
combination of both ‘we screwed up’ and
‘here’s how to
do better’ ... I’m mindful of the fact that what this process ... we
are engaged in, is leading
to, and if you want something to change, you’ve
got to do something differently. And so the fact that something has never
before, or very rarely happened before, we’ve got to ask, well,
what is the result that we’re getting with that situation?
And, you know,
I very strongly believe that we need the system to change and change radically.
And that means we’ve got to
do things differently.
Consultation Participant, Geelong (28 February 2024))
3.98 Participants
also considered different ways in which the relevant information could be
publicised:
[You could] require the company to print 1,000 leaflets about how to safely do
roofing and solar and give it to a TAFE ... for their
Consultation Participant, Morwell (21 February 2024))
I’m thinking like universities, training the younger generation.
(Community Consultation Participant, Shepparton (23 February 2024))
Put [adverse publicity orders] underneath every employee’s signature
block, and on physical hoarding on worksites. Also to
put in on their quotes
when they quote for [a] job. ‘Here’s what we did’.
(Community Consultation Participant, Bendigo (26 February 2024))
3.99 Participants
declined to impose an adverse publicity order for a variety of reasons,
including that they might be mischaracterised
by the offender, with the effect
of it actually boosting their reputation; they were redundant or ineffective;
and the offending
was not sufficiently egregious to warrant such a punishment.
Participants stated:
There’s a risk of it potentially improving their reputation.
Consultation Participant, Bendigo (26 February 2024))
My understanding is that most industries ... do share a lot of information. If
there is a construction company for instance that
has a conviction, it’s
pretty widely [and] pretty quickly spread throughout the industry. So, you know,
[it’s] sort of
double dipping really. I don’t know in today’s
day and age, that publicity orders work. Even if you stuck it in the
, people aren’t looking at it.
(Community Consultation
Participant, Lilydale (18 March 2024))
Because how far does it go, and once it’s out there and stays [then] one
day, it’s gone, it’s disappeared, and
it has no impact on the big
(Community Consultation Participant, Dandenong (20 March
It’d have to be a pretty significant gross negligent act that justifies
[making an adverse publicity order].
(Community Consultation Participant,
Geelong (28 February 2024))
Survey responses
of the survey respondents that wanted to see an increased use of sentencing
orders other than fines referred to adverse
publicity orders as an effective
mechanism of achieving punishment and deterrence in certain cases, including
those involving large
If the company is large or is a big corporation this should definitely be used
should be available for public viewing
[emphasis added].
(Survey Participant (female, 25–34))
Unfortunately, prevention measures are often not taken up [un]til the real fear
of the potential punishment is put under their nose
coupled with the fear of
public exposure and accountability
[emphasis added]
Participant (female, 25–34))
[S]howing the general public that offences will be dealt with properly may deter
them from doing it, and also organizations/businesses
may also take greater
steps to ensuring that they or their staff don’t end up in a position to
be prosecuted.
(Survey Participant (female, 35–44))
Absolutely there should be options other than fines. [Undertakings] are somewhat
effective but they should be forced to
advertise guilt
[emphasis added].
(Survey Participant (male, 35–44))
For many companies and directors a financial penalty is not as punitive as
damage to a reputation. I would like the courts to consider
other options and
combine these with a fine.
(Survey Participant (male, 55–64))
Publish the [incident] to the public. This could be a better corrective action,
so the [offender] has greater incentive to maintain
OHS. Public knowledge of the
offender, event, and result. I believe this is the best corrective order.
(Survey Participant (male, 35–44))
3.101 Respondents
also engaged with the issue of effectively communicating the circumstances of
the offending and the sentencing outcome
in the modern media environment:
How are these orders
effectively
communicated? How do they reach the
intended audience – those employers who are dismissive of their OHS
obligations? How do
if no one sees them? It is worth
considering the use of adverse publicity orders in the context of an
employer’s or company’s
Social Licence to Operate. A serious breach
of OHS duties should result in the removal of their Social Licence to Operate
, as they have proven that they cannot do this or are unwilling to
[emphasis added].
(Survey Participant (male, 55–64))
I would be happy to see some Adverse Publicity Orders though, but it would need
to be meaningful in today’s media, not just
one off, not a substitute for
(Survey Participant (female, 55–64))
Stakeholder views
Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union submitted that adverse publicity
orders should be a mandatory sentencing order in
all OHS cases where a
conviction is recorded (as an order imposed in addition to another
It also noted that,
as part of considering alternative sentencing options, community service in
promoting awareness and preventing
future violations had an important role to
play. While such initiatives could form part of a health and safety undertaking
above), they could also viably be part of an adverse publicity order
with bespoke conditions.
Victorian Trades Hall Council (VTHC) said that adverse publicity orders should
play a ‘complementary role within the current
sentencing framework’.
VTHC considered requiring the publication of a company’s or
director’s contraventions of
OHS laws to be a ‘real
deterrent’, especially in cases where offenders are sensitive to
reputational damage (over and
above the financial loss inflicted by a monetary
penalty). It submitted that adverse publicity orders ‘should be dynamic,
and employer specific’, and should be imposed for the purposes of
deterring, denouncing and punishing offending. In VTHC’s
view, adverse
publicity orders could take the form of statements in notable newspapers, on
social media or on the offender’s
website, as well as declarations to
industry bodies, financial institutions or (where relevant) stock
Victorian Congress of Employer Associations submitted that the consequences of
adverse publicity can be significant in some cases,
and that it was important to
have regard to those broader consequences in considering the true punishment
imposed on offenders in
sentencing:
The consequences of an adverse publicity order on named businesses and
individuals can be severe, and the court should consider these
repercussions when deciding whether to issue such an order. This can include a
significant drop in company value due to
a lower share price caused by a loss of
shareholder confidence, a loss of significant contracts stemming from diminished
confidence, or substantial industrial relations disruptions spurred by
a perceived decrease in public and employee support for the
offender. Again,
this can lead to job losses, or failures to hire, as businesses try to manage
through a more adverse operating environment.
While sub-section 135(6) of the
Occupational Health and Safety Act
... stipulates that the court must not issue
an adverse publicity order unless it is satisfied that the costs of compliance
exceed the maximum penalty, this reference pertains only to the direct
costs of complying with the order, not its broader consequences
. (Submission
11 (Victorian Congress of Employer Associations))
concerns were raised in roundtable
consultation:
[The issue] is what is appropriate. Do you know what cases have been targeted
... and why? Is it to do with the degree of culpability
of the defendant? ... Or
is it more a case of ... we’re wanting to send a message to a particular
industry ... not any particular
employer who might have breached their duty via
the nature of the strict liability [offence], rather than there being clear
culpability
[on their part]?
(Participant at Stakeholder Roundtable (12
August 2024))
there was broad support for the increased use of adverse publicity orders in
appropriate cases, particularly to promote an
informed worker and consumer
We’d like to see health and safety more embedded into the mainstream [of
how] businesses think and work. And let the healthier
and safer businesses
thrive, and do really well, and go make profits and have lots of customers buy
their products, and have the
not-so-healthy ones not do as well.
But the key
differentiator in that is customers have to get the information
(Participant at Stakeholder Roundtable (12 August 2024))
I would be in favour of it, but [as orders] in addition [to a penalty]. In our
industry we have a lot of transient workers who are
looking for employment with
another employer in the industry once a project finishes, and they have the
right to know if they’re
applying for a certain position with a certain
company – they can find out the full disclosure of any OHS offences to
an informed decision whether they want to work with that company
(Participant at Stakeholder Roundtable (12 August 2024))
Participants
expected that adverse publicity orders would regularly be contested by
offenders, and it was important for a court to
turn their mind to the extent of
reputational damage that would result from the order, and whether that required
a corresponding
reduction of the penalty to be imposed alongside the
OHS barristers, with whom we consulted on the draft recommendations, expressed
general support for the increased use of
adverse publicity orders, noting that
in some cases they may generate an enhanced deterrent effect when compared to
purely monetary
penalties like fines. Participants also acknowledged that the
question of whether to impose an adverse publicity order was related
whether to record a conviction. Finally, participants noted that courts should
consider whether adverse publicity orders
should have a set duration for which a
publication was to exist, especially where the order involves the publication of
The Council’s view
are of the view that adverse publicity orders in OHS cases have the potential to
be effectively harnessed to give effect
to the purposes of sentencing,
deterrence and just punishment
, by damaging the offender’s prestige
and reputation within their industry, their client/consumer base, and their
public standing,
while exacting additional costs involved in complying with the
, by publicising the circumstances of the offending, the nature of
the risks involved and their consequences, the offender’s
experience of
being prosecuted and sentenced, the penalty imposed, and steps taken by the
offender to rehabilitate, including insights
gained as a result of the
denunciation
by further communicating the court’s condemnation of the offending more
broadly within the community;
, by raising awareness within specific industries or the community
more broadly about workplace risks, and the responses of the regulatory
framework and criminal justice system to breaches of the law, which can lead to
improvements in OHS outcomes within industries, and
better inform potential
customers and clients about the entities with which they do business; and
rehabilitation
by allowing offenders to communicate how they have made positive changes after
having been prosecuted and sentenced, and the insights
gained from the
experience.
3.110 In this
sense, we agree with community feedback that adverse publicity need not always
be a negative story. We heard in consultation
that one of the most important
aspects to be communicated to industries from a prosecution is the need to be
in identifying OHS risks. In this sense, any such complacency
might be best addressed via messages from peers in the same field or
who, while not intentionally breaching their duties, nevertheless failed to
comply with the required standards. Communicating
messages of learnings and
insights gained can be just as valuable in furthering the objects of the
3.111 We are
similarly of the view that there is strong evidence to show that, in some cases,
in particular, those involving very
large entities with national/international
operations and reputation, a reliance on fines alone may fail to achieve an
level of punishment and deterrence. It is also in those cases that
adverse publicity offers the greatest potential for a substantial
effect, as a
penalty in addition to a fine or another sentencing order. Given that potential,
courts should continue to view the
sentence holistically, and consider the
longer-term effects of an adverse publicity order on the financial circumstances
of the offender.
we see adverse publicity orders as providing an added dimension to sentencing
practices, in that they allow courts to directly
address the
of offenders, something which fines alone cannot do. Concerns about the
effectiveness of such reliance on fines in sentencing are
clearly not limited to
the OHS context. In January 2024, reporting of the Federal Court noted the view
that a $1.8 million penalty
to be paid by a national bank pursuant to a
settlement with the Australian Securities and Investment Commission was
given the bank’s size and
A lot of people would be interested in whether or not someone with whom they
choose to have a commercial relationship is someone
who is breaking the law or
not. Where there’s been breaches of statutory norms, why shouldn’t
the public be told about
that [in] the most effective way possible, rather than
going through the fiction that people are going to read Federal Court judgments?
matter was then adjourned to allow for consideration of whether there should be
additional terms requiring the bank to publish
information about its
unconscionable conduct. The court noted that there was ‘an acute public
interest in securing compliance
with the law by large financial
institutions’, with that interest being best served by ‘transparency
as to how such institutions
have conducted themselves’. However,
ultimately no order to publicise the offending was made by the court, given the
had not had time to make submissions as to whether such an order should
are of the view that adverse publicity orders are extremely underutilised as a
sentencing order in OHS cases. This cannot be solely
due to the fact that most
prosecuted OHS offenders are smaller entities. Instead, it appears that their
underuse results from entrenched
prosecutorial and sentencing practices, which
simply have not evolved to include adverse publicity orders as a key
consideration
(although we note that the recent case of
DPP v Yarra Valley
Park Lane Holiday Park Pty
might signal a
potential shift in this approach). While courts are empowered to make adverse
publicity orders on their own motion,
realistically the impetus should come from
prosecution submissions on sentence. These can assist the court by identifying
the utility
of an adverse publicity order, as well as proposing the content of
the information to be publicised and the mode in which the publication
occur to ensure the order is effective.
3.115 Indeed, it
is not enough to see an increased use of these orders. Their effectiveness is
wholly dependent on their terms: both
the content of the information to be
publicised and the medium by which that information is to be communicated. If
adverse publicity
orders are to be used in more cases, there needs to be close
consideration of the intended audience of the information, as well as
avenues to target that audience, whether it be the offender’s employees,
members of the industry, the offender’s
clients or customers, or the
broader community.
3.116 As is our
view with health and safety undertakings, our view here is that the most
effective way of achieving change in prosecutorial
practice is by fostering
structural changes in prosecutorial decision-making. These changes should lead
practitioners to consider
the option of adverse publicity orders, including the
information to be disseminated, and the mode and medium to be used to
communicate
that information. For example, decisions should be made about what
media platforms should be utilised and how, and whether the purposes
sentencing (and the objects of the
) would be best served by
targeting a specific industry, or consumers and the broader community. These
considerations lend themselves
to guidance in the form of a policy relating to
the use of adverse publicity orders. The policy would specify case-specific
for when such an order might be appropriate. It is intended that
providing a structure for that decision-making will lead to practitioners
increasingly raising these orders in plea hearings and submissions on sentence,
for consideration by sentencing courts.
an example, the New South Wales Centre for Work Health and Safety’s
Guide for Regulators in the Use of Non-Monetary Orders
provides a useful
list of considerations to guide regulators when crafting a proposed adverse
publicity order,
the nature of
the offence;
the prevalence
of the offence in the industry;
the level of
compliance achieved since the offence was committed;
the view of the
offender on the importance of reputation, the likelihood of publicity reaching
the intended audience, the likelihood
that the intended audience will disapprove
of the described circumstances, and the extent of latent impacts of that
disapproval;
the environment
in which the notice will be released;
the language and
wording of the order, paying particular regard to ensuring it is noticeable,
accessible, relevant and implementable;
characteristics of the intended audience, including who needs to be informed,
warned or deterred by the relevant matters under
the order, whether the audience
is the public, industry, employees, investors, shareholders or creditors,
distributors, providers,
or customers, and whether the order is likely to
achieve its intended outcome with that audience;
effective way to reach the intended audience, whether it be, for example, via
media releases, television, radio, print media
(such as newspapers or industry
magazines), online media (such as on websites or social media), the display of
physical notices,
or direct contact through email or post;
the duration
that the adverse publicity should be active for; and
the proportional
cost of implementing the intended form of
Recommendation 6: Increased use of adverse
publicity orders
WorkSafe Victoria should develop a policy relating to adverse publicity
orders pursuant to
section 135
Occupational Health and Safety Act
(Vic) that (a) specifies criteria for deciding whether to recommend
that a sentencing court consider making an adverse publicity
order, including
the content and medium of the information to be publicised, and (b) encourages
the increased use of adverse publicity
orders in appropriate cases.
Revising the offence and penalty hierarchy for breach of duty
Victoria, there are three primary offences relating to a failure to provide a
workplace that is reasonably safe and without
risks to health. These offences,
and their associated maximum penalties for companies, are:
manslaughter (breaching a duty in a negligent manner and causing another
person’s death) – 100,000 penalty
conduct endangering serious injury in a workplace – 20,000 penalty
duty-holder breaching a health and safety duty – 9,000 penalty
3.119 These are
relatively similar to the four primary offences in the model laws, which
separate breaches of duty that expose someone
to a risk of death or serious
injury or illness, from breaches that don’t:
manslaughter – $18 million;
offences (duty holders putting someone at risk of death or serious injury or
illness with gross negligence or recklessness)
– $10,425,000;
offences (duty holders breaching their duty and exposing an individual to a risk
of death or serious injury or illness)
– $2,090,000; and
3 offences (duty holders breaching their duty, but not necessarily exposing
someone to a risk of death or serious injury
or illness) –
3.120 In our
view, for a number of reasons, there is a need to revise the maximum penalties
for breach of duty offences in Victoria,
and – in order to ensure a
logical offence and penalty hierarchy – to revise the reckless conduct
offence currently in
section 32 of the
. We address both of these
Increasing the maximum penalties for breach of duty
current maximum penalty for most breach of duty offences is 9,000 penalty units
for body corporates, and 1,800 penalty units for
individuals.
Occupational Health and Safety Act 1985
effect, the maximum penalty for a corporate employer breaching their duty to
their employees to provide a safe working environment
was 250 penalty units (at
the time, equivalent to $25,000) (Figure 12). As OHSIntros identified in their
submission,
maximum penalty, in 1989, Simsmetal Ltd received a fine of $45,000 for three
charges of that offence after an explosion
killed four workers and injured seven
That fine represented
60% of the total maximum available at the time for three charges
Figure 12: Changes to the maximum penalty for breach
of duty offences by companies in Victoria
Penalty units
Dollar value
1990, the maximum penalty for breach of duty offences was lifted to 400 penalty
units (at the time, $40,000).
Then seven years later in 1997, the maximum was lifted again to 2,500 penalty
units for body corporates (at the time,
Finally, in 2005,
commenced, it was increased to 9,000 penalty units
($900,000) for body corporates. Since then, the value of a penalty unit has
almost annually (indexed to account for inflation), so that it is
nearly $1.8 million in 2024–25.
1985, there has, in effect, been a 7,100% increase in the dollar value of a
maximum fine for breach of duty offences by body
corporates (this increase is
In 2011, the Director
of Public Prosecutions argued that the Court of Appeal should call for an uplift
in sentencing practices for
OHS offences to reflect the significant increases in
the maximum over time. But the court dismissed the appeal, saying that the case
was not an appropriate vehicle for such guidance because the Director was
‘not seek[ing] any increase in the actual sentences
imposed’ on the
offender in that case.
do not appear to have been any subsequent attempts by the Director of Public
Prosecutions to seek an uplift in sentencing practices
3.125 As can be
seen in Figure 13, Victoria now has the second-highest maximum fine in the
country for workplace manslaughter by a
body corporate (almost $20 million in
2024–25, with only New South Wales having a higher maximum of precisely
$20 million),
the third-highest maximum fine for reckless endangerment or
similar offences (after the Commonwealth and New South Wales), and a
comparable maximum fine for breach of duty offences (especially where someone
has been exposed to a risk of death or serious
13: Comparison of maximum penalties for companies for workplace manslaughter,
reckless endangerment and breach of duty offences
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
(Vic) and comparable offences in other Australian
Legislation
Maximum penalty
Australian Capital Territory
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Workplace manslaughter
$18 million
Reckless/negligent endangerment
$10.4 million
Breach of duty
$2.9 million or $700,000
New South Wales
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Workplace manslaughter
$20 million
Reckless endangerment
$10.9 million
Breach of duty
$2.2 million or $731,000
Northern Territory
Work Health and Safety(National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Penalty Units Regulations 2010
Workplace manslaughter
$12 million
Reckless endangerment
Breach of duty
$1.5 million or $500,000
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Workplace manslaughter
$10 million
Reckless/negligent endangerment
Breach of duty
$1.5 million or $500,000
South Australia
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
Workplace manslaughter
$18 million
Reckless/negligent endangerment
Breach of duty
$1.5 million or $500,000
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
Workplace manslaughter
$18 million
Reckless endangerment
Breach of duty
$1.5 million or $500,000
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
Workplace manslaughter
$19.8 million
Reckless endangerment
Breach of duty
$1.8 million
Western Australia
Work Health and Safety Act 2020
Workplace manslaughter
$10 million
Breach causing death/serious harm
$3.5 million
Breach of duty
$1.8 million or $570,000
Model Work Health and Safety Bill 2023 (Cth) ss 4, 31–33, sch 4 cl
Workplace manslaughter
$18 million
Reckless/negligent endangerment
$10.4 million
Breach of duty
$2 million or $700,000
Commonwealth
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Workplace manslaughter
$18 million
Reckless/negligent endangerment
$15 million
Breach of duty
$2 million or $700,000
3.126 Importantly,
however, many of the maximum penalties in the various jurisdictions for
companies that commit OHS offences have
not yet accounted for significant
changes that were made to the model laws in July 2023. At the instruction of
officers of Safe Work
Australia, the Australasian Parliamentary Counsel’s
Committee was asked to draft the
Model Work Health and Safety Legislation
Amendment (Offences and Penalties) 2023
. In that amendment, released in July
2023, the maximum fines for category 1, 2 and 3 offences committed by body
corporates were increased
as follows:
– from $3,000,000 to $10,425,000;
– from $1,500,000 to $2,090,000; and
– from $500,000 to $700,000.
39% and 40% increases to the category 2 and 3 offences derived from a
recommendation of the
Boland Review
to revise maximum penalties to
account for inflation since the original model laws were
This is because
the model laws do not use penalty units (which can be indexed to account for
inflation) but instead use specific
dollar amounts, meaning that the real value
of the maximum declines over time. There was also a decision to
‘significantly
increase the penalties for the Category 1
Commonwealth, New South Wales and most recently the Australian Capital Territory
are so far the only jurisdictions to have implemented
these changes to maximum
The Commonwealth
and New South Wales chose a higher maximum for category 1 offences – $15
million and $10.9 million respectively.
The Tasmanian Parliament has recently
passed an amendment to the
Work Health and Safety Act
introducing an
industrial manslaughter offence with an $18 million maximum (though the Act does
not change other penalties).
It is reasonable to assume that all of the jurisdictions with model laws will
eventually increase their maximum penalties for breaches
of duty offences in
line with the amendments in the model laws. This would leave maximum penalties
in Victoria well behind other
32 reckless endangerment offence carrying a maximum (just under $4 million) of
less than half the maximum for the comparable category 1 offence ($10
Stakeholder views
Consultation Paper
, we asked whether fine amounts for OHS offences
needed to increase, and if so, what the best way to achieve that increase would
At [3.42]–[3.49]
above, we discussed the need to increase fine amounts for OHS offences in some
cases. One of the options we
offered for doing so was to increase the maximum
penalty for breach of duty offences. Across our community consultation, and in
consultation on draft recommendations, there was clear support for
increasing the maximum penalties for breach of duty offences.
This was not
because increasing the maximum penalty would be an effective lever for altering
current sentencing practices as a whole,
but instead because the current maximum
does not allow courts adequate discretion, in particular, when sentencing
serious breaches
by large companies.
3.130 During our
community consultation events, participants were asked to sentence one of two
companies: a small solar panel installation
company with four staff – the
company created a risk of fall from height but no-one was injured; and a large
national construction
company with a turnover of $1.5 billion – the
company’s behaviour resulted in a fatality and it was being sentenced for
two offences (with a combined maximum fine of $3.5 million). Of the 36
participants who sentenced the large company, 58% (21 participants)
imposed the
maximum available fine.
3.131 Two of the
participants who sentenced the large company said:
The whole point of sentencing is to deter it from happening again. [The maximum]
is too low for a company that size.
(Community Consultation Participant,
Bendigo (26 February 2024))
[A] fine for this size company is probably small change even if you impose the
(Community Consultation Participant, Geelong (28 February 2024))
3.132 Near the
end of each consultation session, we asked participants whether, having now
experienced sentencing for themselves,
they thought there was a need to change
the maximum penalty (at that time $1.73 million) in Victoria for breach of duty
It was especially important for us to understand whether those who
imposed the maximum thought that it was sufficient, or if they
felt hamstrung to
impose a less severe penalty than they otherwise would have. We gave
participants five options: the maximum ‘should
‘it’s about right’, ‘it should be closer to $10
million’, ‘it should be closer
to $100 million’, or ‘it
should be unlimited’. Only 14% of participants said the current maximum
was adequate;
no participants advocated a reduction in the current maximum; and
the remaining 86% wanted to see a higher maximum penalty for companies
breach their health and safety duties, with most participants preferring an
unlimited maximum fine (Figure 14).
Figure 14: Community
consultation responses (maximum penalty, both case studies)
Is the maximum penalty for companies ($1.7 million) set at the right
level? (50 participants)
It should be lower
It’s about right
It should be closer to $10 million
It should be closer to $100 million
It should be unlimited
3.133 Similarly,
Uniting Vic.Tas told us that they have supported families in some cases who have
said the current maximum is too
Several Uniting client families have been involved in cases against large
companies. Their typical response to a question like this
[about whether the
size of the company should be relevant in sentencing] is that even the maximum
penalty has minimal impact on financially
organisations.
3.134 Without
advocating for any change, because ‘the determination of maximum penalties
is a matter for the legislature’,
the County Court also observed that:
[T]he current penalties available and imposed for OHS offences are now
inconsistent with other Australian jurisdictions and substantially
out of step
with the fines being imposed for other corporate regulatory frameworks, despite
addressing arguably more serious concerns.
This is particularly the case for
larger companies[.]
3.135 There
were, though, also a number of stakeholders – particularly employer groups
– who opposed any increase in the
maximum fines for OHS offences. They
contended that the maximum penalties are already sufficiently high to achieve
the purposes of
sentencing, and that any problems with current sentencing
practices are largely due to courts not exercising their full discretion
the existing maximums:
The prescribed maximum fine amounts are [already] set at a sufficiently high
(Submission 1 (Housing Industry Association))
[T]he courts are awarding fines significantly below the maximums available to
them. Hence the quantum of fines could be increased
by the courts without any
need to increase the maximums ... Ai Group does not believe that it would be
appropriate to increase all
the maximum penalties that are in the Act,
particularly as they do increase every year with indexation of penalty units.
we do note that the Victorian penalties for some offences are lower
than those in the model laws. If a decision is made to increase
the maximum
penalties in Victoria, they should be aligned with those established in the
model [Work Health and Safety] Act[.]
(Submission 4 (Australian Industry
The maximum financial penalties ... for breaches of section 21 of the [
] ... are massive potential penalties, set at levels clearly capable of
delivering the intended signal and disincentive effects to
employers. There is
no basis to conclude that ... the application of higher penalties to an expanded
range of matters is merited
or necessary.
(Submission 11 (Victorian Congress
of Employer Associations))
The current penalty regime is a far cry from the maximum penalties of $250,000
that were in place prior to the introduction of the
OHS Act 2004 ... VACC
asserts that maximum penalties are in line with (genuine) community expectations
when the risk-based and absolute
liability nature of OHS offences is properly
understood.
(Submission 15 (Victorian Automative Chamber of Commerce))
preliminary view, following community consultation, was that maximum penalties
for breach of duty offences are not currently
sufficient to allow courts
adequate discretion. This is because we were not trying to determine whether the
current maximums were
in light of
current sentencing
practices, but instead we were trying to determine whether current sentencing
practices need to change and, if
so, what to, and whether the current maximums
will be adequate. In consultation on the draft recommendation, we heard support
increasing the maximum, so long as in doing so, we were clear that our
intent was to better enable courts to sentence worst-case
scenarios. For
It’s such a nuanced issue ... there’s little to no utility
increasing the maximum value without the ... [s]entencing
guideline. [B]ecause
at the moment, we’re seeing 1%, 2%, 3% of the maximum penalty ... if you
have something that really adds
to it, being a guideline ... that’s when I
feel you’ll see change.
(Participant at Stakeholder Roundtable (12
August 2024))
I think if it’s made clear that that’s the intention ... that makes
sense to me. But the point being ... [so long as]
it’s really designed to
capture potential worst sort of cases.
(Participant at OHS Barrister
Roundtable (16 August 2024))
I’m supportive of it ... being able to appropriately sentence large
companies and take into account worst-case scenarios ...
[I]n the case of
[Redacted], that individual’s life has been changed so completely that the
penalty that was given was high,
but if it had ... these higher penalties, yeah,
I would just say I support that recommendation.
(Participant at OHS
Barrister Roundtable (16 August 2024))
The Council’s view
the Court of Appeal has observed, there are usually two reasons to increase the
maximum penalty for an offence: first, because
sentencing practices as a whole
are inadequate, and the legislature is attempting to provide the courts with a
new yardstick to reflect
the seriousness of the crime; and second, because there
are ‘worst-case scenarios’ of the offence for which the current
maximum penalty is not
sufficient.
3.138 We are of
the view that there is a clear need to increase the maximum fines for breaches
of OHS duties, in small part because
there is a need to reform sentencing
practices as a whole, but more so because the current maximums do not
sufficiently allow for
worst-case scenarios. It is otiose that the maximum
penalty for an offence must be capable of enabling courts to impose penalties
that are proportionate to the offending, and in the context of OHS offences,
this includes serious offending by very large companies.
The data we reviewed on
current sentencing practices (where some courts have imposed penalties of up to
75% of the maximum), the
responses to our community survey (which also supported
change), our review of maximum penalties in other jurisdictions, particularly
the model laws (which are much higher), and especially the results of our
community consultation exercise (where participants
frequently felt constrained
by the maximum fines available to them), all combine to suggest that the current
maximum fines for breaches
of OHS offences by companies in Victoria are
inadequate. They do not allow courts sufficient discretion to impose appropriate
that are commensurate with the seriousness of the offending, the
culpability of the offender and/or the size of the offender.
do not expect an increase in the maximum fines for breach of duty offences, on
its own, to result in any drastic change to sentencing
practices. Past
experience shows that simply increasing maximums, especially financial
penalties, rarely drives significant
In England and Wales,
where the maximum penalty for an OHS offence was amended to an unlimited fine in
most commentators
attribute the recent decompression of (and increase in) fine amounts to the
introduction of a sentencing guideline
for health and safety offences, and not
to the increase in the maximum
there was strong community support for an unlimited maximum fine, we are not
convinced that this is necessary, given the experience
in England and Wales.
While for the last nine years, the maximum there has been an unlimited fine, the
largest fines (in about half
a dozen cases) have each been between
4 million and almost
7 million, all involving very
large organisations, and almost all involving fatalities (see Case Study
In Victoria, a five-fold
increase in the maximum, to $10 million, is likely to be sufficient to capture
the worst-case scenarios.
For the same reason, we do not propose a maximum as
high as $100 million.
Case study 3: England and Wales Network
Network Rail fined £6.7m over fatal Stonehaven crash
Network Rail has been fined £6.7m at the high court in Aberdeen after
admitting health and safety failings over a rail crash
that claimed three
The crash, the worst accident on Britain’s railways in 18 years, came
after debris had washed on to the track from a wrongly
built drainage system
after heavy rain. Despite the conditions, the driver was not warned to reduce
Network Rail ... admitted a series of failings that resulted in the deaths,
pleading guilty to a charge covering the period from 1
May 2011 to 12 August
These included failing to inform the driver that it was unsafe to drive the
train at a speed of 75mph or caution him to reduce his
speed on the day of the
derailment. There were also failings in construction, inspection and maintenance
of drainage assets and in
adverse and extreme weather planning.
Trish Ewen ... the partner of the train conductor said the crash
“turned her life upside down” ... adding: “Donald
and I should
be thinking about retiring together and planning the rest of our lives –
instead he was taken and I’ve been
left to exist alone.”
Gwyn Topham, ‘Network Rail Fined £6.7m over Fatal Stonehaven
The Guardian
(8 September 2023)
3.141 Increasing
the maximum fine as we recommend will also ensure Victoria remains relatively
consistent with other jurisdictions,
which will likely soon make revisions to
implement recent changes to the model laws. The model laws’ category 1
behaviours that we would expect to be captured by the Victorian
breach of duty offences – are intended to have maximums of
approximately
$10 million following changes to the model laws in July 2023. Further, in light
of our recommended reforms to section
[3.143]–[3.165] below), increasing the maximum for companies that breach
their health and safety duties creates a logical
offence and penalty hierarchy
for companies: 50,000 penalty units for breaches of health and safety duties,
and 100,000 penalty units
for industrial manslaughter.
3.142 We note
some ancillary matters: (1) we see no need for the
to continue to
delineate a lower maximum penalty for those who design buildings and structures;
if those individuals or companies
owe health and safety duties because failures
in those duties may put people at risk, the potential penalties should be the
as the potential penalties for other duty holders; and (2) there is a
consequential need to retain the 1:5 ratio in the maximum fine
individuals and companies, as is apparent throughout the Victorian statute
Recommendation 7: Maximum penalties for breach of duty
The Victorian Government should increase the maximum penalties for breaches
of health and safety duties under the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
50,000 penalty
units for body corporates for offences contrary to
sections 21
10,000 penalty
units for individuals for offences contrary to
sections 21
The recklessness offence
3.143 Under
section 32 of the
, it is an offence to recklessly engage in
conduct that places, or may place, another person who is at a workplace in
danger of serious
injury. The offence carries a maximum penalty of five
years’ imprisonment or a fine of 1,800 penalty units for an individual,
and a maximum fine of 20,000 penalty units for companies.
Statistical Report
, we noted that in the period from 2005 to 2021,
there were exceptionally few sentenced offences of reckless endangerment (a
of seven charges, in five of the 1,197 OHS
offence was introduced as part of the new
in 2004, pursuant to
recommendations from the
and modelled on
the offence of recklessly endangering serious injury in
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) (‘the
This provision applies the same standards, tests and penalty as
Crimes Act 1958
, but creates a high culpability offence applicable within
workplaces. In such cases, a penalty of up to five years imprisonment may
in addition to a fine.
parliamentary debates indicate that, during that process of reform, there was
also an impetus to introduce a workplace manslaughter
offence, which was met
with opposition. Those negotiations eventually resolved to an agreement to
introduce a new ‘recklessness’
offence instead of a workplace
manslaughter offence.
years later, subsequent law reform initiatives have led to the enactment of a
workplace manslaughter offence, with the recklessness
offence still being
3.147 Three
issues arise in respect of the maximum penalties for individuals and companies
for the recklessness offence.
3.148 First, we
noted in the
Consultation Paper
the overlap between this offence and the
offences of recklessly endangering serious injury and recklessly endangering
life in the
offences carry a maximum
penalty of five and 10 years’ imprisonment, respectively. We noted that
the only difference between
offences and the
recklessness offence is that the
offence requires the
prosecution to prove that the offence occurred ‘at a workplace’.
What’s more, the
offence is limited to endangering serious
injury. However, many of the cases sentenced in the last 20 years involved
either risks
to life or an actual fatality; therefore, the
offence is clearly intended to capture conduct that is analogous to the
offence of recklessly endangering
. Despite this,
the maximum penalty for the
offence of endangering life is
twice that for the
offence. It seems incongruous, given the
additional duties placed on people in workplaces, that the maximum prison term
if that conduct occurs in a workplace.
the maximum penalty of five years’ imprisonment for individuals is now
inconsistent with the maximum penalty for the
equivalent offence in
offence in the model laws is
a category 1
breach of duty offence, being a
breach of duty that is reckless or (grossly) negligent. Under the model laws
(developed by Safe Work
Australia), this category 1 designation attracts a
maximum penalty of 10
years’ imprisonment. New South Wales has
already implemented this increase in the maximum
Commonwealth has increased its maximum penalty to 15 years’
imprisonment.
We would expect
the other states and territories to follow suit in the near
3.150 Third, if
the maximum financial penalty for breach of duty offences is increased to 50,000
penalty units for companies consistent
with our recommendation (see
[3.121]–[3.142]), the penalty hierarchy between the breach of duty
offences, the reckless endangerment
offence and the workplace manslaughter
offence would become incoherent.
3.151 In our
Consultation Paper
, we asked whether the maximum penalty of five
years’ imprisonment for reckless conduct endangering serious injury in a
should be increased and, if so, why and to what level (Question 12).
Stakeholder views
3.152 Stakeholders’
written submissions were divided on the appropriateness of the current maximum
penalty for the recklessness
Housing Industry Association (HIA) noted the small number of sentenced reckless
endangerment offences, the fact that a term of
imprisonment was imposed in only
one of those five cases, and the existence of the equivalent reckless
endangerment offences in the
and advocated for the penalty of
imprisonment to be removed, or at least reduced to a maximum of 12
Australian Industry
Group noted that consistency with the maximums in the model laws may be
justifiable, but like HIA, pointed to
the comparatively low sentencing practices
for the offence, to argue that an increase in the maximum penalty was not
The Victorian
Congress of Employer Associations and the Victorian Automotive Chamber of
Commerce also were in favour of maintaining
the current maximum, noting that the
offence was most directly comparable to recklessly endangering serious injury
, which, on its own, has the same five-year maximum
the Australian Institute of Health and Safety was not convinced that increasing
the maximum penalty would result in improved
OHS practices and outcomes, and was
of the view that the prospect of imprisonment itself was of significance to
industry, irrespective
of the maximum possible
contrast, the Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union supported an
increase in the maximum penalty to ‘serve as a stronger
deterrent against
reckless behaviour that could lead to serious
Victorian Trades Hall Council also supported an increase to maximum penalties
for egregious breaches of OHS duties, specifically
nominating a maximum penalty
of 10 years’ imprisonment in such cases (involving offences against
sections 21, 22, 23, or 26
), while noting the low rate of
prosecutions for the reckless endangerment
Vic.Tas submitted that there had been ‘no call from client families to
extend custodial sentencing to breaches under
general “duty of care”
provisions’. It did, however, support retaining a maximum penalty of
imprisonment for breaches
involving serious harm and culpability, and
specifically referred to the section 26 duty applicable to managers and
controllers of
workplaces as a possible
the question of the maximum penalty for individuals, stakeholders participating
in roundtable consultation generally supported
an increase to the maximum term
of imprisonment. They were divided, however, on whether consistency with the
model OHS laws (which
provide a single maximum penalty of 10 years’
imprisonment) or the Victorian
(which provides a two-tiered
maximum of five and 10 years’ imprisonment for conduct endangering serious
injury and conduct endangering
life, respectively) should be preferred. Others
maintained that it was the threat of imprisonment itself that was the main force
of deterrence, rather than the particular maximum
Survey responses
3.159 Survey
responses expressed strong support for maintaining the possibility of
imprisonment to ensure an appropriate level of
deterrence, and to appropriately
respond to especially serious breaches of OHS duties. For example, where the
offender was on notice
for the risks and nonetheless proceeded to cause the
risk, and where the offence caused serious harm:
[t]he mere fact that an OHS offender is imprisoned will serve as a huge
deterrent to others engaging in the same conduct.
(Survey Participant (male,
If someone knowingly creates danger they should be treated very harshly –
that should include “prison” especially
where death or serious
injury happens.
(Survey Participant (male, 65–74))
Prison should be considered if warnings in relation to safety breaches had been
issued previously.
(Survey Participant (female, 45–54))
The Council’s view
that our proposed increases to the maximum penalties for breach of duty offences
would place those maximums above the maximum
penalty for the reckless
endangerment offence, we considered whether it would be appropriate to recommend
repealing that offence
entirely. As it currently stands, the offence is rarely
prosecuted, likely due to the high threshold required to prove
recklessness,
making it in
many cases potentially ‘harder to prove than workplace
manslaughter’.
our meetings with key stakeholders and the balance of community feedback
regarding this offence indicated that there are
distinct advantages to the
retaining a reckless endangerment offence that involves placing
others at risk of serious injury (or death). It ensures the powers
provided in
that Act can be used to investigate alleged offences, and it maintains the
threat of imprisonment for individuals who
grossly fall short of their
obligations (in cases not involving fatalities). Removing the offence would also
introduce a further
inconsistency between Victoria’s OHS laws and the
model laws implemented across Australia.
we believe the recklessness offence provision requires substantial reform to
ensure a coherent offence and penalty hierarchy
. First, we
are of the view that the maximum penalty for individuals should be increased to
10 years’ imprisonment, for conduct
recklessly endangering serious injury
. We do not believe it is necessary to create a two-tiered maximum
penalty, strictly in line with the equivalent
offences. We
heard in roundtable consultation that, in many cases, the distinction between
risks of serious injury and risks of death
is apparent (for example, inadequate
guarding risking a limb in contrast to working at height without fall protection
risking a fatal
fall). In other cases, however, the level of the risk is much
more dynamic (such as incidents involving mobile plant, such as forklifts)
therefore more difficult to classify as either risks endangering serious injury
or risks endangering life. Our recommended approach
would also be more
consistent with the model OHS laws (Figure 15), while avoiding the added
complexity posed by a two-tiered
15: Comparison of maximum penalties of imprisonment for workplace manslaughter
and reckless endangerment under the
Occupational Health and Safety Act
(Vic) and comparable offences in other Australian jurisdictions
Legislation
Maximum imprisonment
Australian Capital Territory
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Workplace manslaughter
Reckless endangerment
New South Wales
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Workplace manslaughter
Reckless endangerment
Northern Territory
Work Health and Safety (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Workplace manslaughter
Life imprisonment
Reckless endangerment
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Workplace manslaughter
Reckless endangerment
South Australia
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
Workplace manslaughter
Reckless endangerment
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
Workplace manslaughter
Reckless endangerment
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
Workplace manslaughter
Reckless endangerment
Western Australia
Work Health and Safety Act 2020
Workplace manslaughter
Breach causing death/serious harm
Model Work Health and Safety Bill 2023 (Cth) ss 31, 30A
Workplace manslaughter
Reckless endangerment
Commonwealth
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Workplace manslaughter
Reckless endangerment
3.162 Further,
we believe the proposed maximum penalty for individuals for breach of duty
offences discussed above (10,000 penalty
units) is adequate to cover
particularly egregious breaches involving a degree of recklessness. The
recklessness offence should therefore
adopt that same maximum financial penalty
for individuals.
3.163 We are of
the view that the proposed increase in the maximum penalty for companies for
breach of duty offences (50,000 penalty
units, see above) also creates
sufficient range to appropriately sentence companies for the most serious
examples of breaches, including
breaches where a degree of recklessness may be
established. We are therefore of the view that the reformed recklessness
should not apply in respect of companies. Instead, companies should be
prosecuted and sentenced for breaching their relevant duties.
This approach
would effectively resolve the incoherent penalty hierarchy between breach of
duty offences (which, after our reforms,
would have a maximum penalty of 50,000
penalty units), reckless endangerment (a current maximum penalty of 20,000
penalty units)
and workplace manslaughter (100,000 penalty units), by
simplifying the hierarchy for companies down to two types of offences: a breach
of duty offence and, in cases involving gross negligence causing a death, the
workplace manslaughter offence.
3.164 We must
stress here that the reforms discussed in this chapter are interrelated in
multiple ways. For example, below we discuss
a proposal to consult on the
introduction of a legislated sentencing guideline to be applied by courts in
sentencing OHS offences.
One of the aims of that reform is to decompress fine
amounts by providing greater guidance on, and structure around, certain factors
in a case, and how those factors should bear on the appropriate sentencing
range. Given that reform, we are then able to recommend
the removal of the
reckless endangerment offence for companies, as we believe the guideline would
assist courts to appropriately
sentence within the new maximum penalties for
breach of duty offences.
summary, the aim of the reform is to increase the maximum penalty of
imprisonment for individuals for the most egregious
breaches of health and
safety duties (those involving recklessness and high risk), and simplify the
penalty hierarchy for companies
by removing the intermediate offence between a
breach of duty offence and workplace manslaughter.
Recommendation 8: Reckless endangerment offence
The Victorian Government should replace
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
(Vic) with a provision specifying a maximum
penalty of 10 years’ imprisonment, in addition to or instead of the
(revised) maximum
fine of 10,000 penalty units, for individuals who recklessly
contravene a health and safety duty under the Act in a way that places,
place, another person in danger of death, serious injury or serious illness.
The relevance of harm in sentencing OHS offences
breaches of duty offences under the
are risk-based offences, it
is not an element of those offences that a breach has resulted in injury or
death. The Court of Appeal
has grappled with this issue when considering the
extent to which an injury or fatality resulting from an OHS offence should
the sentence imposed. In
DPP v Frewstal Pty
the court said that
the fact that a breach resulted in serious injury or death ‘is only
relevant in the sense that it might
manifest or demonstrate the degree of
seriousness of the relevant threat to health or safety resulting from the
where someone has been seriously injured or killed as a result of an OHS
offence, this will not necessarily result in
a more severe penalty. Instead, the
nature of any harm will assist the court in determining the potential or likely
consequences
flowing from the breach. The Court of Appeal has reaffirmed this
principle in subsequent cases, commenting in
DPP v Vibro-Pile (Aust) Pty
that ‘the gravity of a breach of the [
] is not to be
measured by the particular consequences of the
this, in our
Statistical Report
we found a significant difference between
fine amounts in cases that involved a fatality and fine amounts in cases that
Cases in which a person had died were primarily sentenced in the higher
courts and resulted in much more severe sentencing
Over a 9.5-year
period, the median case-level fine for companies in breach of duty cases
involving a fatality was $140,000, whereas
the median fine in cases
involving a fatality was $25,000. A similar trend was apparent in the higher
courts, with a median fine of $275,000 in cases where
there was a fatality, and
$110,000 in cases without a
These findings
demonstrate a clear inconsistency between the principles in case law and actual
sentencing practices.
points of comparison, OHS legislation in Canada specifies that, if an OHS
offence ‘result[s] in the death, serious injury
or illness of one or more
workers’, that is an aggravating factor in
sentencing.
So too does the
sentencing guideline for health and safety offences in England and Wales, which
specifies that the fact that an OHS
offence ‘was a significant cause of
actual harm’ – whether it be injury, illness or death – will
the sentencing court imposing a more severe
Finally, New
Zealand’s equivalent legislation provides a list of factors that must be
considered by sentencing courts, one
factor being ‘whether death, serious
injury or serious illness
or could reasonably have been expected
to have occurred’.
interpreting this requirement, the High Court of New Zealand commented that:
It is correct the level of actual harm can be a matter of chance, but this is a
statement equally true of a lot of offending. The
conduct and intent will often
be the same, but the consequence very different. That different consequence has
always led to significant
differences in sentencing jeopardy. We remain of the
view that what actual harm occurred is a relevant and important feature in
placement within the [sentencing] bands. That a defendant is
“lucky” no-one was hurt does not absolve it of liability
... but the
actual harm caused is still a relevant sentencing factor in determining how
serious the offence was.
Stakeholder views
preliminary consultation, a number of stakeholders expressed a need for clarity
around the relevance of harm in sentencing
OHS offences. We asked participants
in our online survey, attendees at our consultation events, and respondents to
Consultation Paper
, the extent to which harm caused should be
relevant to assessing the seriousness of an OHS
3.170 Among the
64 participants who responded to our survey, there was strong support for harm
being a relevant factor in sentencing
OHS offences, with 75% of participants
being of the view that the sentence imposed should be more severe where serious
death occurs as a result of the breach (Figure 16). Survey responses
varied on the degree to which the sentence should be aggravated
where someone is
harmed, with the majority (59%) proposing that the sentence should be
more severe in cases resulting in harm, and a smaller proportion
(16%) saying that the sentence should be
more severe. The
remaining respondents (25%) said that the sentence should be about the same,
regardless of whether harm resulted
from the offence.
Survey responses (relevance of harm)
Should the fact that someone was killed or seriously injured be relevant
in sentencing an OHS offence? (63 participants)
Much more severe
Somewhat more severe
written submissions, there were competing views on this issue, with seven
submissions suggesting that causing harm should result
in a more severe
and another five
saying that it
3.172 Stakeholders
advocating for actual harm to be an aggravating factor acknowledged the
risk-based nature of OHS offences, but
nevertheless said it was important to
recognise that harm had occurred:
We strongly believe that severity of the harm should be considered as relevant
when sentencing. The effects of serious harm are devastating
to families and
this should be reflected in sentences ... Cases resulting in fatality or injury
should be escalated beyond the Magistrates’
Court due to the limitation on
fine amounts and to demonstrate the seriousness of these cases.
(Submission
17 (Workplace Incidents Consultative Committee))
The LIV acknowledges that breaches of duties under the OHS Act are
‘risk-based’ offences, which do not rely on the causing
harm as an element of the offence ... Nonetheless, the LIV submits that courts
... should more expressly be allowed to
take into account the fact that a
risk-based offence resulted in someone being injured or killed (so long as
causation is established).
That is, courts should be allowed to consider the
fact that a risk did cause severe harm as a factor increasing the seriousness of
the offence
. (Submission 12 (Law Institute of Victoria))
It is a long-standing failure of our current OHS system that the outcome of a
breach is not considered in sentencing. Assessing the
severity of an OHS breach
through a purely risk-based lens ignores one of the foundational principles of
the justice system –
that where someone is harmed, there should be a
reasonable assumption of punishment of the offending party
. (Submission 8
(Victorian Trades Hall Council))
contrast, those who advocated against taking actual harm into account were keen
to preserve the risk-based nature of OHS
The law details that offenders are to be penalised based on the severity of
their breach of duty, not the resulting consequences.
Most [OHS] offences do not
hinge on the occurrence of death or injury; rather, a breach occurs when an
employer fails to reasonably
eliminate or mitigate risks.
(Submission 11
(Victorian Congress of Employer Associations))
We note ... that sentencing practices make it patently clear that the fact of
death is a very significant factor [in OHS cases],
both in the choice of
the community expectations
to punish the offender for the outcome, rather than
the seriousness of the breach. Ai Group has always held the view that the
of harm should not be taken into account when determining the
seriousness of the offence.
(Submission 4 (Australian Industry Group))
Australian Institute of Health and Safety acknowledged that there is likely no
right answer to this difficult issue, noting
the legitimate arguments for taking
harm into account, and for
taking harm into account:
[I]n a very ideal and theoretical sense, the outcome, including its severity,
should be entirely irrelevant to ... assessing ...
the seriousness of the
offence. This is because ... when an incident occurs, it is often only luck that
determines how severe the
incident is ... near misses should be treated equally
as equivalent incidents where harm occurs. However, we know that when factors
such as perceived justice and broader community expectations are considered,
severity is often an important component that shapes
sentencing considerations
and decisions.
(Submission 19 (Australian Institute of Health and
3.175 We then,
at our community consultation events, asked participants how they weighed
certain factors when deciding what sentence
to impose on the company. One of the
factors we asked participants to consider was how relevant they treated the fact
that someone
was (a) killed in the Brick & Mortar case study (Figure 17) or
(b) not harmed in the Daylight Solar case study (Figure
Figure 17: Community consultation responses (relevance of
How relevant was the fact that someone was killed to Brick &
Mortar’s sentence? (36 participants)
Very relevant
Somewhat relevant
A little relevant
Not relevant
Figure 18: Community consultation responses (relevance of harm)
How relevant was the fact that no-one was hurt to Daylight Solar’s
sentence? (14 participants)
Very relevant
Somewhat relevant
A little relevant
Not relevant
majority of participants sentencing Brick & Mortar (83%) considered the
fatality in that case to be ‘very’
or ‘somewhat’
relevant to sentencing, with most considering that it was ‘very’
relevant (Figure 17). In comparison,
participants sentencing Daylight Solar said
that the fact that no-one was harmed in the case was relevant (Figure 18), with
participants considering the fact that no-one was harmed in the Daylight
Solar case as ‘not relevant’ (50%), and a smaller
number considering
the fact that no-one was harmed as ‘somewhat’ or ‘a
little’ relevant (together, 43%) (Figure
3.177 We then
also asked participants whether the sentence should generally be ‘much
more severe’, ‘a bit more severe’,
or ‘about the
same’ where someone is seriously injured or killed in an OHS case (Figure
19). The majority of participants
(54%) across both case studies considered that
the sentence should be much more severe where someone is seriously injured or
Very few participants (8%) felt that the sentence should be the same in
cases with or without serious injury or death.
Community consultation responses (relevance of harm, both case studies)
How should harm in a case affect the severity of the sentence? (48
participants)
Much more severe
A bit more severe
On the relevance of harm in sentencing OHS offences
‘I look at it and go, theoretically, it shouldn’t make a
difference. But ethically, and morally, it makes a massive difference.’
(Community Consultation Participant, Ballarat (19 February 2024))
3.178 When asked
to explain their responses, it became clear that members of the community were
also having difficulty reconciling
the policy intent of risk-based offences with
the severity of harm that can and does occur as a result of OHS offences. For
some participants commented:
[l]egally, it should be about the same. But morally and ethically, it should be
much more severe.
(Community Consultation Participant, Ballarat (19 February
[m]y initial response is [that the sentence should be] ... much more severe,
absolutely. And then I switch back to, what defence
does it create? If we say
much more severe, then, the defence where a worker is seriously injured, or
where a worker really easily
could have been killed, the employer did all the
wrong things, but because ... they go, well no-one was killed, so we want that
fine instead.
(Community Consultation Participant, Bendigo (26
February 2024))
of whether stakeholders felt that serious injury or death should increase the
severity of the sentencing outcome, there
was strong support during consultation
the relevance of harm in sentencing OHS
One participant at
a roundtable commented on the difficulty in obtaining commensurate penalties for
OHS offences where no injury
or fatality has occurred:
It’s the same offence. It’s ... arguably ... just as serious as [an
offence involving injury or a fatality]. One just
shows that the risk
eventuating can cause death, but courts tell us over and over again, it’s
not about the outcome, and that’s
what makes this such a complicated
matter ... the fact that when we’re a risk-based jurisdiction, and our
matters are going
through the courts[.] [W]e even see from the courts that if we
push that risk-based matter as high as it should be as a risk-based
... [where] there’s no death, people look at us sideways to say,
‘But no-one’s died here. Why are
you here? Why are you in the
indictable jurisdiction? [You] should be back in the Magistrates’
Court.’ But the case law
says otherwise.
(Participant at Stakeholder
Roundtable (12 August 2024))
The Council’s view
risk-based nature of OHS offences and the repeated decisions of the Victorian
Court of Appeal suggest that the consequences
of breaches of OHS duties should
not be the driving factor in determining the severity of the penalty to be
imposed in an OHS case.
Conversely, our sentencing data analysis and
consultation with stakeholders suggest that not only is the fact of harm
informing both
the jurisdiction in which a matter is sentenced and the actual
penalty imposed, but also this is what the community expects. An OHS
resulting in a fatality is more likely to be sentenced in the higher courts and
to receive a much higher fine than similar
offences where no fatality
3.181 As noted
Consultation Paper
, if nothing else, there is a need to reconcile
the law and practice in this area, either to ensure that sentencing practices
clearly acknowledge the consequences of OHS offending or to achieve greater
consistency with the principles enunciated in case law.
In this report, we have
not made any specific recommendations about how to resolve this conflict. That
is because we believe the
most effective vehicle for resolving this tension
would be a new legislated sentencing guideline, which will need to be developed
in consultation with legal experts, OHS experts, employee organisations,
employer organisations and the broader community.
The relevance of corporate offenders’ good
Sentencing Act
specifies that courts must take into account an
offender’s ‘previous character’ in determining an appropriate
It then provides a
non-exhaustive list of considerations that may be relevant to determining
‘the character of an offender’,
including their prior convictions,
their general reputation, and any significant contributions they have made to
the community.
This applies
to both individuals and companies.
relevance of an offender’s character to sentencing has been a matter of
considerable public debate in recent years. There
have been a number of highly
publicised cases in which character references were submitted on behalf of an
individual offender.
South Wales Sentencing Council is currently undertaking a dedicated inquiry into
the relevance of good character in
sentencing.
And following a
recommendation of the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child
Sexual Abuse, Victoria’s
Sentencing Act
was amended to prohibit
courts from taking into account an offender’s previous good character or
lack of prior convictions if
that ‘was of assistance to the offender in
the commission of the
the context of OHS offences, companies have successfully argued that they were
of good character on the grounds of good corporate
citizenship, undertaking
certain charitable work (especially donations), and having a positive OHS record
prior to, or after, the
A positive OHS
record has been especially weighty in cases involving companies that have been
in operation for some time (e.g. more
decades) compared to
companies that have only recently come into
Courts have also,
however, described the relevance of a company’s good character as
‘subsidiary’ in OHS cases,
because ‘general deterrence is the
primary sentencing
consideration’.
Consultation Paper
, we asked respondents whether ‘good
character’ should be relevant to sentencing OHS offences and, if so, what
should ordinarily be relevant in assessing a company’s character
(Question 7).
This question
was motivated, in part, by some stakeholders in preliminary consultation
expressing scepticism about some companies
making contributions to the community
(e.g. donations to local sporting clubs) in the wake of an OHS incident, and
then using that
as evidence of their good character.
Stakeholder views
3.186 There
was general support not only for continuing to allow the character of companies
to inform the sentencing exercise but
also for narrowing the ways in which
courts assess the character of companies in OHS cases.
particular, the majority of submissions suggested that the most relevant factor
in assessing a company’s character should
be their approach to health and
safety, both before and after the incident or risk involved. Ai Group said that
‘[p]revious
interactions with the regulator ... responses to improvement
notices ... [and] their approach to risk management’ should all
pertinent considerations.
Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union said that good character should
only be taken into account if the company has:
a clean compliance record ... [such as an] active commitment to improving OHS,
with systems that ensure employee involvement, elected
[health and safety
representatives], positive safety culture, training programs and genuine efforts
to rectify OHS deficiencies.
(Submission 6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union))
Victorian Congress of Employer Associations said that courts should look at
‘the employer’s overall approach to managing
The Victorian
Trades Hall Council expressed a similar view, that:
willingness to prioritise the safety and wellbeing of workers could be a
sentencing consideration ... [such as] consultation with
the workforce,
meaningful engagement with elected [health and safety representatives], union
delegates and officials, collaboration
with WorkSafe above what is expected, the
presence and evidence of implementation of best practice policy and procedures
and priority
(Submission 8
(Victorian Trades Hall Council))
3.189 Some,
though, suggested that factors beyond the company’s OHS record should also
be relevant. The Victorian Congress of
Employer Associations, for example,
argued that:
an offending company’s involvement in charitable or community works that
may be an indication of its character as a good corporate
citizen, as well as
other initiatives such as becoming carbon neutral, community advocacy or
charitable initiatives ... their success
as employers of young people ... [and]
previous track records of safe and successful completion of apprenticeships
should also be
(Submission 11 (Victorian Congress of Employer Associations))
Law Institute of Victoria agreed, but said that while ‘a previous positive
OHS record’ should be an ‘important
factor’ for sentencing
courts, ‘good corporate citizenship and charity work (i.e. donations)
should be given less
Uniting Vic.Tas, saying that bereaved families have often expressed
‘suspicion and view [it] as another legal ploy
to reduce the
sentence’ when companies submit that they have been ‘a “good
corporate citizen” by investing
in good “social work”
works’, ‘between the incident and the
sentencing’.
3.191 In their
submission, the Office of Public Prosecutions said that there is a clear need
for guidance on the notion of ‘good
character’ in the context of
sentencing OHS offending by companies:
[T]here is insufficient guidance for courts as to how to assess a
company’s ‘good character’. The principles commonly
to character are human factors that aren’t easily applied to a company in
any meaningful way. ‘Good corporate
citizenship’ has been raised in
several cases, but there is no case law providing guidance as to the components
of good corporate citizenship in the context of OHS offending. In
some cases, good corporate citizenship will be a hollow proposition
because the
company was created for a limited project or purpose. The OPP considers that it
would be beneficial to have legislative
guidance as to the offender-specific
factors that courts should take into consideration when sentencing a company.
(Submission 3 (Office of Public Prosecutions))
3.192 Again,
during our community consultation events, we asked participants how they weighed
certain factors in deciding what sentence
would be appropriate in their case.
And one of the factors we asked them to consider was the relevance of the
company’s prior
conviction (both companies had a relevant prior
conviction). The large national construction company (Brick & Mortar) had
found guilty and sentenced for an OHS offence in another jurisdiction 11
years earlier at a different worksite. The small solar panel
installation
company (Daylight Solar) had been found guilty and sentenced for an almost
identical offence three months previously.
For both case studies, almost all
participants considered the prior OHS conviction to have been very or somewhat
relevant to sentencing
(Figures 20 and 21).
Figure 20: Community
consultation responses (prior convictions, Brick & Mortar)
How relevant was Brick & Mortar’s prior conviction? (36
participants)
Very relevant
Somewhat relevant
A little relevant
Not relevant
Figure 21: Community consultation responses (prior convictions, Daylight
How relevant was Daylight Solar’s prior conviction? (14
participants)
Very relevant
Somewhat relevant
A little relevant
Not relevant
Participants
in both case studies explained that they applied a significant amount of weight
to the companies’ prior convictions
in sentencing because being on notice
Both of the
companies’ prior convictions involved a risk of falls from
height. One participant said, ‘they’ve been made aware
previously’.
said, ‘they’ve made changes before and couldn’t even hold on
to them for three
For another
participant, the large company’s near miss three months earlier –
the exact same risk at the same location
– was even more important than
the prior conviction, because it meant that the company should have been aware
of the need to
make relevant
3.194 A number
of participants also observed that there are so few OHS offences prosecuted and
sentenced that using prior convictions
as a measurement of a company’s
previous safety record will never be an accurate account:
To me, you could have really bad practices all the time and never be caught ...
I think the company’s prior behaviour, if we
had some crystal ball way to
[see] that, yes, absolutely [it would be] relevant ... I think ... we’ve
potentially set up a
defence of ‘We’ve got no prior
convictions’ and all the workers might be going ‘Yeah, but
you know, absolutely wrecked and in danger every day’.
(Community Consultation Participant, Bendigo (26 February 2024))
[I] can’t believe there’s only one prior conviction. The biggest
challenge I have is getting people to report [incidents].
Consultation Participant, Geelong (28 February 2024))
3.195 We also
asked participants to rate how relevant they considered the company’s
behaviour after the incident. In the Brick
& Mortar case, the company
undertook a national stop-work to audit their safety practices at all worksites,
and paid the funeral
expenses of the deceased worker. Half of the respondents
considered this factor to be ‘somewhat’ or ‘very’
relevant, while the other half considered it either ‘a little
relevant’ or ‘not relevant’ (Figure 22). And
in the Daylight
Solar case, the company had hired a full-time safety manager whose
responsibility it was to monitor implementation
of safety procedures at each
worksite. The majority of respondents (11 of 14) considered Daylight
Solar’s post-offence conduct
as ‘somewhat’ or
‘very’ relevant to sentencing (Figure 23).
Community consultation responses (post-offence conduct, Brick &
How relevant was Brick & Mortar’s post-offence conduct? (36
participants)
Very relevant
Somewhat relevant
A little relevant
Not relevant
Figure 23: Community consultation responses (post-offence conduct,
Daylight Solar)
How relevant was Daylight Solar’s post-offence conduct? (14
participants)
Very relevant
Somewhat relevant
A little relevant
Not relevant
3.196 Comments
from participants illuminate why there were more divergent views on the
relevance of post-offence conduct, especially
in the Brick & Mortar case
study, involving a large construction company. Some were pleased to see the
companies were responsive
to the risks once identified, others were sceptical
stop-work was an automatic consequence of a policy:
[B]ig company like that ... [they’d have] advisors saying,
‘Here’s what you need to do. Immediately put out this
statement saying you’re devastated. Send the family flowers and pay for
the funeral’. In my view, for the most
part, that sort of stuff
isn’t about being humble and recognising that they’re in the wrong.
It’s just about good
(Community Consultation Participant, Bendigo
(26 February 2024))
Where there’s a death on a site, they close the site down for the next
day, as a sign of respect for the deceased worker ...
the unions got together
with the employer associations and made the ‘death in the industry’
policy, which has set parameters
for when there’s a death in the industry
in Victoria. So it’s not that the company wants to do it.
Consultation Participant, Geelong (28 February 2024))
The Council’s view
is, in our view, a clear need for greater guidance on the relevance of an
offender’s prior character in the sentencing
of OHS offending, especially
in cases involving companies. The most common view expressed by stakeholders was
that character should
remain a relevant sentencing consideration, even for
companies, but that it should almost always be a subsidiary consideration to
seriousness of the offending and the need for general
deterrence.
Stakeholders also
considered that there should be clearer guidance about what factors might
contribute to a company’s character
in the context of OHS offending. Most
prominently, stakeholders were keen to see the assessment of a company’s
good character
limited primarily to its workplace health and safety history.
This should include factors such as the number of prior prosecutions,
issued, WorkCover claims, and evidence of investment in health and safety
initiatives, rather than a company’s contributions
to the community,
particularly contributions that occur after a workplace incident that results in
a prosecution.
3.198 Ultimately,
our view is that ‘character’ is a complex sentencing factor for
courts sentencing companies for OHS
offences, and that guidance is best achieved
through the introduction of a legislated sentencing guideline.
The relevance of the offender’s financial
circumstances
OHS offenders are companies
and most sentencing
outcomes are fines (87%).
When sentencing a company (or individual) to a fine, courts are required to
consider ‘the financial circumstances of the offender
and the nature of
the burden that its payment will
reviewing sentencing remarks for OHS cases, we found that courts’
consideration of financial circumstances varied widely.
In some cases, there
were detailed summaries of financial documentation provided by offending
companies, while in other cases, the
characterisation of an offender’s
financial circumstances was very brief, leaving the court to sentence in a
vacuum of information
submissions were made as to the financial capacity of the Company beyond
submitting that the Company could pay a
issue arose as to whether [the offender] had the capacity to pay an appropriate
note the capacity to pay was not raised as an
3.201 It appears
that in these cases, the courts’ limited engagement with the issue of
financial circumstances is driven by
two main factors:
information, or at least no obvious mechanism for courts to require detailed
information, about offenders’ financial
circumstances; and
a focus on the
issue of ‘capacity’ to pay a fine, as opposed to the consideration
of what fine amount would achieve the
purposes of sentencing, including the
primary purpose of general deterrence.
there is no obligation on defendant companies to share information about their
size, they will typically only do so when it
serves their interests, that is, to
demonstrate that they are experiencing, or would experience if fined, financial
hardship. This
state of affairs means that any consideration of financial
circumstances tends to have a
effect on the fine amount to be
imposed, with the court reducing the fine to acknowledge the limited financial
means of the offender.
Evidence of financial circumstances is rarely used to calibrate a penalty
to achieve an appropriate level of punishment or effective
deterrence.
to the introduction of a sentencing guideline, the same issue occurred in
England and Wales, leading to a
compression
of the range of fine
outcomes. For example, when developing its guideline for health and safety
offences, the Sentencing Council for
England and Wales reviewed a sample of OHS
offences that had resulted in death and were broadly comparable in terms of
culpability.
A ‘micro’ company, with a turnover of around £1
million, was fined £50,000 following an early guilty plea –
representing 5% of its turnover. And a very large company, with a turnover in
the region of £900 million, was fined
£300,000 after a trial for a
similar offence – the fine representing just 0.03% of its turnover. The
Sentencing Council
considered that this demonstrated an unacceptable degree of
compression of the sentencing
research has also noted this phenomenon, with smaller entities receiving fines
that are proportionately larger than the fines
received by larger
In one example from
Queensland, the court imposed a $3.6 million fine for work health and safety
breaches that resulted in four deaths.
That penalty represented just 0.54% of
the offending company’s yearly
same issues seem to exist in Victoria, with smaller companies often receiving
proportionately larger fines compared to the fines
received by larger companies.
These disparate outcomes are particularly evident in two cases with similar
levels of culpability sentenced
in the County Court, where evidence of the
offending companies’ annual turnover was provided. Coates Hire Operations
(‘Coates Hire’) was a large national company employing over
2,000 people and, in the financial year prior to its sentencing,
had a turnover
of $160 million. The court found that Coates Hire’s failure to ensure safe
working practices when using elevated
work platforms (resulting in the death of
a contracted employee) placed its culpability between the ‘mid and high
However, the company was fined a total of $250,000 (in respect of
three charges), representing just 0.16% of its prior year’s
Conversely, Redback
Tree Services Pty Ltd (‘Redback’) was a small company with 11
employees and an annual turnover of
approximately $1 million. In that case, the
court found that Redback’s failure to reduce the risk of electrocution
when working
close to live powerlines (resulting in the death of an employee)
also placed its culpability in the ‘upper middle level’
range. The company was fined $150,000 (for one charge), representing 15% of its
reviewed a number of cases that the courts described as involving offending in
the mid- to high range and resulted in a fatality,
but involved vastly different
financial circumstances of the offending companies. In all of these cases, there
was at least some
indication of the size of the company, either in the remarks
or via publicly available sources. Despite substantial variation in
the size of
each company, the following five cases all received fines that fell between
$350,000 and $475,000:
medium-sized recycling company with approximately 35 employees was fined
$450,000 for two
large warehousing company with almost 400 employees was fined
very large national building company (with an annual turnover over $1 billion)
was fined a total of $475,000 for two
small family-owned earthmoving company with limited financial means was fined
large construction and manufacturing company was fined
County Court recently commented on the compression of the range of fine amounts
in OHS cases. In
DPP v D&A Martin Transport Pty Ltd
, the court was
provided with four comparable cases that concerned the same risk (fall from
height) but differed considerably in terms
of the sizes of the companies, their
culpability, and mitigating and aggravating factors. Nevertheless, the court
noted that ‘despite
the differences between the cases, the sentences fell
within a reasonably narrow range (ranging from 21% to 30% of the applicable
maximum penalty)’.
Similarly in
DPP v YJ Auto Repairs Pty Ltd
, the court drew comparisons of
‘David and Goliath’ between the offender that was to be sentenced in
that case, and the
offender referred to in a comparable
Similar sentiments can
be found in media reporting of sentencing outcomes for OHS
the context of pecuniary penalties arising under other regulatory regimes, a
line of case law has emerged from the case of
Trades Practices Commission v
In that case, Justice French of the Federal Court stated that the
principal aim of penalties imposed under the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth), and similar regulatory regimes, was ‘to attempt to put a price
on contravention that is sufficiently high to deter repetition
contravenor and by others who might be tempted to contravene the Act’.
Determining the appropriate deterrent value of
a pecuniary penalty will involve
considering the following factors (known as the ‘French
the nature and
extent of the contravening conduct;
the amount of
loss or damage caused;
circumstances in which the conduct took place;
the size of the
contravening company;
the degree of
power the contravening company has, as evidenced by its market share and ease of
entry into the market;
deliberateness of the contravention and the period over which it extended;
whether the
contravention arose out of the conduct of senior management or at a lower
whether the
company has a corporate culture conducive to compliance with the Act, as
evidenced by educational programs and disciplinary
or other corrective measures
in response to an acknowledged contravention; and
whether the
company has shown a disposition to co-operate with the authorities responsible
for the enforcement of the Act in relation
contravention.
3.209 In other
regulatory contexts, the size of the company is therefore a standard
consideration when determining the amount of a
penalty to impose.
Stakeholder views
preliminary consultation, a number of stakeholders raised concerns about the
inconsistent approach to the assessment and relevance
of a company’s
financial circumstances during sentencing. As a result, we asked participants in
Consultation Paper
and survey whether the size of a company should be
relevant when imposing a
3.211 There was
strong support from stakeholders for a company’s financial circumstances
to be relevant to the sentence imposed.
Of the 63 survey participants who
responded to this question, 70% were of the view that the size of a company
should be ‘very’
or ‘somewhat’ relevant in determining
the appropriate sentence (Figure 24).
Figure 24: Survey responses
(size of company)
How important should the size of the company be in deciding an
appropriate sentence for an OHS offence? (63 participants)
Very relevant
Somewhat relevant
Not very relevant
in written submissions, all but
of the stakeholders who
responded to this question were of the view that the size of the company should
be a relevant factor when
sentencing OHS
Most stakeholders
were of the view that in order to effectively deter and punish OHS offenders,
penalties should be calibrated to
reflect the financial resources and size of a
company. For example:
[t]he financial position of the organisation should be a major contributing
factor to the initial decision about the fine amount
to be imposed ... Failure
to systematically and consistently take into account the financial position of
the defendant fails on equity
grounds. It does not ensure fines are experienced
similarly by defendant companies of different sizes and wealth.
(Submission
18 (Australian Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash University))
[t]he size of a company is ... relevant to the extent to which a fine has the
capacity to be punitive, or to act as a deterrent to
companies of a similar
size. The OPP ... consider[s] that sentencing practices in Victoria (in terms of
the range of fines imposed)
have developed in such a way that they may not be
aligned with the intention of the enforcement component of the OHS Act,
particularly
in relation to large and very large companies.
(Submission 3
(Office of Public Prosecutions))
[t]he AMWU considers that when imposing a fine on a company in an OHS case, the
size of the company should be relevant ... Fines
should be meaningful enough to
serve as a deterrent, regardless of the company’s size[.]
(Submission 6
(Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union))
the size of the company is a relevant consideration in imposing a fine on a
company in an OHS case, particularly in assessing general
culpability and
deterrence ... In terms of deterrence, a lower-range fine applied to a
small-sized business would be likely to have
greater deterrent value than if
applied to a medium to large-sized company. In this regard ... a fine needs to
have a ‘real
sting’ to it, and arguably the only way to achieve that
sting is for larger companies to receive larger fines.
(Submission 12 (Law
Institute of Victoria))
County Court, while acknowledging that matters such as this are matters of
policy for government, was ‘broadly supportive
of changes to sentencing in
OHS matters which ensure that the penalties imposed are consequential to the
offenders’.
Consultation Paper
, we also asked participants to identify (if the
size of the company was relevant to the fine amount) the most appropriate
for determining the size of a
Factors that courts
should examine, as suggested by some stakeholders, included:
company’s annual
number of employees of the
number of operational locations of the
the company is part of a larger corporate structure (including any parent or
subsidiary companies);
the company is publicly
Australian Institute of Health and Safety cautioned, though, against any
prescriptive metric to assess a company’s financial
circumstances, noting
that this ‘may result in companies arranging their reporting,
organisational, and potentially legal structures
so as to minimise risk and
Additionally,
several stakeholders suggested that for the court to be informed about a
company’s financial circumstances, the
parties should present detailed
evidence, including financial statements, annual reports and corporate
structures, to the court,
potentially by way of
3.217 During our
community consultation events, we also asked participants to indicate the
relevance of certain factors when deciding
the appropriate sentence for the
company in their case study. One of those factors was the size of the company.
In the case study
involving the large national construction company (Brick &
Mortar), the most common response from participants was that the size
company was ‘very relevant’ to the sentence they imposed (Figure
25). Conversely, only 14% of participants sentencing
the small solar panel
installation company (Daylight Solar) viewed the company size as ‘very
relevant’ to deciding the
appropriate sentence (Figure 26). Based on these
responses, it seems that members of the community are of the view that financial
penalties imposed on companies should be commensurate to the company’s
size and resources, particularly in the case of large
Figure 25: Community consultation responses (size of
company, Brick & Mortar)
How relevant was the size of Brick & Mortar Pty Ltd (large company)
to their sentence? (36 participants)
Very relevant
Somewhat relevant
A little relevant
Not relevant
Figure 26: Community consultation responses (size of company, Daylight
How relevant was the size of Daylight Solar Pty Ltd (small company) to
their sentence? (14 participants)
Very relevant
Somewhat relevant
A little relevant
Not relevant
to why participants were of the view that a company’s financial
circumstances should be relevant to the penalty imposed,
several participants
told us that larger companies are better resourced and aware of their
obligations under the
, and thus have little excuse for failing to
meet those obligations. For example, one participant commented that ‘a
multinational,
multi-million-dollar company, they’ve got the money, the
employees and a lot more knowledge. That’s certainly a
consideration’.
Similarly, another participant commented that large companies should ‘have
a higher standard of safety in this
3.219 Other
participants were of the view that penalties imposed for OHS offences should be
calibrated to the size of the company
in order to achieve the purposes of
sentencing, namely deterrence and just punishment. For example:
[i]f it’s a small fine in relation to the size of the company,
they’ll just pay it as a cost of doing business. It doesn’t
full weight behind it with a large company if there isn’t a significant
fine ... You couldn’t hit a small company
with [a] four-person team and
[that] doesn’t have a massive turnover with the same level of fine as the
large one because that’s
the end of the business. They’ve learned
something, but they don’t have a business anymore. You’d have to
at the turnover, and perhaps you’d use a ratio.
Consultation Participant, Dandenong (20 March 2024))
[a] large fine to a large company is pocket change in many cases, and it
won’t be a deterrent.
(Community Consultation Participant, Lilydale (18
March 2024))
as far as I’m concerned, I think it should be proportionate across
different companies ... I think it needs to be more proportional,
company’s profitable, etc., versus a small company ... it’s not even
the budget line for a large company, whereas
it would be significant for a small
private company.
(Community Consultation Participant, Morwell (21 February
consultation on our draft recommendations, there continued to be strong support
from stakeholders for the size of a company
to be a relevant factor at
sentencing.
One participant
at our Stakeholder Roundtable said that requiring companies to provide evidence
of their financial circumstances
to the court would help to alleviate some of
the difficulties in determining not only the size of the company but also its
to pay any fine imposed:
The benefit of having the affidavit as the default requirement is that you get
around this sort of grey submission, you’ll
often get that, ‘Oh, no,
we have capacity to pay a moderate fine, but [we’re] under some sort of
financial impact’.
The defence gives just enough so that the court
doesn’t probe further. They think they’ve got just enough
information,
whereas, if it’s all [in] an affidavit, it’s required
process ... I just feel that having that known as a guarantee,
going to get a better outcome.
(Participant at Stakeholder Roundtable (12
August 2024))
participant at our OHS Barrister Roundtable echoed the difficulty in determining
a company’s financial circumstances,
indicating that defendant companies
would only be expected to provide evidence if it benefitted their position
(where the evidence
shows that a company is in financial difficulty or has
limited means to pay a fine):
[I]n my view ... defence ... will only provide the court with financial
information ... if it helps [the] client’s case. And
I would have thought
that’s really what everybody does, and the courts probably know that
that’s the way that we approach
these things[.]
(Participant at OHS
Barrister Roundtable (16 August 2024))
The Council’s view
3.222 Current
sentencing practices do not reflect an adequate and systematic consideration of
the financial circumstances of offenders.
We find this to be a particular issue
in cases involving corporate offenders. There is a clear need to better
calibrate the sizes
of fines imposed to the financial circumstances of the
companies being sentenced. In our view, the best mechanism for doing so is
legislated sentencing guideline
(see [3.236]–[3.270]), one which
builds on the tried, tested, and proven model of England and Wales’
sentencing guidelines.
Recording convictions against companies
Victoria, a finding of guilt is not synonymous with the recording of a
conviction. A conviction is a separate order that can (but
need not) be made by
the court after a finding of guilt. When considering whether to record a
conviction in a case, courts must have
regard to all the circumstances of the
case, including the nature of the offending, the character and past history of
the offender,
and the impact of a conviction on the offender’s economic or
social wellbeing, or employment
respect to corporate offenders, which make up 83% of OHS offenders, the
consequences of recording a conviction are relatively
minimal: it may affect
their insurance premiums, but it may not; it may affect their ability to tender
for government work (if they
undertake such work), or it may not, especially in
thin markets;
prominently, it may affect their reputation, with consumers, with staff or
within their industry.
July 2005 to June 2021, 56% of all OHS offenders sentenced in the
Magistrates’ Court (where the vast majority of OHS cases
are sentenced)
did not have a conviction recorded (Figure
In the higher courts,
the rate was much higher, at
27: Proportion of OHS cases sentenced with and without the recording of a
conviction, Magistrates’ Court, June 2005–July
2021 (1,197
Number of cases
Without conviction
With conviction
3.226 In the
Consultation Paper
, we asked what factors should be the most significant
for courts to consider when deciding whether to record a conviction for an
offence (Question 14).
Figure 28: Community consultation
responses (conviction, both case studies)
Would you record a conviction on the company?
Number of participants
Brick & Mortar
Daylight Solar
3.227 In our
community consultation events, we asked participants if, in sentencing the
offender, they would have recorded a conviction.
As shown in Figure 28, almost
all participants recorded a conviction for Brick & Mortar, the case
involving a fatality at the
worksite of a large national company with a relevant
criminal history. However, participants were evenly split on whether to record
conviction for Daylight Solar, the case involving no injury at the worksite of a
small company: those who recorded a conviction
justified it on the basis of the
company’s prior criminal history, which involved similar risks; however,
those who didn’t
record a conviction pointed to the small scale of the
company’s operations, and a need to promote the rehabilitation of the
[I] was happy to go [with] the [undertaking] or a diversion type of thing that
might not have a conviction. So, it’s around
trying to put the
reinvestment back into ... education [and] awareness, rather than a conviction.
(Community Consultation Participant, Ballarat (19 February 2024))
Stakeholder views
Office of Public Prosecutions, the Victorian Congress of Employer Associations,
Ai Group and the Victorian Automotive Chamber
of Commerce affirmed the current
approach of exercising discretion, which involves weighing a complex range of
circumstances:
The sentencing court has the discretion to impose a conviction as part of the
process of instinctive synthesis. The factors that
are relevant in deciding
whether or not to impose a conviction, and the relative weight of those factors,
will turn on the facts
of the case and the evidence upon which the submissions
(Submission 3 (Office of Public Prosecutions))
[W]hilst the seriousness of the offence ... will ordinarily be the most
significant factor in deciding whether to record a conviction,
a sentencing
judge must balance many different and conflicting features ... [T]his requires a
wide discretion, that in addition to
the nature of the offence, includes
consideration of the character and history of the offender, and the potential
impact of recording
a conviction on the offender’s economic or social
well-being, or employment prospects.
(Submission 15 (Victorian Automotive
Chamber of Commerce))
When deciding whether to record a conviction, a court must consider ... the
character and history of the offender, and the potential
consequences of a
conviction on the offender’s economic or social wellbeing, or employment
prospects. VCEA point to the authorities
that detail that ‘...[t]he
sentence cannot, and should not, be broken down into some set of component
parts,’ and that
‘...the duty of the judge [is] to balance often
incommensurable factors and to arrive at a sentence that is just in all of
circumstances.’ VCEA argues that the factors to consider for recording a
conviction are for an independent judicial officer
to determine in accordance
with established principles and precedent.
(Submission 11 (Victorian Congress
of Employer Associations))
Decisions about recording a conviction should be the same [as those] that are
considered in relation to the quantum of the fine:
good character; guilty pleas
and remorse; and the offender’s conduct after the offending. In relation
to individuals (sole
traders, officers and other people in the workplace,
including employees) there does also need to be consideration of the impact
conviction on their future ability to work and undertake normal activities of
(Submission 4 (Australian Industry Group))
3.229 The Law
Institute of Victoria, in its submission, stated that recording a conviction on
a company can carry significant consequences
in the way of reputational damage
within industry, with clients and partners, and with the public generally, as
well as distinct
economic consequences:
A recorded conviction may also serve as a barrier for organisations to tender
for and secure public sector work, and this could impact
upon the financial
viability of the organisation. The broader economic consequences of recording a
conviction should be considered,
including whether the business will face
financial hardship or loss of market competitiveness due to the stigma
associated with a
conviction.
(Submission 12 (Law Institute of Victoria))
3.230 However,
the Office of Public Prosecutions submitted that this should only become a
consideration when a court is provided with
specific evidence of those
consequences, and not merely a ‘hypothetical’ assertion:
For example, a submission that a conviction could hinder success in future
government procurement processes ought not be considered
relevant (or ought to
carry little weight) if the prospect of that issue eventuating is purely
hypothetical. There is a need to ensure
that appropriate enquiries are made, and
that evidence is adduced, to support submissions that may be relevant or
determinative on
the question of conviction.
(Submission 3 (Office of Public
Prosecutions))
3.231 The Law
Institute of Victoria and the Australian Institute of Health and Safety also
submitted that courts should have regard
to the offender’s OHS record,
both before and after the offending, and exercise a degree of
‘leniency’ where an
otherwise positive commitment to occupational
health and safety can be observed:
[C]ourts should consider whether the organisation has adopted and implemented
adequate risk control measures to mitigate OHS incidents.
Depending on the
circumstances of the case, it may be appropriate for courts to exercise a degree
of leniency for workplaces who
have maintained a proactive and robust approach
towards addressing OHS risks and have a previous positive OHS record.
(Submission 12 (Law Institute of Victoria))
We believe an effective OHS system, and indeed an effective OHS macro-
ecosystem, is one that enables learning and improvement. The
challenge here is
the long-lasting ‘damage’, such as reputational or preclusion from
government tendering requirements,
that a conviction causes. The problem is that
we see [that] individuals and companies involved in serious OHS incidents can
often do) significantly improve their practices, attitude, and performance.
A conviction therefore can have the unintended effect
[of] harshly penalising
strong future performers. Whilst not the purview of this work, we encourage
government entities to take a
broader approach in their procurement to not
simplistically bar those who have received convictions from participating in
activities. Rather the focus should be on their reaction, their
responses, and how they have dealt with the issues, both systemic
incidental, related to the conviction. Again repeatability is important here.
Where there has been a demonstrated inability to
learn and improve, penalties
should be harsh. But where a company has managed risk appropriately and made
preventative investments
in expertise and control measures commensurate with
their scale and risk profile, they should not be ‘blacklisted’ based
on a moment of bad luck.
(Submission 19 (Australian Institute of Health and
and the Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union’s submissions
suggested that, given the current rate of convictions
in OHS cases, convictions
should be recorded in more cases. OHSIntros submitted that a conviction should
be recorded for ‘all
serious offenders, especially those who cause
harm’, but only if it can be shown to have a punitive effect in the sense
a loss of reputation or a deterioration of
The Australian
Manufacturing Workers’ Union submitted that:
[t]he court should be looking to record a conviction in the vast majority of
cases. As mentioned previously, the court should only
avoid recording
convictions in cases of genuine unavoidable accidents or very low-level
offending. The AMWU considers that the most
significant factors for courts in
deciding whether to record a conviction for an OHS offence should be the
severity of the offence,
the level of culpability, the impact on the safety and
well-being of workers, the history of compliance, and the demonstrated
to remedial actions and ongoing improvements in workplace safety
practices. These factors can help the courts make a fair and informed
that takes account of the specific circumstances of each case.
(Submission 6
(Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union))
3.233 However,
the Victorian Trades Hall Council was of the view that convictions should be
OHS cases, to ensure transparency of
court outcomes and the offenders’ history, and achieving an appropriate
level of deterrence:
[T]his is particularly important as a company’s OHS record is often a key
consideration in government procurement with a threshold
often set at whether
OHS convictions exist. The value of recording convictions for companies is the
threat of reputational harm and
limiting their access to publicly funded
projects. This is a significant and important deterrent factor. In addition,
convictions
for OHS offences should be publicly available and accessible. Every
worker deserves to be able to make informed decisions about their
managers, workplace, and industry, and can only make informed decisions when
they are provided all of the relevant information.
These include a suitably
accurate record of OHS breaches, especially those that are serious enough to
result in sentencing. Workers
deserve to know what they’re signing up for.
Currently workers are forced to rely on media attention, word of mouth, or
their own arduous research about the history of their employers
– this is not ok. WorkSafe or a like authority must maintain
an up-to-date
register of all companies and directors convicted of OHS offences, it must be in
plain language and easily accessible
to all workers. Every single OHS offence
with a conviction should be publicly accessible
. (Submission 8 (Victorian
Trades Hall Council))
The Council’s view
balance of stakeholder feedback regarding the court’s discretion to impose
a conviction on companies strongly suggests that,
in the OHS context, the
decision is one of significance, and the (reputational) consequences of a
conviction for a company can be
substantial. It must be noted that in
particularly thin markets, the effect of a conviction on a company’s
prospects for securing
government contracts becomes more difficult to
Notwithstanding
this, courts presented with evidence of the consequences of a conviction –
for the company’s reputation,
financial standing, future growth and
prospects for securing government contracts – can exercise their
discretion so as to
prioritise certain purposes of sentencing.
3.235 Given the
complexities involved in deciding whether to record a conviction for an OHS
offence, especially against a company,
our view is that the most appropriate
reform to achieve consistency, without interfering with judicial discretion, is
a legislated sentencing guideline that provides courts with guidance
A legislated sentencing guideline
3.236 There
is one single policy solution, in our view, that is uniquely capable of
addressing several of the issues described above,
and it is one that would
– as far as we are aware – be the first of its kind in Australia, if
not globally: specifically,
the introduction of a legislated sentencing
guideline into the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
legislated sentencing guideline would operate very similarly to the sentencing
guidelines developed by bodies such as the
Sentencing Council for England and
Wales and the Scottish Sentencing Council, but it would only come into force if
enacted as legislation.
In very brief summary – and we will explore the
various features in more detail below – this would involve amending the
to specify ranges of intended sentencing outcomes in OHS cases
based on certain factors (e.g. seriousness of the offending), and requiring
courts to have regard to those ranges, while still retaining full discretion to
sentence anywhere within, or even outside, those
ranges in appropriate
3.237 Introducing
a legislated sentencing guideline for OHS offences would:
consistency in the sentencing of OHS offences, given evidence in the UK that the
sentencing guideline for OHS offences shifted
sentencing practices ‘from
an art to a
entirely new sentencing standards, allowing courts to be unmoored from current
sentencing practices, which we have found
to be inconsistent with community
expectations and – in some cases – not capable of achieving the
purposes of sentencing;
increased use of currently underutilised sentencing orders, such as health and
safety undertakings and adverse publicity
specify the
extent to which the fact that someone has been killed or injured in an OHS
incident is relevant to sentencing;
sentencing ranges for companies based on the size of the company, and provide
guidance about how courts should assess the
size of a company; and
provide guidance
sentencing an OHS offence.
What are sentencing guidelines?
our 2018 report on the establishment of a sentencing guidelines council for
Victoria, we noted that there are two main types of
sentencing guidelines:
principle-based guidelines (e.g. guidance about how to approach certain
sentencing considerations, such as
the youth of an offender or any mental
impairment they may have) and offence-based guidelines (e.g. guidance about how
to sentence
a certain type of
The latter is where
our focus lies here. Offence-based sentencing guidelines in England and Wales
have three overarching features:
a staged decision-making process, numerical
guidance and principled guidance. In our 2018 report, we recommended that a
guidelines council in Victoria should be able to create offence-based
guidelines, which would include staged decision-making processes,
and include
sentencing ranges and starting points, so long as any guidance about the
appropriate type or level of punishment would
be supported by a comprehensive
and non-exhaustive list of considerations for courts to take into
We also recommended
that the purposes of a sentencing guidelines council should be to promote
consistency and transparency of approach
in sentencing (while preserving
judicial discretion) and promote public confidence in sentencing, and the
functions of a sentencing
guidelines council should include (among other things)
consulting with the community and key stakeholders about those
guidelines.
guidelines in England and Wales provide a framework to assist courts in ensuring
all relevant circumstances of an OHS case,
as well as the effect those
circumstances should have on the sentencing outcome, have been considered. They
guide courts to consider
the level of culpability, the level of harm risked by
the offence (as well as any actual harm suffered), and the financial
circumstances
of the offender. The guideline then provides indicative sentencing
ranges based on all of those factors. In the case of corporate
offenders, those
tables are arranged first by the size of the offender (as a ‘micro’,
‘small’, ‘medium’
or ‘large entity’). The
guideline also acknowledges that there may be ‘very large
organisations’, whose turnover
‘very greatly exceeds the threshold
for large organisations’, in which case ‘it may be necessary to move
the suggested
How would a legislated sentencing guideline for OHS offences
are a number of key features of a legislated sentencing guideline that would
enable it to be effective in achieving changes
to sentencing practices in OHS
cases: it would include a staged approach to sentencing a particular offence, it
would include sentencing
ranges for that offence based on a non-exhaustive list
of factors related to harm and culpability (and potentially even starting
points), it would include a non-exhaustive list of mitigating and aggravating
factors that a court may take into account, and it
would include a
non-exhaustive list of permissible reasons to depart from the sentencing
Applicable offences
are a wide range of offences contained in the
and the associated
regulations. A legislated guideline would be of most use in sentencing offences
that involve breaches of health
and safety duties, as these involve the most
complex elements and evidentiary matters, as well as the highest maximum
penalties and
therefore the broadest available sentencing ranges. They are also
the most common OHS offences sentenced. Offences that would be
subject to the
guideline should include breach of duty offences, the reckless endangerment
offence and the workplace manslaughter
Binding while retaining judicial discretion
legislated sentencing guideline would be located in the
Occupational Health
and Safety Act 2004
with the content forming part of a
schedule to the Act. An additional provision would also be inserted into the Act
to the effect
that courts sentencing applicable OHS offences must have regard to
the guideline (see above [3.236]).
2018, we explained that ‘it would be preferable to have no guidelines at
all rather than non-binding guidelines’, as
non-binding guidelines would
likely make sentencing even more complex and could introduce additional
inconsistencies, which would
threaten the transparency of, and public confidence
in, the sentencing
The same must be said
of any proposed legislated sentencing guideline for OHS offences.
3.244 We also
noted in 2018 that individualised justice is a fundamental principle of the
justice system, and it was imperative that
courts retain discretion to impose a
just and proportionate sentence according to the circumstances of each case. The
legislation
enabling the OHS offences sentencing guideline should therefore
allow courts to depart from the guideline ‘where doing so would
interests of justice’, provided that courts explain their reasons for
doing so. This approach would maintain the
integrity of the legislated guideline
while further promoting transparency in the sentencing process in those cases
where departure
from the guideline is necessary.
Applicable to offences sentenced on or after
commencement
legislated sentencing guideline would apply to all applicable offences
after commencement of the guideline. As noted in our report on
the establishment of a sentencing guidelines council, this approach
equal justice, helps to ensure that sentencing standards reflect current
community expectations and is consistent with the
approach already taken when
other changes are made to sentencing practices, including the High Court’s
decision in
the guideline should not apply during resentencing following a successful appeal
of a sentence that was imposed
to the commencement of the
guideline, and any amendments made to a guideline should not constitute a
permissible ground of appeal
against a sentence previously imposed under the
Sentencing practices for offences committed prior to guideline
enactment no longer relevant
guideline should specify that current sentencing practices prior to the
commencement of the guideline should no longer be relevant.
This is to ensure
that the guideline can have its intended effect of shifting sentencing practices
in appropriate cases.
Sentencing practices that apply the guideline would then become a relevant
factor to which courts have regard when sentencing under
the guideline. However,
the predominant consideration for courts would still be the application of the
guideline itself, with a consideration
of similar cases becoming relevant if
they assist a court in applying the guideline to the circumstances of the
present case.
Non-exhaustive criteria guiding the assessment of offence
seriousness
legislated guideline would provide a non-exhaustive list of criteria to guide
the determination of the seriousness of the breach
and the culpability of the
offender. For example, the first step of the England and Wales sentencing
guideline specifies a scale,
with examples of circumstances indicating the level
of culpability:
: a deliberate breach of, or flagrant disregard for, the law.
serious and/or systemic failures to address risks, or circumstances in which the
of the appropriate standard, for example,
by failing to put in place measures that are recognised standards in the
industry, ignoring
concerns raised by employees or others, failing to make
appropriate changes following prior incidents exposing risks to health and
safety, or allowing breaches to subsist over a long period of time.
systems were in place but were not sufficiently adhered to or implemented, or
the offender
of the appropriate standard that falls
between descriptions in ‘high’ and ‘low’ culpability
categories.
offender did not fall far short of the appropriate standard, for example,
because significant efforts were made to address the
risk although they were
inadequate on this occasion, or there was no warning/circumstance indicating a
risk to health and safety,
or failings were minor and occurred as an isolated
guidance is given regarding the level of harm, including by reference to the
seriousness of the harm that was risked (death,
physical or mental impairment,
significantly reduced life expectancy, etc.) as well as the degree of likelihood
of the harm materialising
(ranked as high, medium or low
likelihood).
Approach to sentencing factors
guideline would address specific sentencing factors, including:
the impact of
the offence on any affected persons (including by reference to any victim impact
statement under the
Sentencing Act
or impact statement under the
(see Recommendation 1);
any injury, loss
or damage resulting directly from the offence;
offender’s plea, and its timing;
the conduct of
the offender
the offending, including any steps taken to remediate
breaches, or to provide support to affected persons such as injured workers;
offender’s previous character and any limitations on relevant matters
informing character, in particular, for corporate
3.251 Importantly,
the guideline would address the court’s consideration of actual harm that
is involved in a case, including
reconciling the policy intent of the risk-based
nature of breach of duty offences with the moral imperative to recognise harm
arises from criminal breaches of OHS laws, the latter of which was strongly
identified in community consultation.
Size and/or financial circumstances of the offender
guideline would provide for a detailed consideration of the financial
circumstances of the offender, which would allow the
court to appropriately
calibrate the sentence to the offender’s size and financial means. This
could be done by reference to
financial measures, such as annual turnover or
earnings, or by reference to scale, such as the number of employees engaged by
offender, the value of assets under management or the geographic extent of
the offender’s operations.
guideline would then provide categories of financial size, to allow courts to
better calibrate the penalty. For example, in the
England and Wales Sentencing
Guideline, four categories are provided – micro, small, medium and large
– with provision
for very large organisations where ‘an offending
organisations’ turnover or equivalent very greatly exceeds the threshold
for large organisations’, in which case ‘it may be necessary to move
outside the suggested range to achieve a proportionate
Provision of sentencing ranges
3.254 Ultimately,
the guideline would specify sentencing ranges that courts should follow in OHS
cases, by reference to the culpability
of the offender, the seriousness of the
offending, the financial circumstances of the offender and other relevant
factors, including
the previous character of the offender, their plea and the
timing of their plea.
3.255 These
ranges would also address the types of available sentencing orders and provide
guidance on when orders such as health
and safety undertakings (as an
alternative to, or in addition to, a fine) and adverse publicity orders would be
appropriate.
Example application of a sentencing guideline: Bupa Care
is perhaps useful to provide a tangible example of how a sentencing guideline
for OHS offences would work. Given we envisage
the legislated guideline in
Victoria being quite similar in content and approach to the health and safety
offences sentencing guideline
produced by the Sentencing Council in England and
Wales, we have the benefit of looking to actual cases sentenced there to see how
the guideline has worked. One of the more detailed cases to date involved the
company Bupa Care Homes Ltd, offering services at over
120 nursing homes,
residential homes, elderly care homes and other similar housing in the United
Bupa Care Homes Ltd v
involved a patient
residing in an elderly care nursing home who had contracted a form of pneumonia
and died, with the most likely
cause being the care provider’s
‘failure to flush and disinfect pipes and fittings that had been installed
during refurbishment
works’. The Court of Criminal Appeal summarised how
the sentencing guideline works, then applied the guideline to the facts
case. In Case Study 4, the court:
assessed the
culpability of the offender as high because they were aware of the risk over a
lengthy period and did not take action;
assessed the
potential consequences of the risk in question as death, but the risk of death
occurring as low;
found that a
large number of people were exposed to the risk, but did not directly find the
risk to have been causative of the deceased’s
noted that the
company had a turnover of over £50 million, making it a ‘large
organisation’;
company had a prior conviction, but also noted the rehabilitative steps the
company had taken since the offending;
accounted for
the offender’s plea of guilty; and
using the ranges
in the guideline for large organisations with high culpability whose offending
is in harm category 2, determined
an initial fine of £2,250,000 that was
then reduced by one-third, to £1,500,000, to account for the plea of
Case study 4: Example application of sentencing guideline in
the UK: Bupa Care Homes Ltd
Summary of guideline
Application of guideline
Step 1(a): Culpability
[21] The Guideline provides a structure within which to sentence for
breaches of health and safety legislation. At Step One, the court
is enjoined to
determine the offence category. As part of that exercise it must first decide
‘culpability’. There are
four levels of culpability: very high,
high, medium and low. The conduct described in the Guideline to inform the
assessment of culpability
ranges from ‘deliberate breach of or flagrant
disregard for the law’, at one end, to ‘offender did not fall far
short of the appropriate standard’ at the other.
[34] Step One required the judge to determine the level of culpability. The
prosecution said that it was high, whereas the defence
said it was only medium.
The prosecution said that the Appellant had fallen far short of the appropriate
standard by allowing serious
breaches to subsist over a period of time, while
the defence said that systems were in place, but these were not sufficiently
[43] Overall, the judge’s conclusion on culpability was as
follows: ‘In my view Bupa Care Homes fell far short of the
appropriate
standards by allowing problems of which they were aware and which had a direct
bearing on the management of Legionella
risk to persist over a lengthy
period ... I’ve concluded on the basis of the entirety of the
evidence ... that the culpability
level is high’.
Step 1(b): Seriousness and likelihood of risk
[22] ... The Guideline [then] requires the court to determine both the
seriousness of the harm risked and the likelihood of that harm
arising. Each of
those factors may be ascribed to one of three categories. The seriousness of the
harm ranges from Level A (death/physical
or mental impairment resulting in
lifelong dependency on third party care for basic need(s) significantly reduced
life expectancy)
to Level C ... The likelihood of harm is to be categories as
either High, Medium or Low ... for seriousness of harm at Level A, with
likelihood of harm ... the harm category is ... 2.
[44] The judge then turned to her assessment of harm. She said the
seriousness of the harm risked was death, and that that had not
been disputed.
She then turned to the question of the likelihood of that harm. Having
considered the statistical evidence about mortality
from Legionnaires’
disease, she concluded that the risk was low, which meant that the harm category
in the relevant table was
Category 3.
Step 1(c): Extent of exposure and actual harm
[23] Having identified the appropriate level of harm, the Guideline then
requires the court to consider whether the offence exposed
a number of workers
or members of the public to risk and whether the offence was a significant cause
of actual harm.
[46] As to the first question, the judge said that she was in no doubt ...
that the offence exposed a number of employees and residents
to the risk of
[47] The judge then considered the second question, namely, the issue
of causation in relation to [the deceased’s] death ...
She found that the
failures she had identified did not themselves contribute to the circumstances
which led to the exposure of [the
deceased] ...
[48] Overall, the judge said
that it was right to go up a category in terms of harm to Category 2 so that,
overall, the case was one
of high culpability, with the harm in Category
Size of company
[24] At Step Two a starting point and category range are determined by
focussing on turnover, with aggravating and mitigating features
influencing
where in the range the starting point lies. The Guideline describes
organisations as ‘large’ (turnover £50
million and over),
‘medium’ (turnover £10 to £50 million),
‘small’ (turnover £2 to £10
million) and
‘micro’ (turnover up to £2 million). The defendant is expected
to provide the court with relevant financial
information to enable this exercise
to be carried out. In respect of each, there is a table bringing together the
four possible levels
of culpability and four possible harm categories.
[50] The Appellant’s turnover in 2015 was £77 million. In 2016
its turnover was £89 million ... Thus, under the Guideline,
it ranked as a
‘Large Organisation’ which meant the starting point was a fine of
£1.1 million with a range of £550,000
to £2,900,000. That
starting point is based on an organisation with a turnover of £50
Step 2(b): Aggravating and mitigating factors
[26] The Guideline includes a non-exhaustive list of factors both
increasing seriousness and those reducing it or reflecting mitigation.
explains that recent relevant previous convictions should result in substantial
upward adjustment. The impact of both aggravating
and mitigating features may
result in a move outside the category range identified in the Guideline.
[52] The judge then turned to aggravating and mitigating factors. She noted
the Appellant had one previous conviction, but not related
to Legionella,
in 2011. She also noted that there had been an improvement notice in relation
to Legionella risk management in 2009
in relation to another company
within the Bupa group.
[53] In relation to mitigation she said there had been
significant steps to address the cause of the offence and that better measures
were now in place. She said there had been remorse within the company albeit it
had not been well expressed.
Step 3: Proportionality
[29] Step Three requires the court to ‘check whether the proposed
fine based on turnover is proportionate to the overall means
offender’ ... a fine [must] take account of the financial circumstances of
the offender; ... it must meet in a proportionate
way the objectives of
punishment, deterrence and removal of gain derived from the offending; and ...
it must be ‘sufficiently
substantial to have a real economic impact which
will bring home to both management and shareholders the need to comply with
and safety legislation.’ It then enjoins the court to consider the
financial circumstances of the offender – the economic
realities –
with the result that in finalising the sentence the following factors are
relevant: (a) profitability. Adjust downwards
for a small profit margin and
upwards for a larger profit margin; (b) any quantifiable benefit derived from
the offence; (c) whether
the fine will put the offender out of business. Such an
outcome might be appropriate in some cases.
[54] The judge concluded: ‘Taking account of all the relevant factors
at this stage and my conclusions on culpability and harm,
at the conclusion of
Step Two I reach a fine of £2,250,000.’
[87] Applying a one
third discount for the guilty plea produces a figure of
£1,500,000.
3.258 Figure 29
provides an extract of the applicable sentencing guideline and highlights the
specific categorisations decided by
the sentencing court.
29: Extract of applicable sentencing guideline
Large Turnover or equivalent: £50 million and over
Starting point
Category range
Very high culpability
Harm category 1
£2,600,000 – £10,000,000
Harm category 2
£1,000,000 – £5,250,000
Harm category 3
£500,000 – £2,700,000
Harm category 4
£240,000 – £1,300,000
High culpability
Harm category 1
£1,500,000 – £6,000,000
Harm category 2
£550,000 – £2,900,000
Harm category 3
£250,000 – £1,450,000
Harm category 4
£120,000 – £700,000
Medium culpability
Harm category 1
£800,000 – £3,250,000
Harm category 2
£300,000 – £1,500,000
Harm category 3
£130,000– £750,000
Harm category 4
£50,000 – £350,000
Low culpability
Harm category 1
£180,000 – £700,000
Harm category 2
£35,000 – £250,000
Harm category 3
£10,000– £140,000
Harm category 4
£3,000– £60,000
Stakeholder views
Consultation Paper
, we asked stakeholders whether, in their view,
there is a need to increase fine amounts in OHS cases and, if so, what the best
to achieve that increase
Of the stakeholders who
responded to this question, seven were of the view that a sentencing guideline
(whether legislated or otherwise)
was the most practical mechanism, or at least
one of the most practical mechanisms, to achieve meaningful change to sentencing
stakeholders commented on the success of the sentencing guideline in England and
Wales in increasing sentencing practices
in workplace health and safety
breaches. Other stakeholders commented more generally on the need for
legislative intervention in
the form of sentencing guidance to assist courts in
interpreting various factors, such as the relevance of harm (see
[3.166]–[3.181]),
good character (see [3.182]–[3.198]) and a
company’s financial circumstances (see [3.199]–[3.222]). For
[s]entencing reform can only be achieved in a meaningful, sustainable, and
transparent way through the introduction of Sentencing
Guidelines ... OHS
Sentencing Guidelines were introduced in the [United Kingdom] ... in 2016. The
following year ... an impact review,
assessing the effect of the reform ...
proved that Sentencing Guidelines do increase fine amounts for OHS breaches.
Whilst the intention
for the Guidelines was to increase the quantum of fines for
large and very large organizations, there was also a reflective increase
fines for smaller companies ... In the period post-introduction, fines increased
by nearly 450%, and analysis of sentencing remarks
... suggest that the
Sentencing Guidelines are being applied in sentencing in the manner in which
they were intended.
(Submission 8 (Victorian Trades Hall Council))
[b]y revising OHS regulations and laws, authorities can explicitly outline the
new fine amounts for different types of offences.
Additionally, implementing a
transparent and standardized fine structure based on the severity of the
violation and the size of the
organization could help ensure fairness and
consistency in the application of increased fines.
(Submission 6 (Australian
Manufacturing Workers’ Union))
the OPP considers that it would be highly beneficial for courts to be provided
with clear guidance as to how to meaningfully conduct
this assessment in
relation to companies. The OPP considers that it would be beneficial to have
legislative guidance as to the offender-specific
factors that courts should take
into consideration when sentencing a company.
(Submission 3 (Office of Public
Prosecutions))
[t]his Submission endorses ... the adoption of the approach in England and
Wales, encompassing the guideline ... on sentencing for
health and safety
offences. The financial position of the organisation should be a major
contributing factor to the initial decision
(Submission 18 (Australian Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash
University))
Victorian Automotive Chamber of Commerce was opposed to the introduction of a
legislated sentencing guideline, concerned
with its potential erosion of
judicial discretion:
VACC ... does not support the introduction of legislated sentencing guidelines,
as it views it [as] fundamentally at odds with the
process of ‘instinctive
synthesis’ affirmed by the High Court, necessary in the fixing of a just
(Submission 15 (Victorian Automotive Chamber of Commerce))
consultation, we heard strong support from stakeholders for the introduction of
a legislated sentencing guideline for offences
contrary to the
For example, some
participants commented:
because [OHS offences are] so different to what [courts] normally see day to day
... having some form of assistance to interpret
legislation in the appropriate
way would be helpful.
(Participant at Stakeholder Roundtable (12 August
I do think ... it could be a really helpful tool to provide guidance to the
magistrates that don’t ordinarily deal with OHS
offences and where you
get, often, the low fines[.]
(Participant at OHS Barrister Roundtable (16
August 2024))
I believe there’s little to no utility increasing the maximum value
without [a] ... [s]entencing guideline, because at the
moment, we’re
seeing 1%, 2%, 3% [of the] maximum penalty, and it just gets lost ... so if you
have something that really adds
to it, being a guideline, it goes with it.
That’s when I feel you’ll see the change.
(Participant at
Stakeholder Roundtable (12 August 2024))
stakeholders, particularly WorkSafe, were of the view that a guideline should
also provide guidance for courts on the factors
relevant to imposing a
conviction in an OHS
3.263 While
there was no opposition to a legislated sentencing guideline from stakeholders
during roundtable consultation, some expressed
concern about the risk of a
guideline increasing the complexity of the courts’ sentencing exercise in
OHS cases. For example:
I could imagine that there’d be a lot of argument at plea hearings ...
is. So, I think it
would add a layer of complexity to those hearings.
(Participant at OHS
Barrister Roundtable (16 August 2024))
I think there probably could be some utility to have guidance ... in a statutory
form, particularly if there is an intention to say
that things like the fact
that death or serious injury occurred is relevant to sentence, or how
that’s relevant ... for example
... the size of the company measured by
these things, is relevant, but ... we already see it in criminal matters, plea
hearings do
become more complicated because all the lawyers are arguing about
statutory categories. (
Participant at OHS Barrister Roundtable (16 August
The Council’s view
results of our statistical analysis and community and stakeholder consultation
on sentencing practices for OHS offences
have shown that, in certain cases,
sentencing practices do not give proper effect to the purposes of sentencing and
are in substantial
misalignment with community expectations. This is
particularly evident in cases involving larger corporate entities and where
particularly
egregious breaches result in fatalities and other serious harm.
These issues undermine the effectiveness of criminal proceedings
offences, as well as public confidence in the criminal justice system and the
regulatory framework for occupational health
and safety.
3.265 We are of
the view that a decompression of sentencing practices (relating to fine
amounts), as well as a greater use of other
kinds of sentencing orders,
including health and safety undertakings and adverse publicity orders, is best
facilitated through the
introduction of a legislated sentencing guideline, which
would be included in the
. We note that, in order to be workable
and constitutionally viable, the guideline would have to be in primary
legislation as opposed
to delegated legislation or regulations.
Sentencing Council for England and Wales’ assessment of the impact of the
guideline, published three years after it came
into effect, found that the
guideline had been applied as intended by judicial officers, and had led to an
increase in fine amounts
imposed, in particular, in cases involving large/very
large organisations. This suggests that the greatest effect of the guideline
in achieving a closer calibration of sentencing outcomes to the size and
financial circumstances of the
are not the first law reform body in Australia to identify a need for
legislative guidance for courts in sentencing corporate offenders.
In 2020, the
Australian Law Reform Commission recommended that the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) be amended to require courts to consider the following factors when
sentencing a corporation:
the type, size
and financial circumstances of the corporation;
whether the
corporation had a corporate culture conducive to compliance at the time of the
the extent to
which the offence or its consequences ought to have been foreseen by the
corporation;
the involvement
in, or tolerance of, the criminal activity by management;
whether the
unlawful conduct was voluntarily self-reported by the corporation;
any advantage
realised by the corporation as a result of the offence;
the extent of
any efforts by the corporation to compensate victims and repair harm;
the effect of
the sentence on third parties (such as employees); and
any measures
that the corporation has taken to reduce the likelihood of it committing a
subsequent offence, including internal investigations
into the causes of the
offence, internal disciplinary action, and measures to implement or improve a
compliance program.
factors largely replicate the ‘French factors’ (discussed at [3.208]
above), which are a list of considerations
relevant to the imposition of
pecuniary penalties, and frequently applied by the Federal Court in
particular.
considering the option of introducing a legislated sentencing guideline as a
means of changing sentencing practices, we have
also considered alternative
options. One such option was incorporating either the French factors or the
factors described by the
Australian Law Reform Commission, into the
as part of a new provision specifying factors relevant to sentencing
offences under the Act. We have come to the conclusion that
courts sentencing
OHS offences in Victoria
largely taking those factors
into account. Moreover, given there would be a continuing obligation on courts
to consider current sentencing
practices – which in our view need to
change – a legislated list of factors is unlikely to result in the
necessary change
to those practices. We are therefore of the view that the
addition of a legislated provision specifying relevant factors would not
any material changes in sentencing practices, as the issue lies with the
those factors are given and the extent to which
they affect
the sentencing outcome. Ultimately, a legislated sentencing guideline offers a
far more promising opportunity to drive
substantial and meaningful changes in
sentencing outcomes in OHS cases.
3.270 In coming
to the view that a legislated sentencing guideline is the most effective way of
addressing the issues identified above,
we note that the detail of such a
guideline was not a dedicated component of our consultation with the community.
Accordingly and
given the novel nature of this reform, extensive further
consultation is required to develop that guideline, and to calibrate the
sentencing ranges contained within it, in close collaboration with all relevant
stakeholders, including regulators, the courts, industry,
and worker and victim
representatives.
Recommendation 9: A legislated sentencing
The Victorian Government should ask the Sentencing Advisory Council to
develop and consult on a draft sentencing guideline for inclusion
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
(Vic) when sentencing offences
contrary to that Act.
Key features of the guideline would include:
the guideline
would apply to all breach of duty offences (sections 21 to 31), as well as the
reckless endangerment (section 32) and
workplace manslaughter (section 39G)
the guideline
would apply to all offences sentenced after enactment;
the guideline
would provide a range of sentencing outcomes based on various characteristics of
the offending and the offender;
for the purpose
section 5(2)(b)
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic), courts applying the
guideline would only be permitted to have regard to sentences imposed for an OHS
offence pursuant to the
courts would be
required to follow the guideline but would be permitted to depart from the
guideline if following it would be contrary
to the interests of justice, and
they explain their reasons for doing so;
the guideline
would include guidance about how courts should approach specific factors in
sentencing OHS offences, such as the offender’s
culpability, the objective
seriousness of the offence, the offender’s financial circumstances, any
injury, illness or harm
caused by the offence, and the offender’s
Providing courts with evidence of financial
circumstances
order for courts to implement the above reforms aimed at changing sentencing
practices, it is essential that courts are properly
informed about the financial
circumstances of offenders. Without that information, courts would not be able
to apply the legislated
sentencing guideline as proposed.
3.272 Our review
of sentencing remarks in OHS cases shows that typically the discussion around
the financial circumstances of the
offender is limited in scope. As noted above,
a court may even make a request for evidence about financial circumstances, only
have that request not be answered by the offender. We are of the view that
this practice should not continue.
cases illustrate the frustrating position sentencing courts are sometimes placed
DPP v Oriana,
the County Court sentenced an individual, a
self-employed plasterer, for a breach of the
regulations.
In imposing a
fine, the court noted that it was required, as far as practicable, to take into
account the offender’s financial
circumstances, in accordance with
Sentencing Act
. The court requested that the offender provide a
tax return or other evidence of income; however, no such evidence was provided,
and the court had to proceed to sentence the company and individual without that
the offending company had a limited capacity to pay a fine, because
it was on the brink of entering liquidation or administration.
considered the principle that where it that appears a company would not be able
to pay any fine (because it is in the process
of being wound up), a court should
effectively ignore the company’s financial circumstances and impose an
otherwise appropriate
fine. However, the court accepted an assurance –
made in open court by legal counsel for the company, on instructions from
the directors of the company, who was a practising solicitor – that the
company would meet its legal obligations. This
enabled the court to ‘very
significantly moderate’ the amount of the fine to be imposed to ensure it
was capable of being
New South Wales District Court provides a useful example of a mechanism for how
financial circumstances could be made more readily
available in more cases. Its
practice directions state that evidence about financial circumstances must be
made by way of affidavit,
within a set period of time prior to the plea
The Law Institute of
Victoria, in its submission, supported the introduction of a similar requirement
in Victoria.
considered two possible reforms aimed at ensuring that courts are provided with
the necessary evidence of financial circumstances
as a matter of course in OHS
introduction of
a legislative requirement for companies being sentenced for OHS offences to
provide courts, by way of affidavit, with
evidence of financial circumstances;
a legislated
presumption allowing courts to assume, in the absence of evidence to the
contrary, that a company found guilty of an
OHS offence will have the financial
means to meet any penalty that the court considers appropriate to impose in the
circumstances.
3.276 While
stakeholders were generally supportive of additional assistance for courts in
this context, they were divided on which
approach was most appropriate. Some
even supported having both measures in place, with the presumption taking effect
if the offender
fails to provide sufficient evidence regarding their financial
circumstances.
3.277 We are of
the view that a legislative
requirement
is the more appropriate reform
option. If the aim is to ensure courts are adequately informed about the
financial circumstances of
an offender for the purposes of sentencing, there
must be a positive obligation to provide that information. The alternative
a presumption that applies in the absence of that evidence – may
often be inadequate because, without actual information regarding
circumstances, in many cases courts would not be able to determine what is an
‘appropriate penalty’. This is
also an issue given the prominent
role ‘financial circumstances’ would play in the structure of a
legislated sentencing
guideline. Accordingly, we believe this reform would have
the greatest intended effect if it was introduced at the same time as the
legislated sentencing guideline, making it clear that this evidentiary
requirement is necessary for courts to correctly apply the
Access to sentencing remarks
3.278 While
90% of OHS cases are sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court, very few
sentencing decisions of that court are publicly
available. This gap is filled by
WorkSafe’s prosecution result summaries published on its website. These
are brief summaries
of the offending involved in the case, the sentencing
outcomes and, in many cases, the sentencing factors considered by the court,
both aggravating and mitigating.
several stakeholders suggested that sentencing remarks in OHS cases sentenced in
the Magistrates’ Court should be more
widely available for two reasons:
ensuring accuracy in reporting sentencing outcomes, and demonstrating more
accurately current sentencing
practices with respect to certain sentencing
factors, thereby assisting courts with sentencing future
preliminary consultation, and in written submissions, some stakeholders
commented that consistency in sentencing practice,
particularly in the summary
previous OHS cases. Access
to sentencing remarks would allow prosecutors and
defence practitioners greater insight into the facts that led to previous
and help them gather more comparable cases to present to sentencing
3.281 This issue
was also raised in the review of Queensland’s
, based on the
model laws:
[I]t was noted that the decisions of the Magistrates’ Court imposing
sentences for breaches of the [Work Health and Safety]
Act are not published.
Rather, those sentences are the subject of a brief summary prepared by the
relevant prosecutor, which do not
contain the presiding problems in respect to
other magistrates, prosecutors and defendants relying upon those summaries, and
the purposes of general deterrence. The lack of published decisions which
are publicly accessible may be an impediment to both the
specific and general
deterrence.
3.282 However,
we ultimately do not believe it is strictly necessary to make a recommendation
that more sentencing remarks be made
public. We consider that the primary issue
identified in this chapter is that sentencing practices, both generally and in
cases, are significantly out of step with community expectations, and
in some cases fail to adequately achieve the purposes of sentencing.
more fundamental issue regarding the
of sentencing approach and
outcomes, as opposed to consistency or access to comparable cases. Accordingly,
we are of the view that
remedying this issue is best achieved by changes to
maximum penalties coupled with a comprehensive legislated sentencing guideline
that will decompress sentencing practices, give greater effect to the purposes
of sentencing, and achieve more effective OHS-related
Prosecutorial resourcing implications of changed sentencing
3.283 Finally,
we note that the introduction of a legislated sentencing guideline is expected
to significantly increase fine amounts
for OHS offenders that receive fines.
This, in turn, may have some bearing on the number of matters that are able to
be heard summarily
in the Magistrates’ Court, given the court’s
heard in the indictable stream, there will need to be, within the Office of
Public Prosecutions, an increase in the specialisation
and level of resources
dedicated to running those matters.
of fines for OHS offences
4.1 Our terms of
reference asked us to examine the enforcement of sentencing orders for OHS
offences, especially court fines. In other
words, how many fines for OHS
offences are actually paid, and are there opportunities to improve payment rates
for those that aren’t?
Thanks in large part to data provided by the
courts, WorkSafe Victoria (‘WorkSafe’) and Fines Victoria, we made a
of important findings about payment of fines for OHS offences in Victoria
Consultation Paper
Statistical Report
published in February 2024:
First, there are
multiple avenues for paying fines for OHS offences, and while these avenues
provide flexibility in payment, they
also mean that there is no single entity
responsible for monitoring payment rates for OHS fines.
Second, while
most fines for OHS offences are directed to WorkSafe to help fund the WorkCover
Authority Fund, there is some uncertainty
in both the legislation and practice,
and some OHS fines appear to instead be directed to consolidated revenue (in
Victoria, ‘the
Consolidated Fund’).
while 67% of fines for OHS offences are fully paid and 4% are partly paid (most
likely due to ongoing payment plans involving
individuals), the remaining 29% of
fines are entirely unpaid, accounting for almost $2.5 million a year in unpaid
Fourth, the
factor most commonly associated with complete non-payment of an OHS fine is the
offender being a company that has deregistered
since the offending. We heard
many stakeholders raise concerns that some companies may be
‘phoenixing’ – that is,
undertaking substantially similar
work, with the same people and plant, but registered under a new company name
paying fines.
Fifth, at the
date of publishing our
Consultation Paper
Statistical
, in February 2024, the ‘declared director’ provisions in
Fines Reform Act 2014
(Vic) had not yet been utilised for any
offenders, let alone OHS offenders, as a means of holding individual directors
liable for fines imposed on deregistered companies.
4.2 Based on
these findings, we asked in our
Consultation Paper
whether there were any
opportunities to simplify or improve the process for paying fines imposed in OHS
cases (Question 17) and also
whether there might be any opportunities to improve
fine payment rates for OHS offences (Question 18).
4.3 In this
chapter, we present stakeholders’ views on these topics and our
recommendations for reform.
Where should fines for OHS offences go?
Consultation Paper
, we observed that there was some ambiguity in the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) (‘the
Sentencing Act
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
section 69ZB
Sentencing Act
specifies that:
[t]he whole or any part of a fine, penalty or sum of money which by or under any
Act is authorised or directed to be imposed on a
person forms part of, and must
be paid into, the Consolidated Fund if no other way of appropriating or applying
it is prescribed
is, unless there is an express intention to the contrary in another legislative
instrument, the default approach is that all
court fines collected will be
distributed to the Consolidated Fund as general
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
(3) There must be paid into the Fund—
amount received or recovered by or on behalf of the Authority ... as a penalty
for an offence under ... the
Occupational Health and Safety Act
is the provision currently relied upon by WorkSafe as authority for the
distribution of most court fines collected for OHS offences
to its WorkCover
Authority Fund.
What is not,
however, immediately apparent in the provision is a clear intention that fines
collected for OHS offences are ‘recovered
... on behalf of’
few stakeholders directly commented on this issue in their submissions. Among
those who did, however, there was a unanimous
view that there should be
legislative reform to more clearly specify where fines for OHS offences should
go, and even more specifically,
that those fines should be directed to
instance, the Law Institute of Victoria wrote that:
[L]egislative clarification is crucial to specify whether all fines are to be
allocated to the WorkCover Authority Fund or [to the
Consolidated Fund], thereby
eliminating the current parallel pathways and ensuring consistency in the
distribution of collected
Victorian Automotive Chamber of Commerce agreed, saying that:
[c]onsideration might also be given to the monies going ... to WorkSafe –
if those monies were utilised for the purpose of
... achiev[ing] healthy and
safe workplaces.
too did the Workplace Incidents Consultative Committee, saying that it was
currently ‘unclear which agency receives the monies
from payment of
fines’, and recommending that fines should ‘accrue to WorkSafe,
which would enable proceeds to be invested
back into OHS prevention and used to
support WorkSafe’s enforcement
activities’.
4.13 We agree
with these submissions. Legislative clarification that court fines for OHS
offences should be directed to WorkSafe would
largely confirm the current
practice in most instances. It would also remove any ambiguity in the
provisions, and ensure that anomalous
OHS fines are not inadvertently sent to
the Consolidated Fund.
Recommendation 10: Distribution of paid
court fines
The Victorian Government should amend the
Occupational Health and Safety
(Vic) to more clearly specify that all court fines paid for OHS
offences are to be paid into the WorkCover Authority Fund.
Improving fine payment rates
mentioned at [4.1] above, we found that a substantial number of fines for OHS
offences are entirely unpaid, in large part
due to offender companies no longer
being in existence at the time of – or soon after – sentencing.
stakeholders wrote in their submissions about the importance of addressing this
WorkSafe, for
instance, wrote that ‘potential phoenix activity as a way to avoid
criminal liability needs to be addressed’,
and also provided a
pseudonymised case study of phoenixing (Case Study 5). Similarly, the Victorian
Trades Hall Council wrote that
non-payment of fines can undermine the efficacy
of the regulatory system, whereas ensuring full payment has the potential to
safety outcomes:
Directors or officers of a deregistered company may go on to
‘phoenix’ their operations. The capacity for a company to
punishment for their crimes threatens the efficacy of the entire OHS system, and
we need sentencing reform in this space to
reduce the incidence of fine
avoidance ... All fines for companies should be attached directly to the
individual directors until
it is paid in full ... Creating structural
directorial liability will ensure a greater likelihood of full repayment and
will reduce
the appeal and ease of ‘phoenix’ companies. A further
positive outcome of this step would be to enhance the personal
involvement in
OHS matters of company directors resulting in an increased focus on safety
throughout companies.
Australian Centre for Justice Innovation also wrote that:
[f]ines do not have much punitive effect if they are not, in fact, paid ...
Phoenixing is a wicked problem. It undermines both the
functional and expressive
purpose of the law. Wrongdoers are not punished; the deterrence effect of the
system is undermined; and
people are left frustrated at its injustice and
Case Study 5: Phoenixing case study
On 3 March 2022, Fake Carpentry Pty Ltd (not a real entity) was charged with
offences under the OHS Act.
On 18 March 2022, WorkSafe receive an ASIC alert regarding Fake Carpentry Pty
Ltd indicating that external administrators had been
appointed. The liquidator
indicated to WorkSafe and the court that Fake Carpentry Pty Ltd did not have
funds to take active part
in the prosecution in order to defend the charges and
would have accepted whatever decision the court would have ultimately taken.
On 8 December 2022, WorkSafe applied for the matter to proceed as an ex parte
hearing. The court found all charges proven. Fake Carpentry
Pty Ltd was
convicted and sentenced to pay a total fine.
On 17 January 2023, WorkSafe become aware that the director of Fake Carpentry
Pty Ltd is the sole director and shareholder of another
company called Fake
Woodwork Pty Ltd, carrying on the same business undertaking with the same
employees (except the one that had
been injured).
Source: Submission 21 (WorkSafe Victoria)
stakeholders advocated against the need for reform in this space. The Victorian
Congress of Employer Associations wrote that it
is ‘not aware that there
is a particular ... problem with low collection rates [for OHS fines] compared
to other fines against
businesses’ and therefore suggested that
‘this would not seem to be a matter that warrants further
consideration’.
Similarly, the Victorian Automotive Chamber of Commerce said that it does
‘not believe that there is an evidenced need to improve
fine payment rates
for OHS offences’ and argued that when insolvent companies receive fines
‘there was never an intention
for the offender to pay the
do not agree that there should ever be an intent for fines for criminal offences
to go unpaid.
We are instead
more persuaded by the submission that unpaid fines have the potential to
undermine the efficacy of the regulatory
system. In addition, a discrete focus
on the payment of fines for OHS offences is warranted, as they are the largest
fines imposed
for criminal offences in
Moreover, given the
greater rationality of corporate actors, maximising the deterrent value of
criminal sanctions is of utmost importance.
effect, we do not see 27% of fines for workplace health and safety offences
going entirely unpaid, at almost $2.5 million a year,
to be an acceptable state
of affairs. If there are ways to better ensure accountability for OHS fines, and
better achieve the purposes
of sentencing in OHS cases (and therefore improve
safety practices more broadly), they should be pursued. Indeed, as the
Centre for Justice Innovation said in its submission, multiple
concurrent solutions may be required to address the complex problem
of ensuring
fine payment in cases involving deregistered
raised a number of possible solutions for improving payment rates for OHS fines
Consultation Paper
. These included (1) making directors personally
liable for fines imposed on companies in appropriate cases, (2) allowing courts
disqualify individuals from being directors of companies and (3) introducing
successor liability for companies that are a ‘mere
continuation’ of
a deregistered entity.
consider each of these options in detail, including stakeholder views,
Making company directors personally liable
are two key circumstances in which a director of a company can be held
personally liable for a fine imposed on the
liable for company fines at sentencing
Sentencing Act
allows the prosecution to apply for a court order that directors be made
jointly and severally liable for a fine imposed on a body
corporate if certain
criteria are met. Those criteria include (1) that the body will not be able to
pay an appropriate fine and (2)
that immediately before the commission of the
offence there were reasonable grounds to believe that the body would not be able
meet any liabilities that it incurred at that time. In other words, the
company would effectively have had to be trading while insolvent
at the time of
the OHS offence, which is rarely the case. This requirement is likely why, as
far as we can tell, this provision has
never been used.
liable for company fines
: the second means of
holding directors personally liable to pay a fine for an offence committed by a
company is perhaps more promising.
Provisions in the
Fines Reform Act 2014
(Vic) allow the Director of Fines Victoria to serve a person with a
‘declared director notice’ if satisfied that certain
criteria are
met. In particular, the person must have been a director of the relevant body
corporate, and the body corporate was
deregistered after the commission of the
alleged offence, it does not have sufficient personal property to pay the fine
or it is under
administration.
declared director notice has been served on a person, they become jointly and
severally liable for the fine imposed on the
body corporate. They can, however,
apply to the Magistrates’ Court, within 28 days of being served the
notice, for an order
that they are
The court can make
such an order if the person was not involved in the management of the
organisation, or they took all reasonable
steps (or there were no reasonable
steps they could have taken) to ensure that the fine was paid after the fine was
registered with
If the person does
not seek an order that they are not a declared director, or if the
Magistrates’ Court refuses to make such
an order, they will be personally
liable to pay the fine imposed on the company.
beyond the scope of our sentencing enquiry to consider whether more directors
as officers of body corporates, in order to enhance
directors’ personal accountability for OHS fines. That is a matter of
prosecutorial
discretion for WorkSafe Victoria and (in appropriate cases) the
Director of Public Prosecutions.
is, however, particularly given our terms of reference, within our purview to
examine the extent to which fines, as sentencing
orders, are complied with and
enforced. In that context, it is fair to describe the director liability
provisions as having been
relatively underutilised since their introduction at
the end of 2017. At the time of publication of our
Consultation Paper
February 2024, Fines Victoria had not issued any declared director notices.
Fines Victoria has, though, issued four since then,
it is encouraging to see increased use of this enforcement tool, we believe
Fines Victoria should undertake a comprehensive
fines (which are the largest fines in Victoria by individual value) and consider
whether to issue a declared director notice
on any relevant persons in
appropriate instances. Fines Victoria should also undertake a similar review on
an annual basis. While
few stakeholders expressed a specific view on the
potential utility of declared director notices (in written submissions, it was
only the Australian Centre for Justice
that supported
increased use of these provisions) there was nevertheless broad support for
enhancing directors’ personal liability
in appropriate
Recommendation
11: Declared director provisions
Fines Victoria should, initially and then annually, review all unpaid court
fines imposed on body corporates for offences contrary
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
(Vic), and consider whether to serve a declared
director notice on any relevant persons.
Introducing successor liability
the United States, the concept known as ‘successor liability’
emerged in the context of corporations law, in particular,
mergers and
acquisitions. Typically when companies merge, they bring their past liabilities
with them into the new larger entity.
But when one company buys another (an
‘asset sale’ transaction) those past liabilities can fall away.
Successor liability
functions as an exception to that latter scenario,
preserving liability.
successor can be held liable for the liabilities of the predecessor if certain
criteria are met: (1) it is a specific form of
liability, (2) the successor had
actual or constructive notice of the liability, (3) the successor’s
operations are ‘a
substantial continuation’ of the
predecessor’s and (4) the predecessor cannot provide the relief
4.26 There is
considerable flexibility in the applicable test of whether one entity is a
‘continuation’ of another. The
test involves examining consistency
in various factors (known as the ‘
personnel (e.g. directors and
supervisors);
other personnel
(e.g. staff);
work and work
identity; and/or
geographical
location of the
workplace(s).
policy intent of successor liability is to ensure corporations ‘[cannot]
avoid liability by simply changing their form or
But currently,
as the New South Wales Court of Appeal noted in 2010, ‘the successor
liability principle ... does not apply
to corporations in
Australia’.
Nor does it
apply in England and Wales:
There is no serious possibility that under English law the successor company
could be made liable for the debts of its predecessor
... [even if] “the
successor has the same stockholders as the predecessor and conducts the same
business with the same management,
facilities, employees, products, and trade
concept of successor liability has, though, been applied widely in the United
States, in thousands of
Despite this, there is
limited literature on the topic, particularly from non-United States countries.
In 2015, one United States
scholar described that there was ‘negligible
scholarly output’ on the topic, and that successor liability ‘has
remained largely
under-empiricized’.
This may partly explain why it has not become a prominent consideration for
reform elsewhere, especially in the context of ensuring
payment of fines that
have been imposed on deregistered corporate entities in criminal proceedings.
Consultation Paper
, we raised the possibility of introducing a form
of successor liability in Victoria, allowing successor companies to be held
for fines imposed on predecessor companies in criminal proceedings, as a
potential means of improving fine payment rates in OHS
Stakeholder views
number of submissions we received raised concerns about some companies
‘phoenixing’, that is, continuing under a new
name to avoid paying
fines imposed for OHS
WorkSafe, for
instance, argued that phoenixing ‘as a way to avoid criminal
liability’ is a problem that ‘needs
addressed’.
stakeholders who specifically addressed the potential utility of successor
liability as a solution to phoenixing supported
such a reform.
Victorian Trades Hall Council expressed support for successor liability as a
possible reform alongside enhanced director liability
4.32 The Law
Institute of Victoria also wrote that:
given the approximately $2.5 million in unpaid annual fines, an approach that
targets fine evaders is necessary. Legislative amendments
should target
‘phoenix’ companies by holding successor entities liable for fines
imposed on their predecessors, thus
closing the loophole that allows companies
to evade financial penalties through dissolution and
liquidation.
4.33 Monash
University’s Australian Centre for Justice Innovation considered the
options raised in the
Consultation Paper
and indicated that a variety of
solutions, including the introduction of successor liability, are likely
required to address the problems
associated with phoenixing:
Each of these options is worthy of further, more detailed investigation. Indeed,
such is the wicked nature of phoenixing, that it
may be that all three options
are required to operate in combination to effectively address the
The Council’s view
wicked problem created by phoenix companies is not new. What is believed to be
the earliest report in Australia raising the
was published by the
Victorian Parliament’s Law Reform Committee in 1994, describing phoenixing
[a] limited liability company fails, unable to pay its debts to creditors,
employees and the State. At the same time, or soon afterwards,
the same business
arises from the ashes with the same directors, under the guise of a new limited
liability company, but disclaiming
any responsibility for the debts of the
previous company.
4.35 A journal
article from 1998 provides the following example:
[A] real estate company ceased trading on one day with substantial debts –
the company being placed into liquidation. On the
same day another company
received a real estate licence – the second company having the same
directors, the same address, the
same staff and the same telephone
are estimated to be thousands of phoenix companies operating in
costing billions
of dollars annually.
Law Reform Committee in 1994 made a number of recommendations to better improve
the ability of creditors (including the state)
to seek relief, despite
deregistration of the liable entity. None of its recommendations, however,
raised the possibility of successor
liability; they focused instead on holding
the former directors of the deregistered entity personally liable. The same is
multiple other inquiries
which grappled with
the issues created by phoenixing, but did not expressly consider the potential
utility of introducing successor
liability. These inquiries have instead focused
on other solutions, such as director disqualification, sanctions for illegal
activity, and limitations on successor companies using similar names as
predecessors.
4.38 We are of
the view that a framework enabling court fines to follow successor companies
would be a crucial component of ensuring
enforcement of, and therefore
accountability for, those fines. This would operate as a major disincentive to
offenders engaging in
illegitimate company phoenixing motivated purely by the
desire to avoid paying court fines, and would also ensure a higher level
accountability in all cases.
consultation, Fines Victoria’s preliminary view was that it would be
feasible for them to investigate and identify successor
companies by reference
to an appropriate threshold for similarity between successors and the entities
they replaced.
We believe the
criteria discussed above at [4.26] – a modified version of the
factors – could be used for this purpose.
4.40 We believe
a mechanism for successor liability could operate in a similar way to that
relating to declared director notices.
That is, Fines Victoria would be given
the power, after conducting necessary investigations, to declare a company a
company’, rendering it liable for the court fine imposed
on the previous, now deregistered company. The declared company, upon
served with a notice, would then have the opportunity to apply to the
Magistrates’ Court for an order that the company
is not a declared company
and therefore not liable to pay the fine of the predecessor company.
4.41 We note
that the introduction of successor liability raises a number of issues, the
first of which is that it would have a very
broad application. While the focus
of this review is cases involving OHS offences, successor liability would, in
theory, apply to
all matters involving a sentenced corporate offender. There are
also a number of potential challenges involved with the implementation
scheme, perhaps most significantly being the constitutional permissibility of a
state-based scheme affecting corporations,
which are governed by a federal
regulatory regime. We believe a number of key questions would have to be
answered, such as:
What kinds of
legal proceedings should the framework apply to?
Where should the
framework be located (i.e. in what legislation)?
What resourcing
would be required, and which agencies would be resourced, to give successor
liability provisions operative effect?
specific provisions need to be put in place to ensure the constitutional
validity of the framework?
impugned entities be permitted to challenge and/or defend against successor
liability declarations?
What are the
full consequences of being deemed liable under the successor liability
provisions (e.g. do the provisions extend beyond
criminal law)?
Should there be
a statute of limitations for successor liability, and if so, how long should
that time period be?
4.42 While our
preliminary view, echoed by stakeholders, is that there is great potential in
the introduction of successor liability
to hold companies accountable for
criminal penalties (especially for OHS offences), these issues are beyond the
scope of this review
and our remit as a sentencing advisory body.
4.43 Instead, we
believe the issue should be the subject of its own inquiry. For this, we believe
the Victorian Law Reform Commission
is best placed to investigate the potential
for successor liability reforms in Victoria, and to address any issues arising
a proposal, including those outlined above. Appropriately crafted
terms of reference should allow adequate scope for a holistic consideration
the proposal and ensure any reforms do not yield unintended consequences, are
workable, apply equitably, and properly interface
with other relevant legal
frameworks, including the
Corporations Act 2001
Recommendation 12: Successor liability
The Victorian Government should provide the Victorian Law Reform Commission
with terms of reference seeking its advice about whether
to introduce a
legislative framework for successor liability for corporations and other legal
entities in Victoria, and if so, what
the key features of that framework should
recommendations we didn’t make
5.1 As a matter
of transparency, it’s important to discuss some of the recommendations we
considered but have not made. This
not only provides insights into our
rationales for making, or not making, recommendations but also acknowledges the
contributions
that numerous stakeholders made on the following topics:
expanding the
use of court-ordered diversion in OHS cases;
compensation orders in sentencing OHS cases; and
expanding the
Expanding the use of court-ordered diversion in OHS
Individuals
and companies prosecuted for any offences, including OHS offences, may be able
to avoid a formal finding of guilt if they
participate in a diversion
For a diversion plan to
be made, the defendant must acknowledge responsibility for the offence, the
prosecution must consent, and
the court must consider diversion an appropriate
outcome. A diversion plan involves the defendant complying with certain
for a period of up to 12 months. If the defendant complies with these
conditions, the matter is dismissed without a finding of guilt
being recorded.
Statistical Report
, we found that in the 16 years to June 2021, 27
OHS offenders received a diversion plan (out of a total of 1,903
It is fair to
describe diversion as an uncommon outcome of criminal proceedings involving OHS
offences. This is no doubt primarily
due to the WorkSafe Victoria
(‘WorkSafe’) policy on diversion, which states that ‘WorkSafe
is of the view that
the aims and benefits of the Diversion Program are not
relevant to corporate accused ... and WorkSafe will not consent to the Diversion
Program in the case of corporate
Consultation Paper
, we asked if there should be increased use of
diversion in OHS cases (Question 10), which would likely only occur through a
to WorkSafe’s policy.
Stakeholder views
number of stakeholders supported an increased use of diversion, particularly if
doing so would result in positive OHS-related outcomes.
The Housing Industry
Association, for example, said that ‘well-designed OHS diversions could be
much more beneficial and effective
than imposing
Ai Group and
the Australian Institute of Health and Safety concurred, saying that when
compared to fines, OHS-specific conditions
in diversion plans would provide more
positive OHS outcomes for the defendant and their
industry/community.
Victorian Congress of Employer Associations also advocated for increased use of
diversion, given that, in their view, it would
result in ‘less burden on
the judicial system and, the potential to educate industry and rehabilitate the
offending party at
various employer associations did, however, caution that if diversion is used
more often, the conditions of diversion plans should
not be used as a means to
impose harsher punishments than might have otherwise been imposed if the matter
had proceeded to sentencing
(in the form of a fine or a health and safety
undertaking).
Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union was opposed to the increased use
of diversion in OHS cases, saying that ‘[d]iversion
is not appropriate to
bring justice to victims or act as a deterrent to
suggested that diversion may possibly be utilised more frequently, but
‘not where there has been a serious offence
where harm has been
Similarly, the
Workplace Incidents Consultative Committee said that diversion should only be
considered ‘in a case where there
has been no death or serious injury as a
result of the
Victorian Trades Hall Council also acknowledged the utilitarian benefits of
diversion, ‘including the reduced cost burden
on the courts and WorkSafe
and the deterrent benefits of punishing first-time offenders who do not cause
serious harm to their workers’.
However, they considered that current
sentencing practices meant that priorities for reform must lie elsewhere:
[A] balance must be struck between diversion and appropriate consequences for
OHS breaches, ensuring that victims feel that justice
has been done. Fines are
already so low that they fail to deter OHS breaches, [and] any attempts to
introduce an increased spread
of diversion tactics may worsen the problem by
letting offenders off with a slap on the wrist. The seriousness of OHS offences
be understated, and offences with low risk and no outcome are rarely
prosecuted anyway.
(Submission 8 (Victorian Trades Hall Council))
The Council’s view
of the key drivers behind our initial enthusiasm for increased use of diversion
was that we heard how inaccessible enforceable
undertakings were for most
companies accused of OHS offences. One legal professional told us that,
anecdotally, the legal fees associated
with negotiating an enforceable
undertaking will usually be in the realm of $250,000. That is clearly
unaffordable for the vast majority
of businesses, meaning that only larger
companies, with the financial means, can afford to negotiate an enforceable
undertaking and
avoid a finding of guilt. Enforceable undertakings are already
effectively a form of diversion that occurs outside court processes.
original thinking was that making diversion plans available via court processes
might be a way of reducing the costs involved
for defendants, enabling smaller
entities to access the benefits of diversionary initiatives.
are a number of benefits to diversionary initiatives in criminal matters. For
one thing, as we found in a recent report, individuals
receiving diversion are
Diversionary
initiatives are also more cost-effective for the parties and reduce burdens on
the justice system. In OHS cases, such
initiatives typically include conditions
that involve considerable investments in improvements to health and safety
practices. In
that context, there are clear benefits to diversionary options
being utilised sooner rather than later, and outside court processes
its submission, WorkSafe indicated that it is currently in the process of
revising its approach to enforceable undertakings to
ensure they ‘are an
accessible option for a range of
offenders’.
wish to make any recommendations regarding diversion that may interfere with
WorkSafe’s work to revise its enforceable
undertakings
and associated
processes to make undertakings more widely accessible for individuals or
companies alleged to have contravened the
Occupational Health and Safety Act
(Vic) (‘the
or regulations. We are
of the view that, if that revisionary work is successful and produces meaningful
outcomes for the accessibility
of enforceable undertakings, reform of
court-ordered diversion will not be necessary.
also note that prosecutions make up a small proportion of WorkSafe’s
enforcement activity.
WorkSafe has decided to proceed with a prosecution, and therefore considers an
enforceable undertaking is not appropriate,
it may be more appropriate in those
cases to seek a health and safety undertaking with behavioural conditions as a
sentence upon
a finding of guilt, rather than asking the court to approve a
diversion plan.
Use of compensation orders in sentencing
sentencing offences, including OHS offences, courts can order an offender
‘to pay compensation of such amount as the court
thinks fit’ to
someone who has ‘suffered an injury as a direct result of the
compensation orders can include compensation for pain and suffering, medical
expenses, counselling expenses, and any other
expenses reasonably incurred as a
result of the offending,
can be made on the court’s own motion, or by application by, or on behalf
of, a person who has suffered an
Consultation Paper
, we noted that compensation orders are seldom
sought or imposed in OHS cases, especially because many people harmed by OHS
are ineligible for compensation orders under the
Sentencing Act
(Vic) (‘the
Sentencing Act
’). This ineligibility is
because many people harmed by OHS offences are entitled to workers’
compensation under the
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Section 371
of that Act provides that courts must not make a
compensation order in sentencing an offender if the compensation would be for a
matter arising from an injury or death in respect of which it appears to the
court that the person has an entitlement to any compensation
under the Act, and
arises from an event that constitutes an offence against the
Dangerous Goods
Equipment (Public Safety Act)
exclusionary provision is replicated in the
Accident Compensation Act 1985
Transport Accident Act 1986
with the same
purpose: to ensure that compensation for harm suffered in contexts covered by
those two respective schemes is determined
under the appropriate scheme.
a result, in our
Consultation Paper
we indicated that, while there are a
number of benefits to seeking compensation orders in criminal
we would not be
seeking any reforms in this
Stakeholder views
their submission, however, Monash University’s Australian Centre for
Justice Innovation suggested that there may be cases
in which someone is
otherwise entitled to compensation, and it may therefore be beneficial for
WorkSafe to seek compensation orders on their behalf in
proceedings.
include, for example, members of the public who are not employees of the
duty-holder.
Victorian Trades Hall Council was also of the view that compensation orders
should be used more in OHS
The Council’s view
consultation on the draft recommendations, WorkSafe advised that there is a
great deal of complexity in understanding whether someone
affected by OHS
offending is entitled to compensation under various schemes, and their
ineligibility for those forms of compensation
is a necessary precondition to
being able to seek a compensation order in sentencing proceedings. There are
also practical issues
in the perceived conflict of interest in WorkSafe being
the same body making a decision about eligibility for workers compensation,
while also potentially making a different decision (within a different unit of
the organisation) about eligibility for an ancillary
compensation order in
sentencing. Even if WorkSafe does initially seek compensation orders, if there
are objections by the defendant
(as occurred in the first workplace manslaughter
), people who may be
entitled to compensation may need to seek their own legal
representation.
5.20 Ultimately
because of how our process and interactions with stakeholders unfolded during
this review, we do not feel we have
consulted widely enough to justify making a
recommendation about changing WorkSafe’s approach to compensation orders.
also beyond our expertise and remit to examine and consider the extent to
which various legislative instruments interact to render
injured people eligible
or ineligible for various compensation schemes. This would be a critical first
step in understanding whether
there is any merit in WorkSafe seeking
compensation orders more frequently. As a result, we do not propose any reforms
in this space.
It may, however, be useful at some stage for WorkSafe to
exhaustively review eligibility for compensation orders in OHS cases to
future decisions.
Additional types of sentencing orders
submissions and survey responses, as well as community consultation
participants, raised the possibility of new sentencing
orders that are currently
available under the
Sentencing Act
dissolution orders and director disqualification orders. The Australian Centre
for Justice Innovation included these in its
suite of suggested reforms intended
to deter phoenixing and improve fine payment
Some online survey
respondents considered that these kinds of orders (alongside the threat of
imprisonment) provide ‘stronger
that should be
available alongside fines and undertakings to deter and adequately punish
persistent or recidivist offenders.
introduction of new sentencing orders was not a focus of our
Consultation
. We instead focused on the orders already available under the
, which appeared to be underutilised. We have, nevertheless, considered
whether new and distinct forms of sentencing outcomes should
be available in OHS
cases, such as:
benefit orders
, which require an offender to pay an amount corresponding to
the amount of monetary benefit acquired as a result of the offence (for
by not spending money on adequate safety
dissolution orders
, known as the ‘capital punishment’ for
corporate offenders, requiring that the entity be wound up and
deregistered;
disqualification orders
, which disqualify an individual found to have been
connected with the management of an offending company from managing companies
for a specified period of
Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) has previously recommended that the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) be amended to allow a court to make an order
dissolving a corporation convicted, on indictment, of a Commonwealth
Flowing from that
kind of order, the ALRC also recommended that there should be a power to
disqualify individuals from managing corporations,
particularly to prevent
5.24 There is
clear merit in these sorts of sentencing orders being available in OHS cases.
However, there is also merit in these
sentencing orders being available more
broadly in the sentencing of companies and those who manage them. There is
nothing about such
orders that would necessitate them being limited to cases
involving OHS offences. As such, we consider it more appropriate for any
consideration of new sentencing orders for companies and directors to occur in a
project with that broader focus.
Appendix 1: Consultation and submissions
Preliminary consultation
7 March 2023
WorkSafe Victoria
18 April 2023
WorkSafe Victoria
Fines Victoria
2 June 2023
County Court of Victoria
2 June 2023
Rob O’Neill (Barrister)
6 June 2023
Workplace Incidents Consultative Committee
7 June 2023
Victorian Chamber of Commerce and Industry
8 June 2023
Herbert Smith Freehills
8 June 2023
Duncan Chisholm (Barrister)
13 June 2023
Tim Bourbon (Barrister)
13 June 2023
Seyfarth Shaw
14 June 2023
Australian Industry Group (Ai Group)
15 June 2023
Law Institute of Victoria (LIV)
19 June 2023
WorkSafe Victoria
20 June 2023
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
20 June 2023
Office of Public Prosecutions (OPP)
28 June 2023
Victorian Court of Appeal
28 June 2023
Sentencing Council for England and Wales
4 July 2023
Victorian Government Solicitor’s Office
5 July 2023
Andrew Palmer KC (Barrister)
6 July 2023
Victorian Trades Hall Council (VTHC)
11 July 2023
Ariadne French (Barrister)
11 July 2023
Paul Holdenson KC (Barrister)
25 July 2023
25 July 2023
Fines Victoria
27 July 2023
Environment Protection Authority Victoria (EPA)
15 August 2023
Victim Services, Support and Reform
17 August 2023
Office of the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
1 September 2023
National Heavy Vehicle Regulator (NHVR)
13 November 2023
Safe Work Australia
Written submissions
Submission number
Organisation/individual
Housing Industry Association (HIA)
Australian Association for Restorative Justice (AARJ)
Office of Public Prosecutions (OPP)
Australian Industry Group (Ai Group)
Construction, Forestry and Maritime Employees Union (CFMEU)
Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union (AMWU)
Maurice Blackburn
Victorian Trades Hall Council (VTHC)
Uniting Vic.Tas
Community and Public Sector Union (CPSU)
Victorian Congress of Employer Associations (VCEA)
Law Institute of Victoria (LIV)
Victorian Automotive Chamber of Commerce (VACC)
RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice
Workplace Incidents Consultative Committee (WICC)
Australian Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash University (ACJI)
Australian Institute of Health and Safety (AIHS)
County Court of Victoria
WorkSafe Victoria
Community consultation events
19 February 2024
21 February 2024
23 February 2024
26 February 2024
28 February 2024
18 March 2024
20 March 2024
22 March 2024
Consultation on draft recommendations
Organisation/individual
24 May 2024
Professor Richard Johnstone
6 August 2024
County Court of Victoria
6 August 2024
Australian Association for Restorative Justice (AARJ)
8 August 2024
RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice
9 August 2024
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
12 August 2024
Stakeholder Roundtable:
Office of Public
Prosecutions (OPP)
Construction,
Forestry and Maritime Employees Union (CFMEU)
Victorian Trades
Hall Council (VTHC)
Incidents Consultative Committee (WICC)
Community and
Public Sector Union (CPSU)
Automotive Chamber of Commerce (VACC)
Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash University (ACJI)
Institute of Health and Safety (AIHS)
Victoria (WorkSafe)
15 August 2024
Australian Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash University (ACJI)
16 August 2024
OHS Barrister Roundtable:
Argiropolous SC
19 August 2024
Australian Industry Group (Ai Group)
21 August 2024
Workplace Incidents Consultative Committee (WICC)
27 August 2024
Herbert Smith Freehills
29 August 2024
Environment Protection Authority (EPA)
19 September 2024
Emeritus Professor Arie Freiberg AM
Appendix 2: Our approach to community consultation
The Sentencing Advisory
Council’s functions are provided under
section 108C
(Vic). Several of our functions relate to providing information to,
and seeking input from, the community on sentencing matters. The
community was
especially important in the context of this project, as the terms of reference
we received from the Victorian Government
specifically asked us to
‘consider whether current sentencing practices align with community
expectations’.
There are a number of reasons it is important to understand community
expectations when recommending reforms to sentencing practices.
First, it better
ensures trust and confidence in the justice system when sentencing practices
align with community expectations.
Second, an awareness of community
expectations can help the courts to achieve the various purposes of sentencing,
including denunciation
of the offending behaviour (expressing society’s
condemnation of it) and ensuring the punishment is appropriate in light of
contemporary norms.
In order to understand community expectations about the sentencing of
occupational health and safety (OHS) offences, we organised,
promoted and
facilitated eight community consultation events around Victoria. We also hosted
a survey via Engage Victoria and made
a public call for written submissions, but
this appendix focuses exclusively on the community consultation sessions we
The consultation framework we used
The Department of Justice and Community Safety
utilises the community engagement framework established by the International
Association
of Public Participation (IAP2). We also adopt that framework in our
approach to community consultation. That framework sets out five
engagement with the community, ranging from the least amount of influence that
the public has on decision-making, to the
most. They include informing,
consulting, involving, collaborating and empowering.
Our consultation process was one of involving the community and was in the
middle of the IAP2 spectrum of community consultation.
This involves working
‘directly with the public throughout the process to ensure that public
concerns are consistently understood
considered’.
commitment was to ensure the community’s concerns and views would be
directly reflected in the recommendations we developed,
and that we would
provide a summary of their views in this report.
Promoting the events
In February 2024, when we published our
Consultation Paper
Statistical Report
, we also announced
all eight of the community consultation sessions that we planned to host. This
included five sessions in regional
Victoria (Ballarat, Bendigo, Geelong, Morwell
and Shepparton) and three sessions in metropolitan Melbourne (Dandenong,
CBD and Werribee). The events were open to the general public.
In order to promote the events, we asked key stakeholders in this space
– such as the various employer associations and unions
we consulted
– to share the details of the events with their members and to encourage
attendance. For example, the Victorian
Trades Hall Council emailed all 90,000 or
so health and safety representatives on their mailing list, and a number of
attendees said
they attended because they received that email. We posted in
various community pages on Facebook in the various regional areas. We
all other Council social media profiles, including X (Twitter) and LinkedIn. We
sent targeted emails to journalists in
each region, including local radio, ABC
journalists, and the crime and courts reporters of the major newspapers. Each of
those emails
included not only the key findings of the review and the key
questions for consultation, but also some recent OHS cases sentenced
area. This led, for example, to a promotional article about the consultation
process in the
Lilydale Star Mail
. We sent targeted emails to local
unions and employer associations in all of the regional areas. There are a
number of work health
and safety blogs in Victoria (e.g.
also made a written submission), and most of those blogs published a dedicated
post about the consultation events, encouraging
attendance. We contacted local
community centres, councils and libraries in each region to promote the event.
We also used a promotional
flyer briefly explaining the review, the locations of
the consultation sessions, what the sessions would involve and that food would
be provided, and the flyer used a QR code to allow potential attendees to
register their attendance. We attached a copy of that flyer
to all of the
targeted and promotional correspondence (see Figure A1).
Our promotional activities resulted in 50 participants attending the eight
sessions. Some sessions were better attended than others,
with the highest
turnout in regional Victoria.
Figure A1: Promotional flyer for community consultation events
Have Your Say About Sentencing for Workplace Health and Safety
The Sentencing Advisory Council is hosting a series of community
conversations around Victoria to seek your views about how workplace
safety offences are sentenced. Your views will influence the recommendations
we’ll be making to the Victorian Government
in late 2024.
What types of sentences do you think should be imposed for health and safety
offences? What factors do you think should be most important
in deciding an
appropriate sentence?
Join the Community Conversation
LUCAS COMMUNITY
HUB (Ballarat) Monday 19 February 2024, 5:30pm-7pm
MORWELL BOWLING
CLUB (Morwell) Wednesday 21 February 2024, 5:30pm-7pm
(Shepparton) Friday 23 February 2024, 5:30pm-7pm
BENDIGO LIBRARY
(Bendigo) Monday 26 February 2024, 5:30pm-7pm
GEELONG LIBRARY
(Geelong) Wednesday 28 February 2024, 5:30pm-7pm
LILYDALE LAKE
COMMUNITY ROOM (Lilydale) Monday 18 March 2024, 5:30pm-7pm
DANDENONG CIVIC
CENTRE (Dandenong) Wednesday 20 March 2024, 5:30pm-7pm
ADVISORY COUNCIL (Melbourne) Friday 22 March 2024, 5:30pm-7pm
WYNDHAM PARK
COMMUNITY CENTRE (Werribee) Monday 25 March 2024, 5:30pm-7pm
Selection of case studies
Our aim was to alternate between two case studies
during the community consultation events, to allow a comparison between the two.
One case involved a very large company (with an annual turnover of more than $1
billion) and a fatality. The other case involved
a very small company (with just
four staff) and no-one being injured. Both cases were based on real-life OHS
cases sentenced in Victoria
(but anonymised through minor changes in details),
and both were representative of OHS cases. For instance, most OHS cases (83%)
involve companies rather than individuals, most OHS offences (66%) are breaches
of duties by employers, one of the most common risks
is falls from height (14%),
and the most common industry involved in OHS cases is the construction industry
(35%). Both cases involved
a risk of fall from height in the construction
industry, resulting in a breach of duty by a company as an employer.
The first case study (which we renamed ‘Daylight Solar Pty Ltd’)
involved workers installing solar panels on the roof
of a residential building.
The second case study (which we renamed ‘Brick & Mortar Pty
Ltd’) involved the installation
of glass panels at a warehouse. Table A1
summarises the consistent and contrasting factors between the two case
Table A1: Factors present in each case study
Daylight Solar Pty Ltd
Brick & Mortar Pty Ltd
What was the risk?
Working at height with inadequate safety measures in place
Working at height with inadequate safety measures in place
Guilty plea?
Yes (early stage)
Yes (early stage)
Criminal history?
1 previous conviction (involving a fall-from-height risk)
1 previous conviction (involving a fall-from-height risk)
Extent of harm resulting from breach
No injury (risk only)
Size of company
Very small (<10 employees)
Very large (500+ employees)
Magistrates’ Court
(approx. $450,000)
County Court ($3.5 million across 2 charges)
Actual sentence imposed in case
$35,000 with conviction
$475,000 with conviction
Delivery of sessions
Each consultation session featured two parts.
was an informative presentation on sentencing law generally, including the
legislated purposes of sentencing, and matters generally
to be taken into
account in sentencing OHS offences. This provided participants with sufficient
context to meaningfully interrogate
the case study and express their views.
was an interactive presentation of the case study. At the end of the
presentation, participants were asked to apply what they had
learned about
sentencing law and the details of the case study to decide what sentence they
would impose on the offender. Participants
were asked nine written questions
– using a form distributed at the session – about their
decision-making process and
expectations around sentencing of the offence. After
each question, participants were verbally asked follow-up questions which
them to elaborate on their choices. A copy of one of the consultation
forms is reproduced in Appendix 3.
The questions in the consultation form
The questions in the form distributed to
participants were almost identical between the two case studies, with some
slight variations
to account for differences (e.g. how relevant participants
considered the fact that someone was killed or that no-one was injured).
Question 1: What sentence type would you impose on the
After being told about the sentencing options
available to be imposed on a company for an offence under
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
(Vic) (‘the
’), the first question asked of participants was what sentence type
they would impose on the company. Participants were given
the option of a fine,
an undertaking, diversion or finding the charge(s) proven and dismissed. An
‘undertaking’ was explained
as being a health and safety undertaking
, which enables courts to impose a range of behavioural
conditions to be fulfilled over a defined period of time. While participants
were not expressly given the option of imposing a combination sentence (for
example, a fine and an undertaking), many participants
either asked if this was
an available option or selected both of their own volition. For participants who
chose to impose an undertaking,
they were verbally asked to describe what types
of conditions they would consider.
Question 2: If you chose to fine the company, or to make them
pay a charitable donation, what value of fine/donation would you impose?
Participants were then asked to specify the amount
of fine (or donation) they would impose on the company. Many participants also
regularly commented on the value of the conditions they would have imposed as
part of a health and safety undertaking.
Question 3: In deciding what type of sentence to impose, which
sentencing purpose was most important for you (please select one)?
Participants were then asked to specify which of
the legislated purposes of sentencing they considered
most important
deciding what type of sentence to impose (general deterrence, specific
deterrence, rehabilitation, just punishment, denunciation
or community
protection). Participants were advised that courts are not required to isolate a
single purpose, and that many of the
purposes are either complementary or at
odds with one another; however, the question intentionally aimed to discern
which sentencing
purpose participants considered most important.
Question 4: In deciding what sentence to impose, how relevant
were each of the following considerations for you?
In question 4, participants were asked to consider,
on a sliding scale, how relevant six factors specific to the case were to them
in deciding what sentence to impose on the company (factor 2 was worded
differently depending on the case study):
risk of someone being hurt
fact that no-one was hurt/the fact that someone was killed
company’s prior conviction
size of the company
company’s response to the incident
company having pleaded guilty
This question was constructed to
directly highlight the key contrasting features of the two case studies: the
harm resulting from
the breach of duty (factor 2) and the size/financial
circumstances of the offender (factor 4). The scale ranged from 1 to 4, with
being ‘not very relevant’ and 4 being ‘very relevant’.
We intentionally did not offer a neutral option
on a scale of 1 to 5 to best
gauge the relevance of each factor.
Question 5: Would you record a conviction?
Participants were then asked whether they would
record a conviction for the offence(s) sentenced. Participants were advised that
recording of a conviction is a separate order to a finding of guilt, and it
carries limited but distinct consequences for corporate
offenders – for
example, damage to reputation, increased insurance premiums, and having to
disclose the conviction if tendering
for certain government contracts.
Question 6: Would you impose an adverse publicity
Participants were then asked whether they would
impose an adverse publicity order. Participants were also verbally asked what
information
would be disseminated under such an order, and in what form/medium
the information would be published.
Question 7: Now that you’ve heard what sentence was
imposed in the case, how appropriate do you think that sentence was?
After participants shared what sentence they would
impose and why, they were told what the court in their relevant case actually
Participants were asked whether they thought the actual sentence
imposed was (a) much too low, (b) a little too low, (c) about right,
little too high or (e) much too high.
Question 8: Is the maximum penalty for companies set at the
right level?
Participants were then asked to reflect on the
effect that the application of the maximum penalty for the offence had on their
decision-making,
and whether they thought it was set at an appropriate level. A
maximum penalty of $1.73 million per charge was stated to apply at
the time of
the offence in both cases. Participants were asked whether they thought (a) it
should be lower, (b) it’s about
right, (c) it should be closer to $10
million, (d) it should be closer to $100 million or (e) it should be
Question 9: If someone is seriously injured or killed in a
workplace incident, how should this affect the sentence imposed?
Finally, participants reconsidered the issue of
harm resulting from an OHS offence, and whether that factor should result in a
severe sentence, that is, rather than applying this consideration to the
case at hand, whether in the abstract they believe that
sentencing outcomes
should be more severe if someone has been hurt.
Demographics of participants
Participants were asked to fill in basic
demographic details to enable us to assess the representativeness of
participation, namely
age, gender and primary occupation. There were no
identifying details requested. Of the 50 participants:
18 participants were female, including six in the Daylight Solar Pty Ltd case
study and 12 in the Brick & Mortar Pty Ltd case
study. The other 32
participants were male, including eight in the Daylight Solar case study and 24
in the Brick & Mortar Pty
Ltd case study.
median age for participants was 45–54. This included three participants
aged 18–24, five participants aged 25–34,
12 participants aged
35–44, 11 participants aged 45–54, and 18 participants aged 55 and
over. One participant preferred
not to specify their age.
Participants were from a wide range of occupations, from IT account manager or
factory worker to a forensic alcohol and drug assessor.
The two most common
working as an OHS adviser (7 participants).
It would be expected that community
members with an especial interest in work health and safety (such as union
officials and OHS
advisers) would be over-represented.
Analysis of responses
Questionnaire responses to each question were
compiled via Microsoft Excel to determine trends. In addition, each session was
and transcribed (using transcription software ‘Otter’, the
product of which was quality-checked by a staff member), and
various quotes from
participants can be found cited throughout the report to elucidate the results
of the quantitative information
from the forms. For example, in addition to
knowing whether participants chose to impose an adverse publicity order, it was
to understand the purpose for which the order was imposed.
Appendix 3: Community consultation form
Sentencing Occupational Health and Safety Offences
Community Consultation Form
responses will help us understand the representativeness of survey
respondents.
□ Prefer not to say
Occupation:___________
Question 1: Sentence type
What sentence type would you impose on Daylight
Solar Pty Ltd:
□ Undertaking
□ Diversion
□ Proven and dismissed
Question 2: Fine amount
If you chose to fine Daylight Solar Pty Ltd, or to
make them pay a charitable donation, what value of fine/donation would you
Question 3: Sentencing purposes
In deciding what type of sentence to impose, which
sentencing purpose was most important for you (please select one)?
□ General deterrence
□ Rehabilitation
□ Just punishment
□ Specific deterrence
□ Denunciation
□ Community protection
Question 4: Sentencing considerations
In deciding what sentence to impose, how relevant
were each of the following considerations for you?
[Consideration]
Not relevant
Very relevant
a. the risk of someone being hurt
b. the fact that no one was hurt
c. the company’s prior conviction
d. the size of the company
e. their response to the incident
f. the offender pleaded guilty
Questions 5 and 6: Additional sentencing orders
Would you record a conviction?
Would you impose an adverse publicity order?
Question 7: The sentence imposed
Now that you’ve heard what sentence was
imposed in the case, how appropriate do you think that sentence was?
□ Much too low
□ A little too low
□ About right
□ A little too high
□ Much too high
Question 8: The maximum penalty
Is the maximum penalty for companies ($1.7m) set at
the right level?
□ It should be lower
□ It’s about right
□ It should be closer to $10m
□ It should be closer to $100m
□ It should be unlimited
Question 9: The relevance of injury/death
If someone is seriously injured or killed in a
workplace incident, how should this affect the sentence imposed? Should it be:
□ About the same
□ A bit more severe
□ Much more severe
Bibliography
Craig, Charles Massy and Deidre Swan,
Review of the
Work Health and Safety
: Final Report
(State of Queensland, 2022).
Anderson, Helen, ‘Illegal Phoenix Activity: Practical Ways to Improve
the Recovery of Tax’
[2018] SydLawRw 10
(2018) 40(2)
Sydney Law Review
Anderson, Helen, Ian Ramsey and Michelle Welsh, ‘Illegal Phoenix
Activity: Quantifying Its Incidence and Cost’
Insolvency Law
Anderson, Helen, ‘The Proposed Deterrence of Phoenix Activity: An
Opportunity Lost?’
[2012] SydLawRw 20
Sydney Law Review
Anderson, Helen, Jasper Hedges, Ian Ramsay and Michelle Welsh, ‘Illegal
Phoenix Activity: Is a “Phoenix Prohibition”
the Solution?’
(2017) 35(3)
Company and Securities Law Journal
Anthony, Thalia and Penny Crofts, ‘The Dreamworld Deaths: Corporate
Crime and the Slumber of the Law’
(2024) 36(2)
Current Issues in
Criminal Justice
Arewa, Andrew O., Stephen Theophilus, Augustine Ifelebuegu and Peter Farrell,
‘Analysis of Penalties Imposed on Organisations
for Breaching Safety and
Health Regulations in the United Kingdom’ (2018) 9(4)
Safety and Health
Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Counts of Australian Businesses,
Including Entries and Exits, July 2020–June 2024’
(abs.gov.au, 2024)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/economy/business-indicators/counts-australian-businesses-including-entries-and-exits/latest-release#>.
Australian Government,
Action Against Fraudulent Phoenix Activity:
Proposals Paper
(Australian Government, 2009).
Australian Government,
National Review into Model Occupational Health and
Safety Laws: First Report
(Australian Government, 2008).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Corporate Criminal Responsibility, Final
(Australian Law Reform Commission, 2020).
Australian Senate, Education and Employment References Committee,
Never Came Home – The Framework Surrounding the Prevention, Investigation
and Prosecution of Industrial Deaths in Australia
(Australian Senate,
Education and Employment References Committee, 2018).
BBC, ‘Chevron Fined for Pembroke Explosion that Killed Four
(7 June 2019)
<https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-wales-48539681>.
BBC, ‘Kier Fined £4.4m for Power Cable Safety Breaches’,
(14 January 2023)
<https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-merseyside-64264015>.
BBC, ‘Northern Gas Networks Fined £5m over Mirfield House
Explosion’,
(10 February 2022)
<https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-leeds-60322518>.
Bleby, Michael, ‘Big Data Boosts Construction’,
Financial Review
(11 January 2015)
<https://www.afr.com/property/commercial/big-data-boosts-constrcution-20150109-12l8xx>.
Bluff, Elizabeth, Richard Johnstone and Michael Quinlan, ‘Regulating
Health and Safety in Work for Digital Labor Platforms in
Australia: The Example
of Food Deliverers’ (2023) 1(1)
Journal of Work Health and Safety
Blumberg, Phillip I., ‘The Continuity of the Enterprise Doctrine:
Corporate Successorship in United States Law’ (1996)
Journal of International Law
Boland, Marie,
Review of the Model Work Health and Safety Laws: Final
(Safe Work Australia, 2018).
Bonett, Robert, Caleb D. Lloyd, Ariel G. Stone and James R. P. Ogloff,
‘Group Conferencing Is Associated with Lower Rates of
Repeated Recidivism
Among Higher-Risk Youth and There Are Enhanced Effects Based on Who Attended the
Conference’ (2024) 23(1)
Youth Violence and Juvenile Justice
Booth, Tracey, ‘Crime Victims and Sentencing: Reflections on
Borthwick’ (2011) 36(4)
Alternative Law Journal
Brookes, Derek,
Restorative Justice and Work-Related Death: A Literature
(Legal Services Board, 2008).
Butcher, Steve, ‘Workers Fined $115,000 over Bullying of Café
The Sydney Morning Herald
(8 February 2010)
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/workers-fined-115000-over-bullying-of-cafe-waitress-20100208-nlrj.html>.
Byrne, Elizabeth, ‘Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young Defends Character
Reference for Man Charged over Family Violence’,
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-03-06/sarah-hanson-young-defends-reference-for-man-in-family-violence/12033938>.
Commonwealth of Australia, Royal Commission into the Building and
Construction Industry,
Final Report: Volume 8 Reform – National Issues
(Commonwealth of Australia, 2003).
Cook, Bree, Fiona David and Anna Grant, ‘Victims’ Needs,
Victims’ Rights: Policies and Programs for Victims of Crime
Australia’ (1999) 19
Australian Institute of Criminology Research and
Public Policy Series
Department of Justice and Community Safety, ‘About Victim-centred
Restorative Justice’ (justice.vic.gov.au, 2024)
<https://www.justice.vic.gov.au/vcrj/about-victim-centred-restorative-justice>.
Department of Justice and Community Safety, ‘Restorative Justice for
Victim Survivors of Family Violence’ (justice.vic.gov.au,
<https://www.justice.vic.gov.au/fvrjservice#:~:text=Victim-centred%20restorative%20justice%20can%20help%20you%20address%20your>.
Dexter, Rachael, Simone Fox Koob and Tammy Mills, ‘I felt
Lighter’: Restorative Justice Gives Sex Crime Survivors a Different
(29 August 2021)
<https://www.theage.com.au/national/victoria/i-felt-lighter-restorative-justice-gives-sex-crime-survivors-a-different-way-forward-20210817-p58jgj.html>.
Director of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Policy of the Director of Public
Prosecutions for Victoria
(Director of Public Prosecutions Victoria, 2023)
<https://www.opp.vic.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/DPP-Policy-21-September-2023.pdf>.
Edwards, Ian, ‘An Ambiguous Participant: The Crime Victim and Criminal
Justice Decision-Making’
(2004) 44(6)
British Journal of
Criminology
Environment Protection Authority Victoria, ‘Axcent Apartments Pty
Ltd’ (epa.vic.gov.au, 2024)
<https://www.epa.vic.gov.au/about-epa/public-registers/court-proceedings/axcent-apartments-pty-ltd>.
Environment Protection Authority Victoria, ‘Register of Court
Proceedings’ (epa.vic.gov.au, 2024)
<https://www.epa.vic.gov.au/about-epa/public-registers/court-proceedings>.
Environment Protection Authority Victoria, ‘South Gippsland Region
Water Corporation (ABN 40 349 066 713)’ (epa.vic.gov.au,
<https://www.epa.vic.gov.au/about-epa/public-registers/court-proceedings/south-gippsland-region-water-corporation#>.
Erez, Edna,
Victim Impact Statements
, Trends & Issues in Crime and
Criminal Justice 33 (Australian Institute of Criminology, 1991).
Fagan, Frank, ‘From Policy Confusion to Doctrinal Clarity: Successor
Liability from the Perspective of Big Data’ (2015)
Virginia Law
& Business Review
Fairfax Media, ‘Investment Briefs’,
Australian Financial
(10 March 1989)
<https://www.afr.com/politics/investment-briefs-19890310-k3axp>.
Fisse, Brent, ‘The Use of Publicity as a Criminal Sanction Against
Business Corporations’
[1971] MelbULawRw 5
(1971) 8(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
Fisse, Brent and John Braithwaite,
The Impact of Publicity on Corporate
(New York Press, 1984).
Freeburn, Lloyd and Ian Ramsay, ‘An Analysis of Publicity Orders Under
the Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Act 2001’ (2022)
Australian Journal of Competition and Consumer Law
Furman, Jillian, ‘An Economic Analysis of Restorative Justice’
(PhD Thesis, The University of Massachusetts, 2012).
Griggs, Lynden, ‘A Note on the Application of Enterprise Theory to the
Problem of Phoenix Companies’
[1998] MacarthurLawRw 3
Macarthur Law Review
Government of Canada, ‘Restorative Justice: Legislation and
Policy’ (justice.gc.ca, 2021)
<https://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/cj-jp/rj-jr/index.html>.
Hall, Thomas J. and Judith A. Archer, ‘The Mere Continuation Approach
to Successor Liability’,
New York Law Journal
(16 April 2020)
<https://www.law.com/newyorklawjournal/2020/04/16/the-mere-continuation-approach-to-successor-liability/>.
Hosier, Phoebe and Elise Kinsella, ‘Questions Arise over Character
References Used to Help Sex Offender Jeffrey “Joffa”
Corfe Escape
Jail Time’,
(8 March 2023)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-03-08/court-jeffrey-joffa-corfe-sentence-character-reference-alex-case/102070088>.
Hunt, Richelle and Nic Healey, ‘Would You Meet with Someone Who Has
Caused You or Your Family Harm?’, ABC Radio Melbourne
(1 March 2023)
<https://www.abc.net.au/listen/programs/theconversationhour/the-conversation-hour/102017044>.
Industry Commission,
Work, Health and Safety: An Inquiry into Occupational
Health and Safety, Volume 1: Report
(Industry Commission, 1995).
International Association for Public Participation Australasia, ‘IAP2
Public Participation Spectrum’ (iap2.org.au, 2024)
<https://iap2.org.au/resources/spectrum/>.
Johnson, Matthew S., ‘Regulation by Shaming: Deterrence Effects of
Publicizing Violations of Workplace Safety and Health Laws’
(2020) 110(6)
American Economic Review
Johnstone, Richard, ‘Rethinking Responsive Regulation’ (Public
Lecture, National Research Centre for OHS Regulation, Australian
University, 28 June 2024).
Kirkham, Rochelle, ‘Community Rallies after Ballarat Council Awards
Tender to Company Convicted over Worker Deaths’,
September 2022)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2022-09-29/community-protest-after-ballarat-council-awards-tender-pipecon/101485618>.
Kuney, George W., ‘A Taxonomy and Evaluation of Successor Liability
(Revisited)’ (2017) 18
Transactions: The Tennessee Journal of Business
Matheson, John H., ‘Successor Liability’ (2011) 96
Maxwell, Chris,
Occupational Health and Safety Act
Victoria, 2004).
McCold, Paul and Ted Wachtel, ‘In Pursuit of Paradigm: A Theory of
Restorative Justice’ (Paper presented at XIII World
Congress of
Criminology, International Institute for Restorative Practices, Rio de Janeiro,
10–15 August 2003).
Muroi, Millie, ‘“Risible”: Federal Court Justice Slams
$9.8m Westpac Settlement’,
Sydney Morning Herald
(31 January 2024)
<https://www.smh.com.au/business/banking-and-finance/risible-federal-court-justice-slams-9-8m-westpac-settlement-20240131-p5f1ad.html>.
National Heavy Vehicle Regulator,
Primary Duty Matters – Comparative
Sentencing Table
(National Heavy Vehicle Regulator, 2024).
New South Wales Government, Centre for Work Health and Safety,
Sentencing: Non-Monetary Orders in Work Health and Safety: Guide for Regulators
in the Use of Non-Monetary Orders
(Centre for Work Health and Safety,
New South Wales Sentencing Council, ‘Good Character in
Sentencing’ (sentencingcouncil.nsw.gov.au, 2024)
<https://sentencingcouncil.nsw.gov.au/our-work/current-projects/good-character-in-sentencing.html>.
Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Curbing the Phoenix Company
– First Report on the Law Relating to Directors and Managers of Insolvent
Corporations
, Report 83 (Parliament of Victoria, 1994).
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services,
Corporate Insolvency Laws: A Stocktake
(Commonwealth of Australia,
Prentice, Dan D., ‘Veil Piercing and Successor Liability in the United
(1996) 10(3)
Florida Journal of International Law
PricewaterhouseCoopers Consulting (Australia) Pty Ltd,
Phoenix Activity:
Sizing the Problem and Matching Solutions
(PricewaterhouseCoopers,
PricewaterhouseCoopers Consulting (Australia) Pty Ltd,
2018 Taskforce
Report—The Economic Impacts of Potential Illegal Phoenix Activity
(PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2018).
Reserve Bank of Australia, ‘Inflation Calculator’ (rba.gov.au,
2024) <https://www.rba.gov.au/calculator/>.
RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice,
It’s Healing to Hear Another
Person’s Story and Also to Tell Your Own Story: Report on the CIJ’s
Restorative Justice
Conferencing Pilot Program
(RMIT Centre for Innovative
Justice, 2019).
Safety at Work Blog, ‘Sentencing and OHS Prosecutions but Few
Solutions’ (safetyatworkblog.com, 2024).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
The Criminal Justice Diversion Program in
Victoria: Second Statistical Profile
(Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Assessing the Impact of Inflation and Penalty
Unit Indexation on Fine Amounts in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Imposition and Enforcement of Court Fines and
Infringement Penalties in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2014).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Long-Term Sentencing Trends in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in Victoria:
Consultation Paper
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in Victoria:
Final Report
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Restitution and Compensation Orders:
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2018).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
A Sentencing Guidelines Council for Victoria:
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2018).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Occupational Health and Safety
Offences in Victoria: A Statistical Report
(Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Occupational Health and Safety
Offences in Victoria: Consultation Paper
(Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the
Children’s Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2024)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/sentencing-outcomes-childrens-court>.
Sentencing Council for England and Wales,
Assessing the Impact and
Implementation of the Sentencing Council’s Health and Safety Offences,
Corporate Manslaughter and Food
Safety and Hygiene Offences Definitive Guideline
(Sentencing Council for England and Wales, 2019).
Sentencing Council for England and Wales,
Health and Safety Offences,
Corporate Manslaughter and Food Safety and Hygiene Offences: Definitive
(Sentencing Council for England and Wales, 2016).
Sherman, Lawrence W., Heather Strang, Geoffrey Barnes, Daniel J. Woods, Sarah
Bennett, Nova Inkpen, Dorothy Newbury-Birch, Meridith
Rossner, Caroline Angel,
Malcolm Mearns and Molly Slothower, ‘Twelve Experiments in Restorative
Justice: The Jerry Lee Program
of Randomized Trials in Restorative Justice
Conferences’ (2015) 11
Journal of Experimental Criminology
Stensholt, Bob,
A Report on the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
Administrative Review
(Public Accounts and Estimates Committee, 2007).
Strang, Heather, Lawrence W. Sherman, Evan Mayo-Wilson, Daniel Woods and
Barak Ariel, ‘Restorative Justice Conferencing (RJC)
Using Face-to-Face
Meetings of Offenders and Victims: Effects on Offender Recidivism and Victim
Satisfaction. A Systematic Review’
(2013) 9(1)
Campbell Systemic
Symons, Bec, ‘Sibelco Fined $400,000 after Workers Exposed to
‘Plumes’ of Silica Dust at Victorian Quarry’
(14 June 2024)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-06-14/sibelco-fined-silica-dust-silicosis-kevin-weekes-quarry/103978622>.
Tombs, Steve and David Whyte, ‘The Myths and Realities of Deterrence in
Workplace Safety Regulation’ (2013) 53(5)
British Journal of
Criminology
Topham, Gwyn, ‘Network Rail Fined £6.7m over Fatal Stonehaven
The Guardian
(8 September 2023)
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2023/sep/08/network-rail-fined-67m-over-fatal-stonehaven-crash>.
Treacy, Seamus, ‘Keynote Address’ (Speech delivered at the
Criminal Law Review Conference, 3 December 2015).
United Kingdom Ministry of Justice,
Restorative Justice: The Views of
Victims and Offenders, The Third Report from the Evaluation of Three
, Ministry of Justice Research Series 3/07 (2007).
Victorian Government Solicitor’s Office, ‘Proposed Psychological
Health Regulations for Victorian Employers Are Under
Consideration’
(vgso.vic.gov.au, 2024)
<https://www.vgso.vic.gov.au/proposed-psychological-health-regulations-victorian-employers-under-consideration>.
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Improving the Justice System Response to
Sexual Offences
(Victorian Law Reform Commission, 2021).
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Recklessness: Report
(Victorian Law
Reform Commission, 2024).
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process: Report
(Victorian Law Reform Commission, 2016).
WorkSafe Victoria,
WorkSafe Annual Report 2023–24
Victoria, 2024).
WorkSafe Victoria, Enforcement Group,
Policy on Enforceable Undertakings
Pursuant to Section 16 of the Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
(WorkSafe Victoria, 2018).
WorkSafe Victoria, Enforcement Group,
Policy on the Criminal Justice
Diversion Program
(WorkSafe Victoria, 2016).
WorkSafe Victoria,
Occupational Health and Safety Compliance and
Enforcement Policy: A Guide for Employers
(WorkSafe Victoria, 2021).
WorkSafe Victoria, ‘Plaster Company to Spend $480,000 after Forklift
Injury’ (worksafe.vic.gov.au, 2024)
<https://www.worksafe.vic.gov.au/news/2024-04/plaster-company-spend-480000-after-forklift-injury>.
WorkSafe Victoria,
Prosecution Result Summaries and Enforceable
Undertakings: A Directory of the Most Recent Prosecution and Enforceable
Undertaking
<https://www.worksafe.vic.gov.au/prosecution-result-summaries-enforceable-undertakings>.
WorkSafe Victoria, ‘Psychosocial Hazards Contributing to Work-Related
Stress’ (worksafe.vic.gov.au, 2024)
<https://www.worksafe.vic.gov.au/psychosocial-hazards-contributing-work-related-stress>.
Arthur’s Seat
Scenic Chairlift Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 269
CDPP v Gregory
[2011] VSCA 145
Di Tonto & Anor v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 312
DPP v Aydin & Anor
[2005] VSCA 86
DPP v A & J Australia Pty Ltd
[2024] VCC 211
DPP v AM Design and Construction Pty Ltd & Anor
[2018] VCC 373
DPP v Bradken Resources Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 1053
DPP v Coates Hire Operations Pty Ltd
[2012] VSCA 131
DPP v Cool Dynamics Refrigeration Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 1882
[2009] VSCA 114
DPP v Cranbourne Turf Club Inc
[2023] VCC 506
DPP v D&A Martin Transport Pty Ltd
[2024] VCC 1355
DPP v De Kort
[2019] VCC 291
DPP v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 266
DPP v Hansen
[2013] VCC 1543
DPP v Hazelwood Power Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] VSC 278
DPP v L Arthur Pty Ltd
[2013] VCC 1051
DPP v Misz Pty Ltd
[2024] VCC 1449
DPP v New Sector Engineering Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 400
DPP v Orbit Drilling Pty Ltd & Anor
[2010] VCC 417
DPP v Oriana
[2024] VCC 535
DPP v Phelpsys Construction Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 394
DPP v Prestige Truck Bodies (Aust)
[2023] VCC 747
DPP v Rapid Perforating Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 1167
DPP v Rapid Roller Co Pty Ltd
[2011] VSCA 17
DPP v Redback Tree Services
[2017] VCC 1602
DPP v Resource Recovery Victoria Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 472
DPP v Ricegrowers Ltd
[2018] VCC 542
DPP v Roads Corporation (trading as VicRoads) & Anor
DPP v Seascape Constructions Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 751
DPP v SJ & TA Structural Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 2016
DPP v St Vincent’s Care Services Ltd
[2021] VCC 1035
DPP v The Crown in Right of the State of Victoria
[2024] VCC 810
DPP v The Elastomers Pty Ltd
[2024] VCC 482
DPP v United Access Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1085
DPP v Vibro-Pile (Aust) Pty Ltd & Anor
[2016] VSCA 55
DPP v W.F. Montague Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 1553
DPP v Yarra Valley Park Lane Holiday Park Pty Ltd
[2024] VCC 1863
DPP v YJ Auto Repairs Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 1759
Hogarth v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 302
Phillips v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 140
[2008] VSCA 51
R v LH Holding & Hanna
[2024] VSC 90
Varghese v The King
[2024] VSCA 115
VWA v Paper Australia Pty Ltd
[2018] VMC 1
VWA v Patrick Stevedoring Pty Ltd
[2011] VMC 14
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v
Qantas Airways Limited
[2024] FCA 1219
ASIC v Commonwealth Bank of Australia [No 2]
[2021] FCA 966
ASIC v Westpac Banking Corporation (Penalty Hearing)
[2024] FCA 52
DPP v Dalgliesh
[2017] HCA 41
Garrett v Williams
[2007] NSWLEC 96
James Hardie Industries NV v Australian Securities and Investments
[2010] NSWCA 332
Linnane (NSW Department of Planning and Environment) v Cummings
Office of Environment and Heritage v Clarence Valley Council
SafeWork NSW v Investa Asset Management Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWDC 472
SafeWork NSW v Saunders Civilbuild Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWDC
Trade Practices Commission v CSR Ltd
[1990] FCA 762
TT-Line Company Pty Ltd v Burrows
[2024] TASSC 46
International
Bupa Care Homes Ltd v R
[2019] EWCA Crim
Chicago Truck Drivers, Helpers & Warehouse Workers Union Pension Fund
v Tasemkin Inc
[1995] USCA7 756
(7th Cir, 1995)
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission v MacMillan Bloedel Containers
[1974] USCA6 632
503 F 2d 1086
(6th Cir, 1974).
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission v G-K-G Inc
[1994] USCA7 1288
39 F 3d 740
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission & Anor v Product Fabricators
, No 13-2103 (8th Cir, 2013)
Prince v Kids Ark Learning Centre LLC
, 622 F 3d 992 (8th Cir,
Stumpmaster v WorkSafe NZ
[2018] NZHC 2020
[2018] 3 NZLR 881
WorkSafe New Zealand v Hellers Limited
[2020] NZDC 18926
Legislation
Accident Compensation
Accident Compensation (Miscellaneous Amendment) Act 1997
Australian Consumer Law and Fair Trading Act 2012
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes Amendment (Bullying) Act 2011
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Dangerous Goods Act 1985
Environment Protection Act 2017
Equipment (Public Safety Act) 1994
Essential Services Commission Act 2001
Financial Management Act 1994
Fines Reform Act 2014
Occupational Health and Safety Act 1985
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
Occupational Health and Safety (Miscellaneous Amendment) Act 1990
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing Amendment (Community Correction Reform) Act 2011
Sentencing (Further Amendment) Act 2005
Sentencing (Victim Impact Statement) Act 1994
Social Services Regulation Act 2021
Transport Accident Act 1986
Victims and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2018
Victims’ Charter Act 2006
Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
Youth Justice Act 2024
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Corporations Act 2001
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes (Restorative Justice) Act 2004
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes) Act 2023
Heavy Vehicle National Law 2012
Marine Safety (Domestic Commercial Vessel) National Law (Application) Act
Model Work Health and Safety Bill 2023 (Cth)
Model Work Health and Safety Legislation Amendment (Offences and Penalties)
National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Protection of the Environment Operations Act
Sentencing Act 2017
Sentencing Act 1997
Sentencing Act 1995
Sentencing Act 1995
Trade Practices Act 1974
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
Work Health and Safety Act 2020
Work Health and Safety Amendment Act 2023
Work Health and Safety Amendment (Safer Workplaces) Act 2024
Work Health and Safety (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Workplace Legislation Amendment Act 2024
International
Criminal Code,
RSC 1985, c C-46
Health and Safety at Work Act 2015
Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012
Occupational Health and Safety Act
RSO 1990, c C-0.1
Sentencing Act 2020
Sentencing Act 2002
Quasi-legislative materials
District Court of New South Wales,
Practice Note
16 of 2021: Criminal Division:
Work Health and Safety Act
Prosecutions
June 2021).
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 31 March 1994
(Jan Wade, Attorney-General).
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 18 November
2004 (Rob Hulls, Minister for WorkCover).
UN Social and Economic Council,
Basic Principles on the Use of Restorative
Justice Programmes in Criminal Matters
, ESC Res 2002/12, 37th plen mtg, UN
Doc E/RES/2002/12 (24 July 2002).
Published by the Sentencing Advisory Council
Melbourne, Victoria,
© Copyright State of Victoria, Sentencing Advisory Council, 2025
This publication is protected by the laws of copyright. No part may
reproduced by any process except in accordance with the provisions
ISBN 978-1-925071-84-9 (Online)
Authorised by the Sentencing Advisory Council,
Level 3, 333 Queen Street,
Melbourne VIC 3000
Copyedited by Donald Ritchie Editing Services
This report reflects the law as at 31 October 2024.
was necessary to review WorkSafe prosecution result summaries of
Magistrates’ Court cases because there are only two published
Magistrates’ Court judgments in OHS criminal cases, neither of which are
sentencing judgments:
VWA v Paper Australia Pty Ltd
[2018] VMC 1
VWA v Patrick Stevedoring Pty Ltd
[2011] VMC 14.
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Penalties and
Sentences Act 1992
Sentencing Act 2017
Sentencing Act 1997
Sentencing Act 1995
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Sentencing Act 1995
Victim Impact Statements
, Trends & Issues in Crime and Criminal
Justice 33 (1991).
(definition of ‘victim’).
and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2018
. Bree Cook
et al., ‘Victims’ Needs, Victims’ Rights: Policies and
Programs for Victims of Crime in Australia’
Institute of Criminology
Research and Public Policy Series
81–85; Edna Erez, ‘Victim Impact Statements’ (1991) 33
Trends & Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice
. For instance, the
introduction of the
Victims’ Charter Act 2006
(Vic) resulted in the
Office of Public Prosecutions establishing policies requiring practitioners to
consult with victims of crime
informing them about plea negotiations: Director of Public Prosecutions
Policy of the Director of Public Prosecutions for Victoria
(Victim Impact Statement) Act 1994
(Vic); Victoria,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 31 March 1994, 778–779 (Jan Wade,
Attorney-General). In 2005, the
Sentencing Act
amended to require the sentencing court to take into account the impact of the
offence on any victim:
Sentencing Act 1991
s 5(2)(daa)
, inserted by
Sentencing (Further Amendment) Act 2005
In 2011, significant
amendments were made to the victim impact statement provisions, making changes
to the contents, presentation
and examination of victim impact statements, most
significantly, allowing victims to read, or elect someone to read, their
to the court:
Sentencing Amendment (Community Correction Reform)
And in 2018, reforms to the
Sentencing Act
(Vic) were made that allow the court to take into account the
entirety of a victim impact statement without specifying which parts
inadmissible:
Victims and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2018
et al. (1999), above n 8, 61.
61; Ian Edwards, ‘An Ambiguous Participant: The Crime Victim and Criminal
Justice Decision-Making’
(2004) 44(6)
British Journal of
Criminology
from WorkSafe Victoria (15 November 2024).
a non-OHS context, see, for example, the recent case of
Varghese v The
[2024] VSCA 115.
In an OHS context, see
Arthur’s Seat Scenic
Chairlift Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 269
[25] (‘the question of
the cause of the injuries ... was an aggravating factor, in respect of which the
Crown bore an onus
of proof beyond reasonable doubt’).
Advisory Council,
Sentencing Occupational Health and Safety Offences in
Consultation Paper
(2024) 43–46
Consultation Paper’
). The other cases cited in the
Consultation Paper
DPP v Hazelwood Power Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] VSC 278
DPP v Roads Corporation (trading as VicRoads) &
[2017] VCC 2021
[31]–[32], [131], [146];
DPP v Ricegrowers Ltd
[2018] VCC 542
v Cool Dynamics Refrigeration Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 1882.
v The Crown in Right of the State of Victoria
[2024] VCC 810.
v The Crown in Right of the State of Victoria
[2024] VCC 810
v Yarra Valley Park Lane Holiday Park Pty Ltd
[2024] VCC 1863
[107]–[114].
Consultation
46 (Question 8).
question we asked in our survey on Engage Victoria was: ‘Is there a need
to broaden the circumstances in which victim impact
statements can be made in
OHS cases?’
1 (Housing Industry Association); Submission 11 (Victorian Congress of Employer
Associations); Submission 15 (Victorian
Automotive Chamber of Commerce). The
Australian Industry Group (‘Ai Group’) did not express a view
against broadening
the circumstances in which a victim impact statement can be
made. They did, however, caution against a ‘strong victim impact
detracting from the key evidence base regarding causation’: Submission 4
(Australian Industry Group).
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions); Submission 6 (Australian Manufacturing
Workers’ Union); Submission 7 (Maurice
Blackburn); Submission 8 (Victorian
Trades Hall Council), endorsed by Submission 5 (Construction, Forestry and
Maritime Employees
Union) and Submission 10 (Community and Public Sector Union);
Submission 9 (Uniting Vic.Tas); Submission 12 (Law Institute of Victoria);
Submission 13 (OHSIntros); Submission 17 (Workplace Incidents Consultative
Committee); Submission 19 (Australian Institute of Health
and Safety);
Submission 21 (WorkSafe Victoria).
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions); Submission 7 (Maurice Blackburn); Submission
8 (Victorian Trades Hall Council), endorsed
by Submission 5 (Construction,
Forestry and Maritime Employees Union) and Submission 10 (Community and Public
Sector Union); Submission
12 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission 21
(WorkSafe Victoria).
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions).
7 (Maurice Blackburn).
7 (Maurice Blackburn); Submission 8 (Victorian Trades Hall Council), endorsed by
Submission 5 (Construction, Forestry and
Maritime Employees Union) and
Submission 10 (Community and Public Sector Union); Submission 13 (OHSIntros);
Submission 17 (Workplace
Incidents Consultative Committee).
with Workplace Incidents Consultative Committee (21 August 2024).
Environment
Protection Act 2017
Sentencing Act
provisions currently only permit victims to describe
‘particulars of the impact of the offence on the victim and of any injury,
loss or damage suffered by the victim as a direct result of the offence’:
Sentencing Act 1991
Given the risk-based nature of these
offences, it is important that impact statements in OHS cases allow affected
persons to speak
consequences as well.
reforms to the
Sentencing Act
in 2018, courts are now permitted to accept
the whole of a victim impact statement without specifying which parts they
inadmissible:
Victims and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2018
There is, however, an anomaly in these provisions. If a victim
wishes to avail themselves of the right to read their victim impact
aloud in court, the court must restrict them to only reading out the
parts of their statement, meaning the court must rule on the
admissibility in those circumstances:
Sentencing Act 1991
. We see no reason to undermine the therapeutic potential of
victim impact statements in circumstances where the victim chooses to
their victim impact statement (or have it read aloud by someone else). As we
heard from people with lived experience of
sentencing proceedings for OHS
offences, such editing and redacting can be unnecessarily distressing for
victims: Meeting with Workplace
Incidents Consultative Committee (21 August
2024). See also Tracey Booth, ‘Crime Victims and Sentencing: Reflections
on Borthwick’
(2011) 36(4)
Alternative Law Journal
victim impact statements submitted via the
Sentencing Act
provisions can
of the offence’:
Sentencing Act 1991
s 5(2)(daa).
impact statements in OHS cases should still be able to inform that
consideration, the contents of impact statements where there
has not been any
harm, or where there is debate over the causative link between the offending and
the harm suffered, should instead
inform the court’s assessment of
‘the nature and gravity of the offence’:
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing Act
allows a victim to attach a medical expert’s written
statement to their victim impact statement (usually to support or substantiate
physical or psychological harm suffered by the victim as a result of the
Sentencing Act 1991
is the difficulty in sentencing breaches of the
where harm has
resulted from the breach, as the Court of Appeal has observed: ‘proof of a
breach of the Act does not require
proof that the breach led to injury or
DPP v Vibro-Pile (Aust) Pty Ltd & Anor
[2016] VSCA 55
Sentencing Act 1991
s 8K(3)(b).
Social and Economic Council,
Basic Principles on the Use of Restorative
Justice Programmes in Criminal Matters
, ESC Res 2002/12, 37th plen mtg, UN
Doc E/RES/2002/12 (24 July 2002).
McCold and Ted Wachtel, ‘In Pursuit of Paradigm: A Theory of Restorative
Justice’ (Paper presented at XIII World
Congress of Criminology,
International Institute for Restorative Practices, Rio de Janeiro, 10–15
August 2003) 1; Jillian Furman,
‘An Economic Analysis of Restorative
Justice’ (PhD Thesis, The University of Massachusetts, 2012) 10. See also
Restorative Justice and Work-Related Death: A Literature
Centre for Innovative Justice,
It’s Healing to Hear Another
Person’s Story and Also to Tell Your Own Story: Report on the CIJ’s
Restorative Justice
Conferencing Pilot Program
(2019) 8; Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial
Process: Report
(2016) 176.
example, in response to the Clarence Valley Council lopping a scar tree that was
registered as an Aboriginal object under the
National Parks and Wildlife Act
(NSW), a restorative justice conference was held with Clarence Valley
Council (the offender) and affected members of the community.
The conference
resulted in an agreement containing, among other terms, a term requiring the
Council to develop and implement cultural
skills development training in
response to the incident:
Office of Environment and Heritage v Clarence
Valley Council
[2018] NSWLEC 205
example, during a restorative justice conference run by RMIT’s Centre for
Innovative Justice, a family violence offender
agreed to compensate his victim
and former partner by paying $5,500 to cover the fees of a university semester
– which she
was unable to attend due to the offending – and related
psychology and psychiatry sessions: Rachael Dexter et al., ‘I
Lighter’: Restorative Justice Gives Sex Crime Survivors a Different Way
(29 August 2021).
University of Sheffield evaluation on three conferencing trials in the United
Kingdom found that 90% of victims who participated
in conferencing received an
apology from the offender, compared to only 19% of those who participated only
in the traditional sentencing
process. Additionally, 91% of victims overall
indicated that they had accepted the apology offered by the offender, even in
conferencing
trials for more serious offences such as robbery or burglary:
United Kingdom Ministry of Justice,
Restorative Justice: The Views of Victims
and Offenders, The Third Report from the Evaluation of Three Schemes
Ministry of Justice Research Series 3/07 (2007) 23–25.
W. Sherman et al., ‘Twelve Experiments in Restorative Justice: The Jerry
Lee Program of Randomized Trials in Restorative
Justice Conferences’
Journal of Experimental Criminology
501; Heather Strang et al.,
‘Restorative Justice Conferencing (RJC) Using Face-to-Face Meetings of
Offenders and Victims: Effects
on Offender Recidivism and Victim Satisfaction. A
Systematic Review’ (2013) 9(1)
Campbell Systemic Reviews
our reference period, 83% of offenders sentenced for an OHS offence were
companies: Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Occupational Health and
Safety Offences in Victoria: A Statistical Report
Statistical Report’
Tombs and David Whyte, ‘The Myths and Realities of Deterrence in Workplace
Safety Regulation’ (2013) 53(5)
British Journal of Criminology
contrast, restorative justice conferences are available for almost all offences
in England: see
Sentencing Act 2020
(UK) s 5; New Zealand: see
Sentencing Act 2002
(NZ) s 24A; and Canada: see
Criminal Code,
1985, c C-46, s 717(1) which, while not expressly stated, is used
for the purposes of deferring sentencing for restorative justice
conferencing to
take place: Government of Canada, ‘Restorative Justice: Legislation and
Policy’ (justice.gc.ca, 2021).
(Restorative Justice) Act 2004
Environment
Protection Act 2017
of the Environment Operations Act
Office of Environment and Heritage v Clarence Valley Council
[2018] NSWLEC 205
Garrett v Williams
[2007] NSWLEC 96.
of Justice and Community Safety, ‘Restorative Justice for Victim Survivors
of Family Violence’ (justice.vic.gov.au,
for example, Dexter et al. (2021), above n 40.
Justice Act 2024
Consultation
49 (Question 9).
question asked in our survey on Engage Victoria was: ‘Should restorative
justice conferences be made available in OHS cases?’
(Survey Question
6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union); Submission 15 (Victorian
Automotive Chamber of Commerce).
1 (Housing Industry Association); Submission 2 (Australian Association for
Restorative Justice); Submission 4 (Australian
Industry Group); Submission 7
(Maurice Blackburn); Submission 8 (Victorian Trades Hall Council), endorsed by
Submission 5 (Construction,
Forestry and Maritime Employees Union) and
Submission 10 (Community and Public Sector Union); Submission 9 (Uniting
Vic.Tas); Submission
11 (Victorian Congress of Employer Associations);
Submission 12 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission 13 (OHSIntros); Submission
16 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice); Submission 18 (Australian Centre for
Justice Innovation, Monash University); Submission
19 (Australian Institute of
Health and Safety); Submission 21 (WorkSafe Victoria).
6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union).
15 (Victorian Automotive Chamber of Commerce).
1 (Housing Industry Association); Submission 7 (Maurice Blackburn); Submission
16 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice);
Submission 18 (Australian Centre for
Justice Innovation, Monash University); Submission 21 (WorkSafe Victoria).
1 (Housing Industry Association); Submission 21 (WorkSafe Victoria).
2 (Australian Association for Restorative Justice); Submission 7 (Maurice
Blackburn); Submission 8 (Victorian Trades Hall
Council), endorsed by Submission
5 (Construction, Forestry and Maritime Employees Union) and Submission 10
(Community and Public
Sector Union); Submission 9 (Uniting Vic.Tas); Submission
12 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission 16 (RMIT Centre for Innovative
16 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice).
21 (WorkSafe Victoria).
2 (Australian Association for Restorative Justice); Submission 16 (RMIT Centre
for Innovative Justice).
2016, the Victorian Law Reform Commission (VLRC) recommended the Victorian
Government introduce a restorative justice conferencing
framework for all
indictable offences in Victoria, and recommended a number of key features:
Victorian Law Reform Commission (2016),
above n 38, 174–194.
its 2021 report on improving justice systems responses to victims of sexual
offences, VLRC again recommended that a restorative
justice conferencing
framework be introduced for all indictable offences in Victoria, including
sexual offences: Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Improving the Justice
System Response to Sexual Offences
(2021) 184–210.
16 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice).
et al. (2013), above n 42, 33–44.
Centre for Innovative Justice (2019), above n 38, 17–19.
2 (Australian Association for Restorative Justice); Submission 16 (RMIT Centre
for Innovative Justice); Meeting with Australian
Association for Restorative
Justice (6 August 2024); Meeting with RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice (8
August 2024); Stakeholder
Roundtable (12 August 2024); Meeting with Australian
Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash University (15 August 2024); OHS Barrister
Roundtable (16 August 2024).
Australia, see
Crimes (Restorative Justice) Act 2004
Internationally, see
Sentencing Act 2020
Sentencing Act
(NZ) s 24A.
Law Reform Commission (2016), above n 38; Victorian Law Reform Commission
(2021), above n 65.
Centre for Innovative Justice (2019), above n 38.
Stakeholder
Roundtable (12 August 2024); Meeting with Workplace Incidents Consultative
Committee (21 August 2024).
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) allows the Magistrates’ Court
and County Court to defer sentencing for a number of reasons, including
the offender to participate in a program or programs
aimed at addressing the impact of the offending on the victim’.
is utilised to allow restorative justice to occur in the Australian
Capital Territory:
Crimes (Restorative Justice) Act 2004
New Zealand:
Sentencing Act 2002
(NZ) s 24A, and the United Kingdom:
Sentencing Act 2020
(UK) ss 3, 5(1)–(3).
our recommendation to increase the use of health and safety undertakings, with
conditions other than charitable donations, we
see an opportunity for components
of restorative justice agreements to be included as conditions of health and
safety undertakings,
which would make those components enforceable: see
[3.58]–[3.72].
RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice has previously commented on the safeguards in
place to address this risk, saying that the extensive
preparation that takes
place between the facilitator and each party, individually, ensures that
affected persons and offenders are
aware of the potential impact of conferencing
on sentencing before providing informed consent about whether or not to
participate:
RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice (2019), above n 38, 29–30.
See also Richelle Hunt and Nic Healey, ‘Would You Meet
with Someone Who
Has Caused You or Your Family Harm?’, ABC Radio Melbourne (1 March 2023).
The Victorian Law Reform Commission
made similar comments when recommending a
pre-sentence conferencing scheme for all indictable offences in Victoria:
Victorian Law
Reform Commission (2016), above n 38, 186.
Stakeholder
Roundtable (12 August 2024); Meeting with Workplace Incidents Consultative
Committee (21 August 2024).
(Restorative Justice) Act 2004
with Australian Association for Restorative Justice (6 August 2024); Meeting
with RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice (8 August
2024); Stakeholder Roundtable
(12 August 2024); Meeting with Australian Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash
University (15 August
2024); OHS Barrister Roundtable (16 August 2024); Meeting
with Workplace Incidents Consultative Committee (21 August 2024); Meeting
Herbert Smith Freehills (27 August 2024); Meeting with Environment Protection
Authority (29 August 2024).
Statistical
Bureau of Statistics, ‘Counts of Australian Businesses, Including Entries
and Exits, July 2020–June 2024’
(abs.gov.au, 2024).
Advisory Council,
Long-Term Sentencing Trends in Victoria
6–7, 18–19.
Advisory Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the Children’s
Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2024).
[2009] VSCA 114
Statistical Report
, we also note that 86.7% of all OHS
received a fine:
Statistical Report
data did not always delineate whether these were adjourned undertakings pursuant
sections 72
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic), or health and
safety undertakings pursuant to
section 137
Occupational Health and
Safety Act 2004
(Vic). Those two orders are, however, largely similar in
data did not always delineate whether these were adjourned undertakings pursuant
sections 72
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic), or health and
safety undertakings pursuant to
section 137
Occupational Health and
Safety Act 2004
(Vic). Those two orders are, however, largely similar in
Statistical
36–37 (Table 5).
Statistical
33 (Table 4).
Statistical
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
v LH Holding & Hanna
[2024] VSC 90.
Victoria, ‘Psychosocial Hazards Contributing to Work-Related Stress’
(worksafe.vic.gov.au,
Steve Butcher, ‘Workers Fined $115,000 over Bullying of Café
The Sydney Morning Herald
(8 February 2010).
Crimes Amendment
(Bullying) Act 2011
. Victorian Government
Solicitor’s Office, ‘Proposed Psychological Health Regulations for
Victorian Employers Are
Under Consideration’ (vgso.vic.gov.au, 2024).
. According to
WorkSafe’s prosecution result summaries published on its website, there
have only been eight workplace
bullying prosecutions in the nine years from 2012
to 2020 (less than one per year), but there have been 10 workplace bullying
prosecutions
in the 3.5 years from 2021 to July 2024 (three per year): WorkSafe
Victoria, ‘Prosecution Result Summaries’ (worksafe.vic.gov.au,
. WorkSafe Victoria,
‘Court Services Victoria’ (19 October 2023),
Prosecution Result
Summaries and Enforceable Undertakings: A Directory of the Most Recent
Prosecution and Enforceable Undertaking
Prosecution Result Summaries’
Victoria, ‘Whitelom Pty Ltd (in liquidation)’ (26 October 2023),
Prosecution Result Summaries
; WorkSafe Victoria, ‘Whitelom
Investments Pty Ltd (in liquidation)’ (26 October 2023),
Prosecution
Result Summaries
Victoria, ‘Mark Whitelock’ (26 October 2023)
Prosecution Result
Victoria, ‘Steven Yousif’ (11 December 2023),
Prosecution Result
Victoria, ‘Ideal Catering Services Pty Ltd’ (14 December 2023),
Prosecution Result Summaries
; WorkSafe Victoria, ‘SC14 of
2023’ (14 December 2023),
Prosecution Result Summaries
Victoria, ‘Celsius Ballarat Pty Ltd’ (16 July 2024),
Prosecution
Result Summaries
instance, there is a general environmental duty that carries a maximum penalty
of 10,000 penalty units for companies and 2,000
penalty units for individuals:
Environment Protection Act 2017
There is also an aggravated
version of that offence, for which the maximum fine is doubled if the offender
engaged in the breaching
conduct intentionally or recklessly, the conduct caused
harm, and the offender should have known it was likely to cause harm:
most commonly prosecuted offences are breaches of license conditions and
offences relating to industrial waste, which also carry
maximum fines of 10,000
penalty units for companies and 2,000 penalty units for individuals: see, for
Environment Protection Act 2017
fines for individuals are $50,000, $150,000 and $300,000 respectively:
Vehicle National Law 2012
ss 26F–26H.
Environment
Protection Authority Victoria, ‘Register of Court Proceedings’
(epa.vic.gov.au, 2024).
Heavy Vehicle Regulator,
Primary Duty Matters – Comparative Sentencing
Environment
Protection Authority Victoria, ‘South Gippsland Region Water Corporation
(ABN 40 349 066 713)’ (epa.vic.gov.au,
Environment
Protection Authority Victoria, ‘Axcent Apartments Pty Ltd’
(epa.vic.gov.au, 2024).
for example, Environment Protection Authority Victoria, ‘Geelong Landfill
Pty Ltd’ (epa.vic.gov.au, 2024); Environment
Protection Authority
Victoria, ‘I, C & J Santospirito Pty Ltd’ (epa.vic.gov.au,
2024); Environment Protection Authority
Victoria (2004), above n 109;
Environment Protection Authority Victoria, ‘Van Hessen Australia Pty
Ltd’ (epa.vic.gov.au,
the recent Federal Court case of
ASIC v Commonwealth Bank of Australia [No 2]
[2021] FCA 966
, the judge (at [17]) wrote about the unlikelihood of
achieving the intended effects of adverse publicity orders if the only
publications
are in newspapers: ‘It is a fairy tale to think that in 2021
dense legalistic public advertisements, published in the notices
daily newspapers, often cheek by jowl with the results of things such as flower
shows and greyhound races, amounts to
an effective way of communicating
information to a broad audience of consumers. The decline in literacy rates in
Western societies,
and the likelihood that the intended audience is made up of
persons at every point of the continuum of sophistication in financial
matters, presents real challenges that cannot be simply ignored’.
the Lilydale event, one participant imposed $480,000 (which we said was the
maximum due to the Magistrates’ Court’s
and another imposed $250,000, both well above any other fines imposed.
person did not respond to this question, so this percentage represents 41 of 49
participants.
Statistical
after the popular beverage constituted by a beer and a non-alcohol drink, such
as lemonade.
Participant (male, 65–74).
Participant (female, 35–44) (‘Obviously if they’re not getting
paid - they’re too high’).
Participant (female, 35–44) (‘The fines are already high ...
[w]e’re in an economic crisis’).
6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union); Submission 8 (Victorian
Trades Hall Council), endorsed by Submission
5 (Construction, Forestry and
Maritime Employees Union) and Submission 10 (Community and Public Sector Union);
Submission 9 (Uniting
Vic.Tas); Submission 13 (OHSIntros); Submission 16 (RMIT
Centre for Innovative Justice); Submission 18 (Australian Centre for Justice
Innovation, Monash University); Submission 19 (Australian Institute of Health
and Safety).
12 (Law Institute of Victoria).
15 (Victorian Automotive Chamber of Commerce). See also Submission 11 (Victorian
Congress of Employer Associations).
1 (Housing Industry Association), citing
Statistical Report
11 (Victorian Congress of Employer Associations).
1 (Housing Industry Association); Submission 4 (Australian Industry Group);
Submission 5 (Construction, Forestry and Maritime
Employees Union); Submission 6
(Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union); Submission 8 (Victorian Trades
Hall Council), endorsed
by Submission 10 (Community and Public Sector Union);
Submission 9 (Uniting Vic.Tas); Submission 19 (Australian Institute of Health
and Safety).
11 (Victorian Congress of Employer Associations); Submission 15 (Victorian
Automotive Chamber of Commerce).
Consultation
Consultation
5–6, citing Industry Commission,
Work, Health and Safety: An
Inquiry into Occupational Health and Safety, Volume 1: Report
103–104; Chris Maxwell,
Occupational Health and Safety Act
(2004) 14; Australian Senate, Education and Employment References
They Never Came Home – The Framework Surrounding the
Prevention, Investigation and Prosecution of Industrial Deaths in Australia
(2018) 70; Marie Boland,
Review of the Model Work Health and Safety Laws:
Final Report
(2018) 127–128.
Consultation
5–6, citing Industry Commission (1995), above n 128,
124–126; Maxwell (2004), above n 128, 376–381; Bob Stensholt,
Report on the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
: Administrative Review
(2007) 81, 85; Australian Government,
National Review into Model Occupational
Health and Safety Laws: First Report
(2008) 148–149.
Consultation
5–6, citing Industry Commission (1995), above n 128,
116–118; Maxwell (2004), above n 128, 367–369; Australian
(2008), above n 129, 139; Australian Senate, Education and Employment References
Committee (2018), above n 128, 70.
Consultation
Consultation
84–87, 89–90.
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
(2004), above n 128, 378.
. For a detailed overview of adjourned undertakings,
see our recent consultation paper and final report with recommendations for
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in
Victoria: Consultation Paper
(2022); Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in Victoria: Final Report
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
Sentencing Act 1991
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
data did not reliably distinguish whether these undertakings were health and
safety undertakings or adjourned undertakings.
Statistical
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
Consultation
Victoria, ‘Plaster Company to Spend $480,000 after Forklift Injury’
(worksafe.vic.gov.au, 2024).
for example, WorkSafe Victoria, ‘Bluescope Steel Limited’ (21
November 2019),
Prosecution Result Summaries
; WorkSafe Victoria,
‘T.S. Constructions Pty Ltd’ (9 May 2019),
Prosecution Result
Victoria, ‘Mornington Peninsula Shire Council’ (13 April 2017),
Prosecution Result Summaries
Victoria (2024), above n 146.
for example, WorkSafe Victoria, ‘E.J. Lyons & Sons Pty Ltd’ (13
December 2018),
Prosecution Result Summaries
for example, WorkSafe Victoria, ‘George Weston Foods Limited’ (15
July 2020),
Prosecution Result Summaries
our consultation paper on adjourned undertakings, we found that 63% of 127,000
adjourned undertakings were precisely 12 months:
Sentencing Advisory Council
(2022), above n 135, 30.
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
[2024] VCC 535.
[2024] VCC 535
[2024] VCC 535
[2024] VCC 535
[2024] VCC 535
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
(2004), above n 128, 377–379.
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
ss 137(4)(b)
(definition of ‘undertaking’).
Environment
Protection Act 2017
(general restoration and
prevention orders, restorative project orders and environmental audit
Work Health and Safety Bill 2023 (Cth) ss 237–238 (orders for restoration,
and work health and safety project orders).
(2004), above n 128, 378.
ss 38(1)(a)(iii)
(2004), above n 128, 378–379.
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
By way of comparison, the maximum
penalty for contravening an adjourned undertaking is a Level 10 fine, which
equates to 10 penalty
units or currently $1,957.90:
Sentencing Act 1991
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
21 (WorkSafe Victoria).
Victoria, Enforcement Group,
Policy on Enforceable Undertakings Pursuant to
Section 16 of the Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
Victoria, Enforcement Group
, Policy on the Criminal Justice Diversion
Occupational Health and Safety Compliance and Enforcement Policy: A
Guide for Employers
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
, (l) (‘to monitor and
enforce compliance with this Act and the regulations ... to monitor the
operation of measures taken and
arrangements put in place to ensure occupational
health, safety and welfare’).
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
(2004), above n 128, 380, citing
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000
Government (2008), above n 129 (Recommendation 61).
and Safety at Work Act 2015
(NZ) s 153.
Occupational
Health and Safety Act
RSO 1990, c C-0.1, s 68.1.
Consumer Law and Fair Trading Act 2012
Services Commission Act 2001
Environment
Protection Act 2017
Safety (Domestic Commercial Vessel) National Law (Application) Act 2013
sch 1 cl 158(2).
Services Regulation Act 2021
(Vic) ss 163–164.
Competition
and Consumer Act 2010
, sch 2 cl 2(1), cl 247(2).
Freeburn and Ian Ramsay, ‘An Analysis of Publicity Orders Under the
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
2001’ (2022) 30(4)
Australian Journal of Competition and Consumer Law
Fisse and John Braithwaite,
The Impact of Publicity on Corporate Offenders
(1984) 285–286.
and Ramsay (2022), above n 189, 302–303.
and Ramsay (2022), above n 189; Fisse and Braithwaite (1984), above n 189,
Fisse, ‘The Use of Publicity as a Criminal Sanction Against Business
Corporations’
[1971] MelbULawRw 5
(1971) 8(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
example, emergent risks in work on digital labour platforms: Elizabeth Bluff et
al., ‘Regulating Health and Safety in Work
for Digital Labor Platforms in
Australia: The Example of Food Deliverers’ (2023) 1(1)
Journal of Work
Health and Safety Regulation
(2004), above n 128, 247.
S. Johnson, ‘Regulation by Shaming: Deterrence Effects of Publicizing
Violations of Workplace Safety and Health Laws’
(2020) 110(6)
Economic Review
v Cranbourne Turf Club Inc
[2023] VCC 506.
v Cranbourne Turf Club Inc
[2023] VCC 506
, [127]. A copy of the publication
is available in our
Consultation Paper
(at 70, Figure 1).
v Yarra Valley Park Lane Holiday Park Pty Ltd
[2024] VCC 1863.
v Yarra Valley Park Lane Holiday Park Pty Ltd
[2024] VCC 1863
Victoria, ‘Yering Farm Wines Pty Ltd’ (13 December 2012),
Prosecution Result Summaries
Victoria, ‘Stowe Australia Pty Ltd’
(29 April 2021),
Prosecution Result Summaries;
WorkSafe Victoria, ‘T.S.
Constructions Pty Ltd’ (9 May 2019),
Prosecution Result
Victoria, ‘Wagstaff Cranbourne Pty Ltd’ (27 March 2014),
Prosecution Result Summaries
‘Belgravia Health and Leisure Group Pty Ltd’ (8 June 2017),
Prosecution Result Summaries
Victoria, ‘Mettle Pty Ltd’ (3 October 2024),
Prosecution Result
Victoria, ‘Retpro Management Pty Ltd’ (16 January 2020),
Prosecution Result Summaries
NSW v Investa Asset Management Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWDC 472
Linnane (NSW
Department of Planning and Environment) v Cummings
[2020] NSWDC 755
SafeWork NSW v Saunders Civilbuild Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWDC
(NSW Department of Planning and Environment) v Cummings
[2020] NSWDC 755
NSW v Investa Asset Management Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWDC 472
[114]–[116].
for example,
SafeWork NSW v Investa Asset Management Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWDC
[117]–[125]. In support of its application, the regulator referred to
its various policies identifying the need to reduce serious
injuries and
fatalities in the context of certain high-impact harms, including falls from
height. Noting the frequency of these kinds
of incidents, the regulator
contended that an adverse publicity order would increase awareness among owners
and users of building
maintenance units of the need to conduct major
inspections.
NSW v Investa Asset Management Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWDC 472
[134]–[135].
NSW v Saunders Civilbuild Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWDC 163
(NSW Department of Planning and Environment) v Cummings
[2020] NSWDC
(NSW Department of Planning and Environment) v Cummings
[2020] NSWDC 755
(NSW Department of Planning and Environment) v Cummings
[2020] NSWDC 755
of the 50 participants did not respond to this question.
6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union).
6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union).
8 (Victorian Trades Hall Council), endorsed by Submission 5 (Construction,
Forestry and Maritime Employees Union) and Submission
10 (Community and Public
Sector Union).
11 (Victorian Congress of Employer Associations).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (12 August 2024).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (12 August 2024).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (12 August 2024).
Barrister Roundtable (16 August 2024).
Muroi, ‘“Risible”: Federal Court Justice Slams $9.8m Westpac
Settlement’,
Sydney Morning Herald
(31 January 2024).
v Westpac Banking Corporation (Penalty Hearing)
[2024] FCA 52
v Yarra Valley Park Lane Holiday Park Pty Ltd
[2024] VCC 1863.
South Wales Government, Centre for Work Health and Safety,
Sentencing: Non-Monetary Orders in Work Health and Safety: Guide for Regulators
in the Use of Non-Monetary Orders
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
; the maximum fine for individuals is
3,000 penalty units.
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
; the maximum fine for individuals is
1,800 penalty units.
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
maximum for individuals for these offences is 1,800 penalty units. Two health
and safety duties have different maximum penalties
for companies:
(duties of employers to monitor health and conditions) has a maximum penalty of
1,200 penalty units, and
(duties of designers of buildings or
structures) has a maximum penalty of 2,500 penalty units.
Work Health and Safety Bill
(2023) ss 30A–33, sch 4. Aside from the
absence of an industrial manslaughter offence, this offence and penalty
hierarchy is
very similar to that in New Zealand, which includes $3 million for
companies that recklessly place someone in danger of serious injury
or illness,
$1.5 million for companies that breach a duty and place someone in danger of
serious injury or illness, and $500,000
in all other instances:
Safety at Work Act 2015
(NZ) ss 47–49.
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
Sections 24
of that Act apply only to individuals.
And the maximum penalty for the offence relating to designers of buildings or
structures is
lower, though the reason for the distinction is not immediately
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
penalty units for body corporates, and 500 for individuals).
13 (OHSIntros).
Media, ‘Investment Briefs’,
Australian Financial Review
March 1989).
Occupational
Health and Safety (Miscellaneous Amendment) Act 1990
(Vic) s 7(a).
Compensation (Miscellaneous Amendment) Act 1997
(Vic) s 73(a).
Bank of Australia, ‘Inflation Calculator’ (rba.gov.au, 2024).
v Rapid Roller Co Pty Ltd
[2011] VSCA 17
Explanatory
Memorandum, Model Work Health and Safety Legislation Amendment (Offences and
Penalties) Bill 2023 (Cth) item 4, referencing
Boland (2018), above n 128, 117
(Recommendation 22).
Explanatory
Memorandum,
Model Work Health and Safety Legislation Amendment (Offences and
Penalties) 2023
(Cth) item 4.
Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes) Act 2023
(Cth) sch 4 div 11
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
, as amended
Work Health and Safety Amendment Act 2023
July 2024);
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
(ACT) sch 4, as
Workplace Legislation Amendment Act 2024
Health and Safety Act 2012
, as amended by
Work Health and
Safety Amendment (Safer Workplaces) Act 2024
Consultation
80–90 (Questions 15 and 16).
9 (Uniting Vic.Tas).
20 (County Court of Victoria).
[2008] VSCA 51
Hogarth v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 302
DPP v Aydin & Anor
[2005] VSCA 86
for example, our recent report on the effect of inflation on court fines over
time, finding that increases to the maximum financial
penalty for failing to
register a cat or dog, and for driving while suspended, appear to have had no
discernible effect on sentencing
practices: Sentencing Advisory Council,
Assessing the Impact of Inflation and Penalty Unit Indexation on Fine Amounts
in Victoria
(2024) 27, 29, 34.
Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012
for example, Andrew O. Arewa et al., ‘Analysis of Penalties Imposed on
Organisations for Breaching Safety and Health Regulations
in the United
Kingdom’ (2018) 9(4)
Safety and Health at Work
‘Northern Gas Networks Fined £5m over Mirfield House
Explosion’,
(10 February 2022); BBC, ‘Kier Fined
£4.4m for Power Cable Safety Breaches’,
(14 January 2023);
Gwyn Topham, ‘Network Rail Fined £6.7m over Fatal Stonehaven
The Guardian
(8 September 2023); BBC, ‘Chevron Fined
for Pembroke Explosion that Killed Four People’,
flagged in our
Statistical Report
, this included five charges sentenced
in the Magistrates’ Court and two in the higher courts. One of those
charges resulted
in the only immediate custodial sentence for an OHS offence in
the 16-year period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2021. One of the two
courts cases was
DPP v Orbit Drilling Pty Ltd & Anor
[2010] VCC 417
the other judgment is not publicly available:
Statistical Report
(2004), above n 128, 375–376.
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 18 November 2004, 1764 (Rob
Hulls, Attorney-General, Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister for
WorkCover).
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 18 November 2004, 1767, 1769
(Rob Hulls, Attorney-General, Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister
WorkCover); Meeting with Australian Industry Group (19 August 2024). The
Maxwell Review
noted that ‘the Victorian Government announced in
early 2003 that it had decided not to introduce an offence of industrial
manslaughter’: Maxwell (2004), above n 128,
Health and Safety Amendment Act 2023
(NSW) sch 1, amending
Work Health
and Safety Act 2011
Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes) Act 2023
(Cth) sch 4 div 2 cl
21, amending
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
1 (Housing Industry Association).
4 (Australian Industry Group).
11 (Victorian Congress of Employer Associations); Submission 15 (Victorian
Automotive Chamber of Commerce).
19 (Australian Institute of Health and Safety).
6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union).
8 (Victorian Trades Hall Council).
9 (Uniting Vic.Tas).
with Australian Industry Group (19 August 2024).
Law Reform Commission,
Recklessness: Report
citing a submission to the VLRC from the Office of Public Prosecutions.
Work Health and Safety Bill 2023 (Cth) s 31.
v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 266.
v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 266
v Vibro-Pile (Aust) Pty Ltd & Anor
[2016] VSCA 55
Statistical
38–40. Indeed, the occurrence (or absence) of an incident
causing serious injury or death is also highly likely to determine
the level of
response from the regulator: see, for example, Richard Johnstone,
‘Rethinking Responsive Regulation’ (Public
Lecture, National
Research Centre for OHS Regulation, Australian National University, 28 June
Statistical
for example,
Occupational Health and Safety Act
RSO 1990, c C-0.1,
Council for England and Wales,
Health and Safety Offences, Corporate
Manslaughter and Food Safety and Hygiene Offences: Definitive Guideline
and Safety at Work Act 2015
(NZ) s 151(2)(d).
Stumpmaster
v WorkSafe NZ
[2018] NZHC 2020
[2018] 3 NZLR 881
, 893 [40].
Consultation
24 (Question 3). The question we asked in the survey was:
‘Should the fact that someone was killed or seriously injured be
in sentencing an OHS offence?’
6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union); Submission 7 (Maurice
Blackburn); Submission 8 (Victorian Trades Hall
Council), endorsed by Submission
5 (Construction, Forestry and Maritime Employees Union) and Submission 10
(Community and Public
Sector Union); Submission 9 (Uniting Vic.Tas); Submission
12 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission 13 (OHSIntros); Submission 17
(Workplace Incidents Consultative Committee).
1 (Housing Industry Association); Submission 4 (Australian Industry Group);
Submission 11 (Victorian Congress of Employer
Associations); Submission 15
(Victorian Automotive Chamber of Commerce); Submission 19 (Australian Institute
of Health and Safety).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (12 August 2024); OHS Barrister Roundtable (16 August 2024); Meeting
with Workplace Incidents Consultative
Committee (21 August 2024); Meeting with
Herbert Smith Freehills (27 August 2024).
for example, Elizabeth Byrne, ‘Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young Defends
Character Reference for Man Charged over Family
(6 March 2020); Phoebe Hosier and Elise Kinsella, ‘Questions Arise
over Character References Used to Help Sex Offender Jeffrey
Corfe Escape Jail Time’,
(8 March 2023).
South Wales Sentencing Council, ‘Good Character in Sentencing’
(sentencingcouncil.nsw.gov.au, 2024).
v YJ Auto Repairs Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 1759
DPP v De Kort
DPP v St Vincent’s Care Services Ltd
[2021] VCC 1035
DPP v United Access Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 1085
DPP v L Arthur
[2013] VCC 1051
v Rapid Perforating Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 1167
v Prestige Truck Bodies (Aust)
[2023] VCC 747
v YJ Auto Repairs Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 1759
for example,
DPP v The Elastomers Pty Ltd
[2024] VCC 482
Seascape Constructions Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 751
[34], [49].
Consultation
33 (Question 7).
4 (Australian Industry Group).
6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union).
11 (Victorian Congress of Employer Associations).
8 (Victorian Trades Hall Council), endorsed by Submission 5 (Construction,
Forestry and Maritime Employees Union) and Submission
10 (Community and Public
Sector Union).
11 (Victorian Congress of Employer Associations).
12 (Law Institute of Victoria).
9 (Uniting Vic.Tas).
Consultation Participant, Lilydale (18 March 2024).
Consultation Participant, Lilydale (18 March 2024).
Consultation Participant, Bendigo (26 February 2024).
is consistent with case law on the topic. See, for example,
CDPP v Gregory
[2011] VSCA 145
[53] (‘general deterrence is a particularly
significant sentencing consideration in white collar crime and ... good
cannot be given undue significance as a mitigating factor ... [it
should play] a lesser part in the sentencing process’).
Statistical
v A & J Australia Pty Ltd
[2024] VCC 211
v New Sector Engineering Pty Ltd
[2020] VCC 400
v Bradken Resources Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 1053
Justice Treacy, ‘Keynote Address’ (Speech delivered at the Criminal
Law Review Conference, 3 December 2015).
et al. (2018), above n 251.
Anthony and Penny Crofts, ‘The Dreamworld Deaths: Corporate Crime and the
Slumber of the Law’
(2024) 36(2)
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
Director of Public Prosecutions successfully appealed the $250,000 fine imposed
in the County Court. The Court of Appeal subsequently
increased the fine to
DPP v Coates Hire Operations Pty Ltd
[2012] VSCA 131.
v Redback Tree Services
[2017] VCC 1602.
v Resource Recovery Victoria Pty Ltd
[2015] VCC 472.
v W.F. Montague Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 1553.
[2013] VCC 1543.
In 2015, two years after sentencing, Hansen
Yuncken’s annual revenue was approximately $1 billion: Michael Bleby,
Data Boosts Construction’,
Australian Financial Review
(11 January 2015). Based on a conservative estimate of at least $1 billion, at
the time of sentencing, a $475,000 fine represented
approximately 0.05% of
Hansen Yuncken’s annual turnover.
v Phelpsys Construction Pty Ltd
[2018] VCC 394.
v SJ & TA Structural Pty Ltd
[2019] VCC 2016.
v D&A Martin Transport Pty Ltd
[2024] VCC 1355
v YJ Auto Repairs Pty Ltd
[2023] VCC 1759
Symons, ‘Sibelco Fined $400,000 after Workers Exposed to
‘Plumes’ of Silica Dust at Victorian Quarry’
(14 June 2024) (‘The fact is, they plead guilty but 400k is a day’s
income for them; it’s a drop in the ocean for
them really’).
Practices Commission v CSR Ltd
[1990] FCA 521 [42].
Consultation
32 (Question 5). The question we asked in our survey was: ‘How
important should the size of the company be in deciding an appropriate
for an OHS offence?’
Victorian Automotive Chamber of Commerce was of the view that the size of a
company should not be relevant in determining the
appropriate sentence:
Submission 15 (Victorian Automotive Chamber of Commerce).
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions); Submission 4 (Australian Industry Group);
Submission 6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’
Union); Submission 8
(Victorian Trades Hall Council), endorsed by Submission 5 (Construction,
Forestry and Maritime Employees Union)
and Submission 10 (Community and Public
Sector Union); Submission 9 (Uniting Vic.Tas); Submission 11 (Victorian Congress
of Employer
Associations); Submission 12 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission
13 (OHSIntros); Submission 17 (Workplace Incidents Consultative
Committee);
Submission 18 (Australian Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash University);
Submission 19 (Australian Institute of Health
and Safety); Submission 21
(WorkSafe Victoria).
20 (County Court of Victoria).
Consultation
32 (Question 6).
6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union); Submission 8 (Victorian
Trades Hall Council), endorsed by Submission
5 (Construction, Forestry and
Maritime Employees Union) and Submission 10 (Community and Public Sector Union);
Submission 12 (Law
Institute of Victoria); Submission 17 (Workplace Incidents
Consultative Committee); Submission 21 (WorkSafe Victoria).
6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union); Submission 8 (Victorian
Trades Hall Council), endorsed by Submission
5 (Construction, Forestry and
Maritime Employees Union) and Submission 10 (Community and Public Sector Union);
Submission 12 (Law
Institute of Victoria); Submission 19 (Australian Institute
of Health and Safety); Submission 21 (WorkSafe Victoria).
19 (Australian Institute of Health and Safety); Submission 21 (WorkSafe
6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union); Submission 8 (Victorian
Trades Hall Council), endorsed by Submission
5 (Construction, Forestry and
Maritime Employees Union) and Submission 10 (Community and Public Sector Union);
Submission 12 (Law
Institute of Victoria).
12 (Law Institute of Victoria).
19 (Australian Institute of Health and Safety).
6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union); Submission 8 (Victorian
Trades Hall Council), endorsed by Submission
5 (Construction, Forestry and
Maritime Employees Union) and Submission 10 (Community and Public Sector Union);
Submission 12 (Law
Institute of Victoria).
12 (Law Institute of Victoria). This is the practice used to assess a
company’s financial circumstances in New South
Wales: District Court of
New South Wales,
Practice Note 16 of 2021: Criminal Division:
Work Health and
Prosecutions
(4 June 2021) 12, [45].
Consultation Participant, Ballarat (19 February 2024).
Consultation Participant, Shepparton (23 February 2024).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (12 August 2024); OHS Barrister Roundtable (16 August 2024); Meeting
with Australian Centre for Justice Innovation,
Monash University (15 August
2024); Meeting with Australian Industry Group (19 August 2024); Meeting with
Workplace Incidents Consultative
Committee (21 August 2024); Meeting with
Herbert Smith Freehills (27 August 2024); Meeting with Environment Protection
(29 August 2024); Meeting with Emeritus Professor Arie Freiberg AM (19
September 2024).
thin market is one in which there is limited competition among suppliers of
goods and/or services.
comments were recently made by the Supreme Court of Tasmania:
TT-Line Company
Pty Ltd v Burrows
[2024] TASSC 46
a combination of WorkSafe and court data, we identified only three offenders
(all companies) that were missing conviction data.
These cases are not included
in Figure 26.
on 107 cases for which sentencing remarks were available.
13 (OHSIntros).
for example, Rochelle Kirkham, ‘Community Rallies after Ballarat Council
Awards Tender to Company Convicted over Worker
(29 September 2022).
et al. (2018), above n 251, 389.
Advisory Council,
A Sentencing Guidelines Council for Victoria: Report
(2018) 43–45.
18 (Recommendation 1), 20 (Recommendation 2).
Council for England and Wales (2016), above n 276, 7.
Advisory Council (2018), above n 350, 51 (Recommendation 10).
subject to the guideline should include Section 21 (Duties of employers to
employees); Section 22 (Duties of employers to
monitor health and conditions);
Section 23 (Duties of employers to other persons); Section 24 (Duties of
self-employed persons to
other persons); Section 25 (Duties of employees);
Section 26 (Duties of persons who manage or control workplaces); Section 27
of designers of plant); Section 28 (Duties of designers of buildings or
structures); Section 29 (Duties of manufacturers of plant
or substances);
Section 30 (Duties of suppliers of plant or substances); Section 31 (Duties of
persons installing, erecting or commissioning
(Duty not to
recklessly endanger persons at workplaces); Section 39G (Workplace
manslaughter).
Advisory Council (2018), above n 350, 59.
v Dalgliesh
[2017] HCA 41.
Advisory Council (2018), above n 350, xx–xxi.
Council for England and Wales (2016), above n 276, 4.
Care Homes Ltd v R
[2019] EWCA Crim 1691.
Consultation
90 (Question 16).
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions); Submission 6 (Australian Manufacturing
Workers’ Union); Submission 8 (Victorian
Trades Hall Council), endorsed by
Submission 5 (Construction, Forestry and Maritime Employees Union) and
Submission 10 (Community
and Public Sector Union); Submission 18 (Australian
Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash University); Submission 20 (County Court
of Victoria).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (12 August 2024); Meeting with Australian Centre for Justice
Innovation, Monash University (15 August 2024);
Meeting with Workplace Incidents
Consultative Committee (21 August 2024).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (12 August 2024).
Council for England and Wales,
Assessing the Impact and Implementation of the
Sentencing Council’s Health and Safety Offences, Corporate Manslaughter
Safety and Hygiene Offences Definitive Guideline
Law Reform Commission,
Corporate Criminal Responsibility: Final Report,
(2020) 16, 338–342.
after Robert French who (as a then Judge of the Federal Court of Australia)
provided the factors in the case of
Trade Practices Commission v CSR Ltd
[1990] FCA 762
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission v Qantas Airways Limited
[2024] FCA 1219
[107]–[109].
[2024] VCC 535.
[2024] VCC 535
v Misz Pty Ltd
[2024] VCC 1449
[33]–[34]; see also
& Anor v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 312
[29]–[30], where the Court of
Appeal stated: ‘[the offender] proposes to meet whatever fines are
imposed, and continue
to run his business ... in other words, he does not intend
to wind up the company in insolvency ... it is true that perhaps more
been put before the sentencing judge to support the contention that fines of the
order that Her Honour ultimately fixed
would be ruinous ... it is tolerably
clear that, as a matter of common sense, this was a modestly sized business, and
in our opinion,
this fact should have weighed more heavily than it appears to
have done in the overall sentencing synthesis’.
Court of New South Wales,
Practice Note 16 of 2021: Criminal Division:
Health and Safety Act
Prosecutions
(4 June 2021) 12, [45].
12 (Law Institute of Victoria).
8 (Victorian Trades Hall Council). See also Safety at Work Blog,
‘Sentencing and OHS Prosecutions but Few Solutions’
(safetyatworkblog.com, 2024).
Allen et al.,
Review of the
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
: Final Report
should be noted that unpaid fines (including entirely unpaid fines and the
balance of partly paid fines) accounted for 43% of the
total value of fines
imposed, representing $10.3 million.
Consultation
established pursuant to
Financial Management Act 1994
originally established under section 32 of the
Accident Compensation Act 1985
(Vic) (as enacted). The purposes for which monies distributed to the
WorkCover Authority Fund may be used are specified in
sections 513(4)
Workplace Injury, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
and effectively relate to WorkSafe performing its functions of compensating
injured workers and enforcing the regulatory scheme.
8 (Victorian Trades Hall Council), endorsed by Submission 5 (Construction,
Forestry and Maritime Employees Union) and Submission
10 (Community and Public
Sector Union); Submission 12 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission 15
(Victorian Automotive Chamber of
Commerce); Submission 17 (Workplace Incidents
Consultative Committee).
12 (Law Institute of Victoria).
15 (Victorian Automotive Chamber of Commerce).
17 (Workplace Incidents Consultative Committee).
6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union); Submission 8 (Victorian
Trades Hall Council), endorsed by Submission
5 (Construction, Forestry and
Maritime Employees Union) and Submission 10 (Community and Public Sector Union);
Submission 9 (Uniting
Vic.Tas); Submission 18 (Australian Centre for Justice
Innovation, Monash University); Submission 21 (WorkSafe Victoria).
21 (WorkSafe Victoria).
8 (Victorian Trades Hall Council), as endorsed by Submission 5 (Construction,
Forestry and Maritime Employees Union) and
Submission 10 (Community and Public
Sector Union).
18 (Australian Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash University).
11 (Victorian Congress of Employer Associations).
15 (Victorian Automotive Chamber of Commerce).
it would be difficult to reconcile such an intent with the various purposes of
sentencing in
section 5(1)
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) if the
sentence has no punitive effect, offers no rehabilitative potential, and plays
no role in protecting the community from
the offender. This leaves just the
purposes of denunciation and deterrence, the latter of which also becomes
questionable if other
would-be offenders are aware that the fine is a mere
Unpublished
court data. The largest non-aggregate fines imposed by Victorian courts to June
2021 were for offences against the
Occupational Health and Safety Act
18 (Australian Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash University).
Consultation
95–98. In our 2014 report on court fines, we also recommended
that the relevant enforcement body (i.e. Fines Victoria) be empowered
winding-up order against companies that do not pay their fines: Sentencing
Advisory Council,
Imposition and Enforcement of Court Fines and Infringement
Penalties in Victoria
(2014) 156 (Recommendation 25). We do not, however,
propose to reconsider this possibility here as the issue of non-payment of OHS
fines appears to be much more significantly associated with already deregistered
companies, not with companies that continue to exist
but fail to pay their
is distinct from a director being personally charged and sentenced for an
offence that is attributed to that director by virtue
section 144
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
(Vic). Under that provision,
directors may be sentenced as a co-offender with the company where the
contravention of the company is
attributable to the officer of the company
failing to take reasonable care: see, for example,
DPP v AM Design and
Construction Pty Ltd & Anor
[2018] VCC 373
, [17], [42] (in which the
company received a $380,000 fine and the director received a separate $100,000
Reform Act 2014
Reform Act 2014
Reform Act 2014
ss 30(4)(a)
from Fines Victoria (24 July 2024);
Fines Reform Act 2014
18 (Australian Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash University).
8 (Victorian Trades Hall Council), endorsed by Submission 5 (Construction,
Forestry and Maritime Employees Union) and Submission
10 (Community and Public
Sector Union); Submission 18 (Australian Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash
University); Submission 19
(Australian Institute of Health and Safety).
W. Kuney, ‘A Taxonomy and Evaluation of Successor Liability
(Revisited)’ (2017) 18
Transactions: The Tennessee Journal of Business
741. See also Thomas J. Hall and Judith A. Archer, ‘The Mere
Continuation Approach to Successor Liability’,
New York Law Journal
(16 April 2020).
Employment Opportunity Commission v G-K-G Inc
[1994] USCA7 1288
39 F 3d 740
instance, in one case a court wrote that the successor had ‘retained most
of’ the predecessor’s ‘personnel,
including most of its
management personnel’, and ‘[i]f this is not a case of substantial
continuity, we do not know what
Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission v G-K-G Inc
[1994] USCA7 1288
39 F 3d 740
, 748 (7th Cir, 1994).
of these are known as the ‘
factors’ in successor
liability cases in the United States:
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
v MacMillan Bloedel Containers Inc
[1974] USCA6 632
503 F 2d 1086
(6th Cir, 1974). See also
Chicago Truck Drivers, Helpers & Warehouse Workers Union Pension Fund v
Tasemkin Inc
[1995] USCA7 756
(7th Cir, 1995);
Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission & Anor v Product Fabricators & Anor
, No 13-2103 (8th Cir,
Prince v Kids Ark Learning Centre LLC
, 622 F 3d 992 (8th Cir,
H. Matheson, ‘Successor Liability’ (2011) 96
Minnesota Law Review
Hardie Industries NV v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
[2010] NSWCA 332
D. Prentice, ‘Veil Piercing and Successor Liability in the United
(1996) 10(3)
Florida Journal of International Law
480–481, citing Phillip I. Blumberg, ‘The Continuity of the
Enterprise Doctrine: Corporate Successorship in United States
Law’ (1996)
Florida Journal of International Law
for example, Frank Fagan, ‘From Policy Confusion to Doctrinal Clarity:
Successor Liability from the Perspective of Big
Data’ (2015) 9(3)
Virginia Law & Business Review
391 (which presented the results of
‘an advanced computational linguistic analysis of slightly more than 2,100
successor liability
decisions’): at 394.
Consultation
6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union); Submission 8 (Victorian
Trades Hall Council), as endorsed by Submission
5 (Construction, Forestry and
Maritime Employees Union) and Submission 10 (Community and Public Sector Union);
Submission 9 (Uniting
Vic.Tas); Submission 12 (Law Institute of Victoria);
Submission 18 (Australian Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash University);
Submission 19 (Australian Institute of Health and Safety); Submission 21
(WorkSafe Victoria).
21 (WorkSafe Victoria).
8 (Victorian Trades Hall Council), as endorsed by Submission 5 (Construction,
Forestry and Maritime Employees Union) and
Submission 10 (Community and Public
Sector Union).
12 (Law Institute of Victoria).
18 (Australian Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash University).
Anderson et al., ‘Illegal Phoenix Activity: Is a “Phoenix
Prohibition” the Solution?’
(2017) 35(3)
Company and Securities
Law Journal
of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Curbing the Phoenix Company – First
Report on the Law Relating to Directors and Managers of Insolvent
Corporations
, Report 83 (1994) 1.
Griggs, ‘A Note on the Application of Enterprise Theory to the Problem of
Phoenix Companies’
[1998] MacarthurLawRw 3
Macarthur Law Review
, 55, citing
Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee (1994), above n 419, xi.
Helen Anderson et al., ‘Illegal Phoenix Activity: Quantifying Its
Incidence and Cost’
Insolvency Law Journal
PricewaterhouseCoopers
Consulting (Australia) Pty Ltd,
2018 Taskforce Report—The Economic
Impacts of Potential Illegal Phoenix Activity
for example, Commonwealth of Australia, Royal Commission into the Building and
Construction Industry,
Final Report: Volume 8 Reform – National Issues
; Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations
and Financial Services,
Corporate Insolvency Laws: A Stocktake
131–147; Australian Government,
Action Against Fraudulent Phoenix
Activity: Proposals Paper
(2009) 12–21; PricewaterhouseCoopers
Consulting (Australia) Pty Ltd,
Phoenix Activity: Sizing the Problem and
Matching Solutions
(2012) 37–53; Australian Law Reform Commission,
Corporate Criminal Responsibility, Final Report,
Professor Helen Anderson has observed, the ‘limitations are clearly
evident’ in simply restricting the use of similar
names, and even coupled
with other recent measures, these efforts ‘fall far short of what is
required to significantly overcome
the problem’ created by phoenix
companies: Helen Anderson, ‘The Proposed Deterrence of Phoenix Activity:
An Opportunity
[2012] SydLawRw 20
Sydney Law Review
, 427, 435.
See also Helen Anderson, ‘Illegal Phoenix Activity: Practical Ways to
Improve the Recovery of Tax’
[2018] SydLawRw 10
(2018) 40(2)
Sydney Law Review
The one exception in the Australian literature where someone has advocated
successor liability appears to have been a journal article
in 1998: Griggs
(1998), above n 420.
from Fines Victoria (24 July 2024).
Procedure Act 2009
Statistical
Victoria (2016), above n 175.
1 (Housing Industry Association).
4 (Australian Industry Group); Submission 19 (Australian Institute of Health and
11 (Victorian Congress of Employer Associations).
1 (Housing Industry Association); Submission 11 (Victorian Congress of Employer
Associations); Submission 15 (Victorian
Automotive Chamber of Commerce).
6 (Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union).
13 (OHSIntros).
17 (Workplace Incidents Consultative Committee).
Advisory Council,
The Criminal Justice Diversion Program in Victoria: Second
Statistical Profile
(2024) 31 (though these findings may not translate to
corporate offenders).
21 (WorkSafe Victoria).
Victoria (2018), above n 174.
example, in 2023-24, WorkSafe conducted 50,177 workplace visits and issued
13,943 improvement notices, compared to 134 prosecutions
commenced: WorkSafe
WorkSafe Annual Report 2023–24
(2024) 8–9,
Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013
Compensation Act 1985
Accident Act 1986
Consultation
49; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Restitution and Compensation
Orders: Report
(2018) 27. These advantages include, for example, allowing
victims to obtain compensation without having to pay the legal costs associated
with litigating the claim themselves, and the process would likely be more
streamlined than bringing a separate claim for civil damages.
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 18 November 2004,
1730 (Rob Hulls, Attorney-General, Minister for Industrial Relations and
Minister for WorkCover).
Consultation
18 (Australian Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash University).
8 (Victorian Trades Hall Council).
v LH Holding & Hanna
[2024] VSC 90.
18 (Australian Centre for Justice Innovation, Monash University).
Participant (male, 65–74).
for example,
Environment Protection Act 2017
Law Reform Commission
, Corporate Criminal Responsibility: Final Report,
Law Reform Commission
, Corporate Criminal Responsibility: Final Report
(2020) 361.
Law Reform Commission
, Corporate Criminal Responsibility: Final Report
(2020) 347 (Recommendation 13).
Law Reform Commission
, Corporate Criminal Responsibility: Final Report
(2020) 348, 360–361 (Recommendation 14).
International
Association for Public Participation Australasia, ‘IAP2 Public
Participation Spectrum’ (iap2.org.au, 2024).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.43 MB)
PDF format (2.99 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter