URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2024/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:43:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BHS Online Pty Ltd at Blackhearts and Sparrows [2024] VicLiqComm 9; (8 July 2024)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application under
section 153
Control Reform Act 1998
by Mr John Mikulcic for an internal review of a
decision by a delegate to grant an application by BHS Online Pty Ltd for a
liquor licence for the premises trading as Blackhearts & Sparrows,
located at 108 Ormond Road, Elwood
Commission:
Mr John Larkins, Deputy Chair
Ms Susan Timbs, Commissioner
Mr Steven Brnovic, Commissioner
Appearances:
Mr John Mikulcic, Applicant
Mr Martin Towey of LGS Legal, Solicitor for the Licensee
Ms Lydia Taylor-Moss, Counsel Assisting the Commission
Date of Hearing: 16 November 2023 and 15 December 2023
Date of Decision: 8 July 2024
Date of Reasons: 8 July 2024
The Commission has determined to affirm the decision of the
Delegate subject to the conditions set out in Appendix A
Signed: John Larkins, Deputy Chair
Original Application
13 February 2023, BHS Online Pty Ltd (
) applied to the Victorian
Liquor Commission (
) under the
Liquor Control Reform Act
packaged liquor licence for the premises located at 108 Ormond Road, Elwood
) trading as Blackhearts & Sparrows (
Application
Licensee sought the ordinary trading hours for a packaged liquor licence,
Between 10am and 11pm
Between 12noon and 11pm
Any other day other than Good Friday and Christmas Day
Between 9am and 11pm
accordance with section 33, a copy of the Original Application was served on the
Chief Commissioner of Police and the Licensing
Inspector (together,
) and the City of Port Phillip (
) on 22 February
3. On 17 March 2023, Victoria Police
indicated that it did not object to the grant of the Original Application. On 29
March 2023,
the Council also indicated that it did not object to the grant of
the Original Application.
March 2023, the Commission accepted four objections to the Original Application,
pursuant to section 38, from occupants and owners
of residential properties
in the local area of the Premises (
). The Objectors included Mr
John Mikulcic (
) and related individuals. The objections were
based on concerns that granting the Original Application would be conducive to
or encourage
harm and would detract from or be detrimental to the amenity of the
Objectors’ concerns also included that a nearby packaged liquor store
operated by the Applicant would be negatively impacted
by the grant of the
Original Application, and that the shopping strip already had too many stores
which sell liquor. Those concerns
in so far as they relate to any impact on
existing businesses or lack of need for a further licence are invalid grounds
for objection.
However, this is not
to be confused with legitimate and permissible issues which might arise from a
significant density of licences
within a particular area.
26 May 2023, a delegate of the Commission (
) granted the Original
Application under section 47, pending the grant of a planning permit by the
Original Decision
Application for Internal Review
23 June 2023, the Applicant applied for an internal review of the Original
Review Application
part of the Review Application, the Applicant sought a stay of the Original
Decision. The Commission refused that stay application
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
of part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under
section 152, the decision made by the Delegate in
the Original Decision is
a reviewable decision and the Applicants are eligible persons to apply for a
review of that decision. The
Review Application was made pursuant to
section 153.
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the Original Decision; or
(b) sets aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Original Application.
In this case, the Commission must decide whether to:
(a) grant the Original Application and, if so, whether to do so subject to
conditions;
(b) refuse to grant the Original
Application.
Determination of a contested application
the LCR Act, an application for the grant of a licence may be contested or
uncontested. The Original Application was contested,
as objections were received
under division 5 of part 2 within the relevant
an application is a contested application, pursuant to
section 47(1):
Subject to Division 3, the Commission
must, after the period for making an objection under Division 5 has
expired, including any extension
of time granted for making an objection, grant
or refuse a contested application.
47(2) provides that the Commission may refuse to grant a contested application
on any of the grounds set out in section 44(2)
and section 44(3)
applies accordingly.
to section 44(2), the Commission may refuse to grant an application on
certain grounds, including that the granting of the
application would:
(a) detract from or be detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the
premises to which the application relates are
(b) be conducive to or encourage
the purposes of the LCR Act, the amenity of an area is defined as being the
quality that the area has of being pleasant and
Factors that may be
taken into account in determining whether granting a licence would detract from
or be detrimental to the amenity
of the area include:
(d) the possibility of nuisance or vandalism;
(e) the harmony and coherence of the environment;
(f) any other prescribed
However, the definition of “amenity” for the purposes of the LCR
Act is not limited by these
Exercising the internal review power
172D(3) and 172U(3)(b) require the Commission, in exercising its internal review
power, to have regard to the objects of
the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines in respect of the regulation of liquor issued by the Minister.
objects of the LCR Act are set out at section 4(1) as
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
4(2) further provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament
that every power, authority, discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or
imposed by this Act
must be exercised and performed with due regard to harm
minimisation.
3(1) defines “harm” as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol,
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury or
property damage.
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker;
(b) may consider further information, material or
Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in
section 44(2) are relevant considerations, the determination
of a contested
application on internal review is ultimately to be made pursuant to
sections 47(1) and 157(1) at the discretion of
the Commission, with
reference to the objects of the LCR Act.
section 49, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the
grant of an application.
Conduct of an inquiry
Section 47(3)
provides that the Commission may have regard to any matter it considers relevant
and make any enquiries it considers
appropriate. The Commission must give the
applicant and each objector a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit,
and is bound the rules of natural
Packaged liquor licences
to section 11(1), a packaged liquor licence authorises the licensee to
supply liquor on the licensed premises in sealed containers,
bottles or cans
during ordinary trading hours for consumption off the licensed
Section 3(1)
defines the “ordinary trading hours” of a packaged liquor licence to
mean: between 9am and 11pm on each day,
other than Sunday, Good Friday, ANZAC
Day or Christmas Day; between 10am and 11pm on Sunday; and between 12 noon
and 11pm on ANZAC
packaged liquor licence is subject to a condition that “the predominant
activity carried on in the area set aside as the licensed
premises is the sale
by retail of liquor for consumption off the licensed
38(1) relevantly provides that any person may object to the grant of a packaged
liquor licence on the grounds that the grant
would detract from or be
detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the licensed premises are
situated, or would be conducive
to or encourage harm.
38(3) provides that the following are not valid reasons for objection:
(a) the business carried on under the licence would or would not be
successful;
(b) the business of another licensee or permittee (including the objector) may
be adversely affected by the grant; or
(c) there is insufficient need or demand to justify the grant.
Material before the Commission
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the materials before the
Delegate. The Commission also received and considered
the following
(a) Original Decision and Reasons of the Delegate dated 26 May 2023;
(b) Review Application received on 23 June 2023;
(c) planning permit for the Premises granted on 11 July 2023;
(d) email communication received from the Applicant on 1 September 2023;
(e) email communication received from Mr Martin Towey on behalf of the
Licensee on 18 September 2023;
(f) email communication received from the Applicant on 28 September 2023;
(g) email communication received from the Applicant on 4 October 2023;
(h) email communication received from Mr Towey on 30 October 2023
(i) submissions on behalf of the Licensee;
(ii) data from the Crime Statistics Agency as at 6 October 2023;
(iii) business profile for the Licensee;
(iv) statement of display dated 27 March 2023; and
(v) letter from the Council to the Licensee dated 25 January 2023;
(i) submissions and evidence presented at the hearing of the Review Application
on 16 November 2023;
(j) email communication received from Mr Towey on 13 December 2023
(i) report prepared by Urbis Ltd dated 13 December 2023 (
(ii) house rules/premises management plan (
Premises Management Plan
(iii) intoxication and ID guide;
(iv) online deliveries guide; and
(v) “20 Coolest Retailers in Australia” report;
(k) response to Urbis Report received from the Applicant on 29 December
(l) letter from Mr Towey received on 12 January 2024 and attached photographs.
Chair Larkins also viewed the Premises and other nearby packaged liquor premises
on 13 November 2023, and the Blackhearts and
Sparrows licensed premises in
Brunswick Street, Fitzroy on 12 December 2023. Commissioner Timbs also viewed
the Blackhearts and
Sparrows on Commercial Road, Prahran
hearing was held in relation to the Review Application on 16 November 2023
The Applicant
appeared in person. Mr Martin Towey of LGS Legal appeared on behalf of the
Licensee. Mr Paul Ghaie, a director of the
Licensee, gave evidence on
behalf of the Licensee.
The Applicant’s evidence
Applicant gave evidence that he had witnessed “a lot of bad behaviour in
the area” and had called the police on certain
Applicant stated that, although there were not a lot of objections to the
Original Application, there were a lot of objections
to the planning permit
application. He said that most people who objected to the planning permit
application were not aware that
they also had to object to the Original
Application.
Ghaie’s evidence
Ghaie stated that he ran the Blackhearts & Sparrows business with his
sister. He said that they opened stores where they thought
they would have a
positive impact on the drinking culture within that neighbourhood by offering up
something more elevated and specialised
that was not currently available in the
Ghaie said that 40% or 50% of the stock they sell is refrigerated and that
corked wine is about 40% of their wine turnover. He
stated that 75% of their
sales were wine and that the bulk of customer purchasing is two or three
bottles. He said that they did
not carry much stock and their cheapest bottle of
wine was $12 to $14. He stated that they did not select stock just because they
were getting a good price on goods, but because it passed a rigorous tasting
panel process and deserved to be in the store. He said
that they were continuing
to diversify their offering, including offering a large range of non-alcoholic
drinks and a bit more food.
Ghaie gave evidence that staff undergo extensive training in wine knowledge and
their responsible service of alcohol obligations.
He said that, during the
COVID-19 pandemic, staff members raised concerns about customers coming in too
regularly and were advised
how to help minimise what those customers were
purchasing, including by suggesting low-alcohol and no-alcohol
Ghaie stated that Blackhearts & Sparrows refers to themselves as a
“wine store” to distinguish themselves from
shop”. He said they see themselves as a premium retailer and were not a
discount retailer. He said that they
offer a standard 10% off six bottles, which
was about the extent of their discount, and are working on a loyalty program. He
that they attract a more discerning drinker who comes for an experience,
rather than a “quick fix”. He said that they
did not have an issue
of attracting underage
Ghaie said that they do not trade late: the latest any of their stores stays
open is 9pm and they currently plan to close the Premises
Ghaie gave evidence that the Premises would probably generate less noise than a
surrounding cafe because the Premises does not
have outside speakers, and they
would not be emptying bottles into bins. He said that most of their recycling is
cardboard recycling,
some of which gets reused for
Ghaie said that their business is very localised and that a lot of customers
come from within a comfortable walking distance of
2 km to 3 km. He
said that some customers drive to their stores, but he was not sure if they
drove specifically to them as there
are lots of complementary businesses
Ghaie said that the Blackhearts & Sparrows business offers deliveries
through its online store, but the Licensee will not offer
deliveries from the
Applicant’s alcohol-related harm statistics
Commission may refuse to grant the licence if the grant of the licence would be
conducive to or encourage harm.
one sense, as a matter of logic, it could be said that any grant of a new
packaged liquor licence would be conducive to or encourage
harm, because it
would mean another outlet from which to purchase liquor: the corollary of which
is to lead to the increased supply
of liquor, which may then lead to easier
access to liquor (such as for minors), and increased consumption through cheaper
brought about by increased competition. Each of these could be said to
be conducive to or encourage harm. But that would defeat
the purpose of the
Commission’s power to grant such a
in this case, the Commission has adopted an approach where it must consider
whether the object of harm minimisation would
be poorly served because of the
particular local, social, demographic and geographic
circumstances.
This requires
forming a baseline understanding of the particular local circumstances
affecting the application (including density
of packaged liquor outlets and the
existing degree of alcohol-related harm). ‘Locality evidence’ on the
social, demographic
or geographical circumstances of the application, are
considerably relevant to this
facilitate this task, on 28 September 2023, the Applicant provided the following
statistics of alcohol-related harm (
Applicant’s Harm
Port Phillip Council Area (PPCA).
The number of
people hospitalised due to alcohol in PPCA for the 5 year period 2017 –
2021 (as last updated) was 6257. This
was the 4th highest number in the state.
For the preceding 5 year period 2012 – 2016 the number was 5341
admissions. Then ranked
8th in the state. This statistic shows an increase of
17% in hospital admissions.
overall period PPCA has the 4th highest number of female hospital admissions in
PPCA has the
6th highest number overall of ambulance attendances in the state. Of this it has
the 5th highest number for women.
The number of
people seeking direct line counselling has risen to 3rd in the state from the
period (2016‐21) from 4th in the
preceding 5 year period.
The number of
people seeking online counselling has risen to 8th in the state from 11th in the
preceding [period]
The number of
serious road injuries has risen by 70% in the period 2015‐19 since the
preceding 5 year period.
have increased by 7.5% in the period 2016‐20 since the previous 5
Assaults have
increased by 20% in the period 2016 – 20 since the previous 5
licences in operation as of the 2021 financial year, the third highest number
out of all local government areas in the
According to
the 2017 Victorian Population Health Survey:
39.3 per cent
of adult Port Phillip residents were at an increased lifetime risk of alcohol
related harm due to weekly drinking habits,
compared to the Victorian average of
24.7 per cent.
59.3 per cent
of adult residents consumed more than 2 standard drinks on a single day once or
twice a week, the Victorian average
being 56.9 per cent.
19.4 per cent
of adult residents were at an increased monthly risk of alcohol‐related
injury from a single occasion of drinking,
compared to the Victorian average of
12.8 per cent.
Licensee’s written submissions
30 October 2023, Mr Towey made the following submissions in relation to
(a) Harm to minors would be appropriately minimised because the Licensee has a
robust process of challenging patrons as to their
age and establishing proof of
(b) In relation to harm to vulnerable persons or communities and family
violence, the Licensee relies upon the fact that the Victoria
Police have not
raised any concerns with the Original Application.
(c) Given the Licensee’s experience and the lack of objections, there is
no evidence that the confirmation of the grant of
a packaged liquor licence will
lead to an increase in anti-social behaviour.
(d) The accuracy of the Applicant’s Harm Statistics was not disputed, but
at no time will the grant of the licence to this
Licensee lead to an increase in
harms as alleged by the Applicant.
(e) Based on data from the Crime Statistics Agency, it appears that public
disorder in the local area is not increasing (sic).
(f) In relation to amenity, the Licensee will provide a high-end offering of
products that do not lend themselves to being consumed
in the street with the
packaging contributing to littering.
(g) The fact that the only objections received were all identified as being
family related, leads to a presumption that the wider
community is in favour of
the proposed offering that the Licensee intends to introduce at the Premises.
Accordingly, granting a packaged
liquor licence to the Licensee is entirely in
keeping with community expectations.
13 December 2023, Mr Towey provided the Urbis Report, Premises Management Plan,
and the Licensee’s intoxication and ID guide
and online deliveries guide.
Mr Towey submitted that the following special conditions would be
appropriate to mitigate identified
risks in the sale of packaged liquor and the
delivery of packaged liquor:
Premises Management
The licensee must take all reasonable steps to conduct and supervise all
aspects of the management of the premises in accordance with
the Premises
Management Plan provided to the Victorian Liquor Commission, as amended from
time to time. The Premises Management Plan
must be retained on the licensed
premises in the possession of the licensee, nominee, manager or other person in
charge. The Premises
Management Plan must be available to an authorised member
of Victoria Police or a Liquor Inspector if requested.
Liquor Accord
The licensee must participate in the Port Philip Liquor Accord as approved
by a Victoria Police Licensing Inspector.
Security Cameras
The licensee must maintain a surveillance recording system that is able to
clearly identify individuals, display time and date, and
provide continuous
images of all areas where patrons are permitted, including entrances and exits.
The surveillance recording system
must operate at all times the venue is open. A
copy of the recorded images must be retained for at least one month and must be
upon request for immediate viewing and/or removal by Victoria Police
or Liquor Control Victoria.
Proof of Age
All proof of Age checks will be undertaken under a security
Complaints Register
The licensee must maintain a register containing details of any complaints
made in relation to its operations on the licensed premises.
Urbis Report made the following findings:
(a) There is no reason to suggest that any of the Applicant’s Harm
Statistics are incorrect. While the data raises some concern
in relation to the
impact of alcohol‑related harms in the Council area, it is not possible to
make conclusions as to the impact
of packaged liquor outlets compared to other
licence types. Although the rate of alcohol-related hospital admissions and
in the Council area are above the Victorian average, the
Applicant’s Harm Statistics are likely skewed by other parts of the
municipality where there is higher concentration of liquor outlets, such as
St Kilda. Given the lower liquor outlet density, low
crime rate and higher
social and economic profile of residents in Elwood, alcohol-related harm in the
local area is expected to be
well below the municipal average. The
Applicant’s Harm Statistics are not able to provide a clear indication of
whether there
is likely to be alcohol abuse and misuse by the local community as
a result of additional access to alcohol sales.
(b) Alcohol-related harm is more closely associated with licensed premises such
as hotels, bars and nightclubs, operating late at
night. As people will not be
drinking on site, issues such as noise, anti-social behaviour, violence and
crime are unlikely outcomes.
It is the positive impacts that are more likely to
result from this proposal including the increased consumer choice of packaged
liquor in the area.
(c) The liquor outlet is likely to be accessed by people in the surrounding area
due to its size and location, in comparison to “big
box” liquor
outlets which attract people from a wider catchment. The modest size of the
liquor outlet and profile assists in
minimising the risk of harm by providing a
destination for customers seeking a more distinctive liquor product or a
higher-end product,
not typically found at larger format, standard bottle
(d) The following mitigation measures are in place:
(i) Local laws prohibit the consumption of liquor in public places.
(ii) The Licensee will notify the police where team members observe and become
aware of persons consuming liquor in a public place.
The Licensee does not
supply liquor to persons whom they reasonably believe are likely to consume
liquor in a public place.
(iii) The Licensee will decline purchase of alcohol to a minor, persons in
school uniforms and persons who appear to be influenced
by alcohol.
(iv) The Licensee observes compliance with the requirements of the
Licensing Code of Conduct: Packaged Liquor Licensees
(Victorian Commission
for Gambling and Liquor Regulation, January 2019) in relation to the display of
signage, and marketing and
promotions.
(v) The Licensee fulfils online orders for next day delivery only.
(vi) The Premises has proposed reduced trading hours to
(vii) The Premises contains clear glazing along the Ormond Road frontage to
enable passive surveillance of the street and the shop
(viii) The Licensee has prepared a Premises Management Plan to ensure all
reasonable steps are made to conduct and supervise all
aspects of the management
of the liquor outlet.
(ix) The Licensee will be involved in the Port Phillip Liquor Accord.
(e) Overall, liquor licence outlet density in Elwood is well below the average
level for the rest of the Port Phillip municipality
and marginally above the
outlet density for Melbourne. While packaged liquor licence density is above the
Melbourne average, it is
not significantly higher and is below the rest of the
municipality.
(f) There is some research that suggests increased outlet density can make
alcohol more accessible or increase alcohol consumption
by increasing market
competition by lowering the price of alcohol. There is no evidence to suggest
that this is necessarily the case
in the Council area. There is also contrasting
research that suggests that the impact of extra outlets diminishes as the number
outlets per square kilometre increases. However, there is no data to confirm
this for the Council area.
(g) When considering the community of Elwood and the potential increase in harm
associated with alcohol misuse, it is reasonable
that one cannot assume it is
directly linked to a packaged liquor outlet. For example, the location and
timing of packaged liquor
consumption is directed by the intentions of the
purchaser (i.e., a customer may intend to consume liquor at a function to be
on the weekend and in a different suburb from the point of sale), as
opposed to the location of the liquor outlet.
12 January 2024, Mr Towey provided submissions which relied on the existing
Urbis report. He emphasised that the Premises is different
to other offerings in
terms of products and only limited discounts. He stated that granting a packaged
liquor licence to the Premises
is consistent with the objects of the LCR Act (in
particular, diversity of licensed premises reflecting community
expectations).
He provided a
table showing the number of licences in the Council area, St Kilda, South
Melbourne, Elwood and other council areas
where Blackhearts & Sparrows holds
multiple packaged liquor licences. He highlighted that Elwood only has 7.25% of
all licences
in the Council area.
Applicant’s response to the Urbis Report
29 December 2023, the Applicant responded to the Urbis Report as
(a) The Urbis report is unable to refute the Applicant’s Harm Statistics.
Urbis’s assertion that the Applicant’s
Harm Statistics are related
to areas with higher concentrations of liquor outlets is the crux of the
Applicant’s objection.
He does not agree that the Applicant’s Harm
Statistics are not able to provide a clear indication of whether there is likely
to be alcohol abuse and misuse by the local community as a result of additional
access to alcohol sales. There is a clear correlation
between alcohol harm and
abuse and the ease of access to it.
(b) Spending on liquor is higher across the local area, which is creating a
toxic drinking environment as supported by the Applicant’s
Statistics. Explaining the higher spend by the higher income level in the
neighbourhood is an assumption.
(c) The use of a 500 m radius is arbitrary. A radius of 3 km is more
applicable as the Ormond Road shopping strip draws from surrounding
neighbourhoods.
(d) It is practically impossible for a staff member to determine where a
customer will consume the alcohol they have purchased once
they leave the store.
The other mitigation measures proposed are quite standard across the industry
and expected of all packaged
liquor premises.
(e) Increased competition can decrease prices and also lead to outlets
overlooking RSA requirements to gain patronage. The flow on
effect of this will
be to negatively impact the amenity of the area and increase risks of harm.
Urbis does not explain why research
outlining that increased concentration can
lead to increased consumption does not apply to the Council area.
(f) It seems that the Urbis Report is trying to say that bottle shops are not
associated with harm and damage occurring in a community,
and that Urbis and the
Licensee do not consider the real risk of alcohol abuse and related amenity
issues as relevant considerations
for the Premises. It is concerning that any
applicant would think their proposed bottle shop would not impact behaviour or
to alcohol-related harms.
Reasons for decision on review
Issues for determination on review
In making its decision on review, the Commission
must determine the following issues:
(a) firstly, whether the business will operate in a way that complies with
section 11;
(b) secondly, whether the grant of a packaged liquor licence would be conducive
to or encourage harm,
(c) thirdly, whether granting a packaged liquor licence would detract from or be
detrimental to the amenity of the area in which
the Premises are
(d) fourthly, whether granting a packaged liquor licence would be contrary to
the objects of the LCR Act.
of these issues is discussed in turn.
Compliance with section
applying for a packaged liquor licence, an applicant must satisfy the Commission
that the “predominant activity” carried
on in the licensed premises
is “the sale by retail of liquor for consumption off the licensed
considered the materials lodged by the Licensee, the Commission is satisfied
that the Licensee will comply with the predominant
activity condition in
section 11(3)(aa).
Whether granting a packaged liquor
licence would be conducive to or encourage harm
application may be refused if granting the application would be conducive to or
encourage harm.
stated above, “harm” for the purposes of the LCR Act means harm
arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol. This
includes harm to minors,
vulnerable persons or communities, including groups within communities; family
violence; and anti-social
behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal
injury or property damage.
Applicant’s Harm Statistics relate to hospitalisations, ambulance
attendances, road injuries, assaults, fatalities and other
risks of harm due to
drinking habits, across the Council area as a whole.
Premises would service predominantly the local area, being the Elwood area and
its immediate surrounds. The Commission accepts
Mr Ghaie’s evidence that
the Licensee’s proposed clientele would be ‘very localised’
and would predominantly
be those persons who shop around the Ormond Road
shopping precinct in which the Premises is located.
Commission accepts that Elwood is a relatively affluent area in Melbourne which
the Urbis Report describes as having a population
‘reflective of the area
being a sought-after inner-city lifestyle suburb with high amenities and access
to beach, especially
amongst the young and established families.’ It is an
area with ‘below average’ disadvantage. The Urbis Report
also states
that the overall crime rate in Elwood is ‘well below’ the municipal,
southern metropolitan region and Victorian
average levels. It states that
overall liquor licence outlet density in Elwood is well below the average level
for the rest of the
Port Phillip municipality and marginally above the outlet
density for Melbourne.
Licensee’s Urbis report made submissions on the density of licensed
packaged liquor outlets. It submitted that there were
three such premises within
100 metres of the site and four within 500 metres of the site. One such premises
was a supermarket; another
was a butcher selling a limited number of wines under
its own brand and in both cases, it was submitted, that the sale of liquor
an ancillary component to the purchase of groceries and meat, respectively. Mr
Towey submitted that Elwood had only 7.25 per
cent of all licences in the City
of Port Phillip.
evidence was that the Premises may serve persons from two to three kilometres
away (being a ‘comfortable walk’) from
the premises and those
passing through Ormond Road
to the city or elsewhere. The City
of Port Phillip local government area – which includes Elwood, Port
Melbourne, South Melbourne,
Albert Park, St Kilda, St Kilda East, Balaclava and
Ripponlea–- is one where there is a relatively high density of liquor
and where data indicates there is a significant and concerning degree
of alcohol-related harm.
on Mr Ghaie’s evidence, the Premises would serve an area including and
adjacent to Elwood, it is appropriate to, in the
words of Judge Bowman VP in
Nardi v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2005] VCAT 323
‘conservative’ approach to the matter. This is so even considering
that the likely area served by the Premises
would be smaller than the City of
Port Phillip local government area, and that the data on harms identified by the
parties is very
likely to be skewed by harms arising from nightclubs and
entertainment areas, particularly in St Kilda and South Melbourne.
Commission considers there is a significant existing degree of alcohol-related
harm arising from the area that may be serviced
by the Premises.
that is not the end of the matter. The Commission is to consider the likely
degree of harm arising if this licence were to be
granted, such that it can
assess whether and the extent to which the granting of the application would be
conducive to or encourage
harm as against the
as presented to
it by the parties.
Commission accepts that the Licensee has applied for a packaged liquor licence
for its specialist wine store and that on Mr Ghaie’s
evidence, the
Licensee is a premium retailer which selects its products based on quality
rather than price, and does not engage in
substantial discounting or sell in
bulk. The Licensee also offers a large range of non-alcoholic options and some
food. The Licensee
will cease trading at 8pm, three hours earlier than the
ordinary trading hours permitted for a packaged liquor
Commission accepts Mr Ghaie’s evidence that when he operated in Balaclava,
he ‘rarely saw any troubles’ and
that their clientele was
‘more about lifestyle’ and an ‘experience’ rather than a
‘quick fix’
of alcohol. The Commission gives significant weight to
the fact that the Licensee’s business model is substantially different
other packaged liquor outlets in the area, given its particular focus, liquor
lines, its recognised brand, niche market and clientele.
Commission considers that all of these factors mean that the Licensee’s
patrons are very unlikely to purchase liquor from
the Licensee and consume it in
the local area in such a way as to contribute to or exacerbate harm within that
area. The addition
of the Premises to the density of packaged liquor outlets
does not therefore necessarily lead to an exacerbation of harm simply because
more liquor will become more accessible. The Licensee’s pricing model also
means that it would not have an impact on competition
in the area such that
alcohol would become unduly cheaper or more accessible.
the Licensee and its directors are experienced packaged liquor retailers with a
history of complying with their obligations
under the LCR Act. This was clear
from Mr Ghaie’s evidence, which acknowledged the relevance and worth
of matters raised and
showed awareness of potential harms of operating a
packaged liquor licensed premises. The Licensee’s Premises Management
intoxication and ID guide, and online deliveries guide are thorough
policies, which include comprehensive refusal procedures and
regular staff
gave evidence of staff raising concerns about customers coming in too regularly,
demonstrating a strong understanding by
staff of their RSA obligations. The
training described by Mr Ghaie of directing such customers to low-alcohol
and no‑alcohol
options is an appropriate procedure for encouraging a
culture of responsible consumption of alcohol. The Commission is confident
the Licensee would continue to engage in appropriate RSA practices and adopt
harm minimisation strategies in the licenced premises
if licensed.
Commission accepts from Mr Ghaie’s evidence and the Licensee’s
policy and procedures documents that the Licensee is
aware of and has adequate
controls in place to mitigate many of the harms arising from the misuse and
abuse of alcohol associated
with packaged liquor premises. It is also clear that
the Licensee strives to encourage a culture of responsible consumption of
and reduce risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community.
all of these matters together, the Commission considers that the Licensee
engages in the following activities and strategies
that are over and above what
might ordinarily be expected of a packaged liquor outlet to appropriately
minimise harm from the misuse
and abuse of alcohol:
(a) The Licensee supplies high-end lines of liquor, promoting itself as focusing
on the wine experience (and providing that experience),
and as such is unlikely
to be a destination for bulk purchases leading to potentially harmful
(b) The Licensee does not engage in substantial discounting or bulk sales of
liquor, which might otherwise lead to a greater and
riskier volume of supply;
(c) The Licensee adopts, and ensures its staff adopt, responsible service of
alcohol practices (including an awareness of when customers
may be at risk of
(d) The Licensee supplies a range of low- or non-alcoholic beverages which
encourages responsible drinking practices, and also supplies
food (which is well
known to assist in slowing intoxication);
(e) The Licensee does not intend to supply liquor during late night hours which
are associated with higher levels of harm;
(f) The Licensee adopts a Premises Management Plan, training practices and
policies to guide the responsible service of liquor in
a manner that encourages
a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol.
is on these bases that the Commission is satisfied that there would not be an
unacceptable degree of harm arising from the grant
of this particular licence,
such that it would not materially contribute to the existing (but significant)
level of harm within the
local area. The Commission’s view is that it is
of significant importance that the Licensee continues to operate as described
being so, it is necessary and appropriate that Licensee be under an obligation
to continue to implement these protective factors
by way of the imposition of
conditions.
Commission considers that requiring the Licensee to adopt its ‘House
Rules’ that gives effect to the factors identified
above at paragraph 72
for the life of the licence will facilitate the objectives of the LCR Act as set
out at section 4.
Commission has considered the conditions proposed by the Licensee, and considers
they are reasonable and appropriate measures
to further minimise harm and risks
to amenity, and so the Commission has determined to impose them.
Accordingly,
taking a cautious approach in the specific circumstances before the Commission,
and imposing the conditions made by the
Delegate and reproduced in Appendix A,
the Commission is not satisfied that the grant of the application would be
conducive to or
encourage harm.
Whether granting a packaged
liquor licence would detract from or be detrimental to the amenity of the
application may be refused under sections 47(2) and 44(2) if the granting
of the application would detract from or be detrimental
to the amenity of the
area in which the premises are situated.
Applicant’s objections to the Original Application and the Review
Application included amenity concerns, such as drunkenness,
violent and
disorderly behaviour, drinking in public places and littering.
Commission notes that the Council issued a planning permit for use of the
Premises for the sale of packaged liquor for consumption
off the premises. That
permit includes conditions concerning waste management and the loading and
unloading of delivery of goods.
discussed above, the Licensee and its directors have demonstrated experience in
the packaged liquor industry and a comprehensive
approach with respect to the
responsible service of alcohol and minimisation of alcohol-related harm. As a
small specialist wine
store with reduced trading hours, the Premises will
operate at times considered to be a lower risk of detrimental impact.
is no evidence that the Premises will have a significant impact on existing
litter problems.
Consequently,
having regard to all the material before it, the Commission is satisfied that
the grant of a packaged liquor licence
subject to the conditions made by the
Delegate and reproduced in Appendix A would appropriately mitigate the risk
of adverse impacts
on the amenity of the area such that it would not detract
from or be detrimental to the amenity of the area.
granting a packaged liquor licence would be contrary to the objects of the LCR
the Commission is satisfied that no grounds for refusal exist under
sections 47(2) and 44(2), the Commission must still exercise
its discretion
whether or not to grant a packaged liquor licence. Such a discretion must be
exercised by the Commission with regard
to any other relevant considerations, as
well as with regard to the objects of the LCR Act.
stated above, the objects of the LCR Act include contributing to minimising
harm; facilitating the development of a diversity of
licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and contributing to the responsible
development of the liquor, licensed hospitality
and live music
industries.
regard to all the material before it, the Commission considers that the grant of
a packaged liquor licence in this instance
would not be contrary to the LCR
Act’s objects.
Decision on review
Commission is satisfied that the Original Application meets all legislative
requirements set out above. Accordingly, for the reasons
set out above, the
Commission is satisfied that granting the licence the subject of the Original
Application is appropriate in all
the circumstances.
Commission on review has therefore determined to affirm the Original Decision
subject to the conditions set out in Appendix A.
Commission notes that, while there has undoubtedly been delay in the delivery of
this decision and reasons because of the Commission
wanting to ensure a
consistent approach is adopted insofar as is reasonably possible with a number
of packaged liquor licence applications
recently before the Commission, the
Licensee has been continuing with its business operations at the Premises in the
The preceding 89 paragraphs are a true copy of
the Reasons for Decision of Mr John Larkins (Deputy Chair), Ms Susan Timbs
(Commissioner)
and Mr Steven Brnovic (Commissioner).
This licence is a packaged liquor licence and
authorises the licensee to supply liquor in sealed containers, bottles or cans
licensed premises for consumption off the licensed premises during the
trading hours specified below.
The licensee must comply with any
Ministerial Order determined by the Minister pursuant to
Section 18D
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
or any successor legislation.
Special conditions
Premises Management Plan
The licensee must conduct and supervise all aspects of the management of the
premises in accordance with the licensee’s Premises
Management Plan, as
amended from time to time. The Premises Management Plan must be retained on the
licensed premises in the possession
of the licensee, nominee, manager or other
person in charge. The Premises Management Plan must be available to an
authorised member
of Victoria Police or a person authorised in writing by the
Commission if requested.
Liquor Accord
The licensee must participate in the Port Philip Liquor Accord as approved by
Victoria Police.
Security Cameras
The licensee must maintain a surveillance recording system that is able to
clearly identify individuals, display time and date, and
provide continuous
images of all areas where patrons are permitted, including entrances and exits.
The surveillance recording system
must operate at all times the venue is open. A
copy of the recorded images must be retained for at least one month and must be
upon request for immediate viewing and/or removal by an authorised
member of Victoria Police or a person authorised in writing by
Commission.
Proof of Age
All proof of age checks must be undertaken under a security camera.
Complaints Register
The licensee must maintain a register containing details of any complaints
made in relation to its operations on the licensed premises.
House Rules
The licensee must develop, implement, maintain and comply continuously
House Rules (
House Rules
) with respect to the licensed
premises, which must include the following matters for the purposes of
minimising harm arising from
misuse and abuse of alcohol:
The licensee engages in the supply of niche or high-end lines of liquor, and
focuses on the wine experience.
The licensee does not engage in substantial discounting or bulk sales of
The licensee adopts, and ensures that its staff adopt, responsible service of
alcohol practices (including with respect to awareness
or identification of
potential risky purchases.
The licensee supplies a range of low or non-alcoholic beverages and food
The licensee adopts training practices and policies to guide the responsible
service of liquor in a manner that encourages a culture
of responsible
consumption of alcohol.
The licensee operates its Premises Management Plan in accordance with and
subject to the House Rules.
The licensee conducts and supervises all aspects of the management of the
licensed premises in accordance with the House Rules.
Before implementing the House Rules as described above, the licensee must
ensure that the Commission receives a copy.
At all times, the House Rules must be available to an authorised member of
Victoria Police or a person authorised in writing by the
Commission if
Trading hours
On any day other than
Sunday, Good Friday,
ANZAC Day or Christmas Day Between 9am and
Sunday Between 10am and 8pm
ANZAC Day Between 12 noon and 8pm
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
LCR Act, section 38(3). See
[30] below.
Section 157(2) to (5) further
prescribes the manner in which the Commission is to undertake internal
LCR Act, sections 47, 49 and
LCR Act, sections 47 and
LCR Act, section 3(1)
(definition of “contested application”).
section 44(2)(b)(i).
section 44(2)(b)(ii).
section 3A(1).
section 3A(2). Until a legislative amendment in 2018, the following
factors were also included as evidencing detriment to the amenity
of the area:
(a) the presence or absence of parking facilities; (b) traffic
movement and density; (c) noise levels.
section 3A(3).
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2012] VSCA 325
confirms that harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act
and therefore the primary consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although
not to the exclusion of the other objects).
section 157(2).
section 157(3).
A packaged liquor licence
may also authorise the licensee to trade at other times if so determined by the
Commission and specified
in the licence: LCR Act,
section 11(1)(b)–(d).
section 11(3)(aa).
A directions hearing was
also held on 24 August 2023. The Applicant provided the Commission with a list
of other nearby packaged
liquor premises.
Transcript of Hearing, page
8, line 21 to page 9, line 21.
Transcript of Hearing, page
6, line 14 to line 20; page 12, line 15 to page 13, line 39.
Transcript of Hearing, page
17, line 8 to line 23; page 19, line 25 to line 40.
Transcript of Hearing, page
17, line 26 to page 17, line 35; page 20, line 4; page 21, line 10 to line 24;
page 26, line 10 to page
27, line 4; page 32, line 31 to line 32.
Transcript of Hearing, page
19, line 42 to page 20, line 18; page 24, line 5 to line 10’ page 30, line
30 to page 31, line
27; page 32, line 43.
Transcript of Hearing, page
20, line 22 to line 31; page 23, line 36 to page 24, line 19; page 32,
line 30 to 39.
Transcript of Hearing, page
28, line 10 to line 14.
Transcript of Hearing, page
33, line 5 to line 22.
Transcript of Hearing, page
33, line 26 to page 34, line 9.
Transcript of Hearing, page
21, line 15 to line 18.
Black Lula Evangeline
& Cooke Brian v Liquor Licensing Victoria & Green Dragon Pty Ltd
[2000] VCAT 459.
Kordister Pty Ltd
[2012] VSCA 325
, 39 VR 92 at
Kordister Pty Ltd v
Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
(2012) 39 VR 92
The Commission notes that Mr
Ghaie said that they currently plan to close the Premises at 8pm: Transcript of
Hearing, page 28, line
10 to line 14.
section 4(1)(b). See [18] above.
sections 44(2)(b)(ii) and 47(2).
sections 44(2)(b)(i) and 47(2).
LCR Act, sections 4 and
172D(3). The Commission notes that, in determining this matter, it has also
considered each of the grounds
set out in section 44(2).
section 11(3)(aa). See [28] above.
sections 44(2)(b)(ii) and 47(2).
LCR Act, section 3(1)
(definition of “harm”).
Transcript of Hearing, page
28, line 10 to line 14.
LCR Act, sections 4,
47(3) and 172D(3).
section 4(1)(a)–(c). The object relating to sexually explicit
entertainment in section 4(1)(d) is not relevant to
this Review
Application. See [18] above.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.41 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter