URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/1006.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:26:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department of Education v Wilson (Review and Regulation) [2025] VCAT 1006 (12 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
REVIEW AND REGULATION LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. Z745/2024
Review and Regulation List –
Freedom of Information Act 1982
– whether the release of a document relating to Victorian
schools’ infrastructure would be contrary to the public interest
provided little information and could be misinterpreted. Whether its release
would influence enrolment decisions.
Department of Education
Jess Wilson MP
Member W Boddison
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
1 October 2025
DATE OF ORDER
12 November 2025
Department of Education v Wilson (Review and Regulation) [2025] VCAT
decision of the Information Commissioner is affirmed.
decision in order 1 does not come into effect until after the expiry of 28 days
from the date of these orders.
APPEARANCES:
For the Applicant
Mr N Wood of Counsel
For the Respondent
Mr N Bird of Counsel
BACKGROUND SUMMARY
8 December 2023, Ms Wilson, a Member of the Victorian parliament, made a request
for access to a document under the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(‘the Act’) from the Department of Education (‘the
Department’).
request was for:
A document which outlines the individual condition score of every government
school in Victoria, sourced from the most recent Condition
Assessment Report for
each individual school under the Rolling Facilities Evaluation program. The
document should contain the school
name, the suburb the school is located in and
the individual condition for the school.
such a document was not in existence at the time of the request, the Department
produced a document containing the relevant information
(‘the Document’).
13 March 2024, an authorised officer of the Department decided to refuse the
request, on the basis that the Document was exempt
of the Act (‘First
Decision’).
18 March 2024, the respondent applied to the Information Commissioner
(‘OVIC’) for review of the Department’s
5 June 2024, after reconsidering the matter in accordance with
of the Act,
an authorised officer of the Department revoked the First Decision, and made a
fresh decision to refuse access to the
Document on the basis that it was exempt
(1)(c) of the Act (‘Second Decision’).
18 July 2024, after conducting a review of the Second Decision, OVIC made a
fresh decision under
of the Act. It found that the Document was not exempt
(1)(c) of the Act and was to be released in full. OVIC was
satisfied that
applied, but was not satisfied that it would be
contrary to the public interest to disclose the
2 August 2024, the Department sought review of OVIC decision to VCAT.
summary, the Department contended that the Document provided no useful
information and the information it did provide had no context,
and so there was
a real risk that it would be misleading and create a mischief.
Wilson relied on the reasoning of OVIC and submitted that:
strong public interest in whether the Department is effectively planning for and
managing school infrastructure.
awareness will inform public debate on school infrastructure.
The government
has announced significant funding towards a school maintenance program. As such,
it should be accountable to the community
The report is of
sufficient detail and expertise to be relied upon for use in the
Department’s planning.
this is a review under
of the Act,
does not apply. This
means the Department does not have the onus establishing its decision was
justified, rather the Tribunal’s
task is to make the correct or preferable
found that the disclosure of the Document was not contrary to the public
interest and affirmed the decision of OVIC for the reasons
set out below.
object of the Act is to extend as far as possible the right of the community to
access information in the possession of the Government
of Victoria and other
bodies constituted under the law of Victoria for public purposes and that any
discretions conferred by the
Act shall be exercised as far as possible so as to
facilitate and promote, promptly and at the lowest reasonable cost, the
of information.
requires agencies to administer the Act with a view to making the maximum
amount of information promptly and inexpensively available
to the public.
of the Act provides that subject to this section, a document is an exempt
document if it is a document the disclosure of which under
(a) would disclose matter in the nature of opinion, advice or recommendation
prepared by an officer or Minister, or consultation
or deliberation that has
taken place between officers, Ministers, or an officer and a Minister, in the
course of, or for the purpose
of, the deliberative processes involved in the
functions of an agency or Minister or of the government; and
(b) would be contrary to the public interest.
was common ground that the document fell within
section 30(1)(a)
and so was an
exempt document. The only issue was whether the release of the document was
contrary to the public interest.
THE EVIDENCE
hearing was held on 1 October 2025. The Department called two witnesses: Ms J
Wandel and Mr C Thompson. Both witnesses adopted their
witness statements and
were not cross-examined. The Tribunal also had before it a Tribunal Book and
written submissions from the
parties. Ms Wilson did not file any evidence or
call any witnesses.
Ms Wandel’s evidence
her statement Ms Wandel outlined her qualifications and work experience and
stated that since 3 March 2025, she has been the Chief
Executive Officer at the
Victorian School Building Authority (‘VSBA’). The VSBA is
responsible for school and early childhood
education infrastructure. The VSBA
plans, designs and builds new schools and early learning services and is
responsible for upgrading
and expanding existing infrastructure. The VSBA also
supports schools to maintain their buildings and grounds by offering expert
advice and coordinating maintenance programs and grants.
explained that Condition Assessment Reports (‘Reports’) are prepared
for each Victorian government school by a third-party
contractor as part of a
process implemented by the Department called the Rolling Facilities Evaluation
(‘RFE’) which
is overseen by the VSBA.
accordance with the RFE, an assessment of each public school is undertaken every
five years, and a Report is produced for each
school. There are currently
approximately 1580 Victorian government schools, and therefore approximately 300
schools are the subject
of a condition assessment report each year. The first
RFE cycle was conducted in the period 2018 to 2022, and the second RFE cycle
being conducted in the period 2023 to 2027.
produced as part of the RFE are used for the primary purpose of asset management
and specifically to help the VSBA identify
and prioritise issues that need to be
rectified within schools, the recommended timeframe for these works and then to
allocate the
resources to fix them.
for schools are prepared for the Department by a third-party contractor. Reports
record information and assessments about
the condition of components of
buildings (e.g. building structure, external fabric, fixed furniture and
fittings, internal fabric,
internal finishes and various services) and other
assets (e.g. footpaths, fencing, shade structures, car parks, walls, landscaping
and other external structures). The condition assessment is a visual assessment.
More technical or intrusive investigations are undertaken
by alternate
processes. The Report is used by the VSBA to assist it in managing the
maintenance, repair and upgrade needs of the
1580 government schools in
ascribe a condition rating for each element or asset that has been assessed,
from one to five. A score of five signifies that
the asset is in excellent
condition. A score of one reflects that the asset is in poor condition. Reports
also ascribe priority ratings
for fixing any defects.
also include a school condition score, which is a number generated by
aggregating and weighting condition scores for the particular
elements that have
been assessed, applying a particular methodology. In accordance with that
methodology, 80% of the school condition
score is derived from individual scores
ascribed to buildings, and 20% is derived from individual scores ascribed to
other assets.
Approximately
10% of the Reports are audited by another third-party contractor to provide a
high-level cross-check that the scores
are calculated accurately and
consistently.
VSBA is currently half-way through the second cycle of the RFE, which means
been evaluated and given
the other half of the schools, their latest condition scores were determined on
different dates in the first cycle of the RFE
(and as such would have been
determined on different dates between 2018 and 2022). Sometimes a school’s
participation in an
assessment is delayed, such as where capital works are
presently underway at a school. In those instances, the RFE program will usually
wait until the works are finished to make an updated assessment and generate an
updated score.
Information
in Reports feed into a number of different funding decisions in different ways.
There are three types of funding which
are relevant:
(a) First, as a factor in the amount Victorian schools receive each year for
general maintenance, allocated through the Student
Resource Package
(b) Second, funding that is made available to address priority repair needs of
a particular school, through the Planned Maintenance
(‘PMP’); and
(c) Third, as a factor in funding that is made available for specific capital
works at schools.
explained the role that condition scores play in the different funding
SRP comprises student-based funding, schools-based funding and targeted
initiatives funding. Infrastructure funding is one type
of school-based
school infrastructure funding within the SRP includes a Maintenance and Minor
Works (‘MMW’) component that applies
maintenance rates to eligible
buildings on eligible campuses, with cost modifiers and adjustments based on
building type, location,
and other factors. While the SRP calculations are
largely driven by the size and type of buildings, one of the elements that
into the MMW component of the SRP is the condition score assigned to
each building as part of the RFE. The score is only one of a
number of different
factors which are taken into account in determining the MMW component of the
SRP. Other factors include building
age, heritage status, rurality, etc.
are required to use the MMW component of the SRP funding to undertake routine
and proactive maintenance of their buildings
and grounds, and to prevent asset
degradation and potential health and safety issues. Principals are responsible
for managing this
funding and, with the support of VSBA teams, must develop a
five-year School Maintenance Plan, which is submitted through the Asset
Information Management System and endorsed by the Department.
noted above, the PMP is an additional amount of funding which is allocated to
schools throughout the year. It is a targeted program
that complements the
annual funding schools receive through the SRP allocation. The Department
administers the PMP, and decisions
particular infrastructure issues that are identified at schools following their
five-yearly
RFE assessment or following other similar audits.
this category of funding, it is information about the condition of particular
elements or assets of a school that is recorded
in Reports generated by the RFE
(rather than the condition score of the school) that is used to work out what
funding needs to be
third main category of funding is major capital works, new school builds, and
significant upgrades. This category of funding is
subject to budget being
allocated, by the government, for particular projects. In briefing the
government in connection with the
making of such decisions, the Department will
typically provide a range of information, including but not limited to school
scores in Reports. In addition, building-level condition information
contained in the Reports is a factor informing initial project
Wandel stated there were a number of limitations associated with the usefulness
of school condition scores generated as part of
the RFE process.
because of the time frame over which condition scores are prepared (i.e. once
every five years), the latest score for any given
school may be (in a sense) out
of date by up to as much as five years.
works to a particular school are prioritised, the school’s condition may
be significantly improved fairly quickly after its
assessment, without that
being reflected in an updated condition score until the school is next up for
assessment as part of a future
cycle in the RFE in five years’ time.
cases where capital works are underway, the RFE program will usually wait until
the works are finished to make an updated assessment
and generate an updated
the way scores change also varies depending on the size of the school and the
size of the planned works:
When dealing
with smaller schools, fixing the roof of a building may drastically change the
school’s score compared to the same
development in a larger school with
many buildings.
The contribution
of the rating assigned to infrastructure versus building elements varies
depending on the composition of each school
site. As such, a school with a
single deteriorated building and multiple good condition buildings may receive a
lower score than
a school with multiple buildings with moderate defects, despite
the overall conditions being arguably comparable.
another limitation of the condition assessment score (especially presented in an
ordered list) is that it can mispresent the
relative condition of a school as
compared to other schools, especially where the methodology used and the
limitations of the data
is not well understood. The methodology underpinning the
RFE is an average that cannot account for a range of building or element-level
comparison (hence, the cross-checks). Presenting the scores in a list runs the
real risk of a creating an inaccurate impression of
the relative condition of
Wandel notes that the Department does not use school condition scores for
ranking or benchmarking schools on their own and to the
extent the Department
does use scores as a high-level way to prioritise funding, the limitation of
condition scores are understood
by the Department and factored into that
decision making.
further limitation of the condition scores is their use as an evaluative tool
beyond the specific purpose of an input into maintenance
and funding allocation.
For example, it is not possible to identify from the scores which assets for a
particular school are contributing
to a higher or lower score and the degree to
variance between scores averaged across different buildings. If a prospective
were interested in understanding the condition of a school’s
sporting facilities, the school’s condition score would
not convey any
information to assist them to gain this understanding.
Mr Thompson’s evidence
his statement, Mr Thompson outlined his qualifications and work experience and
stated he is currently the Regional Director of
the South-Western Victoria
Region and is responsible for the line management of school Principals of about
450 Victorian government
schools in the South-Western Victorian Region.
said he had been involved in the Department’s processes for the allocation
and management of resources to Victorian government
schools. He was familiar
with the way in which the Department manages resource allocation to its schools
and the processes surrounding
states that school condition scores have some utility to the Department for the
purpose of managing school asset repairs and upgrades.
But the limitations of
the usefulness of the scores are known to the Department. The scores are not
treated by the Department as
a reliable metric to assess a school holistically,
or by comparison to other schools (including because Reports are prepared at
times for different schools over the course of a five-year
notes that the way in which condition scores are generated (including how and
when they are generated as part of the RFE process)
is not well understood or
known by the public. Accordingly, the limitations of the usefulness of the
scores are not well understood
or known by the public.
particular, he is concerned that, publication of the Document would tend to
suggest that a school with a lower score than another
or others, was of a
materially lower standard or quality. This is particularly the case if the
condition scores are presented as
a ‘ranking’. This would create a
misleading impression. Condition scores are not used to generate a ranking of
or to enable a comparison by the public of the facilities of one school
against another.
his view there was a risk that condition scores might be misunderstood more
broadly in the public domain, in that parents might
mistakenly believe that
condition scores measure the broader quality or performance of a school (rather
than a more directed assessment
of the condition of the facilities of a school
as one of the inputs into budget allocation decisions and managing maintenance).
condition score of a school does not give any picture of the quality and
performance of a school from a perspective of its culture,
the quality of the
teaching, student wellbeing supports or co-curricular activities available.
Thompson said he was concerned about the impact that the release of condition
scores would have on the quality of the decisions
that parents made about where
to enrol their children. The limitations of the condition score would distort
that decision making
process that families undertake and potentially result in
decisions being made based on (at least in part) an inaccurate understanding
the condition of the facilities, provision of facilities (including specialist
facilities) or even the broader quality of a school,
particularly as it compares
to other schools.
Thompson explained that in Victoria, each residential address sits within a
government school zone which identifies that address’
neighbourhood government school. Every eligible child has a right to enrol at
their designated neighbourhood government
may apply for enrolment at a government school outside their zone. Acceptance
out of zone is governed by the Department’s
priority order of placement.
Thompson said he was concerned that that if a report with the latest condition
scores for each school were to be published, it
would convey a misleading
representation of the comparative condition (or broader quality) of schools. The
resulting reputational
damage from this could materially skew parents’
behaviour. A school that is wrongly perceived as ‘run-down’ may
in-zone families apply elsewhere, or opt for non-government alternatives, even
though the school meets, and might even exceed,
departmental condition and
curriculum standards.
referred to a newspaper article from The Guardian Newspaper from 11 March 2024
which reported on under-enrolment at some inner-city
explained how under-enrolment can affect a school’s funding and in extreme
cases can trigger a re-zoning.
Mr Thompson’s view, if the document was released it may adversely
influence parents when deciding whether to send their children
to a particular
government school. Having regard to the limitations of the condition score, and
the misleading impression that may
be given by publishing a list, as though it
represents a reliable comparison of schools at the time of publication, there
risk that this decision making would be based on inaccurate
information.
stated it may also discourage parents from undertaking a more complete
assessment of the appropriateness of a school for their
children on the mistaken
belief that the condition score functions as a ranking of schools that is
endorsed by the Department.
said the document could:
be misunderstood
as a more general ranking of the relative merit of the schools (as opposed to
its more limited purpose, being a particular
kind of assessment of the condition
of certain facilities of the school to work out what, and over what time frame,
funds need to
be allocated to a school for maintenance or upgrades); or
understood as only an assessment of the physical condition of the school, be
misunderstood on the basis that it represents
a blended score across all
facilities and by reason of the periodic nature over which it is assessed, be
significantly out of date.
This could have the result that, reliance is placed
on the condition score at the expense of the parent making their own enquiries
as to the condition of the particular facilities that are of importance to them
and their child.
the same reasons, the release of the condition score may also impact the ability
of schools to recruit and employ teachers and
education support staff.
Mrs Wandel nor Mr Thompson were cross-examined. It was submitted by Ms Wilson
that their evidence was merely their opinions.
THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS
The Department’s submissions
Department indicated that it was only relying on the exemption in
the Act. It conceded that the exemptions previously claimed under
were not applicable.
Department submitted that the Document would plainly disclose opinion, (the
school condition scores) prepared by an officer for
the purpose of the
deliberative processes involved in the functions of the Department and
therefore, met the requirements of
section 30(1)(a)
of the Act. This was
conceded by Ms Wilson.
Department submitted the issue was whether disclosure of the Document would be
contrary to the public interest such that
applies. To be contrary to
the public interest, the Department need not provide overriding or compelling
reasons. All factors must
be weighed up. The Department referred to
Victorian Casino & Gaming
where the Tribunal
identified matters that may bear on the assessment of public interest. It noted
that one of the factors was the
likelihood that disclosure would create
mischief, such as risk of mischievous interpretation and that this was of
significance in
Department submitted that the potential for mischief, misinterpretation and
undermining of confidence, were prospective and therefore
it is the possibility
of the fact, with which the Tribunal is concerned.
Department assumed Ms Wilson intended to publish the Document.
Department submitted the disclosure of the Document may mislead or confuse,
and/or may be susceptible to misinterpretation or
mischievous
interpretation.
Department referred to a number of cases.
Rosen v Department of Human
the Tribunal accepted that the ‘nature of the information in the document
is clearly a relevant factor
in the balancing
If, for example,
information is unclear, it is more likely that its disclosure would be contrary
to the public interest; there can
be little public interest in seeing something
conveying little meaning.
Peter Ryan MP v Melbourne
the Tribunal held that disclosure of a document containing modelling prepared at
a particular point in time
was contrary to the public interest. It
[I]t is contrary to the public interest to disclose a document which would
potentially mislead and confuse any debate about a general
topic where it deals
only with a narrow range of specific issues”; [i]f it is susceptible to
misinterpretation or mischievous
interpretation, disclosure is contrary to the
public interest.
Department submitted that the Tribunal in Ryan, stated that the document would
be ‘susceptible to misinterpretation’.
The modelling was ‘not
accurate, not current and therefore misleading and impossible for a lay person
to understand and that
to release it now would be mischievous’. The
documents were ‘highly technical documents, incomplete in some respects,
out of date and could easily be misinterpreted’. The information in the
document was only part of the information that the
authority used in conducting
their business.
the documents were intended for a specific audience familiar with the technical
terms and jargon used, so has the potential
for public misunderstanding and the
contents of the document could be misinterpreted.
Department sought to distinguish the decision in
Mildenhall v Department of
(‘Mildenhall’) where a spreadsheet was released which it had been
argued had the potential to mislead and to give rise
to unnecessary debate,
without there being a proper understanding of its purpose by those who read it.
The Department submitted,
in that case the Tribunal found there was no
justification for concluding the documents should give rise to confusion or
for mischief or mislead anyone. The Department argued that the test
was whether there was potential for mischief, or the possibility
of mischief,
being caused by the release of a document, not that it is proven that an adverse
consequence will follow.
Department further submitted that Mildenhall could be distinguished in this
matter, and unlike in Mildenhall, the Document was
artificially created. The
Document was not prepared to be read or provide information. The information was
not meaningful. The Document
only gives a score to each school and no
information about how the ‘score’ was generated, or what the score
signified (including what are the limitations of the score, which are
known by the Department but not more broadly). Unlike in Mildenhall,
Document does not reveal what date the score was given. The Document therefore
conveys very little meaning.
Department submitted not only does it provide little meaning, but it would also
be apt to confuse or mislead. That is because
disclosure of the Document, with a
‘score’ for each school set out in a single document, would enliven
a real risk that
the public (including parents, teachers and other members of
the school community) may infer that each ‘score’ represented
reliable indicator of the condition of the school and/or worse, that the
Document enables a comparison or ‘ranking’
of schools. The Document
does not specify the date on which the relevant assessment for each school was
conducted, or when the score
was determined.
is a real prospect that misleading impressions formed by parents could
contribute to decisions as to where to enrol their children
which can distort
school funding and impact on the ability to recruit staff.
Department referred to Ryan and submitted that the release of the Document,
which contains ‘incomplete’ information
from Reports, which is
‘out of date’ and is of limited value to a reader, without an
understanding of how the score is
derived, and could potentially mislead and
confuse any debate about the conditions of schools or funding decisions. The
did not contain sufficient information for an uninformed audience to
interpret it, and it would be susceptible to misinterpretation
or mischievous
interpretation.
Document does not meet the aims of the request which are to provide a better
understanding the management and planning of school
infrastructure or how
funding is allocated to schools. The condition scores were not representative of
the overall condition of the
schools as shorn of all context, the scores are not
‘meaningful information’.
the hearing the Department submitted that it had the onus of establishing that
releasing the Document would be contrary to the
public interest.
Department referred to Mr Wilson’s written submissions where it was
There is public interest in the disclosure of this information, for the purpose
of questioning whether the Department is effectively
planning for and managing
school infrastructure – ultimately ensuring that the health, safety, and
welfare of school children
are properly safeguarded. There is also a public
interest in promoting transparency and accountability in the allocation and use
of public funds more broadly.
Department submitted that the release of the Document would not provide
information that would further this purpose. The Document
would not advance the
objectives articulated by Ms Wilson. There was a disconnect between the interest
identified and the information
in the Document.
Document lists schools and a score. There is no information as to how that score
was formulated and what it means. There is no
data as to how the score was
ascribed to an individual school, what it was based on, or how current it was.
Due to the rolling assessment,
the score could be derived from the date that was
from 2018 or last year. The Document does not provide this context. If
infrastructure
works had been carried out since the score was assigned, those
works would not be reflected in the score.
Department relied on the evidence of Ms Wandel and Mr Thompson in identifying a
real risk that releasing the information would
cause mischief. The Department
submitted that as they had not been cross-examined, their evidence was
uncontested and ought to be
relied upon.
Department emphasised that test was not whether release
confuse, but rather whether there is a
it might do so.
is a real risk the Document would be susceptible to misinterpretation. There are
no dates in the document that indicate when
the audit was done or the scores
assigned and this may create the misleading impression that the information is
recent or current.
document could be used to rank schools when the underlying data is not available
and there are no dates to give it context.
Department submitted it was not a solution, as suggested by Ms Wilson, that to
remedy the confusion created by the Document the
Department can release
contextual information to address the confusion. The reasoning in
Department of Premier and
(‘Brog’) indicates that the focus is on the document in question
(in the absence of other documents that might help explain
it) and the reasoning
in Ryan also did not support this. It was a speculative that the Department
might be able to mitigate the risk
of the document being misunderstood.
audit reports which Ms Wilcon suggested could be released to give context
involved thousands of pages of documents. The Department
ought not have to
provide the context where the matter is about the release of one document. There
was an obvious risk of misinterpretation
when thousands of documents were needed
to give context.
stated ‘However, I consider the aggregate score would be representative of
the overall condition and is meaningful information’.
The evidence of Ms
Wandel indicates that the aggregate score would not be representative of the
overall condition and is not meaningful
information.
Ms Wilson’s submissions
Wilson submitted there was public interest in the disclosure of this
information, for the purpose of questioning whether the Department
effectively planning for and managing school infrastructure, ultimately ensuring
that the health, safety, and welfare of school
children are properly
safeguarded. There is also a public interest in promoting transparency and
accountability in the allocation
and use of public funds more broadly.
Wison referred to
McIntosh v Department of Premier and
where the Tribunal
said the starting point for the assessment of the public interest ‘is the
object of the Act in
, which emphatically recognises the right of the
community to access information, limited only by exemptions which protect
public interests’.
Wilson conceded that the first limb of
section 30(1)
was met but submitted the
second limb in paragraph (b) was not met. It was for the Department to show that
the release of documents
would harm the public interest in some way.
Wilson submitted there are sound reasons to doubt that the release of the
Document will mislead or confuse. In this respect, Ms
Wilson relied on the facts
and reasons outlined in the OVIC Decision, including as follows:
(e) I acknowledge that the document itself does not contain detailed
information about the factors considered when school infrastructure
and does not fully represent the performance of the school or its facilities.
However, I consider the aggregate score would
be representative of the overall
condition and is meaningful information.
(f) There is no evidence to support that disclosing a list of conditions scores
would impact school enrolments. It may be one factor
considered by parents and
guardians, however, their decision to enroll their child would be dependent on a
multitude of factors.
Wilsons submitted the evidence offered by the Department did not displace these
findings and does not explain why the Department
with its significant number of
media, communications, and policy advisors is not capable of providing any
additional context to the
Victorian public.
Victorian public are entitled to information and can be trusted to interpret it
responsibly. In the circumstances, transparency
is preferable to withholding
information on the assumption that the community cannot understand it.
it is not enough that the Department identifies a risk that the condition scores
are used for purposes other than initially
intended. The Department must show
that this factor outweighs the other facts in favour of disclosure. Ms Wilson
adopted the reasons
of OVIC where it stated:
(a) There is a strong public interest in whether the Agency is effectively
planning for and managing school infrastructure.
(b) Community awareness will inform public debate on school infrastructure.
(c) The government has announced significant funding towards a school
maintenance program. As such, it should be accountable to
the community about
where such funding is allocated.
(d) The report is of sufficient detail and expertise to be relied upon for use
in the Agency’s planning.
balancing a range of factors, disclosure is not contrary to the public
WHETHER DISCLOSURE OF THE DOCUMENT WOULD BE CONTRARY TO THE
PUBLIC INTEREST
Friends of Mallacoota Inc v Department of Planning and Community
Development
summarised the considerations that might arise when deciding whether disclosure
would be contrary to the public interest:
(a) The nature of the information and the nature of the document. The more
sensitive or contentious the issues involved in the communication,
likely it is that the communication should not be disclosed;
(b) Draft internal working documents or preliminary advice and opinions are more
generally than not inappropriate for disclosure,
particularly when the final
version of the document has been made public;
(c) It is contrary to the public interest to disclose documents reflecting
possibilities considered but not eventually adopted, as
such disclosure would be
likely to lead to confusion and ill-informed debate, to give a spurious standing
to such documents or promote
pointless and captious debate about what might have
happened rather than what did;
(d) Decision-makers should be judged on the final decision and their reasons for
it, not on what might have been considered or recommended
by others in
preliminary or draft internal working documents;
(e) It is contrary to the public interest to disclose documents that would have
an adverse effect on the integrity or effectiveness
of a decision-making,
investigative or other process;
(f) Disclosure of documents which do not fairly disclose the reasons for a
decision subsequently taken may be unfair to a decision-maker
and may prejudice
the integrity of the decision-making process; and
(g) Public interest concerns the interest of the public as distinct from the
interest of individuals.
matter proceeded on the basis that if the document was released to Ms Wilson, it
would be released in some form to the public
McIntosh v Department of Premier and
Justice Bell stated:
Under the principles, the application of the public interest in
involves a balancing of various considerations. The starting point is the
object of the Act in
, which emphatically recognises the right of the
community to access information, limited only by exemptions which protect
public interests.
document sets out what was requested. It lists each school by name and number
and a score. A significant number of schools have
not been assigned a score (as
noted in Ms Wandel’s evidence).
cases indicate that there are a wide range of situations that are regarded as
contrary to the public interest.
document is not one that requires confidentiality to promote the giving of full
and frank advice in government decision making.
In my view it is not of a
sensitive or contentious nature.
is not a preliminary draft of a report where the final report was substantially
different and in the absence of accompanying explanatory
material as to why the
changes occurred, would have the potential for misconstruction, confusion and
exploitation and for undermining
confidence in the final report that had been
released to the public as in
only basis for non-disclosure that has been advanced is that there is a real
risk that a ‘mischievous interpretation’
of the Document could be
used to rank schools and influence enrolment (and possibly funding) decisions.
This is primarily due to
the lack of context in the document such as an
explanation as to how each score was calculated and the fact that the time frame
the assessment that led to the score is not apparent from the Document.
Department sought to distinguish Mildenhall (where the documents were ordered to
be released) which involved the release of a
spreadsheet that was describes
a spreadsheet disclosing estimates of maintenance needs of government schools in
Victoria as at 5 November 1997. For each school
referred to in the spreadsheet,
the total anticipated maintenance needs are specified broken down into various
categories according
to priority allocated. Upon the evidence, the figures
contained in the spreadsheet were sent by BSA to the relevant schools with
request for verification or comment on the accuracy. Opportunity was given to
appeal against the estimates. Many schools did not
avail themselves of the
opportunity to comment. The information in the spreadsheet was used for broad
statewide planning relating
to funding.
was argued in that case that disclosure of the spreadsheet would be contrary to
the public interest because it had the potential
to cause confusion and
unnecessary debate because it is inaccurate and, without a proper understanding
of the purpose of the document,
would be likely to mislead.
was also argued in that case that it was contrary to the public interest to
release the document because the information in the
document contained
inaccuracies and had the potential to confuse and mislead and to give rise to
unnecessary debate without there
being a proper understanding of its purpose by
those who read it.
Tribunal in that case noted that the system involved ongoing appraisal subject
to adjustment and that such review might well demonstrate
that earlier estimates
were wrong, was a recognisable aspect of the system. Further it observed the
claim that figures occurring
in a spreadsheet relating to assessment as at a
particular day should give rise to confusion or potential for mischief or should
mislead anyone was unsubstantiated speculation. The Tribunal found there was a
clear public interest in many aspects of education
not the least the maintenance
of the school facilities in which it is provided. In the absence of overriding
and compelling reasons
for refusing to release the information in dispute, it
was released.
the current case, the Document would not be misleading or difficult to interpret
because it contains highly technical terms or
jargon. Nor is it inaccurate as in
accept that the score may provide to the public little useful or valuable
information, but I do not accept that it is meaningless.
If this was the case,
there would be no point in generating the score. The Department’s
submission is that it has some meaning
to the Department but would mislead the
am mindful of the comments in
there can be little
public interest in seeing something conveying little
However that case
involved cryptic handwritten notes that were almost
indecipherable
and that is not
the case here.
mischief the Department pointed to was that it could be used to rank schools and
influence parents’ decisions regarding
enrolment in particular schools
(which in turn could affect funding decisions). As on the face of it, it is
unclear how the score
is calculated, and as it only relates to one aspect,
namely physical infrastructure, I am not satisfied that there is a real risk
that it would influence parents’ enrolment decisions. The evidence of Mr
Thompson that there was a risk it would be used by
parents to rank schools and
influence parents’ enrolment decisions, is speculative.
article Mr Thompson referred to reports that ‘school shopping’ had
become more prevalent among middle-class parents
in gentrified suburbs. Middle
class families were trying to essentially avoid people from lower income
backgrounds. It notes the
lower enrolments in schools next to public housing
towers. It appears to relate primarily to inner city schools and indicates that
there are factors that are more influential than opaque infrastructure scores in
making enrolment decisions.
am also satisfied that the Department when releasing the information could
provide some context to counter any potential mischief.
This need not be the
thousands of documents referred to by the Department in submissions, but rather
an explanation that many factors
go into the calculation of the scores and their
purpose, and that they are done over a rolling five-year timeframe. At the very
that the score is only one factor taken into account in providing funding
to schools.
am not satisfied there is real risk that the mischief it is claimed may result
in the disclosure of the document would eventuate.
affirm the decision of OVIC.
is standard practice, I allowed a 28 day delay, in which the Department may
consider its appeal rights.
Where the requested
information is not available in a discrete form, but the agency could produce a
written document containing
the information in discrete form by the use of a
A document prepared for the
purpose of briefing a Minister in relation to issues to be considered by the
Section 30(1)(b).
Department of Health &
Human Services v Herald and Weekly Times Pty Ltd (Review and Regulation)
[2015] VCAT 291
Department of Treasury and Finance v Davis (Review
and Regulation) (Corrected)
[2024] VCAT 618
Section 3 of the Act.
Although I note since the
2018-2022 assessments are completed and its halfway through the second cycle,
it’s more akin to
three-quarters of the assessments having been
(1998) 12 VAR 483
[2006] VCAT 691.
Ibid, at [66].
Ibid, at [20].
[1998] VICCAT 1266.
(1989) 3 VAR 201.
Ibid, at [18].
At page 210.
Department of Human Services
[2006] VCAT 691
Referring to
Department of Justice
[2005] VCAT 2817
Roy Morgan Research Centre Pty
Ltd v State Revenue Office
(unreported, VCAT, Coghlan DP, 17 June 1999) at
Rosen v Department of
Human Services
[2006] VCAT 691
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (263 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter