URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Celins v Braeside Grove Pty Ltd [1998] VADT 18 (13 November 1998)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LIST
Tribunal No. 55 of 1998
DAGMARA CELINS
Complainant
BRAESIDE GROVE PTY LTD
First Respondent
ALAN ANDERSON
Second Respondent
MS L. ROWLAND
MR G. CARLETON
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS : DECISION
AT MELBOURNE ON FRIDAY 13 NOVEMBER 1998
MS D. CELINS appeared on her own behalf.
The Respondents appeared on their own behalf.
MS ROWLAND: In this matter, the complainant, Ms Celins, lodged a
complaint with the Equal Opportunity Commission on 5 November 1997.
In that complaint she claims discrimination and victimisation under
ss.42 and 96 of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
("the Act"). She says that she
was subject to direct discrimination pursuant to s.8 of the Act. The complainant
bears the burden
of proof in establishing that she has been discriminated
against on the basis of her sex.
By way of background, we find that Ms Celins had a genuine grievance
Mr Scott, who
was engaged by the Body Corporate of the units where she was an owner/occupier.
The problem was first raised in February
1997 with Mr Anderson, the
managing agent, and the committee of the Body Corporate. Mr Anderson referred
the complaint to the committee.
A number of the members of the committee
considered the complaint and decided there was no issue in relation to the
contractor and
instructed Mr Anderson accordingly. On 24 February 1997, Ms
Celins sent Mr Anderson a lengthy letter in which she complained about
conduct and indicated she was making a complaint to the Equal Opportunity
Commission. As a consequence he became, quite understandably,
defensive, and he
sought legal advice.
As a consequence of that legal advice he was advised not to correspond
with Ms Celins. He accordingly wrote to Ms Celins and advised
her of such, and
suggested that she deal with the committee. There followed letters to the
managing agent and the committee members,
including two abusive letters to Mrs
Felvus. These latter two letters, in our opinion, were totally unjustified and
related to an
incident some 13 months prior. Mr Anderson was provided with a
copy of these letters to Mrs Felvus, and he gave evidence that he
was offended
by that correspondence.
On 12 March 1997, Ms Celins sent a further letter to Mr Anderson in
which she stated that she had not lodged a complaint with the
Equal Opportunity
Commission. She required him to provide information in relation to the breakdown
of accounts of the contractor,
disputing his assertion that the matters were sub
judice. During the course of March and April, Mr Anderson had received telephone
requests for a breakdown of the contractor's fees by Ms Celins. He did not
provide the information requested. Mr Anderson gave evidence
that he did not
provide that information because of the abusive way Ms Celins had treated
other committee members.
In April 1997, Mr Legnaghi, Ms Celins' son, rang Mr Anderson and
politely requested a breakdown of the costs. Mr Anderson said that
prepared to provide that information to Ms Celins' son because he had asked
politely. The information was subsequently provided
on 15 April 1997 which is
Following that letter, Ms Celins made further telephone requests, one of
which was taped on 22 April 1997. Mr Anderson did not provide
the information
requested. Ms Celins followed the telephone request up with a letter of 9 May
1997, which is Exhibit G. The letter
requests further information in relation to
the contractors' accounts. It is doubtful, in our opinion, that under the terms
first respondent's appointment, it was required to provide that
information to the complainant. On 14 May 1997, Mr Anderson referred
letter of 9 May 1997 to the committee for action and to be discussed at the next
Annual General Meeting which was to be held
in October 1997.
At the Annual General Meeting in October 1997, the members requested a
breakdown of Mr Scott's accounts to be provided in writing.
Mr Anderson gave
evidence that he gave an oral breakdown of the accounts at the Annual General
Meeting. The members, apart from Ms
Celins, also decided that they were
satisfied with the contractors' work. They disagreed with Ms Celins' views in
relation to the
contractor. Following the Annual General Meeting, Mr Anderson
provided all body corporate members with a detailed breakdown of Mr
On 13 November 1997, Ms Celins wrote to Mr Anderson in response to the
minutes of meeting. She requested more detail of the breakdown
maintenance gardening contractor's fees, and made more allegations about the
standard of Mr Scott's work. She also raised
two other issues; one about
car-parking and another about cigarette butts being thrown over the balcony from
above. She also asked
for all receipts for all payments made in respect of body
corporate fees.
On 20 November 1997, Mr Anderson responded to that letter by stating
that he had written to the owner of the car in relation to the
car-parking
incident, that it was his usual commercial practice for receipts to be provided
only if a stamped self-addressed envelope
were provided, and finally that he
would not respond in relation to the matters raised at the Annual General
Meeting, because the
members had already determined that the gardening
contractor's work was satisfactory.
In relation to the cigarette butt complaint he could not recall whether
he rang the agent in relation to the tenant's conduct, but
admits that he may
not have responded to that complaint because of the nature and length of the
letter. He conceded that the issue
of the cigarette butts may have been
overlooked.
Ms Celins then wrote a letter to all owners on 20 February 1998, which
is Exhibit K. This is an articulate and well-documented letter,
setting out the
discrepancies in Mr Scott's work performance as Ms Celins perceived them.
She did not receive one response apart
from a discussion with a Mr Hoffman
shortly before she vacated the building. Mrs Acklom gave evidence that she
disregarded that letter
because of the abusive letters to Mrs Felvus. It is
apparent to us that Ms Celins did not have the support of any other body
member in relation to her complaint against Mr Scott.
We turn now to the particulars of complaint dated 4 May 1998. We will
deal with each of these particulars separately. In relation
to the first
particular of complaint, we find that it does not allege any unlawful
discrimination. However, in relation to that incident
we find that there was no
conduct that could be said to be discriminatory. In February 1997 Mr Anderson
referred Ms Celins' complaint
to the committee and the committee advised him
that no action was required. This was supported by the evidence of Mrs Felvus
Mrs Acklom, committee members at the time, who both said that they did not
have a problem with the contractor.
In relation to the second particular of complaint, we find that
Mr Anderson's decision not to enter into correspondence with Ms Celins
defensive and based on legal advice he received at the time. We do not find that
his conduct was unlawful discrimination.
In relation to the third particular of complaint, we find that Mr
Anderson was not aware that the original statement that, "Your
overly-soft
attitude due to your being a relative or friend of yours" was made by
Mr Martin. That statement was repeated by Ms Celins.
Mr Anderson was,
in the circumstances, justified in writing to Ms Celins to the effect that, "If
there is any further inference that
the contractor is a relative or friend of
yours, that there is not a strictly arm's-length manager/contractor
relationship, we will
refer the matter to our solicitors". That act is not an
act of discrimination.
In relation to the fourth particular of complaint, Mr Anderson gave
evidence that he did not respond to the requests of Ms Celins
because of abusive
correspondence she had sent to Mrs Felvus and abusive telephone calls he had
received. We accept that Mr Anderson
perceived Ms Celins' conduct to be abusive,
and it is for this reason he refused to provide her with a breakdown of the
maintenance
contractor's accounts. When Ms Celins' son, Mr Legnagni, politely
requested the information, it was provided. We find that Mr Anderson
provide the information to Ms Celins because of her behaviour and because he
considered he was not required by law to
do so, and not because she was a woman.
Accordingly, we do not find any act of unlawful discrimination.
In relation to particular, number 5, Mr Anderson said that the reason
for his initial refusal to instruct Mr Scott to repair the
window frame was
because of the prevailing atmosphere, and in particular the letter to Mrs
Felvus. He also thought that Mr Scott
would object to repairing the window. When
Mr Scott agreed to carry out the works, Mr Anderson authorised the works to be
out. We accept his reasons as to why he initially refused to arrange for
the windows to be fixed, and do not accept the reason was
because Ms Celins was
In relation to particular number 6, we find that Ms Celins' request for
information concerning the breakdown of the maintenance contractor's
were made outside the agenda for the Annual General Meeting, and that Mr
Anderson said that he would deal with the issue
at the appropriate time. When
the matters were raised during the agenda item financial statements, Mr Kelly
requested Mr Scott's
accounts to be broken down into separate categories. This
was supported by Mr Martin and Ms Hooper. Upon receipt of that request
Annual General Meeting, Mr Anderson provided the breakdown of the figures
in writing following the meeting. We do not accept
Ms Celins' contention, that
the only reason Mr Anderson provided the information was because Mr Kelly, a
male, had asked for it.
We find that it was a request supported by at least four
of the five members present, and for this reason Mr Anderson undertook and
provide the breakdown of the figures. Accordingly, this particular does not
disclose any unlawful discrimination.
Particular number 7 relates to Ms Celins' letter of 13 November 1997 in
which she makes numerous allegations about the contractor
and requests Mr
Anderson to take action. Mr Anderson refused to take any action as the
members at the Annual General Meeting had
decided that they were satisfied with
the contractor's work and disagreed with Ms Celins' views. We find that his
response was based
on a decision of the members at the Annual General Meeting,
and not on the basis of Ms Celins' sex. Accordingly, we do not find that
an act of discrimination.
In relation to particular number 8, Ms Celins complains about three
matters. Firstly, that the respondent refused to provide copies
of receipts
without provision of a stamped self-addressed envelope. The respondent said that
his response was based on usual commercial
practice, and that he usually advises
owners that if they want a receipt they should provide a stamped self-addressed
envelope. We
accept that evidence. We note that in his letter of 20 November
1997, Mr Anderson acknowledged that contributions were paid up to
31 March 1998.
We do not find that his response was because Ms Celins was a woman, but because
it was his usual commercial practice.
Secondly, Ms Celins complained that she required action in response to
cigarette butts being thrown over from her balcony above but
Mr Anderson refused
to acknowledge her complaint. Mr Anderson said that he couldn't recall whether
he took action on this specific
complaint, and pointed to the fact that the
handwritten seven page letter contained a number of issues, and he may have
the cigarette butt complaint. He did respond to the car-parking
complaint contained in the same letter. We find that Mr Anderson
did not respond
to the cigarette butt complaint, but the failure to respond was an oversight and
not based on the fact of Ms Celins'
Thirdly, Ms Celins complains that her resignation was not acknowledged
when she resigned from the Committee in May 1996. She said
that Mr Madigan's
resignation was acknowledged and that this constituted unfavourable treatment
based on her sex. She did not realise
that this was an act of discrimination
until much later and says that it formed part of a pattern of conduct against
her. Mr Anderson
said that in the whole time that his company has been managing
agent, only two people have resigned from the committee: Mr Madigan
Celins. He also gave evidence that it is common not to acknowledge such
resignations. The reason he acknowledged Mr Madigan's
resignation was because
Mr Madigan in his letter of resignation, specifically asked Mr Anderson to
notify the other members of the
committee. We accept that evidence and do not
find that the failure to acknowledge Ms Celins' resignation was an act of
discrimination. Accordingly, the complaint dated 31 March 1998 is
I will hand out the rules relating to costs under the VCAT Act. I
understand the respondents wish to make an application for costs
MRS WILSON: Do we have to put a written application or do we state
MS ROWLAND: The normal position you will see from sub-s.(1) is that each
party is to bear their costs in the proceedings. Normally
what happens,
certainly in this list, is that it would take a case which was quite out of the
ordinary for costs to be awarded, and
our preliminary view, subject to what you
may have to say about this, is that this is not one of those cases in which
costs would
be awarded against Ms Celins. We do not accept that she has brought
this claim vexatiously. Ms Celins honestly held a view that she
discriminated on the basis of her sex. She was subject - certainly I think - to
some unfavourable treatment but we have found
it was not based on her sex, but
she believed that it was. And so it is not a situation where we consider she
brought this claim
vexatiously. I might say that the claims that have been
brought in this Tribunal, certainly in the last couple of months, most of
have failed, and her claim is not one totally out of the ordinary in that sense.
So subject to what you have to say, we would
be inclined not to make an order
MRS WILSON: Yes. I haven't seen this before, but it falls into line with
the point under point 3, where the Tribunal may make an order
under sub-s.(2),
having regard to - - -
MS ROWLAND: Yes, the Tribunal does have power to make an order for
MRS WILSON: Yes, I guess we would request, based on point B and C,
whether a party has been responsible for prolonging unreasonably
the time taken.
We feel that three days, this matter could have been dealt with a lot more
MS ROWLAND: Yes, we were here for three days. Most of the witnesses that
were called were your witnesses, and it seemed that those
witnesses were called
purely on the basis of the allegation that you are saying that she was abusive.
I mean that was a matter for
you and that is the way you ran your case, but most
of the witnesses were your witnesses and she was entitled to cross-examine them.
She is unrepresented and I do not believe that she intended deliberately to
prolong the proceeding, so I would reject that.
MRS WILSON: Okay. And point C, the relative strengths of the claim. I
guess our belief is that there was no tenable basis in fact
or law for this to
happen as there'd been a lot of legal cost incurred on our part to get it to
where it is.
MS ROWLAND: If her version of the facts was accepted, she would have
succeeded. Her version of the facts was not accepted, and that
is a question of
evidence. Her claim was not totally unmeritorious. As it turned out she lost,
but it is not such that she did not
have a claim in law if she were believed. As
I said, well over half of the claims that have been brought in this Tribunal in
list recently have failed. So it is not necessarily an easy thing to
We are getting an order typed up so if you would like to wait for that,
if you would not mind.
MR ANDERSON: Could you tell me how long that is likely to be?
MS ROWLAND: We think about 10 or 15 minutes. The second order is that
there be no order as to costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (21.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter