URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VLPT/2005/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:33:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Law Institute of Victoria Limited v Amad [2005] VLPT 2 (26 October 2005)
[2005] VLPT 2
Tribunal reference: T0065 of 2004
address of clients:
Ms Ann Hodgson &
Ms Barbara Hodgson
Name, address, and reference of legal practitioner:
Legal Ombudsman reference: LOV/04/311
RPA and its
reference: Law Institute of Victoria Limited
Ref: JM:JG:LOV/04/311
CONCERNING A DISPUTE
between Ms Ann
Hodgson & Ms Barbara Hodgson (the “clients”) and Michael J Amad
Pty (the “legal practitioner”).
REASONS OF FULL TRIBUNAL OF LEGAL PROFESSION
TRIBUNAL FOR DECISION GIVEN ON 26 OCTOBER 2005
(Section 409 Legal
Practice Act)
On 29 May 2003 Ms Ann Hodgson and her sister Ms Barbara Hodgson
(“the clients”) appeared at Ringwood Magistrates’
charged (inter alia) with criminal damage.
The clients retained Michael J
Amad Pty to act on their behalf. Mr Michael Amad (“the legal
practitioner”) handled the
case on behalf of the clients and briefed Mr
Robert Williams of Counsel to appear on their behalf in the Magistrates’
Before the learned Magistrate each client was found guilty of one
charge of criminal damage and three charges of without authority
entering a private place.
No convictions were recorded. The clients were
fined $500.00 as part of an aggregate order with $325.00 costs.
clients attended at the Registrar’s office of the Ringwood Court and
completed the appropriate documentation to appeal to
the County Court against
the Magistrate’s decision on the general ground that they were not guilty.
Michael J Amad Pty was
stated on the notices of appeal to be the
solicitor’s name and address for service.
On 6 November 2003 the
appeals were heard by His Honour Judge Coish, who ordered that the
On Counts 1 and 4:
Convicted and fined $500.00 as part of an
aggregate fine.
• Order the Appellant (client) to pay witness costs of the Magistrates'
Court hearing in the sum of $325.00 and the witness
costs of this County Court
hearing in the sum of $680.00.
• Order pursuant to section 86(1) of the Sentencing Act (1991) the
appellant to pay the sum of $1,400.00 to Glen Dumergue.
• Stay of 3 months on payment of fine, costs and
compensation.
On Counts 2 and 3:
• Convicted and fined $500.00 as part of an aggregate order.
• Stay of 3 months on payment of fine.
notice of the County Court’s appeal decision is attached to these reasons.
(Annexure “1”).
On the hearing of the appeal before His
Honour Judge Coish the clients were not legally represented and appeared in
The legal practitioner was not retained by the clients to act on
their behalf on the appeal.
The clients filed in the Supreme Court a
notice of judicial review of the decision of the County Court. The Review was
three days starting on 1 December 2004. Once again the clients
appeared in person. The legal practitioner was not retained to act
The application for review was dismissed with costs awarded against
the clients.
The clients initiated proceedings in the disputes
Particulars
of the dispute prepared to assist the Tribunal to conduct a hearing
are dated 8 February 2005 and attached to these reasons (Annexure
On 21 June 2005 the dispute was heard before the
learned Deputy Registrar and member of the Tribunal. The hearing proceeded in
absence of the legal practitioner. The clients appeared in person and were
not legally represented. The Order of the Deputy Registrar
was that the dispute
be dismissed.
The clients gave notice of appeal to the Full Tribunal of
the Legal Profession Tribunal against the Order of the Deputy
“Grounds of Appeal
1. The applicants state that they did not receive a fair hearing and that the
decision reached by the Legal Profession Tribunal was
unfair and unjust
particularly given that the legal practitioner failed to appear and deprived the
applicants of the ability to cross
examine the legal practitioner.”
The appeal to the Full Tribunal came on for hearing
on 14 September 2005. The clients, who attended at the hearing, were
represented
by Mr Stuart Rowland of Counsel. The legal practitioner appeared in
person and represented himself. Mr Alan Hebb of Counsel appeared
to assist the
Mr Rowland was given leave, on his application, to amend the
grounds of appeal:
“Amended Grounds of Appeal
1. The applicants state that
they did not receive a fair hearing and
the decision reached by the Legal Profession Tribunal was unfair
particularly given that the legal practitioner failed to
appear and deprived the applicants of the ability to cross examine the legal
practitioner.
the learned Tribunal Member erred in failing to give any or any proper weight
to the uncontradicted evidence before the Tribunal that
the legal practitioner
failed to advise the clients that they could receive an increased penalty on
appeal to the County Court;
the learned tribunal member further erred in finding against the weight of
the evidence that the letter of the legal practitioner
dated 5 June 2003 was
sufficient to fulfil the legal practitioner’s duty to the clients as it
made no mention of the risk of
an increased penalty and mentioned payment of
$5,000.00 of costs to prosecute the appeal;
the learned tribunal member erred in making a finding about the
clients’ literacy without any or any sufficient evidence for
Before the Full Tribunal the
hearing proceeded by way of submissions from counsel and the legal practitioner
and detailed reference
to the reasons for decision given by the Deputy Registrar
(Annexure “3”) and the hearing of a tape of the full proceedings
before the Deputy Registrar (Exhibit “A”).
In view of the
decision we have reached it is not necessary for us to do other than state we
are satisfied there was evidence, referred
to in the course of discussion
between counsel and the Tribunal, to support the Deputy Registrar’s
observation that there was
“some doubt” in relation to the ability
of the clients to understand the written word. Further, the Deputy Registrar
had the undoubted advantage of seeing and hearing the clients give
Be that as it may, the Deputy Registrar made it clear that he
accepted the clients’ assertion that the legal practitioner failed
advice of the possibility of a higher penalty on a County Court appeal and that
“they did not understand the wording
of the warning given on the appeal
documents that a sentencing order more severe than that which has been imposed
by the Magistrates'
Court was a possibility.” The Deputy Registrar made
specific reference to the fact “this evidence has not been
contraverted.”
The clients lodged their appeal at the Ringwood
Magistrates' Court on 29 May 2003. By letter dated 5 June 2003 the legal
practitioner
wrote to the clients as follows:
Police Charges – Ringwood Magistrates' Court 29 May
We confirm that you appeared before Mr Martin (Magistrate) at the Magistrates'
Court at Ringwood on 29 May 2003.
We confirm that on that day you were found guilty of all charges and fined an
aggregate of $500.00 each, without conviction and
granted an Order to pay costs
in the sum of $325.00 each. We note that you were granted until 1 October to
pay the fines.
We confirm that you have lodged an Appeal against the decision and the Appeal
is listed for hearing on 5 and 6 November 2003. It
is our strong view that your
Appeal will be unsuccessful and, therefore you should seriously consider
abandoning the Appeal.
We further advise that you would not qualify for Legal Aid, under the
guidelines to prosecute your Appeal and if you wished for
our office to act in
relation to the Appeal we would require $5,000.00 on account of our costs.
Yours faithfully
MICHAEL J AMAD PTY”
The Deputy Registrar accepted the clients’ evidence that
the letter of 5 June 2003 was read to them and they understood its
contents. We
find the Deputy Registrar was correct in his finding, “This letter clearly
gives a strong piece of advice that
the appeal will be unsuccessful.” The
clients’ evidence is that they chose to go against this
Indeed the evidence before the Deputy Registrar was that
after receipt of the letter and with knowledge of and understanding of its
contents, the clients spoke to the legal practitioner by telephone. The legal
practitioner reiterated his advice an Appeal would
fail. The clients’
response was, “How would you know.”
With reference to the sum
of $5,000.00 Ms Ann Hodgson said to the legal practitioner, “Where would I
get that money from.”
She stated, “That is the end of it. We acted
on our own after this.”
Ms Barbara Hodgson in agreeing with her
sister’s evidence said, in effect, “After the letter and the
reference to $5,000.00
we went down and collected the file and that was the end
The gravamen of the complaint against the legal
practitioner is that at no stage did he inform the clients that an appeal by
to the County Court may result in a sentencing order more severe than that
imposed by the learned Magistrate at Ringwood.
On behalf of the clients
Mr Rowland submitted that the Deputy Registrar placed too much weight on the
letter of 5 June 2003. That
letter did not advise of the risk of more severe
sentences and its failure to do so was negligent.
Further, Mr Rowland
submitted the Deputy Registrar placed too much weight on the fact the clients at
Ringwood Magistrates' Court signed
on the notice of appeal a statement to the
effect an appeal may result in a sentence more severe.
We have already
referred to the fact the Deputy Registrar accepted that the clients’
evidence in that matter was not contraverted
and played no part in his
The legal practitioner submitted the letter of 5 June 2003
completely discharged his duty to the clients with a clear indication an
would not succeed.
Mr Hebb submitted the only matter for the Full
Tribunal to determine was whether the Deputy Registrar’s finding to the
“This letter (i.e. letter 5 June 2003) clearly gives a strong piece
of advice that the appeal will be unsuccessful.”
The clients’
evidence is that they chose to go against this advice. The clients pursued the
appeal without the assistance
of the legal practitioner. Under the
circumstances it must be concluded that the legal practitioner was not negligent
in relation
to the alleged loss arising from the disposition of the County Court
on appeal.”
The evidence before the Deputy Registrar was that with
knowledge and understanding of the contents of the letter and a subsequent
telephone conversation with the legal practitioner in which his advice an appeal
would fail was reiterated, the clients dispensed
with his services. He was no
longer retained to act on their behalf.
His advice was, do not proceed.
Had the clients informed him they required him to represent them as they
intended to proceed with
an appeal, despite his strong advice to the contrary,
then it would probably have been incumbent upon him to advise not only of the
risk of an increased sentence, but also other detrimental risks that can result
to an unsuccessful appellant.
That situation had not arisen at the stage
the clients no longer retained the legal practitioner and collected their file.
not negligent in failing to canvass such matters in his letter of 5 June
2003. His advice was crystal clear – an appeal will
not succeed.
We are of the unanimous view the decision of the Deputy Registrar was
correct and no error of law is discerned therein.
The appeal by the
clients is dismissed.
Mr Rowland indicated the clients desired to stress
to the Tribunal that the legal practitioner’s statement in the letter of
June 2003 to the effect “If you wished our office to act in relation to
the appeal we would require $5,000.00 on account
of our costs” was an
invitation to proceed to appeal. We are satisfied no such interpretation is
open from the reference to
.................................................................................
Deputy Chairperson of Legal Profession Tribunal
1. Copies of this document will be provided by the Tribunal to the client, the
legal practitioner, the Legal Ombudsman, and the recognised
professional
association that originally handled the dispute.
2. More information about the operation of the Tribunal can be found on the
Tribunal’s website at
www.legalpt.vic.gov.au
reference: T0065 of 2004
Name and address of clients:
Ms Barbara Hodgson
336 Steeles Creek Road
YARRA GLEN VIC 3775
Tel: 9730 1363
Name, address, and reference of legal
practitioner:
Michael J Amad Pty
Suite 1, 230 Dorset Road
BORONIA VIC 3155
Tel: 9762 9455
Fax: 9762 1518
Ref: Michael J Amad
Legal Ombudsman
reference: LOV/04/311
RPA and its reference: Law Institute of
Victoria Limited
Ref: JM:JG:LOV/04/311
CONCERNING A DISPUTE
between Ms Ann
Hodgson & Ms Barbara Hodgson
(the “clients”) and Michael J
Amad Pty (the “legal practitioner”).
ORDER OF FULL TRIBUNAL ON APPEAL
HEARING BEFORE: Full Tribunal constituted by His Honour E J Cullity A.M.,
Q.C. (Deputy Chairperson) and Mrs L Cooney and Mr K Stone
OF HEARING: 14 September 2005 and 26 October 2005
DATE OF ORDER: 26
October 2005
SECTION(S) OF LEGAL PRACTICE
ACT UNDER WHICH HEARD: Section
ATTENDANCES: Mr Alan Hebb appeared to assist the
Tribunal on 14 September 2005
Mr S Rowland appeared on behalf of the clients on 14 September 2005
The legal practitioner appeared in person on 14 September 2005 but there was
no appearance by or on behalf of the legal practitioner
on 26 October
Ms Ann Hodgson and Ms Barbara Hodgson attended in person on 14 September 2005
and 26 October 2005.
THE FULL TRIBUNAL
PROFESSION TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT
the appeal by the clients against the Order
of the Deputy Registrar made on 21 June 2005 be
.................................................................................
Chairperson of Legal Profession Tribunal
I CERTIFY that this order, signed by me and stamped with the seal of
the Legal Profession Tribunal, correctly and fully sets out the
order made by
the Full Tribunal of the Legal Profession Tribunal on 26 October
.............................................................
of Legal Profession Tribunal
1. Copies of this document will be provided by the Tribunal to the client, the
legal practitioner, the Legal Ombudsman, and the recognised
professional
association that originally handled the dispute.
2. Any party may appeal against this order to the Court of Appeal, but only on a
question of law: Legal Practice Act section 170.
3. Any party, after giving written notice to the other party, may enforce this
order by filing a copy of this document free of charge
in the Magistrates'
Court: Legal Practice Act section 135.
4. More information about the operation of the Tribunal can be found on the
Tribunal’s website at
www.legalpt.vic.gov.au
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter