URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/39.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:24:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
East Gippsland C171egip (PSA) [2025] PPV 39 (22 August 2025)
East Gippsland Planning Scheme Amendment C171egip
Eagle Point Structure Plan
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
22 August 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
East Gippsland Planning Scheme Amendment C171egip
Eagle Point Structure Plan
22 August 2025
Con Tsotsoros, Chair Shannon Davies, Member
List of Figures
Glossary and abbreviations
East Gippsland Shire Council
East Gippsland Catchment Management Authority
General Residential Zone
Housing and Settlement Strategy
East Gippsland Housing and Settlement Strategy (2023)
Low Density Residential Zone
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning Scheme
East Gippsland Planning Scheme
Rural Living Zone
Significant Landscape Overlay
Structure Plan
Eagle Point Structure Plan Volume 1 (East Gippsland Shire Council and Mesh,
Note: A number following the zone or overlay code refers to its schedule
Amendment summary
The Amendment
East Gippsland Planning Scheme Amendment C171egip
Common name
Eagle Point Structure Plan
Brief description
The Amendment proposes to implement the Eagle Point Structure Plan (2019)
through the East Gippsland Planning Scheme
Subject land
See Figure 1
Planning Authority
East Gippsland Shire Council
Authorisation
12 September 2024, with conditions
25 November 2024 to 31 January 2025
Submissions
Panel process
Con Tsotsoros (Chair) and Shannon Davies
Supported by
Georgia Thomas and Sarah Vojinovic
Directions Hearing
By video, 26 May 2025
Panel Hearing
- East Gippsland
Shire Council Offices, Bairnsdale and online video,
24 June 2025
Panels Victoria, Melbourne and online video,
25, 26, 27 and 30 June, 1, 2 and
3 July 2025
Site inspections
Unaccompanied, 23 July 2025
Parties to the Hearing
- East Gippsland
Shire Council represented by Kellinde Chester
- Friends of
Gippsland Lakes, Parks and Reserves Inc represented by David Nicastro
- Albert Robert
Laurence Ah Yee, Frederick George Ah Yee and Christopher John Ah Yee (Ah Yee
Family) represented by Nick Sutton of
Norton Rose Fulbright Australia who called
expert evidence on:
- planning from
Mark Woodland of Echelon Planning
- economics from
Rhys Quick of Urbis
- visual amenity
and landscape from Steve Schutt of Hansen Partnership
- drainage from
Nina Barich of Incitus
East Gippsland PSA C171egip [2025] PPV
Date of this report
22 August 2025
Executive summary
Eagle Point is a small
coastal settlement in the East Gippsland Shire next to Eagle Point Bay, near
Paynesville and Raymond Island,
and about 13 kilometres southeast of
Bairnsdale.
In 2013, Council started its structure planning process for Eagle Point which
included community consultation. Council adopted the
Eagle Point Structure Plan
(Structure Plan) in June 2019 after it was completed the year before.
East Gippsland Planning Scheme Amendment C171egip (the Amendment) seeks to
implement the Structure Plan into the East Gippsland Planning
Scheme (Planning
Scheme) by:
revising the
Municipal Planning Strategy and Planning Policy Framework which includes:
- identifying
Eagle Point for minor expansion rather than significant expansion
- realigning the
settlement boundary to exclude most of 25 Waterview Road
residential land and introducing new zone schedules
extending the
Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule 2 area
applying the
Environmental Audit Overlay to specific sites
referencing the
Structure Plan as background document.
Key issues raised in
submissions included:
accuracy of the
Eagle Point Structure Plan (Structure Plan) and its supporting documents
land supply,
residential growth and housing
boundary including coastal separation and whether certain land should be
included or excluded
zones provisions
and application
climate change,
coastal hazard assessments and sea level rise
road network
safety and capacity
infrastructure
and service, social infrastructure and service capacity
stormwater and
The Panel conducted one Hearing for both Amendment
C171egip (Eagle Point Structure Plan) and Amendment C172egip (Paynesville
The Panel has considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment, observations from site visits,
submissions,
evidence and other material presented to it during the Hearing.
Strategic issues
Structure Plan and supporting reports are appropriate to justify the Amendment. There is sufficient strategic justification to support
the proposed land supply in Eagle Point.
For the reasons set out in this report, the Panel concludes that the Amendment:
is supported by, and implements, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy Framework
is consistent with the relevant Ministerial Directions and Practice Notes
is well founded and strategically justified
should proceed subject to addressing the more specific issues raised in submissions as discussed in this report.
Settlement boundary
The proposed settlement boundary:
generally appropriate and strategically justified when having regard to the
proposed settlement separation between Eagle Point
and Paynesville which
excludes part of 25 Waterview Road
should exclude
the Rural Living Zone land – the McTaggarts Road area (land south of the
Eagle Point settlement boundary in the
existing Rural Living Zone) and the
Mathiesons Road area (proposed to be rezoned to Rural Living
It is appropriate and justified to apply Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule 2 to the part of 25 Waterview Road proposed by the
Procedurally, the McTaggarts Road area should not be rezoned through the Amendment because:
landowners were not given an opportunity to respond to such a proposal
it is beyond the
scope of the Amendment.
Zone provisions and application
It is appropriate and strategically justified to apply the proposed General Residential Zone Schedule 2. However, General Residential
Zone Schedule 2 should be revised to delete ‘Incremental change area’ from the title.
The proposed Low Density Residential Zone Schedule 2 should not apply to land in Eagle Point. Rather, the existing Low Density Residential
Zone Schedule 1 should remain. Land at 30 Forge Creek Road should be rezoned from the General Residential Zone to Low Density Residential
Zone Schedule 1 (rather than the exhibited Low Density Residential Zone Schedule 2).
It is strategically justified and appropriate to rezone the Mathieson Road precinct to Rural Living Zone Schedule 1.
Other issues
The Structure Plan and the Amendment have appropriately:
balanced the township’s long-term growth aspirations with the need to incorporate and respond to updated flood, coastal hazard,
and climate change information
considered the role of social infrastructure in the context of Eagle Point’s intended function.
The Amendment appropriately acknowledges the environmental sensitivities of the Eagle Point landscape. Biodiversity impacts can be
effectively managed through the existing planning framework.
The Amendment has appropriately considered and responded to:
the capacity of the existing road network and the potential impacts of increased traffic, as it will enable modest growth that does
not warrant further investigation at this stage
infrastructure and servicing capacity
stormwater and drainage infrastructure.
Future proposals seeking to increase residential development will have to respond to traffic related planning provisions through the
planning permit application process.
Recommendations
on the reasons set out in this Report, the Panel recommends that Council:
In association with the relevant catchment management authority, review and update flood mapping, schedules and policy using best
available data and with consideration of climate change, sea level rise and increased rainfall intensity.
1 Introduction
1.1 The Amendment
(i) The subject land
Amendment applies to the Eagle Point settlement area within the red outline
shown in Figure 1. Eagle Point is part of a broader
settlement network
including Paynesville and Raymond Island. Eagle Point is accessed by
Paynesville Road which connects it to Bairnsdale
in the north and Paynesville in
the south. The township contains low density development including permanent
dwellings and holiday
accommodation. The surrounding land is predominantly used
for rural or conservation purposes.
Land identified in this report refers to land is Eagle Point unless specified
(ii) Amendment description
The purpose of the Amendment is to implement the
Eagle Point Structure Plan (2019) (Structure Plan) by updating the Planning
Framework relating to Eagle Point, rezoning land, applying relevant
overlay provisions and inserting the Structure Plan as a background
Specifically, the Amendment proposes to:
amend Clause
02.03-1 of the Municipal Planning Strategy to update the strategic direction for
Eagle Point
introduce a new
Clause 11.03-4L-12 (Eagle Point) to include the relevant Structure Plan
- land in the
Mathiesons Road and Forge Creek Road area from Low Density Residential Zone to
Rural Living Zone Schedule 1 (RLZ1)
- 30 Forge Creek
Road from General Residential Zone to a new Low Density Residential Zone
Schedule 2 (LDRZ2)
General Residential Zone Schedule 1 land to General Residential Zone Schedule 2
- an area of
Farming Zone land including a section of 25 Waterview Road to
Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule 2 to part of 25 Waterview Road
Environmental Audit Overlay to the part of 25 Waterview Road proposed to be
rezoned GRZ2
amend the Clause
72.08 Schedule to reference the Structure Plan as a Background Document
amend the Clause
74.02 Schedule to remove reference to the preparation of a planning scheme
amendment to implement the Structure Plan.
LDRZ2 specifies a minimum
subdivision area of:
2,000 square
metres for 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 Morecroft Rise; 1007A and 1007B Paynesville Road;
1005 Paynesville Road and 76 Eagle Point
4,000 square
metres for all other applied land.
GRZ2 provides neighbourhood
character objectives and decision guidelines for all land in the existing GRZ
except 30 Forge Creek Road.
1.2 Background
Chronology of events
2013 – 2018
Council prepared the Eagle Point Structure Plan (Structure Plan) following
community and stakeholder consultation
Mesh Planning completed the draft Structure Plan Volumes 1 and 2
25 Jun 2019
Council formally adopted the Structure Plan
Council officers presented Amendment C171egip to Council and recommended it
request authorisation from the Minister for Planning
Council resolved to seek authorisation from the Minister for Planning to
exhibit the Amendment
Minister for Planning authorised the Amendment subject to conditions
25 Nov 2024
Amendment exhibition started
31 Jan 2025
Amendment exhibition ended
15 Apr 2025
Council formally considered submissions and resolved to refer all
submissions to an independent Planning Panel.
1.3 The Panel’s approach
Panel conducted one Hearing for both Amendments C171egip (Eagle Point Structure
Plan) and C172egip (Paynesville Structure Plan).
The two Amendments have
interrelated issues associated with the town separation between Eagle Point and
Paynesville.
The Panel has assessed the Amendment against the principles of net community
benefit and sustainable development, as set out in Planning
Scheme Clause
71.02-3 (Integrated decision making).
The Panel considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment, observations from site visits, and
submissions,
evidence and other material presented to it during the Hearing. It has reviewed
a large volume of material, and has
had to be selective in referring to the more
relevant or determinative material in the Report. All submissions and materials
been considered by the Panel in reaching its conclusions, regardless of
whether they are specifically mentioned in the Report.
This Report deals with the issues under the following headings:
Zone provisions
and application
1.4 Amendment versions
The Panel directed
Council to circulate a version of the Amendment documentation before the Hearing
started, and another version after
drafting discussion on the final day of the
Hearing. Council circulated:
(Version 1) documents (Documents 65 to 77 on 18 June 2025)
Amendment (Final
version) documents (Documents 142 to 150 on 7 July 2025).
incorporated changes in response to evidence, review and submissions. The Final
version incorporated further changes in
response to matters raised during the
Parties were given the opportunity to provide tracked drafting changes and
associated comments on Version 1 of the Amendment documents
before the drafting
discussion. Changes were received from Ah Yee, estate of F Ah Yee, and C Ah Yee
(Documents 99 to 103).
The Panel has had regard to all requested drafting changes and comments and
Council’s Final version when developing its recommended
1.5 Limitations
Panel has not considered potential land contamination in this report because
this issue was resolved before the Panel was appointed.
The Amendment proposed to apply the Environmental Audit Overlay to part of 25
Waterview Road. After the Amendment was exhibited,
Council commissioned a
preliminary site investigation in December 2024 and the landowner conducted a
further investigation in January
2025. After considering these assessments,
Council no longer proposed to apply the Environmental Audit Overlay through the
2 Strategic issues
2.1 Planning context
chapter identifies planning context relevant to the Amendment.
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
- section 4 of
Municipal Planning Strategy
- Clause 02.03-1
(Settlement), 02.03-2 (Environmental and landscape values), 02.03-3
(Environmental risk and amenity), 02.03-5 (Built
environment and
Planning Policy Framework
11.01-1S (Settlement), 11.01-1R (Settlement – Gippsland), 11. 02-1S
(Supply of urban land), 11.02-2S (Structure Planning),
11.03-4S (Coastal
Settlement), 11.03-6S (Regional and local places)
12.02-1S (Protection of Biodiversity), 12.01-2S (Native vegetation management),
12.02-1S (Protection of the marine and coastal
environment), 12.02-1L
(Protection of coastal areas), 12.03-1S (River corridors, waterways, lakes and
wetlands), 12.03-1R (High value
water body assets), 12.03-1L (Waterways),
12.03-1S (Environmentally sensitive areas), 12.05-1L (Landscapes)
13.01-S (Natural Hazards and climate change), 13.01-2S (Coastal inundation and
erosion), 13.04-1S (Contamination and potentially
contaminated land)
14.02-1S (Catchment planning and management)
15.01-1S (Urban design), 15.01-5S (Healthy neighbourhoods), 15.01-5L
(Neighbourhood character), 15.01-6S (Design of rural
areas), 15.03-2S
(Aboriginal culture heritage)
16.01-1S (Housing supply)
18.01-1S (Land use and transport integration), 18.02-1S (Walking), 18.02-2S
(Cycling), 18.02-4S (Roads), 19.02-6S (Open
space), 19.03-3S and Clause 19.03-3L
(Integrated water management)
Other planning strategies and policies
- Plan Melbourne
Direction 2, Policies 2.1, 2.5
- Plan Melbourne
Direction 4, Policies 4.1, 4.2
- East Gippsland
Housing and Settlement Strategy (2023)
Planning scheme provisions
Residential Zone
- Low Density
Residential Zone
- Rural Living
- Development
Plan Overlay
- Significant
Landscape Overlay
Planning scheme amendments
- East Gippsland
Amendments C159egip, C165egip, C169egip, C170egip and C172egip
Ministerial directions
- Ministerial
Direction 1 (Potentially Contaminated Land)
- Ministerial
Direction 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments)
- Ministerial
Direction 13 (Managing Coastal Hazards and the Coastal Impacts)
- Ministerial
Direction 15 (The Planning Scheme Amendment Process)
Planning practice notes
Practice Note 30: Potentially Contaminated Land
Practice Note 36: Implementing a Coastal Settlement Boundary
Practice Note 46: Strategic Assessment Guidelines
Practice Note 53: Managing coastal hazard and the coastal impacts of climate
Practice Note 91: Using the Residential Zones
2.2 Structure Plan and supporting reports
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Structure Plan and background reports are sufficiently
current and appropriate to justify the Amendment.
(ii) Background
The Structure Plan was informed by the:
Eagle Point
Structure Plan Vol 1 (the Structure Plan) (Mesh Planning, June 2018)
Eagle Point
Structure Plan Vol 2 (Background Report) (Mesh Planning, June 2018)
Eagle Point
Drainage Assessment (Water Technology, April 2017)
Planning Considerations (Euca Planning, December 2018)
Preliminary Site
Investigation (Ewers Environmental Consulting, December 2024).
Proponent commissioned the Waste Clearance Report (Ewers Environmental
Consulting, January 2025).
(iii) Submissions
Submissions:
The Structure
Plan and background documents are outdated because they were adopted more than
five years ago and they no longer reflect
the fabric of Eagle Point.
region’s growth rates and demand for housing have changed exponentially
since the Structure Plan was prepared.
The Structure
Plan should be updated to ensure it provides relevant guidance and still
suitable, particularly in response to climate
submission:
It is common to
have a time gap between structure plans and changes to the Planning Scheme due
to resource and budget constraints.
principles outlined in the Structure Plan still apply even though there have
been changes including population growth in
Eagle Point since 2019.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel acknowledges the Structure Plan Volume 1
was completed over six years ago and the Structure Plan Volume 2 over seven
ago. While a structure plan for an activity centre or township is
typically reviewed every five years to maintain relevance, there
have been no
significant changes in planning policy for Eagle Point or in climate change
conditions. Unlike an activity centre, Eagle
Point has experienced minimal
change, providing little justification for updating the Structure Plan or its
supporting studies.
Both submissions that raised this issue did not provide specific reasons why
these documents are outdated and not suitable to support
the Amendment. Age
alone is not an indicator of accuracy and relevance.
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes the
Structure Plan and background reports are appropriate to support the
2.3 Land supply, residential growth and housing
(i) The issue
issue is whether there is sufficient strategic justification to support the
proposed and requested land supply in Eagle Point.
(ii) Background
Planning Scheme Clause 11.02-1S includes a strategy
that seeks to:
Plan to accommodate projected population growth over at least a 15 year
period and provide clear direction on locations where growth
should occur.
Residential land supply will be considered on a municipal basis, rather than a
town-by-town basis.
The Municipal Planning Strategy identifies Eagle Point as:
one of East
Gippsland’s 13 coastal settlements
consolidated town distinct from Paynesville, characterised by low scale
development, and a landscape setting influenced by
the natural environment and
the lake foreshore.
The Structure Plan states that Eagle Point:
is a small town
of only 739 people living in about 377 dwellings (categorised as larger rural
style living, low density development
and standard housing lots)
historically low population and residential dwelling growth, and this trend is
expected to continue
has a higher
proportion of vacant homes indicating many are used for holiday homes
has a generally
older residential population, with a median age of 55 years and will continue to
reflect an older cohort
tends to have
young adults (20-35 years old) move away likely to pursue educational and
employment opportunities.
The Amendment proposes to revise Clause
02.03-1 to:
identify Eagle
Point for minor expansion rather than significant expansion
characterise
Eagle Point as a location with “
low scale development, and a landscape
setting influenced by the natural environment and the lake
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Council submission:
The Housing and
Settlement Strategy (2023):
residential growth to Bairnsdale, Paynesville and Lakes Entrance mainly due to
available services and infrastructure
- supports Eagle
Point as a minimal change area.
responsible to identify adequate supply of suitably zoned land in the
municipality and to provide clear direction to achieve
high quality development
outcomes, in line with
East Gippsland Shire Council – Council Plan
The Structure
Plan draws on detailed analysis of background information including land supply
and demand.
The Amendment
proposes to rezone a small portion of 25 Waterview Road within the proposed
settlement boundary to allow for an estimated
30 to 40 lots for future
residential land supply.
Submissions:
There is no
urgency to rezone farmland to the GRZ because the Structure Plan refers to
historical and future low growth rates, 20
per cent vacant housing stock rate,
and existing zoned land being able to accommodate future residential development
over the next
10 to 20 years.
The Australian
Bureau of Statistics states:
Point’s population has increased by 19.4 per cent since the Structure Plan
was adopted
- over the next
20-30 years, the East Gippsland Shire will experience low to modest population
growth, principally in Bairnsdale to
a lesser degree in Lakes Entrance, Bruthen
and Paynesville.
There is little
evidence to justify the proposed rezonings and it has not been demonstrated the
proposal has significant community
inadequate strategic justification to realign the settlement boundary to exclude
part of 25 Waterview Road.
Mr Quick’s expert evidence:
The Structure
Plan is not informed by evidence-based residential land supply and demand
assessment.
Point’s recent strong population and dwelling growth of 3.6 per cent each
year suggests a need to reassess residential
land provision.
Eagle Point has
- is below the
strategic planning requirement of ensuring a minimum of 15 years of
- represents a
highly constrained residential land supply capacity
- is a likely
significant supply shortfall.
potential supply gap of around 266 lots in the Structure Plan area, including
low density residential lots.
The potential
supply gap is equivalent to 45 hectares of additional total residential
73 per cent of
lots ranging from 2,000 to 4,000 square metres sold in the local region between
2016 and 2021 were in Eagle Point,
indicating its strong appeal as a lifestyle
residential location with diverse housing options.
assessment informing the Structure Plan’s population growth and dwelling
demand overstates supply.
sensitivity testing indicates lot supply may be as low as 12 years under
reasonable assumptions.
planning should consider opportunity for future residential land in appropriate
locations in Eagle Point to satisfy long
term demand.
Waterview Road present a strategic opportunity, and designating it for
additional residential capacity would help deliver
greater economic value and
broad community benefits for Eagle Point and the region.
closing submission:
adequate residential land supply in Eagle Point.
The proposed new
settlement boundary is not about growth or land supply so Council disagrees with
Mr Quick that additional land supply
is needed in Eagle Point.
State planning
policy seeks to measure 15 years of land supply on a municipal wide basis and
not on a township basis.
In line with
planning policy, land supply should be based on Council's adopted Housing and
Settlement Strategy which considers the
role and growth opportunities in nearby
growth settlements of Bairnsdale and Paynesville.
identification of land for future residential development as part of a
settlement boundary cannot be assessed on supply and demand
inappropriate for demand to automatically equate to growth and expansion.
The Structure
Plan and the Amendment need to consider all relevant policy matters associated
with the orderly planning of the area.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel has referred to existing planning policy
objectives and strategies and supporting reports when considering whether there
is sufficient strategic justification to support the proposed and requested
increase in land supply in Eagle Point.
State planning policy at Clause 11.02-1S seeks residential land supply to
accommodate population growth for a 15 year period at a
municipal level rather
than town-by-town. Eagle Point would not be required to provide more housing if
East Gippsland was unable
to achieve housing supply at a municipal level.
Rather, the Municipal Planning Strategy sets a settlement hierarchy that directs
most growth to Bairnsdale as the regional centre, and Paynesville and Lakes
Entrance as growth area towns. Eagle Point is designated
as a coastal
settlement where there will be less growth.
Existing environmental, settlement and coastal town planning policy
objectives support a more constrained settlement area rather than
to encourage
greater growth. They do not support increasing supply to meet existing or
future demand for land in Eagle Point. The
Structure Plan further articulates
and outlines these expectations for the township’s future, setting a clear
framework to
maintain its limited growth capacity, protect its character and
guide any change in a manner consistent with its environmental and
The Amendment provides sufficient strategic justification for the level of
land supply it enables in Eagle Point, but there is inadequate
justification to
increase supply beyond what is proposed.
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes
there is sufficient strategic justification to support the proposed land supply
in Eagle Point.
2.4 Strategic justification
(i) Evidence and submissions
submission – the Amendment:
has adequate
strategic justification, and is consistent with the aims and objectives of the
Planning Policy Framework and Municipal
Planning Strategy in the Planning
provides an
opportunity for housing in East Gippsland in a well-serviced location where
constraints can be adequately
No submission requested the
Amendment be abandoned due to insufficient strategic justification.
Mr Woodland’s evidence regarding the
strategic planning work for Eagle Point:
The Structure
Plan has not had proper regard to the existing settlement boundary or the
existing policy on the future role of Eagle
Point contained in the Planning
The proposed new
East Gippsland settlement policy (described in Amendment C169egip) appears to be
following the Structure Plan rather
than shaping the longer-term planning
outcomes for Eagle Point.
The Structure
Plan has not adequately analysed whether any part of 25 Waterview Road can be
developed having regard to matters such
as township breaks, significant views
and landscapes, open space and
Council disagreed with Mr
(ii) Discussion
The Amendment relies on sound strategic work to
support its justification. The Panel has concluded the Structure Plan and
reports form a suitable strategic basis for the Amendment.
The Structure Plan clearly explains:
context for Eagle Point as a small village and the need for a break between its
settlement area with Paynesville
how it has had
regard to the proposed settlement boundary throughout the document including
Section 3 (Township boundary).
The Structure Plan looks forward, and
it recommends a revised settlement boundary and local policy regarding Eagle
Point’s future
direction based on strategic work and community
consultation since 2013. The Structure Plan would have benefitted from some
explanation
why the existing settlement boundary is inappropriate. However,
this does not diminish support for the proposed settlement boundary
realignment
which reduces Eagle Point’s settlement area to:
intended local policy direction
achieve State
planning objectives.
discusses reasons why the settlement
boundary needs to be realigned to achieve environmental policy objectives
related to the Gippsland
The Panel has considered the Amendment against the principles of net
community benefit and sustainable development, as set out in
Clause 71.02-3
(Integrated decision making) of the Planning Scheme. It could not identify any
notable conflicting policy objectives.
There was no evidence the East Gippsland
Shire has not planned for at least 15 years of residential land supply at the
level. Therefore, housing related policy objectives are not competing
with planning policies seeking coastal settlement breaks and
significant
landscape protection.
The Structure Plan includes a second volume with a policy context section
where it had regard to existing policy. Having regard to
policy does not mean
the Structure Plan needs to align with existing policy objectives. The
structure planning process found the
degree of growth envisioned in local policy
is inappropriate for Eagle Point. Accordingly, the Amendment proposes to revise
to reduce the extent of future growth. It is not uncommon for a
structure planning process to result in a planning scheme amendment
such changes.
(iii) Conclusions and recommendation
For the reasons set out
in this report, the Panel concludes that the Amendment:
supported by, and implements, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy
consistent with the relevant Ministerial Directions and Practice Notes
well founded and strategically justified
proceed subject to addressing the more specific issues raised in submissions as
discussed in this report.
The Panel recommends:
East Gippsland Planning Scheme Amendment C171egip as exhibited with the changes
recommended in this report.
3 Settlement boundary
3.1 The issue
issue is whether the proposed settlement boundary is appropriate and justified,
when considering:
if a separation
can be effectively achieved between Eagle Point and Paynesville
whether the
identified part of 25 Waterview Road should form part of the separation and be
recognised as a significant landscape
whether the
McTaggarts Road area and Mathiesons Road area should be included.
3.2 Settlement separation
(i) Background
Structure Plan states:
Eagle Point will be defined by enduring township boundary that is informed by
the natural environment, landscape setting and its built
form composition and
character. Implementation of a township boundary will protect Eagle
Point’s highly valued small village
character and will assist to guide
land use and change outcomes within the township. The presence of a township
boundary reinforces
Eagle Point’s role in the broader network of towns and
importantly provides clear separation to Paynesville acknowledging it
distinctly different in terms of a limited capacity for growth and change.
The proposed separation is shown in
of this report.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Council submission on justifying a settlement
separation:
Eagle Point and
Paynesville are two distinct coastal towns which offer different settlement
opportunities and each have their own
distinct character.
The Amendment
seeks to define the settlement boundary of Eagle Point and provide separation
between Eagle Point and Paynesville, consistent
with Planning Practice Note 36
(Implementing a costal settlement boundary).
There are a
range of existing policies within the East Gippsland Planning Scheme and State
planning documents which justify the separation
between coastal towns and these
are discussed below.
The Victorian
Coastal Strategy Implementation Plan 2014 states:
Defining the
extent of growth of a coastal settlement is undertaken by defining a settlement
boundary in a strategic plan. Introducing
or reviewing a coastal settlement
boundary for expansion.
development on ridgelines, primary coastal dune systems and low-lying coastal
non-urban breaks between all coastal settlements must be maintained to support
community identity and inspire a sense of
Avoid linear
urban sprawl along the coastal edge and within rural landscapes, protect areas
between settlements for non-urban use.
Non-urban use
and development between coastal settlements is retained and visually significant
landscapes and views are protected.
The Eagle Point
Urban Design Framework (Coastal Towns Design Framework 2007) is implemented in
the Planning Scheme and identifies:
Eagle Point as small,
consolidated town distinct from Paynesville, with a permanent resident
settlement and a holiday recreation destination.
The Planning
Scheme has policies which support a settlement boundary between Eagle Point and
Paynesville:
Clause 11.03-4S
Coastal Settlement - Identify a clear settlement boundary around coastal
settlements to ensure that growth in coastal
areas is planned and coastal values
are protected. Where no settlement boundary is identified, the extent of a
settlement is defined
by the extent of existing urban zoned land and any land
identified on a plan in the planning scheme for future urban settlement.
Clause 11.01-1R
Settlement Gippsland – Support the continuing role of towns and small
settlements in providing services to their
districts, recognising their
relationships and dependencies with larger towns.
11.01-1L-01 East Gippsland Settlements - preserve intervening areas of rural or
natural landscapes to protect the separation
settlements.
Mr Woodland’s expert evidence:
approach to planning for growth in settlements in Victoria starts with
strategically designating preferred locations for
growth, and then:
- identify a
long-term settlement boundary for the relevant settlement
- identify any
known opportunities or constraints on the development of land within that
boundary that need to be addressed in the
more detailed planning of land within
the settlement boundary
- prepare a
detailed structure plan for the land identified for growth within the settlement
- implement the
structure plan through planning scheme amendments, including land rezonings
planning permits for use and development that accords with the structure plan
and associated statutory controls.
State policy on
coastal settlements requires clear settlement boundaries to be identified around
coastal settlements to plan growth
and to protect coastal values.
Towns Design Framework 2007
identified Eagle Point as a town with potential
for significant expansion, and was the basis for including all of 25 Waterview
within the current settlement boundary (Clause 11.03-4L-12).
Any decision to
substantially reduce a settlement boundary should be informed by wider policy
considerations and solid evidence that
the current settlement boundary is
inappropriate.
The Structure
Plan has not had proper regard to the existing settlement boundary or the
existing Planning Scheme policy on the future
role of Eagle
Mr Shutt’s expert evidence:
The aspiration
to achieve a separation between Eagle Point and Paynesville cannot be
Any existing
perceived separation between Eagle Point and Paynesville is significantly
fragmented by:
- the less than
700-metre separation between them (measured from existing residential-zoned and
developed land in the two towns)
- the extent of
development already visible in most viewsheds when travelling between the
East Gippsland
Amendment C172egip will exacerbate the existing fragmentation and reduce the
separation to 200 metres by rezoning land
on the western side of Paynesville for
residential expansion.
Mr Shutt’s evidence included
photographs showing views from different vantage points such as the view looking
northeast across
25 Waterview Road from Paynesville Road, opposite the
Bairnsdale Golf Club shown in
View looking northeast across 25 Waterview Road from
Paynesville Road, opposite the Bairnsdale Golf Club
Source: Mr Shutt evidence, Figure 18
At the Hearing, Mr Shutt opined:
settlement break is needed like the 6-kilometre town breaks in the Surf Coast
distinctive landscape area.
between Eagle Point and Paynesville is comparable to Torquay and Jan Juc where
it is largely obliterated.
Council closing submission:
There is an
ability to have a settlement separation between Eagle Point and
Paynesville.
adequate strategic justification to realign the settlement boundary, and it
referred to planning policies that support the
Any perceived
separation between Eagle Point and Paynesville is not fragmented, lost or
diminished.
The photographs
in Mr Shutt’s evidence clearly articulate the openness of the rural vista
and views to and from Eagle Bay.
Not applying a
settlement boundary would undermine 20 years of planning policy that has
consistently supported maintaining a distinct
separation between Eagle Point and
Paynesville.
(iii) Discussion
There are previous and current broader and local
planning policies that support a separation between settlements, particularly in
coastal areas. This includes the Marine and Coastal Policy 2022 which
superseded the Victorian Coastal Strategy Implementation Plan
2014. There were
different perspectives on whether a town separation is possible based on
existing circumstances, and the scale
and nature of the town break needed to
provide an appropriate separation.
Currently, there is undeveloped land north of Paynesville Road between
McTaggarts Road (Eagle Point) and Palm Avenue (Paynesville).
This represents
almost 3 kilometres of green space between both points, with an opportunity for
a settlement break.
Some of the most prominent views of Eagle Point Bay appear while driving
along Paynesville Road towards Paynesville near the north-west
corner of the
Bairnsdale Golf Club. This is a relatively elevated area providing commanding
views towards the lake. The trees form
part of the natural landscape, and they
filter views of Eagle Bay, but not to the point where the view cannot longer be
appreciated.
This will not be interrupted by the portion of 25 Waterview Road
proposed to be rezoned to GRZ2. Existing development along the
somewhat reduces the quality of the separation, but in its diminished form, not
to the point where it cannot achieve the
Currently, the naturally observed settlement break includes undeveloped land
between the existing urbanised areas in Eagle Point and
Paynesville. This
separation will be reduced if the Paynesville settlement area expands westerly
to Grandview Road, as proposed
in the Paynesville Structure Plan. The question
is whether the reduced settlement separation will effectively function and be
as a separation break or whether it will appear like yet-to-be
developed land within a single town.
The Panel agrees with Mr Shutt that there may be instances where a sizeable
settlement break is needed to appreciate two distinct
urban areas. However,
there is no one-size-fits-all formula for settlement separation distances or
form. Regarding distance, an
urban area the size of a regional city such as
Bairnsdale would likely need a greater separation for its closest town compared
two relatively small coastal towns. Regarding form, the distinction between
two settlement areas relies on how the areas within
each settlement boundary and
the area between them (outside the settlement boundary) are visually
When considering the Paynesville Structure Plan (sought to be implemented
through Amendment C172egip) and the Eagle Point Structure
Plan together:
Eagle Point will
continue to present a rural village character through its smaller footprint,
lower density and considerable vegetation
along Paynesville Road and within its
local streets
Paynesville will
present as a more urbanised town with a larger footprint.
Point / Paynesville context is different from Torquay and Jan Juc which present
as one settlement area with a more consistent
suburban form.
Assuming that Amendment C172egip is implemented, the Panel is satisfied
ultimate form, and with the town separation proposed through the Structure Plan,
Eagle Point and Paynesville can be distinguished
as two separate towns
the proposed
planning provisions provide an appropriate urban design response along each
town’s interface.
3.3 25 Waterview Road
(i) Background
Structure Plan identifies 25 Waterview Road as ‘Separation of
Towns’, as shown in
The land is generally bound by Paynesville Road, Waterview Road and the proposed
Township Boundary shown by the red dashed line.
25 Waterview Road, as shown in the Structure Plan
Source: Structure Plan, Figure 5 extract
The Amendment proposes to apply Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule 2
(SLO2) to part of 25 Waterview Road, as shown in
Proposed Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule 2
Source: Exhibited Amendment
SLO2 specifies 12 character objectives to be achieved including:
locally significant views and vistas that contribute to the character of the
landscape, including scenic lookouts and recreation
locations with views over
the Gippsland Lakes.
To manage the
impact of new development on the sense of space and openness in the rural
To protect the
largely natural and unbuilt views of Lakes King and Victoria from the
lakes’ edges.
The Amendment’s Explanatory Report
Application of the Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule 2 will protect
views to and from Eagle Point Bay.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Council submission:
25 Waterview
Road provides the natural separation both geographically and visually, between
Eagle Point and Paynesville.
While some of
the land is high and enjoys views to the lake, parts of the land are quite low
lying and will be subject to coastal
storm surge inundation.
The land should
provide that separation between the coastal towns and remaining Farming
The SLO is used
to protect and manage significant landscapes.
The SLO is not
appropriate for land designated for urban development so:
- it is good
practice to remove it to ensure the efficient administration of the Planning
- the Amendment
proposes to delete the SLO from the land being rezoned to GRZ3.
The existing
SLO2 should remain on 25 Waterview Road.
The area of SLO2
proposed by the Amendment should no longer be applied to 25 Waterview Road
because it is outside the 500-metre curtilage.
Submissions:
25 Waterview
Road should be considered for future development.
planning including the Eagle Point Urban Design Framework has historically
envisaged some form of development on the land.
The Eagle Point
Urban Design Framework envisages a physical break between Eagle Point and
Paynesville which can be incorporated into
future development on 25 Waterview
Council has not
sufficiently explained or justified the basis for changes introduced through
East Gippsland Amendment C162 which deleted:
Investigate the
potential of land north of the Bairnsdale-Paynesville Road between Eagle Point
and Paynesville for future residential
uses with the requirement that it must be
developed in a manner that maintains the physical east-west separation of the
two settlements
and provides extensive open space areas.
proposed to extend the existing SLO area should not proceed.
Woodland’s expert evidence:
The Structure
Plan does not adequately analyse whether any part of 25 Waterview Road can be
developed having regard to matters such
as township breaks, significant views
and landscapes, open space, drainage.
unnecessary for all of 25 Waterview Road to be kept free or urban development to
achieve policies that seek urban breaks.
25 Waterview
Road should be considered for future housing if there is evidence the Structure
Plan cannot meet local housing needs
over the next 15 years.
The existing
township boundary includes all of 25 Waterview Road and indicates it is
appropriate for future residential growth.
The rationale
for applying SLO2 about 500 metres from the shoreline of Lake King and Lake
Victoria is not explained.
SLO2 should be
applied to land which “
exhibits the valued landscape attributes which
the control is theoretically seeking to ensure the protection
Valued landscape
attributes include:
vegetation patterns in rural areas
significant views and vistas that contribute to the landscape character
natural and unbuilt views of Lakes King and Victoria from the lakes’
25 Waterview
Road and the surrounding landscape do not have the valued landscape attributes
so it is inappropriate and unnecessary
to apply SLO2.
Hearing, Mr Schutt stated there is an elevated section along Paynesville Road
with views across 25 Waterview Road to Lake King,
though they are through
vegetation and over house roofs.
The Structure Plan (Final version) deleted Action A2 to “
Significant Landscape Overlay to the landholdings as shown in Figure
” and revised Figure 6 accordingly.
Council closing submission:
Any change to
the Structure Plan and the Amendment to enable development of all land at 25
Waterview Road is fundamentally opposed.
Identifying 25
Waterview Road for residential development:
- contradicts
State planning policy regarding non-urban breaks set out in Plan for Victoria,
Gippsland Regional Growth Plan, Marine
and Coastal Policy, Planning Practice
Note 36 and the Planning Policy Framework
- contradicts
community aspirations for the future of Eagle Point as a
township that is characterised by low scale development, and a landscape setting
influenced by the natural environment
foreshore.”
Developing 25
Waterview Road would have a significant detrimental impact on the established
landscape values identified in SLO2.
(iii) Discussion
The Panel has found the Structure Plan is not
required to accommodate 15 years of housing supply in Eagle Point. This should
be achieved
at a municipal level. Therefore, 25 Waterview Road is not needed to
achieve further land supply. The Panel has also found that
a town separation
should be maintained between Eagle Point and Paynesville, and an opportunity
remains to implement it.
The Panel considered all perspectives presented at the Hearing to see whether
there is an opportunity for a portion of 25 Waterview
Road to be developed while
continuing to achieve the outcomes sought by the Structure Plan, including a
settlement separation. This
includes Mr Shutt’s acknowledgement that
there is an elevated section along Paynesville Road with views across 25
Road to Lake King through vegetation and over house roofs.
The Panel agrees the views towards the lake are somewhat affected by existing
housing roofs. However, the roofs are significantly
diminished when viewed from
Paynesville Road through distance and their lower elevation. They do not
compromise the view enough
to no longer warrant the landscape as significant.
The vegetation forms part of the natural landscape and enables sufficient views
of the lake to appreciate the landscape.
The portion of 25 Waterview Road proposed to be excluded from settlement
boundary is therefore required for two purposes – to
protect a significant
landscape comprising views and to act as a settlement break between Eagle Point
and Paynesville. The opportunity
for such a break will not exist in Paynesville
if land west of its existing settlement area is rezoned for future residential
This increases the importance of retaining 25 Waterview Road as
rural land.
The Panel is not persuaded there is an opportunity to develop part of 25
Waterview Road while being able to achieve the vision of
the Structure Plan.
Such an approach is likely to result in:
the inability to
distinguish Eagle Point from Paynesville, even with well-designed
interrupted by more prominent urban development in the
foreground.
SLO2 should apply to the part of 25 Waterview Road
remaining in the Farming Zone to achieve the SLO2 design objectives relating to
views to Eagle Point Bay and rural openness between the two townships. This
retaining the
existing SLO2
extending SLO2
to the southern portion of the property, as proposed by the
Not applying SLO2 to this more prominent and elevated
part of 25 Waterview Road:
may result in
not achieving SLO2 design objectives such as views to Eagle Point Bay from the
public realm – Paynesville Road
would infer this
part of the land is not significant enough to consider how future built form
such as rural storage will impact views
from Paynesville Road to Eagle
While the Panel could not find reasons why SLO2 was applied
compromise the ability to achieve its objectives.
3.4 McTaggarts Road area
(i) Submissions
Submissions:
The McTaggarts
- is around a
1.6-kilometre road, comprising rural residential lots of 5 to 14 hectares
potential to increase residential density while retaining rural
It is considered
likely the area can accommodate more development without detrimentally impacting
the environmental qualities subject
to expert investigations.
The Housing and
Settlement Strategy supports and encourages the suggested strategic changes to
The Structure
Plan should encourage rural residential style development.
submission:
The McTaggarts
- is south of
the Eagle Point township and is zoned Rural Living Zone
- has not been
included because it is not appropriate to include rural zones within the
settlement boundary.
currently reviewing Rural Living Zone schedules in the municipality through a
separate project, as recommended by the Housing
and Settlement Strategy.
The Amendment is
not the appropriate vehicle for reviewing the Rural Living Zone schedules for
the McTaggarts Road area.
(ii) Discussion
The Panel agrees with Council’s submission
regarding the McTaggarts Road area, particularly because it is inappropriate to
rural zones within the settlement boundary. It is acknowledged that
Council is reviewing such zones through a separate process.
The Amendment is not the appropriate process for rezoning this land
landowners were not given an opportunity to respond to such a proposal
it is beyond the
scope of the Amendment.
3.5 Mathiesons Road area
(i) Submissions
the Hearing, the Panel asked Council whether its submission to exclude rural
zones from within the settlement boundary (as relating
to McTaggarts Road) also
applied to the Mathiesons Road area which was proposed to be rezoned to Rural
Living Zone.
Council closing submission:
The Mathiesons
Road area should be excluded from the settlement boundary if it is rezoned to
the Rural Living Zone.
The Structure
Plan and Framework Plan should be revised to reflect this change.
(ii) Discussion
The Victoria Planning Provisions identify the Rural
Living Zone as a rural zone. The Panel agrees with Council that it is
inappropriate
to include a rural zone within a settlement area. Accordingly,
the settlement boundary should be realigned to exclude the Mathiesons
This should be reflected in the Structure Plan and Clause 11.03-4L-12 Eagle
Point Framework Plan.
3.6 Conclusions and recommendation
Panel concludes:
proposed settlement boundary:
- is generally
appropriate and strategically justified when having regard to the proposed
settlement separation between Eagle Point
and Paynesville which excludes part of
25 Waterview Road
- should exclude
the Rural Living Zone land – the McTaggarts Road area (land south of the
Eagle Point settlement boundary in
the existing Rural Living Zone) and the
Mathiesons Road area (proposed to be rezoned to Rural Living
is appropriate and justified to apply Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule 2
to the part of 25 Waterview Road proposed by the
Procedurally,
the McTaggarts Road area should not be rezoned through the Amendment
landowners were not given an opportunity to respond to such a proposal
- it is beyond
the scope of the Amendment.
the Eagle Point Structure Plan (2019) as a background document through the
Clause 72.08 Schedule only after the settlement
boundary has been realigned to
exclude all land proposed to be rezoned to the Rural Living
4 Zone provisions and application
4.1 Low Density Residential Zone Schedule 2
(i) The issue
issue is whether it is appropriate and strategically justified to apply the
proposed LDRZ2 to land in Eagle Point.
(ii) Background
The Amendment proposes to apply LDRZ2 to:
the existing
LDRZ area south of Forge Creek Road and 30 Forge Creek Road which is currently
zoned GRZ, as shown in
minimum subdivision area of:
- 2,000 square
metres for 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 Morecroft Rise; 1007A, 1007B and 1005 Paynesville
Road and 76 Eagle Point Road
- 4,000 square
metres for all other
Proposed Low Density Residential Zone area
Source: Exhibited Amendment
(iii) Submissions
Council submission:
The Structure
Plan recommends that all LDRZ land in Eagle Point apply Schedule 2 to limit the
minimum lot size to 4,000 square metres
based on existing and preferred
neighbourhood character.
The Amendment
was prepared and exhibited based on this approach being considered appropriate
at the time.
Submissions:
The Amendment
proposes to homogenously classify all land in the LDRZ without understanding the
environmental or character values of
individual areas.
The proposed
minimum lot size of 4,000 square metres:
- is unfair and
not strategically justified
- contradicts
the Explanatory Report statement “
to enable Council to appropriately
respond to increasing demand for residential development in Eagle
- will reduce
existing residential land supply, and is unsupported by any environmental or
character analysis
- does not align
with the Housing and Settlement Strategy which expects future growth in Eagle
Point to be accommodated in existing
residentially zoned areas through infill
development
- contradicts
the preference to avoid further rezoning without objective and strategic
justification that demand for housing cannot
otherwise be accommodated in
existing residential areas.
Practice Note 91 (Using the residential zones) recognises the ability to create
lots to a minimum of 2,000 square metres
in the LDRZ where land is serviced by
reticulated sewer, and there is no justification to depart from this.
Residential land
including the LDRZ is finite, and State policy expects the best use of fully
serviced and zoned land.
LDRZ2 nominates
11 properties where subdivision may occur to a minimum lot size of 2,000 square
metres, which in many instances reflects
previous subdivision approvals –
eight of these properties are already below 4,000 square metres.
There is no
analysis to justify why:
- the remaining
three of the 11 nominated properties which retain subdivision potential are
considered appropriate for subdivision
to 2,000 square metres
- many other
LDRZ properties that have been subdivided with lots less than 4,000 square
metres, are not included in LDRZ2 Clause 1.0.
The Explanatory
Report suggests the increased minimum lot size has been applied to
“residential land in sensitive environmental locations that is
commensurate the environmental quality and capacity of the land”
- there is no
evidence of such consideration
- there are no
existing or proposed environment and landscape overlays beyond those on the road
environmental constraints have been identified in the proposed LDRZ2
The proposed
increased minimum lot size will make larger LDRZ parcels with subdivision
potential unviable, reduce any presumed housing
gains in Eagle Point, and affect
housing availability and affordability.
The LDRZ2 should
rely on the default minimum subdivision lot sizes and consider each permit
application on their own merit.
Council submission in response:
Council formally
resolved after exhibition to retain the current LDRZ schedule and allow the
state provision of a minimum lot size
of 2,000 square metres where sewer is
available and 4,000 square metres where it is not.
The proposed
LDRZ2 was considered unnecessary many subdivisions have created lots below 4,000
square metres over the past six years.
applying the LDRZ2 may result in a reduction of about 40
Council’s resolved changes appeared in LDRZ2 (Version
(iv) Discussion
The Panel acknowledges the Structure Plan refers to
specifying minimum lot sizes in the LDRZ schedule for certain land in Eagle
This is reflected in the Plan’s Table 3 for Area F (as identified
in Figure 19).
The Panel acknowledges the Structure Plan refers to specifying minimum lot
sizes in the LDRZ schedule in Table 3 for Area F identified
in Figure 19. It
explains this approach is sought to “
reflect rural living
” but it does not explain why the default LDRZ minimum lot
sizes cannot achieve the same outcome.
The Panel agrees with Council’s post-exhibition proposal (Amendment
Final version) to no longer apply the exhibited LDRZ2.
No longer applying the
more restrictive minimum subdivision lot area specified in LDRZ2 would:
result in no
change to existing LDRZ land which can currently apply to subdivide land to
2,000 square metres if the lot is connected
to reticulated sewerage
recognise that a
proportion of properties have already been subdivided below 4,000 square
not mean that
all properties can achieve the specified minimum lot area, as this will be
subject to an assessment of each permit application
based on their own
(v) Conclusions and recommendation
The Panel concludes:
proposed Low Density Residential Zone Schedule 2 should not apply to land in
Eagle Point.
existing Low Density Residential Zone Schedule 1 should remain.
Panel recommends:
the existing Low Density Residential Zone Schedule 1 in Eagle Point rather than
applying the proposed Schedule 2.
4.2 General Residential Zone Schedule 2
(i) The issue
issue is whether it is appropriate and strategically justified to apply the
proposed GRZ2.
(ii) Background
The Amendment proposes to apply GRZ2 to land
identified in
Proposed General Residential Zone 2 area
Source: Exhibited Amendment
(iii) Submissions
Council submission:
The Amendment
proposes to apply a new GRZ2 to all land currently zoned GRZ within the
settlement boundary.
GRZ2 seeks to
apply objectives specific to Eagle Point.
The General
Residential Zone Schedule can only specify a maximum building height greater
than 11 metres.
GRZ2 does not
make any changes to the Clauses 54 and 55 standards because a neighbourhood
character assessment has not been undertaken
to justify such changes.
The Victorian
Government’s recent changes indicate the standards in the GRZ (and other
residential zones) will no longer be
able to depart from the state standards of
Clauses 54 and 55.
In closing,
agreed with submissions to remove reference to ‘Incremental Change
Area’ in the GRZ2 title.
Submission – GRZ2 should:
requirements relating to site layout and building massing (Clauses 54.03 and
55.03); amenity impacts (Clauses 54.04 and 55.04);
and on-site amenity and
facilities (Clauses 54.05 and 55.05)
maximum building height (as enabled by GRZ Clause 32.08-11), otherwise the
maximum building height of 11 metres (3 storeys)
specified in GRZ will
revise two of
the neighbourhood character objectives which are broad and subjective
include decision
guidelines to assist decision makers
add details to
Clauses 2.0, 3.0 and 4.0 if the proposed changes to local policy at Clause
11.03-4L-12 are not made clearer with better
reference to ‘Incremental Change Area’ in the zone description due
to unnecessary confusion of terms.
In its closing submission,
Council agreed with submissions to remove reference to ‘Incremental Change
Area’ in the GRZ2
(iv) Discussion
The Panel agrees with Council regarding the GRZ2
provisions.
Council is commended for expressing what GRZ2 seeks to achieve in two
succinct objectives rather than five overly complicated and
verbose objectives.
The proposed two GRZ2 objectives will be read with the four objectives in the
parent GRZ. Similarly, permit
application triggered by GRZ2 have to consider
decision guidelines in the parent GRZ and in Clause 65 (Decision guidelines).
was no demonstrated need for objectives and decision guidelines beyond
this scope.
The submission criticised GRZ2 for not taking the opportunity to specify a
maximum building height. It did not explain why this was
needed and did not
suggest a specific building height metric. Council has correctly identified
that a GRZ schedule cannot specify
a building height less than the default GRZ
height. Ministerial Direction 7(5) states:
The schedule must not specify a height and number of storeys lower than the
height and number of storeys specified in the zone.
Nonetheless, there was no request to include a specific maximum building
height in GRZ2.
The submission also criticised GRZ2 for not taking the opportunity to vary
Clause 54 and 55 standards through GRZ2. It did not explain
why this is needed
and did not request any change. Of note, a permit applicant can apply to vary
the default Clause 54 and 55 standards
because they are not mandatory
provisions. The Panel does not support any variation to these standards without
the necessary neighbourhood
character assessment to justify such a change.
GRZ2 (Final version) deleted ‘Incremental change area’ from the
(v) Conclusions and recommendation
The Panel concludes:
is appropriate and strategically justified to apply the proposed General
Residential Zone Schedule 2.
Residential Zone Schedule 2 should be revised to delete ‘Incremental
change area’ from the title.
The Panel recommends:
General Residential Zone Schedule 2 to delete ‘Incremental change
area’ from the title.
4.3 30 Forge Creek Road
(i) The issue
issue is whether it is strategically justified and appropriate to rezone 30
Forge Creek Road from General Residential Zone to
Low Density Residential
(ii) Background
The Amendment proposes to rezone 30 Forge Creek Road
as shown in
The Eagle Point Structure Plan:
identifies 30
Forge Creek Road as a strategic development site
rezoning the site to LDRZ in recognition of its topographic constraints,
landscape setting and limited development potential
under the existing GRZ
notes the need
to manage drainage, protect the site’s environmental features, and ensure
that any future development responds
sensitively to the semi-rural character of
Proposed rezoning of 30 Forge Creek Road
Source: Exhibited Amendment
(iii) Submissions
Submissions:
30 Forge Creek
Road should remain as GRZ rather than be rezoned to LDRZ.
The land is
suitable for standard residential development due to:
- proximity to
services like the school, foreshore and main roads
- access to
reticulated sewer, water, power and stormwater infrastructure
Rezoning to LDRZ
undermines housing affordability and reduces development potential.
The Structure
Plan should not identify a drainage reserve through the property or pedestrian
paths across private land.
Council’s submission:
The Structure
Plan and the Amendment propose to rezone 30 Forge Creek Road from GRZ to
The site is
considered highly constrained due to:
running through the property which serves as a natural drainage line
- the presence
of significant native vegetation.
Given these
constraints, the site is not suitable for conventional residential densities
associated with GRZ.
LDRZ is more
appropriate because it enables larger lot sizes and site-responsive
development.
drainage and perceived public access:
- Council’s
Assets and Engineering Department is working with the landowners to manage
stormwater that is flowing into the gully
- the Amendment
does not propose public access or walking tracks on private land
- the Structure
Plan includes a conceptual layout for future development, which identifies
opportunities for improved township connectivity
features would only be considered through a future planning permit
(iv) Discussion
Having regard to its physical characteristics, the
Panel accepts that 30 Forge Creek Road is subject to notable environmental
constraints,
including a defined gully and drainage line that bisects the
property, and the presence of significant native vegetation. These
constraints
materially limit the site’s capacity to accommodate residential
development at conventional densities typically
associated with the GRZ. In
this context, the Panel is satisfied that the LDRZ represents a more appropriate
zone to enable a site-responsive
planning outcome that respects the
environmental values of the land while still supporting residential use.
The Panel acknowledges that 30 Forge Creek Road is well located near services
and infrastructure. However, not all well-located land
needs to be developed to
its maximum theoretical capacity. In this instance, the environmental features
of the site provide a compelling
reason to adopt a more tailored planning
response that balances development potential with land capability.
Regarding the depiction of a drainage reserve and pedestrian links, the Panel
accepts Council’s clarification that the Structure
Plan provides a
high-level conceptual framework, and does not create any entitlements or
obligations for access or public infrastructure.
Such a proposal would involve
the landowner through a planning permit process. The Panel is satisfied that
future drainage or access
considerations would be properly addressed through the
permit application process in consultation with the landowner.
On balance, the Panel supports the rezoning of 30 Forge Creek Road to LDRZ as
proposed by the Amendment. The proposed zoning provides
an appropriate
framework to manage the identified site constraints and enable sensitive,
sustainable development in accordance with
the objectives of the Structure
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes that
it is strategically justified and appropriate to rezone 30 Forge Creek Road to
Low Density Residential Zone.
4.4 Mathiesons Road area
(i) The issue
issue is whether it is strategically justified and appropriate to rezone land in
the Mathiesons Road area to from LDRZ to Rural
Living Zone Schedule 1.
(ii) Background
The Amendment proposes to rezone land in the
Mathiesons Road area from LDRZ to Rural Living Zone Schedule 1 (RLZ1), as shown
, with a minimum subdivision
area of 2 hectares.
The Structure Plan strategically justifies the rezoning by identifying the
area as a ‘no change’ precinct due to its:
presence of
natural drainage features
character and vegetated landscape
role as part of
a key entrance corridor into Eagle
Proposed rezoning of Mathiesons Road area
Source: Exhibited Amendment
As referred to in Council’s submission, East Gippsland Amendment
amended Clause
52.02 of the Planning Scheme to vary restrictive covenants affecting properties
along Mathiesons Road and Forge Creek
broadly sought
to resolve the inconsistency between the covenants and the Planning Scheme to
make the historical pattern of subdivision
and development consistent between
the two instruments
was considered
by a Planning Panel and approved by the Minister for Planning on 19 April
(iii) Submissions
Submissions:
The land should
not be rezoned from LDRZ to RLZ1
The rezoning
will reduce development rights.
Council submission – Rezoning
land in the Mathiesons Road area from LDRZ to RLZ1:
will restrict
the minimum subdivision area to 2 hectares
is consistent
with the overarching allotment pattern, the existing character and the original
intent of the restrictive covenant that
applies to the land within this
reflects the
area’s undulating landform, natural features and rural character,
supporting the continuation of existing development
and rural lifestyle
is strategically
justified by the Structure Plan based on the above
is based on
advice from lawyers who recommended the zoning of this area be reviewed after
the conclusion of East Gippsland Amendment
(iv) Discussion
The LDRZ has applied to the Mathiesons Road area
since at least 1999 when the new format Planning Scheme was introduced. About
years later, the area has a strong rural residential character with large
allotments, and an undulating landform with notable natural
features. The area
does not resemble an urban residential area normally found in the LDRZ or a
However, planning is about selecting the appropriate zone to reflect
aspirations for the future. It was unclear what these aspirations
were because
the Structure Plan showed the Mathiesons Road area within the Eagle Point
settlement boundary while the Amendment proposed
to rezone it to the Rural
Living Zone (a rural zone). As discussed earlier in this report, later in the
Hearing, Council proposed
to realign the settlement boundary to exclude the
Mathiesons Road area. Having considered this proposed realignment with the
for rezoning the land set out in the Structure Plan, the Panel agrees it
is appropriate to rezone the area to RLZ1. The RLZ1 provisions
better manage
the area’s preferred rural character and existing physical
constraints
fragmented or uncoordinated development at its edges
reinforce the
character of Eagle Point’s southern entry
limit further
subdivision to align with the sought objectives.
The Panel disagrees
with Council about the RLZ1 needing to be consistent with the original intent of
the restrictive covenant. Strategic
planning should reflect the broader
community’s aspirations for the future rather than respond to existing
restrictive covenants
which are often applied for commercial reasons. Applying
a zone that reflects these aspirations will form a basis for applying to
remove covenants that no longer reflect the values or aspirations of a modern
community. Nonetheless, the strategic reasons
for applying RLZ1 to the
Mathiesons Road area appear to align with existing restrictive covenants.
On balance, the Panel finds that the rezoning of the Mathiesons Road precinct
to RLZ1, with a 2-hectare minimum lot size, is a logical,
strategically
supported outcome that aligns with both local and broader planning policy
objectives. The Panel supports the proposed
change as exhibited.
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes that
it is strategically justified and appropriate to rezone the Mathiesons Road
precinct to Rural Living Zone
Schedule 1.
5 Other issues
5.1 Climate change, coastal hazard assessments and sea level
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Structure Plan and the Amendment appropriately respond to
risks associated with coastal inundation, flooding
and climate change.
(ii) Submissions
Submissions – the Structure Plan:
is not informed
by a contemporary coastal hazard risk assessment
adequately account for the effects of coastal processes (including wind, waves,
flooding, storm surge, tides, and erosion)
on foreshore areas
sufficiently address future risks to people and assets arising from coastal
hazards and climate change.
East Gippsland Catchment Management
Authority (EGCMA) submission:
The Structure
adequately address input from the EGCMA
- should be
incorporate projected sea level rise of 0.8 metres by the year 2100, consistent
with mapping previously provided to Council
integrate the updated inundation mapping and recommended strengthening of
watercourse protection measures.
These omissions
represent a failure to fully respond to climate risk and natural hazard
considerations in accordance with current
expectations.
Council submission:
The Structure
Plan and the Amendment do not explicitly address flood or coastal inundation,
and this as a minor limitation of the
Although flood
and inundation are relevant considerations at Eagle Point, the Structure Plan
and Amendment:
- do not promote
substantial growth
- recognise
existing constraints and support only incremental development within the defined
settlement boundary.
In response to
submissions, including that of the EGCMA, Council amended Clause 74.02 to
include future actions to update flood mapping
and to consider the impacts of
climate change in ongoing strategic planning.
Council has
started a separate Planning Scheme Amendment to revise flood mapping and
strengthen flood-related planning controls across
the municipality, in
collaboration with the EGCMA.
(iii) Discussion
The Panel acknowledges concerns regarding the
absence of a contemporary coastal hazard risk assessment to inform the Structure
The Structure Plan and the Amendment documentation did not rely on
updated modelling that might address the impacts of flooding,
coastal inundation
or climate-related coastal processes on future development and infrastructure
within the township. However, the
approach taken for the Structure Plan and the
Amendment was supported by both the EGCMA and DEECA. The Panel is satisfied
strategic direction of the Structure Plan:
appropriately
responds to the context of Eagle Point as a low-growth settlement
facilitate substantial urban expansion or intensification
incremental and managed growth within a clearly defined settlement
Council is committed to further strategic work to address
these issues. It has commenced a separate Planning Scheme Amendment in
partnership with the EGCMA to update flood mapping across the municipality and
to strengthen flood-related planning provisions.
The Panel supports
Council’s proposed changes to Clause 74.02 which includes actions to
update flood mapping and to consider
the impacts of climate change in future
strategic planning. These actions:
are appropriate
and sufficient in the context of the Structure Plan’s modest growth agenda
and strategic framework
appropriate pathway for addressing these matters.
(iv) Conclusion and recommendation
Panel concludes that the Structure Plan and the Amendment appropriately balance
the township’s long-term growth aspirations
with the need to incorporate
and respond to updated flood, coastal hazard and climate change information.
the Clause 72.04 Schedule to revise further strategic work for climate change,
sea level rise and coastal inundation
In association with the
relevant catchment management authority, review and update flood mapping,
schedules and policy using best
available data and with consideration of climate
change, sea level rise and increased rainfall intensity.
5.2 Flora and fauna
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment appropriately considers and responds to
biodiversity values and the potential impacts on flora
(ii) Submissions
Submissions:
The Structure
Plan has not been informed by a comprehensive biodiversity or vegetation
assessment.
The landscape
character and biodiversity values are referenced in policy but lack supporting
field-based data or mapping to substantiate
their significance.
The proposed
rezoning of 25 Waterview Road would result in the loss of productive farmland,
historically contributed to the area providing habitat for biodiversity
- functions as a
buffer between urban development and the surrounding
environment.
Council submission:
The Structure
Plan and the Amendment are not underpinned by a dedicated, site-specific flora
and fauna assessment.
The Structure
Plan references ecological values and acknowledges surrounding assets such as
the Eagle Point Flora and Fauna Reserve
and the Mitchell River Silt
The Amendment
does not include detailed field-based vegetation or biodiversity mapping.
The proposed
rezoning affects only a small portion of land (part of 25 Waterview Road), and
any future development on this land will
be required to respond to relevant
planning provisions including Vegetation Protection Overlay Schedule 1.
Biodiversity
considerations (including protection of roadside vegetation, waterway buffers,
and potential impacts on local fauna)
will be addressed at the planning permit
stage through site-specific assessments and compliance with overlay
provisions.
(iii) Discussion
The Panel acknowledges that the Structure Plan and
associated Amendment are not informed by a dedicated site-specific biodiversity
or vegetation assessment. The strategic planning process drew on broader
environmental information and acknowledged key ecological
features in the
surrounding landscape such as the Eagle Point Flora and Fauna Reserve and the
Mitchell River Silt Jetties. However,
the Amendment documentation does not
include detailed mapping or studies of on-site biodiversity values.
A flora and fauna assessment would have provided a stronger evidentiary basis
for the strategic direction set by the Structure Plan.
Nonetheless, the Panel
agrees with Council that:
proposed for residential rezoning (part of 25 Waterview Road) represents only a
modest extension to the existing residential
the Amendment
will enable a limited supply of residential lots and does not propose
substantial growth
environmental
values can be appropriately considered and protected through existing policy and
overlay provisions at the planning
permit stage.
Council can
appropriately consider environmental and biodiversity matters through future
permit applications when proposal details
are known. This will include
how the proposal
responds to Vegetation Protection Overlay Schedule 1 which applies to part of 25
Waterview Road
site-specific
environmental features such as roadside vegetation, creek lines and potential
impacts on native fauna.
The planning framework requires a permit
applicant to demonstrate how a development proposal will avoid or minimise
ecological impacts
and respond to the environmental context.
(iv) Conclusion
Panel concludes:
The Amendment
appropriately acknowledges the environmental sensitivities of the Eagle Point
Biodiversity
impacts can be effectively managed through the existing planning
5.3 Road network safety and capacity
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment appropriately considers and responds to the
capacity of the existing road network and the potential
impacts of increased
(ii) Submissions
Submissions:
insufficient capacity on the road network, including a single road in and out,
to manage future traffic volumes.
The proposed
rezoning is expected to increase traffic volumes, particularly affecting vehicle
movements onto Paynesville Road.
traffic volume will:
- exacerbate
existing delays on Paynesville Road during peak periods
- add congestion
which may affect safe and efficient access for residents
- affect road
safety, particularly for pedestrians and cyclists.
The limited
infrastructure for non-vehicular movement such as footpaths and dedicated cycle
lanes will further amplifying safety risks.
Council Part A and B
submission:
The Amendment
proposes modest growth in Eagle Point.
development on the small part of 25 Waterview Road proposed to be rezoned will
be required to respond to relevant traffic
planning provisions.
Traffic will be
considered during the planning permit stage through site-specific assessments
and an assessment against planning provisions.
The Structure
Plan outlines directions for the progressive enhancement of the integrated road
network, including proposed improvements
which Council intends to implement
incrementally over time.
(iii) Discussion
The Panel agrees with Council that the Amendment
proposes only modest growth including rezoning a small part of 25 Waterview
which is estimated to result in approximately 30 to 40 lots. Any future
development would be subject to site-specific traffic and
infrastructure
assessments through the planning permit process. The Structure Plan reinforces
the township’s role as a small,
lifestyle-based settlement and discourages
urbanised road forms that might conflict with the informal, coastal character of
It is acknowledged that no significant road upgrades are proposed by the
Amendment and that the Structure Plan explicitly discourages
‘urban-style’ cross-sections or road expansion that would erode
Eagle Point’s informal coastal character.
Having regard to the extent of rezoning proposed and the limited growth
envisaged by the Structure Plan, the Panel is satisfied that
the modest increase
in development potential will not generate traffic impacts that would compromise
the operation or safety of the
local road network. Any traffic-related matters
can be appropriately managed at the planning permit stage when a specific
will be assessed against relevant traffic related planning
provisions.
(iv) Conclusions
Panel concludes:
Amendment has appropriately considered and responded to the capacity of the
existing road network and the potential impacts of
increased traffic, as it will
enable modest growth that does not warrant further investigation at this
proposals seeking to increase residential development will have to respond to
traffic related planning provisions through the
planning permit application
5.4 Infrastructure and service capacity
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment appropriately considers and responds to
infrastructure and service capacity.
(ii) Background
The Structure Plan states:
Eagle Point will
experience modest, incremental growth within a defined township boundary.
Development is
to occur where land is already serviced or can be appropriately serviced.
infrastructure upgrades such as drainage and stormwater management are not
proposed by the Structure Plan.
management is to be addressed through future permit processes, in line with best
practice and agency referral requirements.
The township
will continue to rely on existing infrastructure networks and the capacity of
servicing authorities.
(iii) Submissions
Submissions:
infrastructure, particularly drainage, stormwater and sewerage may be inadequate
to support additional developments.
The area has
experience flooding and runoff issues.
New development
will add pressure to electricity networks and future servicing
East Gippsland Water submission:
Did not objected
to the Amendment and supported the Structure Plan.
Rezoning land
from Farming Zone to GRZ will require the sewer servicing district boundaries to
be realigned.
Developers would
be required to fund extensions to sewer and water services in line with East
Gippsland Water’s requirements.
Council submission:
Assets and Engineering Department is currently reviewing drainage infrastructure
across the municipality, recognising
that much of the existing system was not
designed to accommodate the effects of climate change and increased rainfall
– a challenge
shared in areas across Victoria.
The Structure
Plan and the Amendment focus on facilitating modest, incremental change that
makes use of existing infrastructure without
placing additional strain on
Eagle Point does
not have a commercial centre, but it is well serviced with reticulated
utilities, sealed roads with drainage and
a network of existing and proposed
walking paths.
Infrastructure
matters, including drainage, will be addressed at the planning permit stage
through site-specific assessments, rather
than through the Amendment.
Any required
infrastructure upgrades will be determined through the permit process and in
consultation with relevant authorities.
(iv) Discussion
The Structure Plan establishes a framework for
modest, incremental growth within a clearly defined township boundary, with
development
to occur only where land is already serviced or can be appropriately
serviced. The Amendment does not propose major infrastructure
Stormwater, drainage and related matters will be addressed at the planning
permit stage in consultation with relevant
Regarding infrastructure capacity, the relevant servicing authority, East
Gippsland Water, did not object to the Amendment. Rather,
it advised it would
consider a request to expand its infrastructure and any future upgrades
necessitated will be funded by the developer.
The Panel agrees with Council that infrastructure issues, including
stormwater management can be appropriately addressed through the
development
planning processes. This is within the context of Eagle Point being generally
well serviced with reticulated infrastructure.
Council’s broader
infrastructure review in response to climate impacts may influence how future
applications are assessed.
The Panel is satisfied that there is no infrastructure related reason for the
Amendment not to proceed.
(v) Conclusion
Panel concludes that the Amendment has appropriately considered and responded to
infrastructure and servicing capacity.
5.5 Social Infrastructure and service capacity
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Structure Plan and the Amendment have appropriately
considered social infrastructure capacity.
(ii) Background
The Structure Plan states:
Eagle Point is a
small village that relies on services in Paynesville and Bairnsdale, including
higher-order services like health
care and education
it does not
propose new schools, medical centres or major facilities
Eagle Point will
not become self-sufficient in terms of social infrastructure, and its role is to
remain a low-growth, lifestyle-focused
(iii) Submissions
Submissions:
Existing social
infrastructure, particularly health and education services, is inadequate to
support further residential development.
There is limited
capacity of Bairnsdale Regional Health Service, as it is already under pressure
from the current population.
Any rezonings
enabling urban growth should only proceed if accompanied by upgrades to
essential infrastructure, including hospitals
and schools.
Part B submission:
The Amendment is
not about growing Eagle Point, and any growth would be incremental and modest.
The Victorian
Government is responsible for providing health and education services so these
issues are outside the scope of the Amendment.
(iv) Discussion
The Structure Plan clearly identifies Eagle Point as
a small township that will continue to rely on Paynesville and Bairnsdale for
access to health, education and other higher-order services. No new social
infrastructure is proposed, and the township is not intended
self-sufficient.
The Panel agrees with Council that the Victorian Government is responsible
for providing health and education services to the future
Eagle Point
population. This issue is beyond the scope of the Amendment because it is not
an issue that Council is responsible for,
and any future services are likely to
be located beyond the Structure Plan area.
The Panel is satisfied the Amendment aligns with the strategic role
identified for Eagle Point and that it is appropriate to rely
on nearby centres
for social infrastructure.
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes that
the Structure Plan and the Amendment have appropriately considered the role of
social infrastructure in the
context of Eagle Point’s intended
5.6 Stormwater and drainage
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Structure Plan and the Amendment has appropriately
considered stormwater and drainage.
(ii) Background
The Structure Plan states:
Eagle Point will
experience modest, incremental growth within a defined township boundary.
The Structure
Plan does not propose broader infrastructure upgrades such as drainage and
stormwater management.
management is to be addressed through future permit processes, in line with best
practice and agency referral requirements.
The township
will continue to rely on existing infrastructure networks and capacity of
servicing authorities.
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Submissions:
Historic and
ongoing flooding of properties along Bay Road (including 53, 55, and 57 Bay
Road) due to runoff from higher ground to
the south (Tait Street/Hosking
The existing
drainage infrastructure is inadequate, and additional development in proposed
GRZ2 areas will exacerbate the flooding
Development
below 2.8 metres Australian Height Datum may be at risk due to exposure to
coastal processes and inundation.
Regarding the
rezoning of 30 Forge Creek Road:
- Council has
not resolved past stormwater issues caused by nearby developments
- the proposed
Drainage Line Linear Reserve should not run through a private property without
proper consultation.
Ms Barich’s expert evidence:
The Eagle Point
Drainage Assessment (2017):
- is considered
outdated, particularly the sizing of drainage reserves and stormwater treatment
infrastructure
- should be
revised with an updated stormwater management strategy, including the redesign
and relocation of drainage assets—especially
those associated with 25
Waterview Road.
There are no
impediments from a stormwater management perspective to expanded urban
development on 25 Waterview Road.
Council submission:
Drainage is a
municipality-wide issue, exacerbated by climate change and ageing
infrastructure.
Assets and Engineering Department is currently reviewing drainage and stormwater
infrastructure across the municipality.
Site-specific
drainage issues will be addressed at the planning permit stage through
appropriate conditions and assessments.
The Structure
Plan is intended to facilitate incremental change rather than large-scale
growth, thereby limiting cumulative pressure
on existing
infrastructure.
(iv) Discussion
The issue of stormwater
and drainage is one of functional infrastructure planning and appropriate
sequencing of development. While
there is concern about past performance and
the adequacy of drainage in Eagle Point, these are common in legacy coastal
settlements
where development has occurred incrementally. This does not
preclude future development, provided site-specific solutions are delivered
accordance with best practice and consistent with planning policy.
The evidence provided by Ms Barich was
instructive. While it identified potential shortcomings in the Eagle Point
Drainage Assessment
(2017), especially regarding reserve sizing and treatment
design, it concluded that 25 Waterview Road can be developed without impediment
from a stormwater management perspective. This finding confirms that the
limitations of the existing drainage strategy do not preclude
development, but instead highlight the need to refine and apply updated
standards. This approach is consistent with the typical
evolution of structure
planning, which is often implemented and refined progressively over many
Council’s position that drainage concerns
are best addressed through the permit process is reasonable, particularly given
scale of change proposed by the Amendment. The rezonings facilitated by the
Amendment are modest and incremental, and development
is expected to occur
progressively over time. This provides an appropriate opportunity for detailed
drainage design to be resolved
at the subdivision stage, where current
engineering and environmental standards can be applied in response to local site
conditions.
On balance, the Panel accepts that stormwater and
drainage issues raised through the Amendment process reinforce the importance of
coordinated infrastructure planning. However, they do not present a barrier to
the modest and strategically located growth proposed.
Rather, they highlight
the importance of resolving drainage performance issues in greater detail
through formal development processes
including ongoing monitoring, refinement of
technical inputs and compliance with best-practice stormwater management at the
permit stage.
(v) Conclusion
Panel concludes that the Amendment appropriately considers and responds to
matters of stormwater and drainage infrastructure.
A Document list
One Hearing was conducted for Amendments C171egip and C172egip. The
documents below include only those relevant to Amendment C171egip.
Description
Presented by
Panel Directions Hearing letter
Eagle Point submitter map
Panel Directions and Hearing timetable (Version 1)
Nominated site inspection locations
Information request – GIS mapping data
Friends of the Gippsland Lakes, Parks and Reserves (FoGL)
Panel response to FoGL information request
Validation Report – 25 Waterview Rd Paynesville 24 January 2025
Gippsland Lakes/90 Mile Beach Local Hazard Assessment Project Report 1:
Summary Report (Water Technology, April 2014)
Eagle Point Structure Plan – Volume 1
Eagle Point Structure Plan – Volume 2
Preliminary site investigation – Waterview Road, Paynesville
Eagle Point Draft Structure Plan Bushfire Review 2018
Eagle Point Precinct Structure Plan Drainage Assessment 2017
Contour 2.8 GIS plot map
Panel declaration and information request
Email – regarding site inspection locations
Eagle Point site inspection Map 1
Paynesville site inspection Map 2
Annotated Directions for site inspection maps
Nominated site inspection locations
S McSweeney
Directions and Hearing timetable (Version 2)
Nominated site inspection locations
Various parties
Part A Submission
Part B Submission
Submissions summary
Amendment – Explanatory Report (Version 1)
Amendment – Zone map (Version 1)
Amendment – Instruction Sheet (Version 1)
Amendment – Low Density Residential Zone Schedule 2 (Version 1)
Amendment – General Residential Zone Schedule 2 (Version 1)
Amendment – Clause 72.08 Schedule (Version 1)
Amendment – Clause 74.02 (Version 1)
Amendment – Clause 11.03 (Version 1)
Amendment – Clause 02.03 (Version 1)
Expert report – Rhys Quick (economics)
Ah Yee, estate of F Ah Yee, and C Ah Yee (Ah Yee Family)
Expert report – Steve Schutt (visual amenity and landscape)
Ah Yee Family
Expert report – Nina Barich (drainage)
Ah Yee Family
Expert report – Mark Woodland (planning)
Ah Yee Family
Zone map (LDRZ replaced LDRZ2 in one area)
Eagle Point Structure Plan – Volume 1
Planning Scheme map (SLO2)
Changes Table
S McSweeney
Hearing submission
Document 80 Attachment 1 – aerial photo
Presentation of Rhys Quick (economics)
Ah Yee Family
East Gippsland Amendment C128 Panel Report
Hearing submission
Ah Yee Family
25 Waterview Road permit application – Proposed subdivision
25 Waterview Road permit application – Site context and proposed
subdivision plan
25 Waterview Road permit application – Access and servicing
Response to expert evidence (Barich, Quick, Schutt and Woodland)
Clause 02.03 – requested changes
Ah Yee Family
Clause 11.03 – requested changes
Ah Yee Family
Instruction Sheet – with notes
Ah Yee Family
GRZ2 – requested changes
Ah Yee Family
Clause 74.02 Schedule – requested changes
Ah Yee Family
Response to Council’s evidence response table (Document 98)
Ah Yee Family
Clause 74.02 Schedule – further revisions
Ah Yee Family
Eagle Point Structure Plan (Volume 1) – requested changes
Ah Yee Family
Aerial image – existing break between the two settlements
Ah Yee Family
Letter from Rhys Quick – Estimated dwelling supply capacity in
Paynesville Growth Area and Structure Plan area
Ah Yee Family
Closing submission
Explanatory Report (Final version)
Eagle Point Structure Plan (Final version)
Zone Maps 50 and 51 (Final version)
Instruction Sheet (Final version)
GRZ2 (Final version)
Clause 72.08 Schedule (Final version)
Clause 74.02 Schedule (Final version)
Clause 02.03 (Final version)
Clause 11.03 (Final version)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (24.3 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter