URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1610.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Turner v Norwalk Precast Burial Systems Pty Ltd (Ruling) [2025] VCC 1610 (7 November 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
LAW DIVISION
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
Case No. CI-18-04517
Garth Turner
Norwalk Precast Burial Systems Pty Ltd
His Honour Judge Over
DATE OF HEARING
5 November 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT
7 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Turner v Norwalk Precast Burial Systems Pty Ltd
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1610
Subject: Remitted proceeding
Catchwords: The Court of Appeal remitted the proceeding to the Court for a
further hearing – form of the further hearing –
whether plaintiff
can file amended statement of claim to add alternative basis for establishing
causation – whether plaintiff
can adduce expert evidence
Legislation Cited:
Federal Court of Australia
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules
Evidence Act
Cases Cited:
Turner v Norwalk Precast Burial Systems Pty Ltd
Barfly’s Nominees Pty Ltd v Kliger Partners (a firm) (Remitter
issues ruling)
[2020] VSC 277
Community and Public Sector Union v
Telstra Corporation Ltd (No 2)
[2001] FCA 479
RV Pty Ltd v Connector
Park Pty Ltd (No 4)
[2022] TASSC 66
Judgment: The plaintiff has leave to file a second
amended statement of claim and expert report
APPEARANCES
For the plaintiff
Mr J Ribbands
Country Life Law
For the defendant
Mr S Moloney
Barry Nilsson
HIS HONOUR:
plaintiff successfully appealed to the Court of Appeal a previous decision of
this Court. The Court of Appeal remitted the matter
to this Court for
“further hearing and determination in accordance with [its]
Norwalk Precast Burial Systems Pty
the remitted proceeding, the plaintiff applies for leave to do the
(a) file a second amended statement of claim that pleads that if he cannot
establish factual causation under
in seeking to prove causation (the
(b) file a report from Professor Andrew Stephen Ball, microbiologist.
defendant consents to the filing of the second amended statement of claim and
opposes the filing of Professor Ball’s report.
The last matter raises an
interesting issue about the scope of the further hearing.
trial at first instance
Court of Appeal succinctly summarised the trial at first instance as
“The applicant arranged for the installation of a
septic tank system on his property in Seaton. He alleges that this system
missing a part — variously described as an ‘aerator arm’, or
‘aerator shaft’ — which caused
him to suffer recurrent
Helicobacter Pylori (‘HP’) infections, sickness, loss and
The applicant brought a case in negligence and contract against the
manufacturer of the septic tank system in the County Court. He
alleged that the
system was improperly installed and maintained. By the time the matter came to
trial, the applicant was self-represented.
He gave evidence himself. He also
adduced evidence from his friend, Ms Berry, who assisted him at the trial.
However, at the conclusion
of this evidence, the respondent made a no case
submission on the basis that the applicant could not prove his case in respect
causation. More particularly, that he could not prove that the fitting of the
aerator arm would have averted his injury.
The judge upheld the no case submission and gave judgment for the
respondent.”
plaintiff sought leave to appeal, ultimately relying on the following
“the judge erred in that he failed to provide the
applicant, as an unrepresented litigant, the degree of assistance required
ensure procedural fairness and the undertaking of a fair trial;
the judge erred in ruling in favour of the respondent’s no case
submission:
(a) without having considered whether it was an appropriate case to invoke
Wrongs Act 1958
Wrongs Act’
), as is required
by the Act;
(b) without providing the applicant, as an unrepresented litigant, the
opportunity of proving causation by an alternative means under
factual causation could not be
established.”
Court of Appeal granted leave to appeal and upheld the appeal on two grounds.
the Court of Appeal held that the judge had failed to appropriately correct the
plaintiff’s miscomprehension that the
defendant would call two witnesses
who he could then cross-examine, and thereby failed to ensure that the
plaintiff, who was self-represented
at the trial, was assisted so that he had a
fair trial and practical injustice was avoided. Without seeking to be
prescriptive, the
Court considered that the judge should have taken the
following steps:
“... the applicant should have been expressly
told, prior to closing his case, that the respondent might not call witnesses
all, in which case the evidence would be finished at the end of his case. Given
that the applicant clearly wished to adduce ‘all
the relevant
information’ from the respondent’s witnesses, we also consider that
the judge should have told the applicant
that he was able to, and might choose
to, call those witnesses himself. If such a path was taken, he could then have
been advised
Taylor) and if necessary, in the course of their evidence to make
an application
to cross-examine them under s 38 (or perhaps to ask leading questions of them
Evidence Act
the Court of Appeal held that the judge should have explained to the plaintiff
the terms of
and particularly
provides an alternative way of establishing factual causation if
cannot be satisfied.
Court of Appeal allowed the appeal, set aside the order of the judge and
remitted the matter to this Court for “further
hearing and determination
in accordance with the
of the Court of
Application to file a second amended statement of claim
previously filed amended statement of claim did not plead that the plaintiff
sought to rely on
The Court of Appeal considered and rejected a
submission from the defendant to the effect that the plaintiff, who was
self-represented
at trial, should have pleaded reliance on
the matter has been remitted to this Court, the plaintiff has been represented
by barristers and a solicitor. In those circumstances,
I requested the plaintiff
to consider whether he wished to rely on
, and if so, to prepare a second
amended statement of claim making that clear.
proposed second amended statement of claim pleads that if the plaintiff cannot
establish factual causation under
to prove causation.
defendant consents to the filing of the second amended statement of claim.
plaintiff has leave to file and serve the second amended statement of claim. The
second statement of claim goes directly to an
issue identified by the Court of
Appeal as needing rectification, being the
issue. Now the plaintiff is
legally represented, it is important that he identify reliance on that section
and seeks to articulate
how and why he says that section applies so the
defendant and the Court are not surprised.
Should the plaintiff
be permitted to adduce further evidence?
plaintiff seeks to adduce further evidence in the form of an expert report of
Professor Andrew Stephen Ball, microbiologist. He
provided a draft report to the
defendant and the Court, with a final report expected soon. In summary, he
considers the operation
of the Taylex Clearwater 90 aerated wastewater system
installed at the plaintiff’s premises, how a system without a fitted
and aerator would work, whether it would or could have caused
bacteria to be dispersed to the plaintiff’s backyard causing risk of
infection to the plaintiff, and whether the plaintiff’s
infections were caused by the system.
defendant opposes the plaintiff adducing Professor Ball’s report,
ostensibly arguing that the further hearing should be
limited to addressing and
taking steps to correct the errors identified by the Court of Appeal.
legal principles relevant to whether new evidence can be adduced on a remitter
were considered by Macaulay J in
Barfly’s Nominees Pty Ltd v Kliger
Partners (a firm) (Remitter issues
in the context of the
remitter of a professional negligence claim from the Court of Appeal to the
Trial Division of the Supreme Court.
His Honour identified from the authorities
that a remitter judge has a discretion to permit further evidence and the
has to be exercised judicially having regarding to all relevant
matters, which could include the following:
overarching purpose set out in s 7 of the CPA;
the directions
given by the Court of Appeal pursuant to its powers under r 64.37 (7) of the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules
the nature of
the matter which has been remitted and the manner in which the task of
determining the remitted matter is to be undertaken;
public interest in the finality of litigation;
• fairness to all parties, including a fair opportunity to be heard and to
present evidence to the Court on the issues which
need to be decided, tempered
by the values of timeliness, efficiency and cost effectiveness in resolving the
issues in dispute;
the extent to
which the new evidence may expand the dimension of the dispute; and
opportunities which the applicant party has had to adduce the evidence in the
past and its reasons for not having done
defendant referred me to two cases.
Community and Public Sector Union v Telstra Corporation Ltd (No
Finkelstein J
considered what was meant by a “new trial” in
Federal Court of Australia Act
and held that it was a continuation of
the first trial, rather than a completely new trial. The case has limited
application to this
case given, first, it concerns interpretation of legislation
peculiar to the Federal Court and, secondly, the Full Court of the Federal
had identified that only one issue needed to be dealt with in remitting the
RV Pty Ltd v Connector Park Pty Ltd (No
Blow CJ considered
whether new evidence could be led on the issue of assessment of damages on
remitter of a matter from the Full
Court of the Tasmanian Supreme Court. His
Honour’s decision to allow new evidence turned on the facts of the case.
consider the plaintiff should be allowed to adduce evidence by filing and
serving Professor Ball’s report for the following
(a) the Court of Appeal remitted the matter to this Court for “further
hearing and determination in accordance with [its]
(b) the Court of Appeal in its reasons did not give any express direction to
this Court about the future conduct of the proceeding
pursuant to its power
under reg64.37 of the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules
(c) the Court, without seeking to be prescriptive, considered what steps the
trial judge should have taken to avoid the identified
errors, and it can be
inferred from the steps identified that at a bare minimum, in the remitter, the
plaintiff should be able to
seek to establish factual causation by s51(2) and
make a decision about whether he wishes to call John Taylor and Andrew Taylor as
(d) a necessary precursor to establishing factual causation under s51(2) is that
a plaintiff cannot establish that negligence was
a necessary condition of the
occurrence of the harm in accordance with s51(1)(a);
(e) given that the plaintiff in the remitter will now seek to rely on s51(2),
evidence about whether he can or cannot establish that
negligence was a
necessary condition of the occurrence of the harm is relevant to the s51(2)
(f) furthermore, if he cannot establish that negligence was a necessary
condition of the occurrence of the harm, it is likely to
be essential to
considering the claim relying on s51(2) to know why not. For example, if it was
because of an evidentiary gap, the
nature and reason for the gap is likely to be
significant given the rationale for s51(2) is to enable bridging of evidentiary
in some limited
circumstances;
(g) the defendant accepted that generally the plaintiff should be able to lead
evidence to prove his s51(2) claim. As stated, the
evidence of Professor Ball
will be relevant to this part of the claim. It could also be relevant to the
part of his claim relying
on s51(1)(a), but the defendant submitted that it was
actually adverse to that claim (a matter I do not need to decide at this stage);
(h) if Professor Ball’s report was admitted, the defendant did not submit
that I should seek to limit its use, for example,
by making an order under
Evidence Act
(i) the plaintiff was self-represented at the trial, though he had solicitors
acting for him at times in the lead up to the trial.
He is now legally
represented. The fact that he was self-represented does not mean he gets a
second chance to present his case, but
in the peculiar circumstances of a
remitter, holding him to what happened at the initial trial has less force than
it may have if
he had been legally represented at the trial;
(j) further to the last point, the plaintiff needs a fair opportunity to be
heard and to present evidence to the Court on the issues
that need to be
decided. Given that the plaintiff was not aware at the initial trial of the
issue, it is difficult to see how or why he should be prevented from
adducing evidence on that issue, even if it may also go to other
issues such as
(k) the defendant must also have a fair opportunity to be heard and to present
evidence to the Court on the issues that need to be
decided. The defendant
stated that if the plaintiff can rely on Professor Ball’s report, then it
too would seek to obtain further
expert evidence, which it considered could be
done by 18 December 2025;
(l) the trial is currently scheduled for 16 February 2026. Allowing the
plaintiff to adduce further evidence (and the corresponding
opportunity for the
defendant to obtain expert reports) means that the trial date may be put in
jeopardy. But a slight delay, if
needed, to the trial is justified; and
(m) adducing new evidence could increase the duration of the remitted trial but
may also increase the chance of the parties resolving
the matter by
negotiations. This is especially so in the context where both parties indicated
a willingness for a further judicial
mediation after expert evidence had been
have made an order that reflects these reasons. I ask that the parties confer
the lead up to the trial,
including for a judicial mediation, and consider an appropriate date for a
directions hearing about two
weeks before trial.
Order of the Court of Appeal
dated 6 May 2025, [4].
[2025] VSCA 94
Ibid, [1]-[3].
Ibid, [4] (citations
Ibid, [129].
Order of the Court of Appeal
dated 6 May 2025, [4].
, [131]-[132]
[2020] VSC 277.
Ibid, [33].
[2001] FCA 479
[2022] TASSC 66.
Order of the Court of
Appeal dated 6 May 2025, [4].
Review of the Law of
(Final Report, September 2020), 100 [7.30].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (169 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter