URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMC/2025/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ihalagamage v Fifteen 50 Pty Ltd [2025] VMC 15 (29 August 2025)
MAGISTRATES’ COURT OF VICTORIA
MAG-CI-250026805
DAHAM KUMARA IHALAGAMAGE
FIFTEEN50 CONSULTING PTY LTD
MAGISTRATE:
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
17 July 2025
DATE OF DECISION:
29 August 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS:
Ihalagamage v Fifteen 50 Pty Ltd
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VMC 15
INDUSTRIAL LAW –
Fair Work Act 2009
claim – Application of time in lieu provisions in the
Professional
Employees Award 2020
– Alleged agreement to provide time in lieu for
additional hours on a temporary assignment – Employment contract clause
permitting reasonable additional hours – Whether additional hours were
required to be worked – Relevant considerations
for contractual term
requiring reasonable additional hours.
APPEARANCES:
Litigant in person
For the Defendant
Matthew Delahunty
TABLE OF CONTENTS
HER HONOUR:
INTRODUCTION AND ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED
Defendant Fifteen50 Consulting Pty Ltd (
) operates an environmental
advisory and engineering consulting firm with offices in Echuca and Melbourne.
From October 2022, the
Plaintiff Mr Ihalagamage (
Ihalagamage
employed by F50 as a Senior Project Manager.
Ihalagamage’s
employment contract (
) required him to work 38 ordinary hours per
week, along with reasonable additional hours without any additional payment. The
provided that his usual place of work was in Melbourne, but that he
could be required by F50 to work at a different location.
15 April 2024, F50 assigned Ihalagamage to work 40 hours per week for Coliban
) for a six month period (
the Assignment
). Between that
date and 2 August 2024, this required Ihalagamage to work some days each week at
the Bendigo Wastewater Treatment
Bendigo Site
). The Bendigo Site
is about 175 kilometres from Ihalagamage’s home and the one way travel
time is about 2 to 2.5 hours.
Ihalagamage
claims to be entitled to payment for his additional hours of work and travel on
the Assignment under the
Professional Employees Award 2020
). Alternatively, he claims that F50 agreed to provide him with
an hour of time in lieu for each additional hour he worked above his
hours, including travel time, during the Assignment (
TIL Agreement
Ihalagamage further claims he is entitled to be paid for the additional hours he
was required to work because they were unreasonable,
and were not covered by his
Contract. Having resigned his employment effective 16 August 2024, he claims
that F50 is required to
pay him $13,535.05 for 172.55 time in lieu hours he had
accrued but not taken at that date.
denies there was a TIL Agreement, contending that the Contract provided for
Ihalagamage to work the additional hours without further
compensation because
they were reasonable. Whilst the application of the Award was not in dispute,
F50 contends that Ihalagamage’s
salary level exempts him from the Award
time in lieu and overtime entitlements. F50 also disputes the number of time in
claimed, and contends that time in lieu was in any event provided
when Ihalagamage was directed not to work for the two weeks’
prior to his
resignation taking effect.
matter was heard as a small claim under
Fair Work Act 2009
). The parties filed an agreed statement of facts. In addition,
Ihalagamage and Nathan Heinrich (
), Director of F50 and Principal
Engineer, gave evidence.
first issue I have considered is the Award claim. I have concluded that based on
the undisputed facts, the Award time in lieu
provisions do not apply to
Ihalagamage.
second issue to be resolved is whether there was a TIL Agreement between the
parties. To determine this issue, I have considered
Ihalagamage and
Heinrich’s conflicting accounts of several communications about
Ihalagamage’s additional hours in April
and May 2024. I have preferred the
evidence of Heinrich which has led me to conclude that there was no TIL
third issue I have considered is whether the additional hours worked by
Ihalagamage were outside of the scope of his Contract
because they were
unreasonable, entitling Ihalagamage to the payment claimed. I have concluded
that the hours F50 required Ihalagamage
to work were reasonable. This is based
in part on a conclusion that F50 did not require Ihalagamage to work all the
hours he claims
for, and in part on a number of other considerations as to the
parties and the work.
turn now to my reasons for these conclusions.
ISSUE 1 – THE AWARD CLAIM
18 of the Award deals with overtime and penalty rates. Clause 18.2 and cl 18.3
prescribe overtime and time in lieu entitlements.
However, clause 18.6 of the
Award, ‘Exemptions,’ provides that cl 18.2 and cl 18.3 ‘will
not apply to employees
who have a contractual entitlement to an annual salary
which exceeds the minimum annual wage prescribed in clause 14.1 by 25% or
highest minimum annual wage in cl 14.1 of the Award was $104,074 between 15
April and 30 June 2024, and $107,997 from 1 July 2024
onwards. It was not in
dispute that pursuant to the Contract, Ihalagamage was entitled to an annual
salary (exclusive of superannuation)
of $155,000. This sum exceeds the highest
minimum annual wage post 1 July 2024 by $47,003, or 43.5 per cent and pre 1 July
$50,926 or 48.9 per cent. Because Ihalagamage’s annual salary
exceeded the minimum Award annual wage by more than 25 per cent,
cl 18.2 and cl
18.3 do not apply. Ihalagamage has no Award entitlement to time in lieu.
ISSUE 2 – WAS THERE A TIL AGREEMENT?
Evidence and
findings about communications between 12 April and 6 May 2024
Ihalagamage
contended that the TIL Agreement was initially made on 12 April 2024 and was
confirmed in a series of discussions and
emails between him and representatives
of F50 between then and 6 May 2024.
was not in dispute that on 12 April 2024, Ihalagamage met with Jamie Horkings,
Operations Manager (
), and was provided with a company car for
use during the Assignment. Ihalagamage’s evidence was that in this
meeting, Horkings
agreed to provide him paid time off work for all of his
additional hours. I will return to the details of this meeting and my findings
Heinrich’s management authority over Ihalagamage
this time, all of the relevant communications about Ihalagamage’s work
hours occurred between Ihalagamage and Heinrich.
However, Ihalagamage disputed
that Heinrich had management authority over him regarding the time in lieu
was not in dispute that Heinrich was the client manager for CW and also worked
at the Bendigo Site, but that the Contract provided
Ihalagamage reported to
Horkings. It was also not in dispute that on 29 April 2024, Matt Barden
), another Director, told Ihalagamage that Horkings had stood down
and that Ihalagamage would now report directly to Barden.
Ihalagamage
said that prior to Horkings standing down, all work instructions and HR matters
came through Horkings and no other Directors
had operational responsibilities
within the company. He produced a summary of text messages illustrating no
previous communications
from Heinrich before 15 April 2024. He said that because
Heinrich was not his manager, Heinrich could not negotiate anything with
agreed Horkings was still Operations Manager when he commenced discussing time
in lieu with Ihalagamage. However, Heinrich
said he is one of three Directors in
the small business, who are at the top of the organisational chart, are active
within the business
and manage all functions of the business. He also had a role
in directing Ihalagamage as the CW client manager.
accept Heinrich’s evidence and conclude that whilst Heinrich did not have
direct line management responsibility for Ihalagamage,
he had overall management
responsibility for F50 as a Director of the business and a direct interest in
the matter as the CW client
manager. I am not persuaded that he did not have
authority to negotiate with Ihalagamage on behalf of F50 about time in lieu. I
that he did.
16 April Discussion
gave evidence, and I accept, that F50 does not have a formal time in lieu
policy. F50 monitors staff workloads and uses discretion
to provide some form of
relief if staff are going well over and above. Overtime is not usually returned
by time in lieu, it is offset
by discretionary benefits or by working from
was not in dispute that on 16 April 2024, the second day of the Assignment, at
an informal roadside meeting instigated by Heinrich,
Heinrich told Ihalagamage
that F50 did not have a time in lieu policy.
nature and significance of this statement was in dispute. Ihalagamage said that
Heinrich casually raised that F50 does not do
time in lieu for additional time.
Heinrich didn’t tell him there was no time in lieu as a work instruction,
he just made a
comment, not as a Director of the company, but as a work
colleague. Heinrich said he made the statement to clarify to Ihalagamage
the arrangements within the business were. Ihalagamage had raised a concern
accommodated. Heinrich told
Ihalagamage that F50 didn’t have a time in lieu policy but as it was only
the second day of the
Assignment, he wanted to see how the role took shape to
manage Ihalagamage’s travel requirement. Heinrich also told Ihalagamage
was not required at the Bendigo Site every day, that on-site requirements would
likely reduce over time, and other staff, including
Heinrich, could also work
Ihalagamage
said that after the meeting he immediately telephoned Horkings and told Horkings
he didn’t agree with what Heinrich
had said. Horkings said he would make
some calls and get back to Ihalagamage, but did not do so before he stood down.
conclude from this evidence that in the 16 April Discussion, Heinrich conveyed
to Ihalagamage that F50 does not provide time in
lieu for additional hours. I am
not persuaded that the statement, which Ihalagamage accepted was made, had any
lesser meaning or
effect due to either the informal nature of the meeting or
because Heinrich was not Ihalagamage’s line manager. Ihalagamage’s
immediate call to Horkings further suggests that he understood, but disagreed
with, what he was told by Heinrich.
30 April Email, 3 May Email and related communications
was not in dispute that within CW, Ihalagamage reported to Nathalie Lopez,
Bendigo Site Operations Manager (
). Heinrich said, and I accept,
that he had a discussion with Lopez on 30 April 2024 about the Assignment in
which they reached agreement
requirements. Heinrich did not confirm the agreement in writing with Lopez,
was not in dispute that he emailed Ihalagamage that day about his
discussion with Lopez, stating:
Nathalie is
mindful of your travel time, as we are, and we agreed that you are not required
to be present 8.30-4.30pm for the days
you attend site (nominal 3
days/week).
She is more than
happy to accommodate some travel time into the work day (say 2-3hrs), and
overnight accommodation is an option if
your site days couple up. You and I will
manage time/expense come end of month invoicing, F50 will wear some travel
the 30 April Email, Heinrich also canvassed other methods to reduce
Ihalagamage’s required time on site, including that Ihalagamage
autonomy to work out the key times he needed to be on site and when he could
work remotely, ‘to optimise efficiency and
travel time’. Heinrich
also suggested junior engineers, including ‘Sumit’, could assist
Ihalagamage to pick up
some of his menial tasks and encouraged Ihalagamage to
manage the workflow to bring Sumit on board, to ‘facilitate redundancy
was not in dispute that Ihalagamage initially replied to the 30 April Email the
same day, saying ‘Thanks Nath! Good stuff.
Regular overnight stays aren't
ideal with kids etc.., but traveling during work hours is a better option.
Getting Sumit for some
safety items next week and aiming to introduce him to
on-site work more, and the new grad as much as can.’
was a dispute as to what occurred next. However, it was common ground that on 3
May 2024 Ihalagamage sent Heinrich a further
email stating:
I've reached my limit and it's time to address some issues:
- The standard work day is 7.6 hours and 38 hours per week, not the 10 or 11
hours you've been suggesting. The additional hours you're
talking about are
regular and significant, and I don't find it reasonable to expect me to offset
- Regarding the role itself, ... there will be a significant site presence
required to perform that role, even if you don't see it
that way. I have given
you my professional opinion but you keep neglecting mentioning that there is
another approach, please direct
me, which I will follow. I have an obligation to
do the job properly irrespective of all these side shows and how hard it is for
- Both you and Jamie have emphasized numerous times that the company offsets
travel time, but you haven't followed through, nor have
you made any plans to do
so. It seems like you've negotiated something with CW and wants rest by me,
which I haven't agreed to. I've
already offset 15+ hours per week in the past
few weeks, and there hasn't been any acknowledgment or gratitude shown for that.
Ihalagamage’s
explanation for his change in position was that he had accepted Heinrich’s
offer to travel during work hours
on 1 May 2024, and did so that morning, but
Heinrich then called him and told him he could not travel in work hours at all.
said the reason he called Ihalagamage was that Lopez had told him
Ihalagamage had both arrived late and left early that day. Heinrich
Ihalagamage had misunderstood his instruction that only one way travel could be
included as part of the work day. He said he
reiterated in the call that F50
does not have time in lieu as a policy and restated the agreement he made with
Lopez was for one
way travel.
prefer Heinrich’s account of this discussion. Ihalagamage’s
subsequent 3 May Email reference to having to work ‘10
or 11 hours’
is consistent with one way travel within billable time. If all travel was
undertaken outside billable hours, this
would result in a total of 12 to 13
hours per day. I conclude that Ihalagamage did initially form the view, from the
30 April Email,
that he could undertake all travel in billable hours. His
initial reply stating ‘traveling during work hours is a better
without qualification is consistent with this. I conclude that it
was only after this discussion that Ihalagamage understood only
one way travel
would be accommodated. The 3 May Email is consistent with him changing his
position in light of this new understanding.
Ihalagamage relied on his time
sheet for 1 May 2024, which reflects only one way travel in billable hours, in
support of his account
of this discussion. However, he agreed he only started
recording travel time after 6 May 2024, meaning this record was made
retrospectively,
and it is not surprising that it therefore reflects only one
way of travel.
was not in dispute that in response to the 3 May Email, Heinrich called
Ihalagamage and said he would arrange a formal meeting
with Ihalagamage and the
management group. However, again, the accounts of this call differed. Heinrich
says he told Ihalagamage
the purpose of the meeting was to work through
Ihalagamage’s concerns. Ihalagamage said that Heinrich told him F50 would
him time in lieu for additional hours. I prefer Heinrich’s account of
this call. I consider it unlikely, in light of the previous
communications, and
given the call was to arrange a meeting to discuss Ihalagamage’s
additional hours, that Heinrich agreed
ahead of that meeting to provide time in
6 May Meeting and 8 May Email
was agreed that on 6 May 2024, a meeting was held between Ihalagamage, Heinrich,
Senior Project Manager Jeremy Nolan (
) and Barden.
said that he believed the meeting was productive and they had reached agreement
and understanding about how the role would
be delivered and how they would
manage additional effort. On 8 May 2024 he sent an internal email titled
‘HR Note’ which
he did not copy to Ihalagamage but which accurately
recorded the meeting. The email stated:
...DK [Ihalagamage] has been in regular phone/face contact with management team
(JH, NH, MB and JN) in period 15/4/24-3/5/24 regarding
recently commenced
secondment. Particular concern from DK surrounding the overtime initially
required to service the role and how
this is addressed/recognised. ...
Formal meeting
held with DK on Monday 6/5/24, with NH, MB and JN present.
DK encouraged to
manage the role to minimise overtime, and how to structure resourcing across the
business to optimise role delivery
and efficiency.
F50 to record
all overtime as non-billable task in the job, with some time off in lieu (e.g.
occasional day off) provided by agreement
with JN/NH/MB where it doesn’t
impact delivery.
Coliban Water’s acceptance of some travel time can be incorporated as
billable time (say 2hrs per site day).
Recognition that
not all overtime can be returned in lieu and is offset in other ways e.g. WFH
and for broader business success
Commitment that
discussions are continuing to provide DK with resource support to the role both
internally and recruitment, in collaboration
with his leadership in role
definition and strategic delivery.
Ihalagamage’s
evidence about what occurred in the meeting was contradictory. He initially said
that the managers confirmed that
he had to do 8 hours’ billable work on
site and that they would give time in lieu. He said the outcome of the meeting
TIL Agreement. However, he also agreed that he was not told that he
would receive ‘hour-for-hour’ time in lieu and accepted
Heinrich had never stated what percentage of Ihalagamage’s additional
hours he would receive time in lieu for. He said
he did not know
Heinrich’s calculation. He also said that Heinrich mentioned CW’s
agreement that some travel time could
be incorporated as billable time. He
agreed that minimising overtime was discussed, that he could make calls while
travelling, not
attend the Bendigo Site when unnecessary, and have support from
another graduate.
said that he did not discuss the specifics of what time in lieu meant because it
is offered on a discretionary basis when
F50 perceives additional efforts.
Ihalagamage said he refused this proposition. However, Ihalagamage also said he
was happy with
the outcome of the 6 May Meeting. It was accepted that he did not
subsequently raise any further issues about travel time.
conclude that the 8 May Email is an accurate record of what the F50 managers
said in the 6 May Meeting. I do not accept that Ihalagamage
was told that all
travel must take place outside billable hours, as he accepted Heinrich mentioned
otherwise. I do not accept that
F50 agreed to provide time in lieu for all
additional hours worked. Ihalagamage agreed this was not stated. I conclude that
6 May Meeting, F50 agreed to provide Ihalagamage with an undefined amount
of time in lieu, expressly not on an hour for hour basis,
at its discretion,
along with a number of other measures which F50 intended would reduce the
additional hours required of Ihalagamage.
was not in dispute that at the 6 May Meeting, F50 requested that Ihalagamage
record his travel time and subsequently established
an additional time recording
category for him to do so. Ihalagamage characterised this as evidence supporting
the TIL Agreement.
Heinrich said it was because F50 wanted to monitor what days
Ihalagamage was going to site and so F50 could understand his travel
requirements, so they could be addressed later on. I accept Heinrich’s
evidence as to the purpose of recording travel time,
which is consistent with
the 8 May Email.
Subsequent references to a TIL Agreement
was not in dispute that Ihalagamage gave notice of his resignation on 17 July
2024. On 25 July 2024, he emailed Barden stating
that he had unused time in
lieu accumulated, and that with the handover and other tasks, it looked like he
wouldn’t have much
time, asking ‘what options do I have?’
Prior to his resignation taking effect, he gave F50 a document detailing his
for accumulated time in lieu and requesting that he be paid for it as an
eligible termination payment, upon his resignation.
12 April Meeting
to the 12 April Meeting, Ihalagamage’s evidence was that he had previously
raised concerns with Horkings about the
travel required for the Assignment. He
said that on 12 April 2024 Horkings agreed that Ihalagamage would get paid time
off work for
all of his additional hours, on an hour for hour basis. Ihalagamage
said there was no agreement F50 would pay for time in lieu, but
Horkings assured
him that F50 would wear the travel time cost, as a business development
activity, in F50’s books.
did not give evidence in the proceeding and no explanation for this was
provided. Notwithstanding that this may ordinarily
lead to an inference that his
evidence would not have assisted F50, I did not consider Ihalagamage’s
evidence about the 12
April Meeting to be reliable.
evidence illustrated a pattern whereby Ihalagamage maintained that F50 had
unconditionally agreed to the TIL Agreement in subsequent
communications with
F50 in the face of either express statements to the contrary, or only limited
and non-specific statements having
been made by Heinrich. Ihalagamage appeared
to hold a genuine belief that F50 had agreed to the TIL Agreement. However, I
that he formed this belief without a reasonable foundation, despite F50
expressly stating to the contrary.
the conduct of the parties subsequent to the 12 April Meeting is inconsistent
with the TIL Agreement having been reached.
Heinrich told Ihalagamage in the 16
April Discussion that there was no time in lieu policy. On Ihalagamage’s
evidence, Horkings
did not confirm the TIL Agreement in their subsequent phone
call. Ihalagamage’s initial reply to the 30 April Email reflects
and acceptance that travel time would be undertaken in billable hours, rather
than compensated by time in lieu. His 3 May
Email does not assert the TIL
Agreement but states only that Heinrich and Horkings had ‘emphasised
numerous times that the
company offsets travel time’ and states that F50
had not followed through in doing so.
I am persuaded by Ihalagamage’s evidence that he and Horkings discussed
time in lieu, I do not accept that Horkings told
Ihalagamage that F50 would wear
all travel time and he would get time in lieu for all additional hours on an
hour for hour basis.
In any event, on Ihalagamage’s own evidence, there
was no commitment by Horkings to make any payment for time in lieu.
Was there a contractual entitlement to time in lieu?
concluded that there was no TIL Agreement as alleged by Ihalagamage, I have also
considered whether any other agreement with
contractual effect arose from the
statements made by F50 representatives as to time in lieu.
the 30 April Email, Heinrich stated that ‘ F50 will wear some travel
time’ however this was to be managed ‘come
end of month
invoicing’. This was then overtaken by the 6 May Meeting, where the
relevant F50 commitments were that some time
off in lieu (an occasional day off)
would be provided to Ihalagamage by agreement with a manager where it did not
impact delivery,
however not all overtime would be returned in lieu. There was
no commitment as to when, or how much, time in lieu would be granted.
discretion was retained by F50. I do not consider this sufficient to objectively
establish contractual intent on the part
of F50. Nor did Ihalagamage intend an
agreement in these terms. He said he did not agree to part time in lieu. He
believed, albeit
without foundation, that the 6 May Meeting resulted in the TIL
even if these commitments were enforceable, the extent of F50’s
obligations would have been to reasonably consider
approval of discretionary
grants of occasional time in lieu where it did not impact delivery. There is no
evidence of any request
to take time in lieu by Ihalagamage, or any refusal to
provide it, whilst the employment was on foot. Ihalagamage only ever sought
payment. However, the commitments made by F50 at no point extended to payment of
accrued time in lieu on termination.
Ihalagamage
referred the Court to a number of authorities which I have considered.
Fu Chan v Fire Protection Services (WA) Pty Ltd
confirms the jurisdiction of
a State and Territory Court to deal with a small claim under the Act. Other
authorities related to the
standard of proof for a serious allegation or dealt
with matters specific to other awards or the capacity to set off payments
award entitlements. These authorities did not assist with the current
ISSUE 3 – WERE THE ADDITIONAL HOURS UNREASONABLE?
was not in dispute that the Contract provided for F50 to require Ihalagamage to
work reasonable additional hours above 38 ordinary
hours per week from time to
time. Clause 4 stated: ‘You agree, having regard to the Employer’s
operational requirements,
the nature of your position and the wages paid to you
under this letter, that all additional hours are reasonable.’ Clause
‘Remuneration’, provided that payments by F50 under the Contract
included payment for all hours worked and overtime.
Ihalagamage
contended that the additional hours were outside the scope of the Contract, as
they were unreasonable, and he should therefore
be paid for them.
contended that because of cl 4, there was no entitlement to any additional
remuneration for additional hours. F50 did not rely
on Ihalagamage having agreed
in advance that ‘all’ additional hours were reasonable, but rather
contended that assessed
objectively, the additional hours Ihalagamage was
required to work were reasonable, having regard to F50’s operational
requirements,
the nature of his position and his salary. F50 further contended
that any entitlement to payment for additional hours, which was
denied, ought be
greatly reduced due to discrepancies in Ihalagamage’s records and because
the hours were travel, not work.
parties did not address the legal basis for an entitlement to payment for hours
worked outside the scope of the Contract. I have
assumed without deciding that
an entitlement to reasonable remuneration could
However, I have nonetheless
concluded that the additional hours F50 required Ihalagamage to work were
reasonable and thus fall within
the scope of the Contract.
What additional hours was Ihalagamage required by F50 to work?
Hours claimed by Ihalagamage
Ihalagamage
claimed he was required to work 172.55 additional hours over a 17 week period.
Ihalagamage’s claimed additional
hours range from 6.5 hours a week (one
day on site) to a maximum of 17.2 hours per week (three days on site) above 38
hours in the
first week of the Assignment. Ihalagamage relied on a spreadsheet
with a daily breakdown of his hours to 21 June 2024, and his time
sheets, which
from 15 April 2024 separately record entries for CW ‘Project
Management’ and ‘Travel Time’
and include some time-based
records. The additional hours Ihalagamage claimed he was required to work are
set out in Table 1 of
Attachment A
, along with the number of on-site days
he worked each week derived from the time sheets.
disputed the accuracy of the claimed and recorded hours. Ihalagamage relied on
his time sheets having been approved weekly to
establish their accuracy.
However, he agreed that for 15 April 2024 his time-based breakdown did not match
his travel time entry.
He also agreed that the time sheets included hours and
travel time after 5 August which he did not perform, saying these were his
forecast hours or must have been entered by someone else. I accept hours after 5
August were not included in the claim. However,
there were other inconsistencies
between the various records, illustrated by a comparison of them for the first
week of the Assignment,
at Table 2 of Attachment A. Despite this, the
discrepancies are minor, and I have used the hours claimed to consider the
Project hours
was not in dispute that during the Assignment F50 required Ihalagamage to work
40 hours per week for its duration, as opposed to
his 38 ordinary hours.
Ihalagamage’s claim includes these 2 hours for each week that additional
hours are claimed.
Travel time outside billable hours
Ihalagamage’s
spreadsheet illustrates that except for 1 May 2024 his claimed hours include
travel time for both directions of
travel outside billable hours. For most of
those days, only 15 or 30 minutes of Ihalagamage’s travel was absorbed
into billable
Ihalagamage
said that he decided not to travel in work hours because Heinrich’s
message was inconsistent between 30 April and
1 May. I have already rejected
this characterisation of the 1 May conversation. Ihalagamage also said it was
not possible for him
to travel in work time, because CW set the work and he did
not have any flexibility. He relied on a calendar entry from 22 May 2024
he said was a typical day, with meetings from 9am until 4pm. I also reject this.
Given the express permission provided to Ihalagamage
to travel one way in
billable hours by CW, and the autonomy granted to him by Heinrich to arrange his
work, I am not persuaded Ihalagamage
could not have arranged to travel one way
in work hours.
Ihalagamage
also argued that because there was no written agreement between F50 and CW
reflecting his entitlement to travel one way
in billable hours, the agreement
was not enforceable. He relied on CW’s ‘General conditions for the
provision of Services’
which state at cl 19(c) that the agreement with F50
can only be varied or replaced by a written document executed by the parties.
was not persuaded by this argument, as there was no initial contractual term
between F50 and CW about how Ihalagamage’s travel
time was to be treated
requiring variation or replacement.
conclude that Ihalagamage was permitted by F50 and CW to undertake one way
travel to the Bendigo site per day within billable hours.
I infer the reference
in the 8 May Email to ‘say 2 hours’ was an estimate of the one way
journey time, not a cap. It
follows that to the extent Ihalagamage undertook
this travel outside billable hours, he was not required to do so by F50. Had
Ihalagamage
fully absorbed one direction of travel into billable hours, he would
have incurred up to two hours less additional hours per day.
Capacity to stay overnight in Bendigo
conclude that F50 offered Ihalagamage the option of staying overnight in
Bendigo. The written proposal from F50 to CW upon which
the Assignment was based
specified that F50 would charge CW for overnight accommodation where required,
with express approval from
CW. Ihalagamage’s own evidence was that when he
initially discussed the Assignment with Horkings, Horkings asked if Ihalagamage
was open to spend overnight in Bendigo. In the 30 April Email Heinrich recorded
that overnight accommodation was an option if his
site days coupled up.
Ihalagamage’s
evidence was that he was not in a position to stay overnight as he has two young
children and his wife relied
on him to drop them at school and other things, and
whilst one to two nights was fine, it was not an option for six months. I
that regularly staying away from home was not Ihalagamage’s
preferred option as it involved being away from his family. However,
Ihalagamage’s practice of travelling to the Bendigo Site and back, mostly
outside billable hours, also involved a very long
day away from his family.
Ihalagamage’s evidence did not otherwise address the relative benefits of
travel over overnight stays.
I was not persuaded that at least some overnight
stays could not have been undertaken. Had Ihalagamage ‘coupled up’
site days and taken the option of overnight accommodation, as suggested in
the 30 April Email, it would have avoided two journeys
between his home and the
Bendigo Site, and reduced his total work/travel time by four to five hours, on
each occasion he did so.
Hours in excess of 8 hours on site
Ihalagamage
said that he recorded all work above 7.6 hours per day as travel time, including
when he worked longer than 8 hours per
day on site. F50 contended that
Ihalagamage was not required to work these hours as F50’s contractual
obligation to F50 was
8 hours per day. I agree with this contention, however
Ihalagamage’s spreadsheet indicates that the occasions on which this
occurred were minimal and I do not consider it materially impacts the overall
reasonableness or otherwise of the hours.
Conclusion on what additional hours F50 required Ihalagamage to
conclude that Ihalagamage was required to work two additional hours per week on
the Assignment by virtue of the 40 hour per week
commitment. Further, I conclude
that F50 required Ihalagamage to work additional hours to undertake some travel
outside work hours.
However, from 1 May 2024 Ihalagamage was not required to
work additional hours for one way of travel each day he worked on site.
for the duration of the Assignment he could have undertaken overnight stays. It
is difficult to be precise as to what the
consequence for Ihalagamage’s
additional hours would have been had he availed himself of both of these
measures, in particular
because the overnight stay was dependent on him
‘coupling up’ his days on site. But for illustrative purposes, in a
that Ihalagamage worked two days from the Bendigo Site, had he conducted
one way of travel in billable time and stayed overnight,
the need to work
additional hours could have been eliminated.
is in this context that I have considered the question of reasonableness.
Factors in determining whether additional hours are reasonable
Contract at cl 4 prescribes the matters to be considered as to whether hours are
reasonable, which are F50’s operational
requirements, the nature of
Ihalagamage’s position and the wages paid. Both Ihalagamage and F50 also
made reference to the
considerations set out in the National Employment Standard
concerning maximum weekly hours at s 62(3) of the Act. F50 contended,
Australasian Meat Industry Employees Union v Dick
that what is
reasonable in any given case depends on an evaluation of the particular
circumstances of both the employee and employer.
I have considered each of the
matters raised by the parties in determining whether the additional hours are
reasonable.
Ihalagamage
contended that the additional hours were unreasonable because:
(a) They were required every week for a six month
period with possible extension;
(b) Health and safety risks arise with extended driving
and shifts exceeding 13 hours;
(c) His personal circumstances and family
responsibilities were adversely affected;
(d) He provided notice that additional hours would only
be undertaken if compensated;
(e) His refusal was consistent with industry practice;
(f) He was also required to undertake other work
unrelated to the Assignment;
(g) There was no consultation with him prior to
committing him to the Assignment; and
(h) His position did not ordinarily require such
extensive hours of work and duties.
contended that relevant considerations in this case are:
(a) F50 is a small consultancy firm;
(b) Most of its projects are located in regional
Victoria which necessitates travel;
(c) CW was a significant client and source of revenue;
(d) To win CW work necessitated F50 staff to travel or
stay overnight in Bendigo;
(e) It is expected that employees incur some travel at
their own expense to attend work;
(f) Ihalagamage was the only person with capacity to
take on the role; and
(g) Ihalagamage’s level of remuneration is
consistent with an expectation of working additional hours and travel outside
as evidenced by the Award exclusion.
F50’s operational requirements and the nature of
Ihalagamage’s position
evidence was that F50 works for governments, water authorities, construction
contractors and private developers and
the majority of its work is in regional
Victoria and New South Wales. F50 regularly expects staff to travel outside of
work hours.
Many projects are a few hours’ drive from the base offices in
Echuca or Melbourne. F50’s project management services
are quite often
performed partially from client sites. Often accommodation is provided to manage
workload and fatigue. Further, other
F50 employees including Heinrich were based
in project management roles on CW sites in Bendigo, Echuca and Cohuna. Heinrich
that each project is different and some have a more intense site
presence than others.
Ihalagamage’s
evidence was that prior to the Assignment, he performed engineering consulting
services across five to ten projects
at a time, in contrast to the Assignment,
which was labour hire into a role within an operational team. He agreed regional
site visits
were regularly required, however said most F50 work was engineering
projects which require less site presence, and travel requirements
are usually
infrequent, ad hoc and came with flexibility to informally take time off.
conclude based on this evidence that the majority of F50’s client work is
regionally based. Given this, I accept Heinrich’s
evidence that F50
project managers are regularly required to travel as part of their role. I also
accept that other F50 staff were
required to work from remote CW sites. Whilst I
accept that the work and travel requirements of the Assignment were
substantively
different to the types of projects Ihalagamage had previously
personally worked on, I am not satisfied that the Assignment was outside
range of projects generally required of F50 project managers.
conclude that F50’s operational requirements and the nature of
Ihalagamage’s position support a conclusion that the
additional hours were
reasonable, as they were undertaken in a context where the majority of
F50’s client work is regionally
based and F50 project managers are
regularly required to travel outside hours as part of their role.
Ihalagamage’s usual overtime requirements
was not in dispute that prior to the Assignment, Ihalagamage was occasionally
required to work reasonable additional hours, including
on weekends, for which
he received no additional remuneration. Whilst ad hoc, he estimated this to be
an average of two to three
hours per week. This supports a conclusion that the
requirement to work 40 hours per week on the Assignment was not of itself
unreasonable,
particularly in the context that the Assignment was temporary and
for a fixed initial six-month period only.
Ihalagamage’s salary
Ihalagamage’s
salary exceeded the highest Award minimum by 48.9 per cent initially and then
43.5 per cent (see paragraph
Whilst the provisions of the Award are not directly applicable to the Contract
claim, they indicate minimum the legal standard.
Ihalagamage’s salary was
well above the minimum necessary to compensate him for a 38 hour week and also
disentitled him to
Award benefits for additional hours. This illustrates that
Ihalagamage’s salary is capable of compensating him for work beyond
hours, and is expected to do so.
F50 efforts to mitigate/minimise additional hours
further matter which I consider supports a conclusion that the additional hours
were reasonable is F50’s attempts to mitigate
and minimise
Ihalagamage’s additional hours.
I conclude that F50 encouraged Ihalagamage to manage the role to minimise
overtime, and provided him with strategies to do so. F50
told Ihalagamage he had
autonomy to determine when he needed to be on site and when he could work
remotely and that he could and
should delegate some on-site work to more junior
the 3 May Email Ihalagamage in effect rejected this approach, stating that there
would be a significant site presence required
‘even if you don’t see
it that way.’ Nonetheless, Ihalagamage’s records illustrate a
reduction of days at
the Bendigo Site over the course of the Assignment which is
consistent with Heinrich’s evidence that he believed the on-site
would reduce over time. In total, there were only six weeks where Ihalagamage
was at the Bendigo site for three days, and
each of these occurred in the first
eight weeks of the Assignment. After that time, Ihalagamage mainly worked two
days per week at
the Bendigo Site and on one occasion worked one day, with a
commensurate reduction in travel time.
addition, F50 was responsive to the concerns raised by Ihalagamage in proposing
mitigatory measures, including the offer to provide
Ihalagamage with time in
lieu in the form of an occasional day off in respect of some of the additional
hours worked. It was not
in dispute that Ihalagamage was not required to work
for the final two weeks of his notice period. F50 contended this was akin to
providing time in lieu. I reject this characterisation, as Ihalagamage was
instructed not to attend work by F50 without reference
to his time in lieu.
However, time in lieu was available to Ihalagamage to request whilst the
employment was on foot, but he did
not request it.
Travel ordinarily required of an employee in their own
contended that because the additional hours were primarily travel time and not
‘work’ they should be viewed in a context
whereby most employees are
required to incur some travel time at their own expense. Ihalagamage said, and I
accept, that the driving
time between his home and F50’s office is five to
10 minutes, however he cycles to and from the F50 office for exercise. Whilst
Ihalagamage accepted that he did not get paid for travel between F50’s
office and his home, he disagreed that, to an equivalent
extent, his travel to
the Bendigo Site would be reasonable.
Ihalagamage
contended further that travel to the Bendigo Site was travel ‘for
work’ not ‘to work’ and that
standard practice was to
undertake this travel in working hours or charge back the client for the hours
incurred. Relatedly, Ihalagamage
contended that F50’s travel policies
required F50 to have completed a journey plan for him, and required all of his
to be undertaken during business hours.
was not in dispute that F50 has a published Travel Procedure. The Travel
Procedure stated that there were ‘above average’
requirements for F50 employees. It provided that: the total work day (work plus
driving) should not exceed 12 hours; driving
time should not exceed five hours
in one direction; driving should not exceed two trips in one day exceeding three
hours each; and
journey management plans were mandatory for travel beyond 200
kms from the home office. It was also not in dispute that on 21 November
Horkings emailed all F50 staff with the subject ‘Inter-Office Travel
Process.’ It stated that F50 would like to
encourage inter-office travel
and stated ‘[t]o assist with this please see below the formal process to
be followed.’
That process included a requirement that all travel be
pre-approved and that staff were required to arrange to travel and arrive
their destination in business hours. Travel longer than two hours was required
to be accompanied by an approved journey management
policies do not have the effect contended for by Ihalagamage. The Inter-Office
Travel Process email is confined in its application
to discretionary travel
between F50’s two offices. The travel being undertaken by Ihalagamage fell
within the permissible travel
under the Travel Procedure, except he exceeded 12
hours work and driving time on several days. However, after 30 April, this arose
because Ihalagamage did not undertake one direction of travel within billable
hours. The travel policies themselves do not support
a conclusion that the
required additional hours were unreasonable.
broadly, I accept Ihalagamage’s contention that the travel he undertook to
the Bendigo Site was of a different nature than
ordinary travel to and from work
by an employee. I don’t consider the two can be equated. However, I also
accept F50’s
contention that, in effect, the time claimed by Ihalagamage
ought be offset to the extent that employees’ time in travelling
from work is ordinarily not compensable. I consider it appropriate to have
regard to this notwithstanding that Ihalagamage
ordinarily used that journey to
exercise. I have had regard to this factor in a qualitative way only and make no
finding on what
an ordinary amount of time for travelling to and from work would
be for an employee. However, I would expect it to often significantly
Ihalagamage’s own travel time to F50’s office. In any event, even
the nominal five to ten minute journey referred
to by Ihalagamage would offset
each day of travel he has claimed by 10 to 20 minutes.
Lack of consultation prior to the Assignment
Ihalagamage
said, and I accept, there was no consultation with him prior to F50 committing
him to the Assignment. Ihalagamage said
that Horkings persuaded him to accept
the Assignment. An email from Horkings to Heinrich, Ihalagamage and others on 8
corroborates this, stating ‘We are on here. DK full time
starting ASAP and support as required.’ I conclude this occurred
accepted F50’s written proposal.
supports a conclusion that the additional hours were unreasonable. It was
foreseeable from the terms of the agreement between
CW and F50 that
Ihalagamage’s work and travel requirements would need to be addressed. Had
consultation with Ihalagamage occurred,
it might have resulted in an arrangement
which necessitated less additional hours. However, F50’s attempts to
mitigate or minimise
additional hours commenced shortly after the commencement
of the Assignment, which I consider reduces the significance of F50’s
failure to consult in advance.
Ihalagamage’s personal circumstances and family
responsibilities
accept that the Assignment resulted in Ihalagamage’s personal
circumstances and family responsibilities being adversely affected.
included time with his family, caring for his children, and also time travelling
to work which previously he was able to use
for exercise. This clearly supports
a conclusion that the additional hours were unreasonable.
The duration of the Assignment
am not persuaded that the 6-month duration of the Assignment makes the
additional hours unreasonable. It was a temporary project,
of a fixed duration,
meaning the period in which the additional hours was required was limited.
Further, as described above, it is
apparent from the pattern of hours relied
upon by Ihalagamage that the need for him to be present on site reduced after
the initial
8 week period.
Health and safety risks
accept that there are health and safety risks associated with long shifts of
work and driving, as is recognised in the Travel Procedure.
However, again,
shifts of this duration could have been avoided had Ihalagamage’s
undertaken one way travel within billable
hours and/or availed himself of
overnight stays.
Requirement to perform work unrelated to the Assignment
Ihalagamage’s
time sheets indicate only one occasion of work being billed to another client,
being Discovery Parks, on 26 April
2024, for 1 hour. I accept that Ihalagamage
may not have recorded other client work in his time sheets, however there is
reference to it on his own spreadsheet. I am not persuaded that there
was anything more than a nominal amount of work required for
other clients.
Notice that compensation was required
Ihalagamage
relies on having provided verbal and written notice that he would not undertake
the additional hours unless they were
compensated. However, I am not satisfied
that he did so, as he continued to undertake the Assignment following the 6 May
without complaint.
Industry practice
was no evidence of industry practice before the Court, and I have not had regard
to this factor.
Ihalagamage was the only person available for the Assignment
was not the subject of any evidence and I have disregarded it.
Conclusions as to whether the additional hours were reasonable
have already indicated my conclusion that Ihalagamage was not required by F50 to
work all of the additional hours he has claimed.
In that context, I conclude
that to the extent F50 required Ihalagamage to work additional hours, those
additional hours were reasonable.
I have reached this view despite F50’s
failure to consult Ihalagamage ahead of committing to the Assignment and despite
adverse effects it had on him personally and on his family responsibilities.
I have reached this view in light of the nature of the
business and
Ihalagamage’s role, his salary, F50’s additional efforts to mitigate
or minimise the required additional
hours, the temporary nature of the
Assignment and because the hours in effect absorbed what would ordinarily be
non-compensable employee
travel to and from work.
its heart, Ihalagamage’s main complaint in this proceeding was that he was
not paid for the additional hours. His position
was that he did not agree to
undertake the Assignment in the absence of compensation for his travel time.
However, on the evidence
before me, F50 never agreed to this position, and
Ihalagamage nonetheless undertook the Assignment. Ihalagamage’s own
was that he liked working at CW, the travel was taxing but if he had
been paid for it, it would have been reasonable. I am not satisfied
that F50 was
required to provide hour for hour time in lieu in order for the additional hours
to be reasonable.
Accordingly,
the claim is dismissed.
ATTACHMENT A
1 – CLAIMED HOURS AND DAYS ON SITE
Week commencing
Ordinary hours
Total hours
Claimed hours
Days on site
TABLE 2 – INCONSISTENCIES IN RECORDS AND CLAIM – WEEK
OF 15 APRIL 2024
Daily spreadsheet
Time sheet notes
Time sheet totals
54.5 h (54h 30m)
55.08 h (55h 5m)
See Irving, M,
The Contract
of Employment
Ed, LexisNexis Butterworths, 2019), 348
[6.31], 363 [6.41].
[2022] FCA 512
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (820 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter