URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/1000.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:26:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Shaikh v Prestige Car Connect Pty Ltd (Civil Claims) [2025] VCAT 1000 (7 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
CIVIL CLAIMS DIVISION
CIVIL CLAIMS LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO.
Claim by the purchaser of a used motor vehicle against a motorcar trader
– significant disregard for the Tribunal’s prehearing
Golem v Transport Accident Commission
[2002] VCAT 319
– sections 54 and 259 – 261 of the
Australian Consumer
Law (Victoria)
– onus of proof – applicant’s claim not
Naveed Shaikh
PRESTIGE CAR CONNECT PTY LTD ACN: 641 934 385
VCAT Bundoora
I Lulham, Deputy President
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
27 October 2025
DATE OF ORDER
7 November 2025
Shaikh v Prestige Car Connect Pty Ltd (Civil Claims) [2025] VCAT 1000
party has leave to be represented by a legal practitioner.
proceeding is dismissed.
application for costs shall be made in writing by 28 November 2025. This written
application need only say that costs are sought.
An applicant for costs need not
set out the grounds of the application, nor an itemisation of the costs sought.
If an application
for costs is made by 28 November 2025, the Tribunal will list
a costs hearing before me at which the parties can be
Deputy President
APPEARANCES:
For Applicant
For Respondent
Mr T Carmody of Counsel
applicant purchased a used 2011 Toyota Kluger whose odometer reading was around
123,000 km from the respondent in October 2023,
and in this proceeding issued in
June 2024, he seeks:
(a) a refund of the purchase price of $18,000.00, which implies orders declaring
that he is entitled to reject the vehicle under
sections 54 or 55 and of the
Australian Consumer Law (Victoria)
(b) alternatively damages of $12,877.90 which is the estimated cost of replacing
the vehicle’s engine with a second-hand engine;
(c) additional damages based on the cost of replacing the Kluger with a hire car
at various times, and out-of-pocket expenses alleged
to have been incurred by
the applicant when the Kluger was not operating.
respondent defends the claim on these bases:
(a) to the extent the claim is based on notions of breach of contract, that the
contract did not contain any express guarantees in
relation to the operation or
functionality of the Kluger;
(b) to the extent the claim is based on notions of there being an obligation to
repair the Kluger, the contention that there is no
individual cause of action
for failure to repair, either at common law or in legislation;
(c) the claim under section 55 of the
Australian Consumer Law (Victoria)
must fail because the applicant did not disclose a particular purpose for
his acquiring the Kluger, beyond the normal use of it as
a motor vehicle;
(d) because section 55 is inapplicable on the facts, the applicant’s
strongest claim is under section 54 of the
Australian Consumer Law
, but on the facts the respondent has not breached any obligation
arising from that section;
(e) the applicant is unable to succeed under section 54 of the
Consumer Law (Victoria)
, because he rejected an offer by the respondent to
replace the engine at its expense, insisting that the work be performed by
mechanic selected by the applicant. The respondent’s submission is
that by making this offer, as well as other matters, it
took active steps to
remedy the situation and fulfilled its obligations under the
Consumer Law (Victoria)
, only to be thwarted by the applicant;
(f) the respondent offered to replace the engine, but takes the view that doing
so would be unnecessary. It follows that, if caried
out, the applicant’s
insistence on having his mechanic replace the engine would result in
‘betterment’ –
that is, the applicant receiving an unnecessary
improvement to the vehicle at another person’s expense;
(g) the respondent’s mechanic discovered, when inspecting the Kluger for
the purposes of considering the applicant’s
claim, that the vehicle had
been involved in a front end collision whilst under the applicant’s
ownership, which throws doubt
on the cause of any defect in the engine which
might exist; and
(h) the applicant has driven the Kluger approximately 16,000 km since asserting
that its engine needed to be replaced, thus severely
diminishing the
plausibility of his claim and suggesting that the engine is not defective.
hearing was conducted on 27 October 2025. The applicant gave evidence. The
respondent was represented by Counsel, with leave,
and its director Mr Danny
Haykal gave evidence. Mr Haykal was not the salesperson in the transaction and
had little personal knowledge
of the matters giving rise to the proceeding. Mr
Haykal did have personal knowledge of the applicant making his complaint and the
steps taken by the parties thereafter.
PROCEDURAL FAIRNESS
Tribunal does not have procedural rules of the kind that exist in the Courts.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(Vic) the Tribunal is empowered to give directions for the expeditious
or fair hearing and determination of a proceeding. Directions
are given to the
parties by the making of an Order, either by a Member in
or at a directions
this proceeding, directions were first given by way of an Order made on 10
December 2024. That Order first dealt with an irregularity
arising from the
applicant’s mis-naming of the respondent, and then set out a timetable for
the applicant to file and serve
Points of Claim to more fairly put the
respondent on notice of the claims being made and the grounds for them; the
respondent to
file and serve Points of Defence responding to that document; the
respondent having the opportunity to bring a
counterclaim
and for the applicant
to file a Defence to any such counterclaim; and then for the parties to make
discovery of documents.
the interests of assisting self-represented parties to understand and comply
with their obligations, the Tribunal avoids using
‘discovery’. Paragraphs 5 and 6 of the Order of 10 December 2025
were in these terms:
if the respondent filed Points of Defence or a
counterclaim by the due date,
no later than 11 February 2025, each party must send to each other party and
VCAT a copy of all documents in their possession or control
which they want to
rely on in any hearing of their case or which might be harmful to their case or
if the respondent has not filed Points of Defence or a counterclaim by the
no later than 11 February 2025 the applicant must send to the other party and
VCAT a copy of all documents in the applicant’s
possession which they want
to rely on in any hearing of their case or which might be harmful to their case
or helpful to the case
of another party.
7 of the Order advised the parties of the consequences of the respondent not
filing Points of Defence or a counterclaim
by the due date, as follows:
‘the hearing will be undefended, but the applicant must still prove their
case and the respondent
may challenge the applicant’s evidence and
submissions but cannot cross-examine or present evidence on any fact or matter
the respondent could have identified in Points of Defence’.
on this topic, paragraph 8 of the Order warned the parties that ‘A party
will not be permitted to use or rely on any
document in the hearing that they
have not disclosed to the other parties and sent to VCAT under these
16 January 2025 the applicant wrote to the Tribunal seeking extensions of time,
and on 22 January 2025 the Tribunal made an Order
extending all time limits
in the Order of 10 December 2024. The effect of this Order was that the
applicant’s Points of Claim
had to be filed and served by 30 January 2025,
the respondent’s Points of Defence and any counterclaim by 20 February
and discovery of documents completed by 20 March 2025.
respondent filed and served Points of Defence and on 23 August 2025 the
Tribunal’s registry sent the parties a Notice of
Hearing with an Order
dated 23 August 2025. Paragraphs 1 and 2 of that Order supplemented the previous
orders for discovery of documents,
by stating in paragraph 2 that the documents
were to be presented in a paginated, logical sequence, and stating at paragraph
the documents had to be filed and served at least 4 weeks before the
hearing. In that sense paragraph 1 further extended the time
for the giving of
discovery, to 29 September 2025. Paragraph 7 of the Order stated that a party
could seek further directions by
completing and filing the appropriate form,
called the Application for Directions Hearing or Orders.
respondent filed Points of Defence dated 20 February 2025, but did not give
discovery of documents. It would not be acceptable
in a Court proceeding for a
party to simply not comply with an Order for discovery, but many cases in the
Tribunal are conducted
by parties who are self-represented, and not infrequently
do such parties say – eventually – that they did not literally
comply with such an Order as a way of signifying that their opponent has given
discovery of all relevant documents and that they
do not seek to refer to any
other documents. The Tribunal’s hands are somewhat tied when a
self-represented litigant conducts
itself in this way because it is up to the
opposing party to make an application for discovery in those circumstances if it
to do so. It is not the Tribunal’s role, and nor does it have the
resources, to ‘police’ its timetable orders.
The applicant did not
make any application in relation to the respondent’s discovery.
Friday, 24 October 2025 Counsel for the respondent filed and served a three-page
Outline of Submissions. This was done as a courtesy
to the applicant and the
Tribunal, rather than being done pursuant to an Order.
Remarkably,
receipt of this three-page document led the applicant to serve on the respondent
– at approximately 3:30am on the
morning of the hearing, Monday 27 October
2025 – some 64 pages of material followed by extracts from the
Australian Consumer Law (Victoria)
. In these new documents the applicant
gave discovery of additional documents such as copies of SMS correspondence and
short videos
of the Kluger being started; a quotation by Karworx Essendon of
February 2024 in relation to the repair of panel damage; and some
showing the applicant’s use of Uber cars for his children and relating to
the applicant’s alleged loss of income
as an Uber driver himself.
effect of these new documents, if admitted by the Tribunal, would be to amend
the applicant’s claim at the ‘last minute’,
particularly as
the respondent and its legal practitioners could not have known of the documents
the circumstances, a bit of time was taken up at the beginning of the hearing
examining whether the respondent opposed the filing
and service of this new
bundle of documents, whether the respondent would be prejudiced, and whether any
application for an adjournment
would be made. The applicant also sought time to
have a discussion with his wife as to whether he wanted to proceed with the
and whether he would seek an adjournment on the grounds that the
respondent had legal representation.
the end, the applicant said he wished to proceed with the hearing. He then
handed up a folder of these new documents. As I said
to the applicant in the
hearing, they had obviously been prepared with a good deal of care, in much the
way that a lawyer would prepare
a written submission with exhibits. The
respondent said that it was content to proceed with the hearing and did not
object to the
new documents being received by the Tribunal or any amendment of
the applicant’s claim which followed from the filing of those
THE EVIDENCE
I said above, Mr Haykal of the respondent was not involved in the sale of the
Kluger to the applicant, and only had personal knowledge
of the complaint being
made and the steps taken by the parties thereafter. As such much of what he said
amounted to assertions of
what the respondent ‘would have done’
based on his understanding of what the respondent usually does in conducting its
business. Mr Haykal could not directly contradict the applicant on much of his
evidence, and so the respondent’s challenges
to the applicant’s
evidence were largely based on submissions that his evidence was implausible and
contradictory.
do accept Mr Haykal’s evidence that the types of cars which the respondent
usually sells are ‘high-end, prestige vehicles’
and that this Kluger
would not have been offered for sale in the normal course of things. What
happened here was that the Kluger
was owned by one of the respondent’s
former subcontractors (a salesperson), and he traded in the Kluger in a
transaction with
the respondent, and then conducted the sale of the Kluger on
behalf of the respondent.
seems that if the Kluger had not come from the subcontractor, the respondent
would have disposed of it through the normal motor
trade channel of sending it
off to auction. However, Mr Haykal did not seek to deny – and nor could he
– that the respondent
had sold the Kluger to the applicant in its capacity
as a motor car trader.
applicant’s evidence was to the effect that he bought the Kluger on 17
October 2023. The next day he noticed white/grey
smoke coming from the vehicle.
He contacted the salesperson – ‘Mac’ – who asked the
applicant to bring the
car to the dealership on 23 October 2023 so that the
respondent could get the car checked by its mechanic. On 20 October 2023 the
applicant sent an SMS which he submits constituted rejection of the Kluger.
19 of the new bundle of documents contains an SMS from the applicant to the
respondent on 19 October 2023, in which the applicant
wrote, ‘The squeaky
sound is still there when you press brakes. Also when turning right or left
there is a slight knocking
sound from the steering. Additionally there is a lot
of white whitish grey smoke when I start the car, what could it be. Can you
please get it check(ed)’.
20-21 of the new bundle of documents contains an SMS from the applicant to the
respondent on 20 October 2023, in which the applicant
wrote, ‘Thanks for
your call yesterday. I had a check with local mechanic and they say the smoke
coming out on start and revving
the acceleration shows some issues with engine.
You suggested to come on Monday to get it checked by your mechanic that I can
today if you can arrange the check and fixing.
Please fix the issues
appropriately otherwise I want to return the car as soon as possible as whole
family is stressed due to this
. Thanks for your understanding’.
[Emphasis added]
respondent replied, ‘bring it Monday. I’ll take it to my mechanic
and I’ll sort it out for you thank you’.
21 of the new bundle of documents contains an SMS from the applicant to the
respondent on 24 October 2023, in which the applicant
wrote, ‘As discussed
car has been dropped to your showroom and keys handed over. Please get the
comprehensive testing and fixing
a problem with complete engine and exhaust,
including fuel injectors, coolant engine oil mixing, if any cracks, sensors et
causing this issue. Please also ask your mechanic to share the report
testing results. Also please get the brakes done properly.
Please let me know
the time when the car will be ready. Don’t want to upset and stressed the
kids. Thanks for your understanding’.
25 October 2023 the respondent advised the applicant by an SMS message that the
respondent’s mechanic was picking the car
up in the morning. On 30 October
2023 the respondent advised the applicant that the car was still with the
mechanic. On 1 November
2023 the respondent advised the applicant that it had
just collected the applicant’s car from the mechanic, and it was being
cleaned. The respondent wrote, ‘They’ve changed the oil to thicker
oil. The service they done when we’ve done the
roadworthy they put thin
oil and I think they put more than normal. It’s all good now. Let me know
what time you can pick (it
applicant replied, ‘Which thick oil they have put now. Can you tell me the
specs’, to which the respondent replied,
‘Brother I don’t have
a clue. I give it to him to do it. I’m just telling you what he told
applicant replied, ‘As discussed, I am taking the car conditionally based
on agreement that I will check it. If the issue
is not resolved or any other
issues found, then you will take return of the car. Thanks for your
understanding and support’.
Two minutes later the applicant wrote,
‘As discussed please also get the service and test report from the
mechanic who worked
on it’. The respondent replied, ‘Let’s be
positive about this. Drive it see how you go and let me know. I’m
will be fine’.
is no suggestion from the respondent that these SMS messages, which certainly
appear to have come from ‘Mac’ who
then worked for the respondent as
a subcontractor and had been the owner of the Kluger, were sent without the
actual or ostensible
authority of the respondent.
above exchange shows the following:
(a) Regrettably, the applicant seems to have paid a lot more attention to the
condition of the Kluger after buying it than before.
(b) The applicant did not expressly refer to provisions of the
Consumer Law (Victoria),
but of course the legislation does not require a
purchaser to expressly refer to them. The important issue is the substance of
communications.
(c) The applicant identified defects in the Kluger – a squeak in the
brakes, a slight knocking sound in the steering, and a
quantity of white grey
smoke being emitted on starting. These defects as described do not amount to a
‘major failure’
of the Kluger within the meaning of that term in the
Australian Consumer Law (Victoria).
I will return to this point.
(d) The respondent’s request for the vehicle, so that the respondent could
have its mechanic attempt to identify defects, is
consistent with the respondent
taking the steps required of it when a purchaser of a car identifies defects
which do not amount to
a ‘major failure’.
(e) It is unsurprising as a matter of simple logic that the applicant was
unimpressed by the respondent saying that the mechanic
had supplied
‘thicker oil’. It might well be the case in some situations that the
be very important and that replacing the oil
was appropriate. However, the respondent’s description in the brief SMS
would not instil confidence in a purchaser.
(f) The applicant’s requests of 24 October 2023, on page 21 of the bundle,
could and should have been much more carefully expressed.
The Tribunal
understands that people express themselves in shorthand, and write quickly, when
sending SMS messages and that they
do not compose SMS messages with the same
care as they would when drafting a formal letter. I also observe that several of
messages which I have quoted above contain the ‘praying
hands’ emoji to signify that the performance of requested steps
appreciated.
(g) The applicant is an engineer, and I do not doubt that if he was writing on
behalf of a client, he would express himself carefully.
communications, though, he used expressions consistent with him asking the
respondent to do things, rather than demanding
that they be done. He wrote,
‘Please get the comprehensive testing and fixing a problem with complete
engine and exhaust,
including fuel injectors, coolant engine oil mixing, if any
cracks, sensors et cetera causing this issue. ... Also please get the
done properly’. The use of the words ‘complete engine’ are
unfortunate but I interpret them to mean that
the applicant was asking that the
engine be completely repaired, and that he was not saying that he was demanding
a replacement –
a complete engine. I interpret the words ‘including
fuel injectors, coolant engine oil mixing, if any cracks, sensors et
not as meaning that the applicant was asserting that the injectors
needed to be replaced, that there were cracks, or that sensors
needed to be
replaced. Rather, I see those words as indicating that the applicant had heard
from his mechanic a list of the things
which might cause smoke in an engine, or
that he had found general information to that effect elsewhere. I do not
interpret the words
as meaning that the applicant was asserting that there were
specific problems with the injectors or sensors, or that there were cracks
anywhere. Because of this, I interpret the applicant’s SMS of 24 October
2023 as only amounting to a request that the respondent
get the Kluger
(h) In the circumstances, I conclude that the applicant’s SMS message of
20 October 2023 which contained the words, ‘Please
fix the issues
appropriately otherwise I want to return the car as soon as possible as whole
families stressed due to this issue’,
did not constitute the
applicant rejecting the Kluger.
applicant gave evidence that ‘on 10 January 2024, at the
respondent’s request, he entrusted the Kluger to Karworx
Essendon for
repairs. The respondent agreed to bear the cost of these
his oral evidence, the applicant said that he had a discussion with the
respondent about this, which amounted to the respondent
persuading him not to
exercise his right of cooling off under the contract for the purchase of the
Kluger. In fact, though, the contractual
cooling off period had expired by then.
applicant said that before giving possession of the Kluger to Karworx Essendon,
he had his own mechanic, Airport Toyota, inspect
it. He said that by this time,
the respondent had had 3 months to repair the Kluger but it had not done so. The
applicant did not
regard the Kluger as having been repaired. He had kept driving
it, but he observed that it would blow smoke and sometimes lose power.
applicant was using the Kluger as an Uber car, as well as for his personal use,
and he was concerned that Uber might deregister
him as a driver on the basis of
customers complaining about the condition of the Kluger.
party has given discovery of a document from Karworx Essendon concerning repairs
in January 2024.
only Karworx Essendon document presented to the Tribunal is its
estimate/quotation dated 15 February 2024, addressed to the applicant,
concerning panel damage.
Essendon gave an estimate of $1,463.00 including GST for replacing the front
bumper bar and a guard liner, and carrying out
necessary painting.
party has discovered an invoice from Karworx Essendon, or any other panel
repairer, for that work however the applicant indicated
in his evidence that the
damage had been sustained when the Kluger struck a kangaroo, and that the panel
damage was repaired. Certainly,
if the applicant was concerned at Uber customers
giving him bad reviews, then it stands to reason he would have had the panel
repaired promptly.
16 April 2024 the applicant wrote to the respondent, in much more formal terms
than the previous SMS messages.
applicant wrote that Karworx Essendon told the applicant in April 2024 that
‘all the issues have been fixed including the
engine and smoke
issues’, and that he collected the Kluger at around 3:30pm on 12 April
2024. The applicant said he observed
that the vehicle was still ‘throwing
smoke’ and that the engine was ‘missing’ when driving at
90/100 km/h.
In this email the applicant expressly referred to section 54 of the
Australian Consumer Law (Victoria)
, and said that he was formally
requesting the full refund of the purchase price, reimbursement of the expenses
he incurred in renting
an alternative car when the Kluger was not available, and
any future car rental cost he incurs. He wrote that if these claims were
addressed within 7 business days he would explore further legal avenues to seek
redress. That is, he did not specifically say
that he would reject the
Haykal replied on behalf the
respondent,
saying that the
statutory warranty under the
Motor Car Traders Act 1986
(Vic) did not
apply because the Kluger was too old. He wrote, ‘We have made every effort
to resolve the issues with your vehicle
in good faith, including arranging and
financing repairs through Karworx Essendon. Unfortunately, despite these
efforts, the vehicle’s
problems have persisted. ... Given the
circumstances and the age and mileage of the vehicle, the options for recourse
under the warranty
are limited. However, I am committed to finding a feasible
resolution for both parties. Let’s discuss how we can move forward
here. Unfortunately buying the vehicle back is not an option. I am available for
a meeting or a call ...’
the references to the
Motor Car Traders Act 1986
(Vic) are irrelevant, in
that this Act does not exclude the consumer guarantee provisions of the
Australian Consumer Law (Victoria),
I can only interpret the words
‘buying the vehicle back is not an option’ as signifying to the
applicant that the respondent
would oppose any submission on his part that he
was entitled to reject the Kluger.
8 May 2024 the applicant wrote to Mr Haykal and advised that he had obtained an
estimate of $12,877.90 from Airport Toyota for
the replacement of the
Kluger’s engine with a second-hand engine. The applicant sought payment of
that sum within 7 days.
respondent did not reply and in due course the applicant issued this
proceeding.
pages 58 & 59 of the new bundle of documents, the applicant discloses
records of having spent $887.45 on Uber fares, which
he said was the cost of
getting two of his children, aged 11 and 14, to and from school when the Kluger
could not be used. He said
that both children are under 15 years of age and that
he did not consider public transport to be safe.
applicant also gave evidence that he was making an income as an Uber driver of
around $1,000.00 a month, using the Kluger for
that purpose until January 2024.
The applicant had not gone to the extent of giving discovery of tax records but
did produce a history.
He explained that he is an engineer by profession and
looked at the Uber driving as a spare time second job, which he was performing
to maintain the living standards of his family.
the applicant was cross-examined, a few factual matters which potentially
favoured the respondent emerged:
(a) The applicant inspected the Kluger before purchasing it. He test drove it.
He noticed some issues with the Kluger before he agreed
to buy it, namely some
noise in the brakes but the salesperson said – orally – they were
‘small issues’ which
the respondent would fix. The applicant
conceded that he had no written evidence to verify this point, such as SMS
(b) The respondent supplied a Certificate of Roadworthiness (‘RWC’)
with the Kluger. This occurred after the applicant
had advised the dealer of the
noise in the brakes and the ‘small issues’. The applicant
appreciates that the RWC was
issued by an independent person, but he notes that
he does not know what steps the certifier took before issuing the RWC.
(c) When the applicant took the Kluger to his mechanic to check, after he had
purchased it, he did not ask his mechanic to repair
anything. He only asked the
mechanic to check the vehicle. The mechanic told the applicant that he observed
smoke. The applicant
had not seen smoke before he purchased the Kluger, and by
way of explanation he said that when he did the test drive, he did not
engine when the Kluger was stationary.
(d) The applicant says that now, smoke is seen on starting the Kluger when it is
stationary.
(e) The last time the applicant saw the Kluger emit smoke was on 18 October
2025. When Counsel for the respondent suggested that
was quite close to the
hearing, the applicant answered that he had driven the Kluger to the hearing. He
said his wife also drives
the Kluger.
(f) The applicant concedes that the respondent does not conduct business as a
mechanic, and that when in October 2023 the respondent
took the Kluger to its
mechanic, that mechanic changed the oil. The applicant conceded that at that
point the respondent did everything
that the applicant had then asked for, and
that the respondent relied on a mechanic’s advice.
(g) Addressing issues under
Australian Consumer Law
(Victoria),
which refers to fitness for disclosed purposes, the applicant
said that using a passenger vehicle for the purpose of being an Uber
not a ‘commercial use’. The precise meaning of that phrase to the
applicant was not explored in cross examination
but I gained the impression that
it may relate to the issue of whether an owner would pay a higher premium for
insurance on an Uber
car compared to a private use vehicle. Counsel for the
respondent suggested that the applicant’s ‘purpose’ of
the Kluger was simply to use it as a car, so that in this case there
was no important difference between
sections 54
Consumer Law (Victoria).
The applicant summarised the ‘rules’
which Uber imposes on drivers, and under which it can remove a driver’s
to the Uber app if their car is too old or of unacceptable appearance.
(h) The applicant had ceased using the Kluger as an Uber car by January 2024.
(i) When the applicant took the Kluger to Airport Toyota, it told him that it
suspected that the Kluger had a poor service history
and that it had sludge in
the engine.
Airport Toyota
quoted $754.00 to carry out a proper inspection of the Kluger, but the applicant
did not proceed.
(j) The applicant relies on the Airport Toyota documents, amongst other things,
to prove the defects which he alleges. He acknowledges
that because he did not
proceed to get a proper inspection by Airport Toyota, his evidence from that
source is weak.
(k) Airport Toyota told the applicant that they could repair the engine in the
Kluger, but that replacing the engine was ‘better’.
(l) The applicant did not accept Karworx’s quote to repair the panel
damage to the Kluger. There is no evidence of how that
panel damage was
repaired. The applicant is not a mechanic but he believes this front end
collision was not detrimental to the engine.
the hearing the applicant played some short videos of the Kluger, which he had
filmed on his mobile phone. As neither party called
an expert witness, these
videos must be seen ‘as is’ without the benefit of a technical
explanation. All I can say about
the videos is that they suggest that if a
person starts the Kluger cold, and revs the engine as if in preparation for a
at the Thunderdome, some white smoke comes from the exhaust. I cannot
conclude from the videos that the smoke is evidence of a defect.
Occasionally
one sees cars accelerate rapidly on the freeway, and emit smoke, only for the
smoke to end when the car goes back to
a cruising speed. That sort of event does
not prove that the car which accelerated has a defect. The fact that the smoke
rather than black or dirty, suggests that it might not be the result
of a defect.
ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION
Considering
all the evidence, and bearing in mind the fundamental principle that the
applicant in a civil legal proceeding bears the
onus of proof, I must dismiss
this proceeding. The applicant has simply not proven his case.
applicant bought a used car. It had travelled 123,000 km over some 12 years.
This was quite mild use. The Kluger is not a ‘high
is not as perfect as a new car would be. Nor did it cost as much
as a new model. When it is alleged that a supplier of goods has not
the consumer guarantee under
section 54(1)
Australian Consumer Law
that the goods must be of acceptable quality, the definition of
that term in
sections 54(2)
& (3) must be considered
They provide
that goods are of acceptable quality if they are as -
(a) fit for
all the purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly supplied; and
(b) acceptable in appearance and finish; and
(c) free from defects; and
(d) safe; and
(e) durable;
as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods [including any hidden defects of the goods] would
regard as acceptable
having regard to ...
(a) the nature of the goods; and
(b) the price of the goods [if relevant]; and
any statements or representations made about them.
definition in
sections 54(2)
& (3) puts the goods which are the subject of a
dispute in context. Read with the concept of ‘a reasonable consumer fully
acquainted with the state and condition of the goods’
sections 54(2)
(3) operate such that a 12 year old car is not expected or required to be as
free from defects, safe and durable as a new car.
Australian Consumer Law
requires the respondent to have sold this Kluger in a condition
which was as acceptable as an average 12 year old Kluger of similar
bit of smoke produced during heavy acceleration does not prove a defect.
one assumed, for the moment, that the Kluger had some defects for the purposes
Australian Consumer Law (Victoria)
, sections 259
– 261 dictate the remedies which are available to the consumer.
Determining whether the goods have experienced
a ‘major failure’ is
central. Put simply, if goods are defective the consumer is usually entitled to
If there is a major
failure the consumer can dictate the remedy (for example, to reject the goods
and be refunded the purchase price,
or to be awarded damages); but if the
failure is not major the supplier can dictate the remedy (for example to repair
the goods).
I have indicated above, I find that the Kluger did not exhibit a major failure.
The fact that the applicant drove the Kluger to
the hearing in October 2025, two
years after he purchased it, establishes this fact.
respondent did not deny the applicant a remedy. Even though Mr Haykal of the
respondent did not consider that it was necessary
to replace the engine, the
respondent offered to do this at its own expense and the applicant rejected that
offer. Having elected
to reject the offer, and to issue proceedings which has
caused the respondent to expend time and money to defend itself, the applicant
cannot now change his mind.
applicant has the burden of proof. He has some ‘commonsense
arguments’ to the effect that the engine is defective,
but he does not
have sufficient evidence to prove this. The videos don’t. The superficial
cost estimate from Airport Toyota
the applicant had established that the respondent was liable, his claim for loss
of income might have failed for lack of evidence,
and his claim for the cost of
his children getting to and from school by riding in Uber cars might have failed
on the basis that
it was not an example of damages but rather of an expenditure
which the applicant simply chose to make. However, because the applicant
proven that the respondent is liable, it is unnecessary to drill into the
damages claimed.
proceeding must be dismissed and I will reserve costs.
Deputy President
Orders are also made by
registrars of the Tribunal, under formal
delegations.
The respondent
did not bring a counterclaim.
These extensions of time were
granted without reference to the respondent, but the respondent's rights are
protected under this
procedure because it could seek directions itself.
Golem v Transport Accident Commission
[2002] 19 VAR 265
the Tribunal observed that
section 98(1)(d)
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic), which speaks
of the Tribunal's obligation to conduct each proceeding with as little formality
and technicality as practicable
as the requirements of the act and the proper
consideration of the matters before it permit did not mean that
‘Rafferty's Rules’
prevail in the Tribunal. This important
observation seems to been overlooked frequently since the Covid pandemic and the
in parties filing documents electronically.
23 of the bundle.
Pages 24 & 25 of the
This is stated at
paragraph 4 of the applicant's points of claim dated 29 January
Page 57 of the new
bundle of documents.
of the new bundle of
Page 39 of the
new bundle of documents.
Page 40 of the new bundle of documents.
In a nutshell, if a
car’s engine oil is not replaced when it should be, it becomes thick with
impurities and through dehydration.
This puts strain and pressure on engine
components and by spreading impurities it can cause components to wear.
In saying this I exclude
limitation periods and other sophisticated topics.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (251 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter