URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2005/2702.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:32:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Asher MP v Department of Innovation, Industry and Regional Development (General) [2005] VCAT 2702 (20 December 2005)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
GENERAL LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. G1011/2004
Freedom of Information Act
– names and projected job
numbers of entities receiving facilitation – private investment –
some objections to
release of information – exemptions claimed pursuant to
(4) – public interest.
[2005] VCAT 2702
Louise Asher MP
RESPONDENT:
Department of Innovation, Industry and Regional Development
WHERE HELD:
His Honour Judge Bowman
DATE OF HEARING:
13 & 14 December 2005
DATE OF REASONS:
20 December 2005
(1) Application dismissed, following agreement that a mathematical error in the
information provided was of no significance.
Judge Bowman
Vice President
APPEARANCES:
For the Applicant: Mr M A Adams QC, with Mr S Rowland
For the Respondent: Mr R M Niall of Counsel
REASONS FOR DECISION
1 This application comes before me pursuant to
Information Act
(“the Act”). It is brought by the
applicant, Louise Asher (“Asher”) who seeks to review a decision of
Department of Innovation, Industry and Regional Development (“the
Department”). The decision of which a review is sought
is a decision
taken by the Department on 12
November 2004. The decision so taken
is one to refuse to Asher access to certain documents, which could be described
as parts of
one document, on the grounds of exemptions under the Act. The
refusal followed a request by Asher for documents relating to the
facilitation
of investment projects for the financial year 2002-03.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS
2 I am conscious of the objects of the Act as set out in
I am conscious of
the method of interpretation of the Act to be adopted as set out in
am aware of the various authorities, which could be summarised as standing for
the proposition that it is proper to give the relevant
provisions of the Act
that construction which would further, rather than hinder, free access to
information, and that the Act is
to be interpreted generally in favour of access
but not so as to override specific provisions. I am also aware of the
proposition
that the Department bears the onus of proof in attempting to
establish that the documents are exempt documents. I am conscious of
statements made from time to time by those on both sides of Parliament
concerning the desirability of there being openness
and accountability in
Government and by agencies. I have borne the above matters in mind, and have
applied them, in coming to a
decision in the present case.
3 I am also conscious of the fact that some care has to be taken by me in
formulating the wording of this judgment so that details
of the information
sought are not revealed. I am aware that, should the result be in favour of
Asher, I should not render any appeal
process effectively useless by
“letting the cat out of the bag” in my reasons. Similarly, should
the result fall the
other way, I should not descend into such detail as to give
Asher the information which she seeks, whilst at the same time finding
4 In the present case, counsel who appeared on behalf of Asher had the
opportunity to examine what became the document in issue,
they having given an
undertaking pursuant to
of the Act. As I have remarked on previous
occasions, when this can be done the conduct of the case becomes very much
have little doubt but that it assisted greatly in having the area of
dispute considerably narrowed in this case.
5 Mr Adams QC, with Mr Rowland of counsel, appeared on behalf of Asher. Mr
Niall of counsel appeared on behalf of the Department.
Oral evidence was
received from Mr Ben Foskett, the Chief Executive Officer of Invest Victoria,
and from Mr Dermuid McCabe, the
Freedom of Information Officer attached to the
Department. Each was called on behalf of the Department and was subject to
cross-examination.
The balance of the material placed before me was introduced
by way of the tendering of documents. Very helpful submissions in relation
the law were received from counsel on behalf of each party.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND AND THE DOCUMENT IN
6 In making any findings of fact, I am so doing solely in relation to this
application and in order to place it in context. Should
there be any dispute
between any entity involved in the facilitation of investment process and the
Department, the following findings
of fact are in no way intended to be
determinative of any issue “on the merits”. The material received
was solely so
received for the purposes of the freedom of information process.
7 The Government of the State of Victoria has, as one of its important
objectives, a desire to encourage investment in this State.
In order to achieve
this, and in order to promote job growth, what is described as facilitation is
advanced to various entities
which may wish to set up business here or establish
a new or expanded adjunct to an existing business. The facilitation so provided
can be financial or non-financial. In other words, it may be by way of a
specific grant of funds. However, the bulk of facilitation
provided is by way
of other Government assistance. Examples which were given were the adjustment
of rail timetables, assistance
in dealing with local authorities and the like.
8 I gather that some business entities apply for such facilitation, and others
are approached. A database is run by the Department
in relation to
facilitation. As I understand it, entities seeking facilitation firstly give
broad general instructions and information.
Later this is condensed by Invest
Victoria on behalf of the Department into an electronic form which ultimately
becomes the basis
of the databank. Thus, it could be said that the information
fed into the databank is so fed upon instructions. The information
includes the
projected capital investment value which the entity seeking facilitation will
invest, and the number of jobs which will
thus be created. There is also
recorded on the electronic form whether or not external release is authorised
for the data. In other
words, the client manager handling the application
records as to whether or not the client, or prospective investor, desires
confidentiality
or is agreeable to information concerning the application being
9 In relation to the general approach adopted by the Department, I accept the
evidence of Mr Foskett that, generally, the Department
sees it as an advantage
to release, if not publicise, details of projected investments and job growth.
This assists in creating
an image of a job being performed well. I also accept
his evidence that, if the client or proposed investor seeks confidentiality,
this wish is respected. Thus, in the present case, and as shall be discussed,
the Department released information in relation to
all entities that consented
to this being done.
10 The document concerning which a dispute exists in the present case is an
extract or summary obtained from the database. It lists
some 165 entities
(“the entities”) in relation to which the Department states
facilitation was afforded in the year under
consideration. Previously the
information sought to be released was the name of each entity to which such
facilitation was allegedly
extended, the amount of projected capital investment
which the entity would be making, and the projected number of jobs which would
thus be created. The request for details of the capital sum to be invested has
since been abandoned. Only some of the names and
job projections remain in
11 One of the original grounds for resisting the release of the information was
that the task of consulting the 165 entities and
obtaining their instructions as
to the release would be too time consuming and onerous. Argument concerning
this was heard by Senior
Member Megay on 24
June last. Without
going into the reasons of her detailed ruling, she rejected this argument by the
Department and, as a result,
ensued. Some had indicated their preparedness to release information at the
of giving original instructions. At the end of the consultation process,
99 consented to the release of the information (this including
previously so consented). 42 objected to such release. 4 were not able to be
gave no formal response, in the sense
that, for example, they were undecided, or were considering the matter, and then
nothing further
12 Accordingly, the Department has released the information in regard to those
99 entities which consented to or did not object to
such a course being adopted.
This seems to me to be both sensible and consistent with the stated approach of
Mr Foskett. What remains
in dispute is the information relating to the
remaining 62 entities where there has been either objection taken by them to the
of information or where there has been no, or no formal, response
following consultation. In relation to that latter group, I accept
original instruction of each entity was that external release of the information
was not authorised. I should add that
there may be some mathematical error in
relation to the figures with which I have been supplied. A chart provided by Mr
Niall would
indicate that information has been released in relation to 99
entities and withheld in relation to 62. That adds up to 161. However,
total number of entities is shown as 165. The difference of 4 may relate to the
entities described as uncontactable. As shall
be discussed, this apparent
discrepancy probably does not affect the ruling which I shall give.
13 Against the above background, I now turn to a summary of the submissions
advanced on behalf of the parties. Because of the onus
which it bears, the
Department assumed the carriage of the action and I shall firstly turn to the
case put on its behalf.
THE CASE FOR THE
14 The submissions advanced by Mr Niall on behalf of the Department could be
summarised as follows. As Mr Niall advanced his submissions
concerning the
exemptions separately rather than globally, I shall deal with them under
separate headings.
15 The exemptions relied upon by the Department are those found in
(4) of the Act. The Department submits that release of the remaining parts of
the document would disclose information which relates
to matters of a business,
commercial or financial nature and such disclosure would be likely to expose the
entities unreasonably
to disadvantage within the meaning of
s.34(1)(b).
Alternatively, such disclosure would expose the Department unreasonably to
disadvantage within the meaning of
Application for Exemption Pursuant to
Section 34(1)(b)
16 That the various entities are business, commercial or financial undertakings
is admitted. It is also basically indisputable that
the information which would
be disclosed upon release relates to matters of a business, commercial or
financial nature. Thus, the
dispute in relation to this exemption revolves
around the issue of whether the disclosure would be likely to expose the
unreasonably to disadvantage. In this regard, it does not have to be
established that it is certain or almost certain that disadvantage
will result.
It only has to be “likely”. The word “unreasonably” is
related to the balance to be struck
between accountability and confidentiality.
Reference is also made to
of the Act. In assessing whether any
disadvantage has been so suffered, it is not simply a question of looking just
at the document,
but one also looks at what other information can be gleaned
from it. In the present instance the release of the document reveals
that the entities are proposing to invest in Victoria and that they have sought
government assistance. These matters in
themselves have the potential to create
a disadvantage. Particularly when combined with the further information
concerning the number
of projected jobs that will be created, this gives
competitors valuable information. Large companies in particular (and there are
some on the list) take into account a wide range of factors when working out the
pricing of goods and the likely pricing of their
competitors’ goods. The
release of such information may act to the disadvantage of an entity that is,
for example, intending
to purchase additional property into which to expand, or
seeking further rental space.
17 In relation to “disadvantage”; the statements made by Young CJ
and O’Bryan J in
Accident Compensation Commission v Croom
[1991] VicRp 72
must be viewed against the background of the facts in that case, which
related to an investigator’s report and a medical report
concerning an
injured worker. The disadvantage suffered has to be in the context of the
conduct of the business.
18 Those entities which have objected to the release of the information are in a
particularly strong position. The information was
imparted by them in
confidence. There has been consultation with them. They have either maintained
their position or now wish that
confidence to exist. Those who have not
responded may have so failed to do for a variety of reasons including delay,
lack of appreciation
of the issues and the like. The fact remains that they
initially objected to the release of the information, and nothing that has
occurred since has changed that position. Confidentiality should also be
maintained in respect of them.
19 Further, these entities run a reputational risk. If the information is
released against their wishes, and subsequently, for whatever
reason, the
projected number of jobs is not reached, such entities may be the subject of
unfair criticism.
(b) The Application for Exemption Pursuant
Section 34(4)
20 It is common ground that the Department is engaged in trade or commerce.
There is also no issue but that the document contains
information of a business,
commercial or financial nature. The argument centres on whether disclosure
would be likely to expose
the Department unreasonably to disadvantage. The same
submissions are put as to the meaning of the words “likely”,
“unreasonably”
and “disadvantage”, save that there is no
equivalent to
which applies to
21 In relation to the disadvantage suffered by the Department, the attracting of
investment to Victoria is a high priority for the
Department and the Government.
In attracting entities to invest in this state, there is competition both with
other states and internationally.
In balancing accountability and the need for
confidentiality, this is not a situation where full transparency is required.
Department did not blindly accept the need for confidentiality. It
consulted with the entities. Some have requested confidentiality
Department has respected that request. If the information is then released in a
situation where the Department has been
requested to provide confidentiality and
has agreed to this, its ability to attract future investments will be damaged.
22 Further, it is to be remembered that what is being dealt with here is private
investment as opposed to public investment. The
matter does not concern such
things as the building of hospitals or railways. This is relevant to both the
issue of full transparency
and to the public interest. In the present situation
there is a real risk of loss of investment. The evidence of Mr Foskett
establishes
this. Furthermore, there is adequate scrutiny by the
Auditor-General and by the provision of an annual report. If there exists
problem in relation to the wording of the annual report for the relevant year,
the releasing of this information does nothing to
improve public accountability.
The operation of
so as to result in release is not warranted.
THE CASE FOR ASHER
23 The submissions advanced by Mr Adams and Mr Rowland on behalf of Asher could
be summarised as follows. In his submissions, Mr
Adams made a more global
attack upon the Department’s reliance on the exemptions. Therefore I
shall not divide this summary
under sub-headings as I did with the summary of
the submissions advanced by Mr Niall.
24 The central issue is whether the release of the information is likely to
expose the entities or the Department unreasonably to
disadvantage.
“Disadvantage” was described in
by O’Bryan J at
page 331 as follows:-
“In my opinion, the word
“disadvantage” in the context of trade or commerce and information
of a business, commercial
or financial nature means injury of a financial
25 Whilst “disadvantage” does not have to be proved strictly in
terms of dollars and cents, it does not extend, for example,
to embarrassment.
The argument of the Department based upon damage to reputations is a nonsense.
26 The reporting by government departments to Parliament is of intense public
interest. Documents referred to in this regard, and
placed before the Tribunal,
include the Second Reading Speech upon the introduction of the
Information (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill
1999; a policy statement dated 11
October 2000 and headed
“Insuring Openness and Probity in Victorian Government Contracts”;
and a policy document headed
“Integrity in Public Life”, a document
setting out various standards which would be adopted by a Labour Government and
which includes a section on freedom of information.
27 Already the application by Asher has flushed out one error in relation to the
way the statistics relating to facilitation were
recorded in the annual report
for the relevant year. The manner of that reporting, particularly in relation
to describing new investments
as being facilitated and announced as opposed to
being projected, is quite misleading and the review by the Auditor-General does
not seem to have picked that up. Reference is also made to complaints made by
two entities to the effect that they had received
no facilitation. This was
during the consultation process following the orders of Senior Member Megay.
The explanations given in
relation to this by Mr Foskett and Mr McCabe were
inadequate. Their evidence generally was insufficient to satisfy the burden of
28 In relation to the question of unreasonable disadvantage,
“unreasonable” does refer to the balancing exercise that
undertaken between the competing factors of public accountability and the need
for confidentiality. However, the intention
of the legislature as indicated in
the Second Reading Speech should be borne in mind. That part of the Second
Reading Speech dealing
with commercial confidentiality is emphasised in
particular.
29 Furthermore, s.34(2)(c) indicates as a consideration “Whether the
information could be disclosed without causing substantial
harm to the
competitive position of the undertaking”. Thus, the harm must be
substantial. Whilst there is no equivalent sub-section
expanding upon s.34(4),
the words “unreasonably to disadvantage” must have the same meaning
in s.34(4) as in s.34(1)(b).
Accordingly, the considerations listed in s.34(2)
should also be applied to s.34(4).
30 In addition, it is now some 3 years after the events in question. The
expiration of time lends further strength to the arguments
in favour of release
of the information.
31 It is also emphasised that the document in question is an edited list of
innocuous material extracted from a database. Reference
is made to the
observations of the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria in
of Public Prosecutions v Smith
[1991] VicRp 6
[1991] 1 VR 63
at page 78.
32 In addition to and as part of the above arguments, reliance is placed upon
the “public interest override” contained
in s.50(4) of the Act.
33 The interpretation urged by the Department is one that effectively equates
the perceived need for commercial confidentiality with
the “cabinet in
confidence” provisions of the Act. This interpretation is not justified
or correct, particularly bearing
in mind the public government statements which
have been made, and the provisions of the Act.
34 Accordingly, the applications for exemption pursuant to s.34(1)(b) and
s.34(4) should fail and Asher’s application seeking
release of the
document in full should be granted.
35 In this ruling, I shall deal firstly with the exemption contained in s.34(4)
although Mr Niall, in seeking to rely upon the exemptions,
firstly turned his
attention to s.34(1)(b). I am dealing with the exemptions in this order
because, in my opinion and subject to
any question arising from the minor
discrepancy to which I have referred, I am satisfied that the Department has
discharged the burden
placed upon it in relation to s.34(4). In those
circumstances a ruling in relation to s.34(1)(b) is not required.
36 The parts of the document to which this ruling is directed are the names and
projected job numbers of the entities which have
not agreed to the releasing of
the information. In other words, they are the details relating to entities
which initially did not
authorise external release of the data and have not
resiled from that position or, if there be any, entities that may have initially
authorised the release of data but changed their position during the
consultation process. I am satisfied that the burden in relation
to s.34(4) has
been discharged for the following reasons.
37 In the present case there was effectively no argument but that the Department
is engaged in trade or commerce. There is no argument
but that the relevant
information is of a business, commercial or financial nature. In any event, and
even if there were no agreement
as to this, I am quite satisfied that, in each
instance, the requirements have been met.
38 I turn now to whether disclosure would be likely to expose the agency
unreasonably to disadvantage. As stated by Mr Niall, the
test is one of
likelihood rather than of certainty. The relevant definition of
“likely” in the Australian Concise Oxford
Dictionary is
“probable; such as well might happen or be true”. In relation to
the word “unreasonably”,
all counsel effectively agreed that the
word should be seen in the context of the balancing process between the
competing factors
of the perceived need for confidentiality and the need for
public accountability and transparency on the part of the government,
departments and agencies. I agree with Mr Adams that public government
statements and the objects and provisions of the Act
are relevant in this
regard. In relation to “disadvantage”, whilst the submissions of
counsel originally were some distance
apart, ultimately there was perhaps not
much distance between them. As was stated by Young CJ in
“... the information ... must relate to matters of a business nature
before exemption can be claimed”. In addition,
the decision in
must be viewed against the background of its own peculiar facts.
In the present case, the disadvantage alleged seems to me to be
clearly of a
business nature. In my opinion, the alleged disadvantage would also be an
“injury of a financial kind”,
to adopt the wording used by
O’Bryan J in
The evidence of Mr Foskett, which evidence I
accept, is that companies may avoid seeking assistance or avoid investing in
because of the risk that their investment decisions would be
prematurely exposed and subject to public scrutiny. The disadvantage,
loss of investment, seems to me to be of a business nature and of a financial
39 I accept the evidence of Mr Foskett in relation to the real risks which exist
if information which is of the type under discussion,
and which is received in
confidence, is subsequently released. It seems to me that this is particularly
so if the entity supplying
the information specifically does not authorise the
release of the information.
40 I accept the propositions put forward by Mr Foskett and submitted by Mr Niall
that release of information that an entity is seeking
government assistance, and
information concerning the number of jobs that may be created if that assistance
is forthcoming, carries
with it some real risks that such information might be
used by competitors to the disadvantage of the entity. That risk has been
concern to some of the entities. However, others have not authorised the
release of the information. If an entity has indicated
that it does not
authorise the release of the information, which information was given in
confidence, and the information is subsequently
released, I can well understand
that such entity may be reluctant to avail itself of a similar opportunity in
the future. I can
also understand why other entities, learning of this, might
look elsewhere. They might so do as a matter of principle. They are
likely so to do if the information released carries with it the risk of an
advantage to financial competitors.
41 In summary, I accept the evidence of Mr Foskett. I am of the view that
disclosure would expose the Department to a disadvantage
of a business or
financial kind. I am also of the view that this is likely to occur. I
understand and accept the logic of the situation
as put forward by Mr Foskett
and I think that it is indeed likely or probable that, should there be a
destruction of trust between
the investing entities and the Department, some
potential investors will look elsewhere or will not proceed with developments
had been contemplated.
42 Having determined that there is a disadvantage to which the Department is
likely to be exposed, I turn now to the word “unreasonably”.
Counsel are basically in agreement as to the relationship between this word and
the relevant balancing exercise which must be performed.
Because that balancing
exercise also involves elements of public interest, some of the matters which I
shall now discuss are also
relevant to s.50(4).
43 The various points made by Mr Niall in this regard seem to me to be valid.
It is to be borne in mind that what is being considered
here is private
investment as opposed to public investment. I also accept that, should the
information be released, there is a risk
of entities being exposed to misleading
and unfair criticism. The fact that the entities under discussion have
specifically not
authorised release of the information seems to me to be
relevant when the word “unreasonably” is being considered. On
question of public accountability, the Department is subject to random reviews
by the Auditor-General and has obligations in
relation to reporting annually.
Bearing in mind my earlier findings concerning the real risk of loss of
investment in this State,
and bearing in mind the matters just mentioned, it
seems to me that the balance is quite strongly in favour of the proposition that
there is a need for confidentiality, and I have reached this conclusion whilst
being fully aware of the objects and provisions of
the Act, the relevant second
reading speeches, and the various public pronouncements by politicians on either
side of the House.
44 Three further matters generally affecting disclosure and the public interest
should be mentioned. Firstly, I am of the view that
there is some force in the
submission of Mr Niall that the Department has already provided a very sizeable
sample of the entities
that have sought facilitation, and the projected number
of jobs thereby created. In every instance where authority has been given
entity to release the information, it has been so released. I refer again to
the evidence of Mr Foskett. The Department wants
to be seen to be doing a good
job, attracting investment from many well known and substantial companies, and
thus also creating jobs.
It seems to me that it is taking a perfectly
reasonable approach in relation to the information already released and in
to the request for release generally.
45 Secondly, I do not agree with the argument of Mr Adams concerning s.34(2) and
its applicability to s.34(4). Section 34(2) lists
some factors which may be
taken into account in deciding whether disclosure of information exposes an
entity unreasonably to a disadvantage
for the purposes of s.34(1)(b). Thus, the
sub-section is specifically directed towards the disadvantage that may be
suffered by
an undertaking, as opposed to by an agency. There is no equivalent
sub-section providing assistance as to the interpretation of
“unreasonably
to disadvantage” in respect of an agency. The legislature opted to omit
such a provision. In any event,
the sub-section lists factors that
be taken into account in respect of an undertaking or entity. In my opinion it
is reading too much into the provisions to say that
the disadvantage referred to
in s.34(4) must involve “substantial harm”. I am not convinced that
this is the test which
has to be applied.
46 Mr Adams also referred to the passage of time as being a factor in favour of
disclosure. Whilst it may often be, I am not of
the view that it is an
important factor in this case. Firstly, it must be remembered that, although
the information was acquired
in confidence in the year 2002/03, the disclosure,
and any apparent breach of that confidence, would occur now, and, as a matter
principle, could be just as damaging to the environment of trust which the
Department understandably sees as desirable as it would
have been had it
occurred in the relevant financial year. Secondly, the majority of the entities
now under discussion are those
that recently have taken objection to, or not
authorised release of, information as part of the consultation process.
Thirdly, some
of the projects for which facilitation has been sought or arranged
are of a comparatively long term nature. I am not persuaded that
the passage of
time is a factor of any significance in favour of release.
47 As stated, many of the matters just discussed are also relevant to any
possible operation of s.50(4). Wherever the onus of proof
might lie in relation
to s.50(4), I am of the view that release pursuant to it is not justified in
this case. There may be public
interest in the reporting by departments to the
government, and thus to the people. However, in the present case it seems to me
to be in the public interest that the environment of trust between private
investors and the Department, and hence the government,
not be damaged. It also
seems to me to be in the public interest that the Department not be hindered in
its attempts to attract
private investment to Victoria or encourage expansion by
entities already here. I have already referred to several of the factors
I have taken into account as part of the balancing exercise generally and which
are relevant to a consideration of the public
interest override. I shall not
repeat them.
48 In summary, the Department succeeds in its submission that those parts of the
document which have not been released are exempt.
In other words, where an
entity has not expressly authorised release of the relevant information, whether
such authorisation be
given originally or during the consultation process, the
document is exempt. That exemption applies where an entity has not deviated
from its initial opposition to release, or has subsequently expressed such
opposition. I refer again to the apparent mathematical
discrepancy referred to
previously. If my assumption in relation to the basis of that discrepancy is
correct, and it refers to the
uncontactable entities, the ruling would not seem
to be affected. If the relevant information in relation to those entities has
already been released, no further ruling is required. If it has not, and if the
uncontactable entities did not originally authorise
release, the information in
relation to them is in the same position as that which pertains to the entities
which have objected or
made no response to consultation. If their initial
response was that they did not authorise release, the parts of the document
to them are exempt. If I have made some error in relation to this
apparent discrepancy, I will certainly hear argument in relation
to it should
that be necessary.
49 Given my ruling in relation to s.34(4), there seems to me to be no need for a
ruling in relation to s.34(1)(b). I might say that,
for many of the above
reasons, I am of the opinion that the exemption was again made out but the
situation in relation to s.34(4)
seems to me to be more clear cut. Thus, this
ruling is based upon it.
50 Subject to the qualification referred to above, the application is dismissed.
Judge Bowman
Vice President
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (119 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter