URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/998.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:26:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mooney v Ballarat CC [2025] VCAT 998 (13 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. P425/2025
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. PLP/2024/568
Elizabeth Mooney
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Ballarat City Council
SUBJECT LAND
3 Albion Street
GOLDEN POINT VIC 3350
HEARING TYPE
Preliminary Hearing
DATE OF HEARING
7 November 2025
DATE OF ORDER
13 November 2025
Mooney v Ballarat CC [2025] VCAT 998
land at 3 Albion Street, Golden Point, does not have existing use rights for the
purpose of two dwellings.
details of the hearing as set out in the Tribunal’s order dated 15 October
2025 are confirmed. Either party may may request
a Practice Day Hearing to
consider the future conduct of the proceeding.
Bill Sibonis
Senior Member
APPEARANCES
For applicant
For responsible authority
J Kane, counsel, by direct brief
C Stathis, town planner
detailed in the Tribunal’s order dated 15 October
the purpose of the
preliminary hearing was to:
whether the subject land has existing use rights for the purpose of two
give directions,
if required, including with respect to any amended permit application and/or
statement of grounds
give future
directions about the future conduct of the proceeding.
proceeding concerns an application to the Tribunal for a review of the Ballarat
City Council’s (‘council’) decision
to refuse a permit for the
subdivision of the subject land into two lots and the construction of a
proceeding has been the subject of two practice day
The remarks/reasons in
the orders arising from the practice day hearings explain why this preliminary
hearing has been listed.
remarks/reasons are attached as Appendices, for background.
subject land accommodates two buildings. The first is a double-fronted
Victorian-era dwelling dating from c1890 (‘Victorian
dwelling’). It
is located on proposed Lot 1 as shown on the ‘proposed site plan –
subdivision’ which forms
part of the planning permit application.
second building is a smaller structure, known as Rapunzel’s Cottage
(‘the cottage’) which dates from 1998 and
is located on proposed Lot
Construction
of the cottage was authorised by Planning Permit 681-97 (‘permit’),
issued on 2 October 1997. The permit
Construct an Ancillary Building (Human Habitation)
No. 6 of the permit states:
No more than five (5) tourists shall be accommodated on the site at any one time
to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
advised that it has been unable to locate any endorsed plans which form part of
the permit. What have been located are building
permit plans which show the
cottage comprising a central space, a spa, a ‘bar area’ and a
bathroom. The applicant advised,
and photographs show, that the central space
is a combined bedroom and sitting/dining area.
to the officer’s report which provided an assessment of the Certificate of
Compliance application (referred to below),
the council planning report which
resulted in the granting of the permit states that the building is to be used as
part of the existing
bed and breakfast operation and is to provide accommodation
for couples.
is common ground between the parties that the Victorian dwelling has existing
use rights for a dwelling.
dispute lies with respect of the cottage. The applicant’s position is
that it, too, has existing use rights for a dwelling.
Council does not
both agree that:
the cottage is
not used as a ‘Bed and Breakfast’ as it is not a dwelling used by a
resident of the dwelling to provide
accommodation for persons away from their
normal place of residence.
cottage is not occupied by the applicant (the applicant resides in the Victorian
dwelling). Occupants of the cottage have sole/exclusive
use of that building
for the duration of their stay. There is no connection (physical or otherwise)
between the Victorian dwelling
and the cottage. To access the cottage, the
applicant has to exit the property, traverse the adjacent public footpath for a
distance and then use a separate driveway area to reach the cottage
the cottage has
been used continuously as short term accommodation for a period exceeding 15
years and council has not given a written
direction for the use to
application for a Certificate of Compliance was made pursuant to
section 97N
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic) in August 2025 and described
the existing use and development as:
there is a house I live in and a cottage known as Rapunzel’s cottage as
well which has been used for short term accommodation
since approximately 1998.
There has never been a two year gap where it has not been used for these
purposes. Currently platinum
property group rent it from me for approximately
the last twelve months
6 October 2025, council issued a Certificate of Compliance. It
THE CERTIFICATE REFERS TO:
The use of the land for short term accommodation
(Bed and Breakfast)
This Certificate is issued in accordance with
section 97N(1)(a)
Planning and Environment Act 1987
. The use or development existing on
the land and referred to in this Certificate complies with the requirements of
the planning
scheme at the date of this Certificate.
light of the council’s position that the cottage is not used as a
dwelling, the reasons why this Certificate of Compliance
refers to ‘Bed
and Breakfast’ are not clear. The definition of ‘Bed and
breakfast’ refers to a ‘dwelling’.
The applicant confirmed
that at no time has the cottage been used by her or previous owners as residents
of that building to provide
accommodation for persons away from their normal
place of residence. She also argued that the cottage cannot be defined as a
and breakfast’ as it is not connected to the Victorian
73.03 of the Ballarat Planning Scheme provides the following definition of the
land use term ‘dwelling’:
A building used as a self-contained residence which must include:
a) a kitchen sink;
b) food preparation facilities;
c) a bath or shower; and
d) a toilet and wash basin.
It includes outbuildings and works normal to a dwelling.
parties agree that the cottage contains all these
As a building, it meets
the definition of a dwelling.
what needs to be considered is the use.
Armato v Hepburn Shire
[2007] VCAT 603
Tribunal found that, when considering whether the land is used as a dwelling, it
is important not to be distracted by
the form of buildings on the land. The
Tribunal went on to say that just because there is a house on the land does not
it is being used as a dwelling, and further:
The use of land for planing [sic] purposes is not determined by the style of
development but the purpose for which the land is actually
used. Thus it is
fallacious to say that because there is a house on the land ipso facto the land
is being used as a dwelling.
to the ‘use’ component in the definition of dwelling, that is, a
building used as a self contained residence,
the Tribunal found that
‘residence’ means a place where people live or reside either
permanently or for a considerable
period of time. In doing so, the Tribunal
noted and adopted the findings of the Supreme Court in
Derring Lane Pty Ltd v
Port Phillip City Council (No 2)
[1999] VSC 269
and the findings of the
Tribunal in
Merrett v Moira SC
[2005] VCAT 242.
submitted that the cottage is not being, and has not been, used as a dwelling.
Rather, it has been used for short term accommodation
where occupants stay for
short periods of time, and not as a residence where people live or reside
permanently or for a considerable
period of time.
applicant submitted that, in addition to the ‘development’ component
of the definition, the cottage satisfies ‘use’
component of being
self contained for the following reasons:
physically joined to the Victorian dwelling; it is an entirely separate
it has its own
frontage, driveway, gas supply and meter, sewerage and drainage
it is separately
rated by council, and land tax is paid based on council’s valuation
the applicant
does not provide any services or meals to persons staying at the cottage, and
does not have any interaction with them
of these matters raised by the applicant are evidence of, or substantiate the
submission that, the cottage is used as a residence
for the purposes of the
definition of dwelling at clause 73.03. They are not relevant to the
consideration of whether the cottage
is a place where people live or reside
permanently or for a considerable period of time.
applicant referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in
Swan v Uecker
[2016] VSC 313
in support of an argument that short term occupation does not
mean that the building is not a residence.
case concerned a circumstance where a tenant had sub-let part of the leased
dwelling without the landlord’s consent and
was a matter which considered
the provisions of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
(Vic). I agree with
council that it is not relevant to the consideration of whether the cottage
meets the definition of ‘dwelling’
under the Ballarat Planning
Scheme. It concerns a different legislative context.
applicant submitted that ‘residence’ in the definition of dwelling
is a noun and it refers to the type of property,
and not whether a person lives
there permanently or for a considerable period of time. The findings in
do not support this submission. The submission refers to the
built form, not the use. It is the nature and duration of the use (or
occupation) which is relevant. The definition refers to how the building is
used. Therefore, for the building to be considered
to be used as a residence,
it must involve a person or persons living there permanently or for a
considerable period of time. Consistent
, it does not follow
that because the cottage is constructed as a house (or residence), it is being
used as a dwelling. The use is
a separate consideration to the built form, or
‘development’.
the reasoning and findings in
, I find that the cottage is not used
a dwelling. This is because it is not, and has not been, used as a self
contained residence.
It has been, and continues to be, used for short term
accommodation. It is not a building where people live or reside either
permanently
or for a considerable period of time.
these reasons, I find that the subject land does not have existing use rights
for two dwellings.
Bill Sibonis
Senior Member
REASONS CONTAINED IN THE PRACTICE DAY HEARING
ORDER DATED 23 JUNE 2025
the applicant
) is seeking a review of Ballarat City
Council’s (
) decision to refuse to grant a permit. The
grounds of refusal are based on heritage concerns.
applicant sought a planning permit for a two lot subdivision. The application
form described the existing conditions as ‘two
dwellings’. The
report submitted with the application also describes the existing conditions as
being ‘two existing
single storey dwellings’, and that the property
is served by reticulated power, water, sewer, gas and telecommunications.
proposed plan of subdivision includes notations for two existing dwellings
(figure 2 in Council’s delegate report).
permission is required to subdivide the land under the General Residential Zone
and the Heritage Overlay.
application report identifies the relevant type/requirement of subdivision
requiring planning permission in the General Residential
application to subdivide land must meet the requirements of Clause 56 unless
contains an existing dwelling or car parking space
delegate report outlines the permit history of the site, including that a permit
issued in 1997 for the ‘construction
of an ancillary building (human
habitation)’. The associated planning delegate report stated this
building (described as a
cottage) would be used as part of an existing bed and
breakfast operation and the report notes that the plans showed a single bedroom,
shower room with toilet and basin and a ‘bar’ (no sink). Council
has a building permit endorsed plan in the delegate
report for this proposed
subdivision. It is dated March 1998 and shows the kitchen area in general
terms, meaning it is silent as
to what is constructed in the
‘kitchen’ area. Ms Mooney advises she provided this plan to
delegate report notes the applicant’s advice that both buildings are
dwellings including that they have separate
gas meters and are billed
separately; have separate rate notices; and up until 2015 were used as
short-term rentals. During this
hearing, Ms Mooney advised she has owned the
property for at least 10 years and both buildings have been dwellings during
as well as during ownership by the previous owner.
this hearing, Ms Mooney provided information including photographs of the
cottage to demonstrate the fitout of the kitchen and
bathroom, which indicates
it meets the definition of a dwelling. Council acknowledges this material
demonstrates it has the requirements
to be defined as a dwelling. This may mean
the cottage has existing use rights for use as a dwelling. Council has not
this, and Council has not assessed this permit application as it was
applied for – being two dwellings.
I have decided to remit the permit application back to Council for
re-consideration. I am using the power under
section 51A
Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
maintains the applicant’s review proceeding with the Tribunal;
does not affect the priority of the processing of this proceeding as this matter
has not yet progressed to being listed for a final
merits hearing; and
enables Council to reconsider the applicant’s permit application as it was
originally sought.
foreshadowed that potentially considering the permit application on the basis of
two dwellings may change the required processing
including whether the giving
notice of the application is necessary. Given this, I asked Council to nominate
how long it needs to
reconsider the application. The time allocated in Order 2
accords with Council’s advice.
notice is given and any objections are received by Council, this is a matter
that the Tribunal will further consider following
receipt of Council’s new
decision and the reasons for it (which will presumably identify any objections
received). If necessary,
the Tribunal will consider how to give notice of this
application for review to the objectors.
must advise the Tribunal and the applicant of its new decision in writing. It
should not issue a formal notice of any new
have allowed the applicant time after the new decision advice is received to
decide whether to amend the grounds of review. The
applicant must advise the
Tribunal and Council in writing of any amended grounds of review.
REMARKS CONTAINED IN THE PRACTICE DAY HEARING
ORDER DATED 3 OCTOBER 2025
order issued on 23 June 2025, the Tribunal invited council to reconsider its
decision. That order explains in detail why this
invitation was issued, so in
these remarks I will simply summarise as follows:
Mooney submits she has existing use rights for the two buildings on her property
to be used as dwellings;
did not consider the application as put by Ms Mooney and referred to one of the
buildings as not being a dwelling when making
its decision;
the information before me during that practice day hearing, I decided to remit
the application so that Council could consider
the permit application as put by
Ms Mooney including whether one of the buildings has existing use rights for use
as a dwelling.
has now reconsidered the application and has determined that the building does
not have existing use rights because it does
not have a planning permit for use
as a dwelling. However, there is still a question about whether the building
has existing use
rights pursuant to clause 63.11 Proof of continuous use.
report assessing the application when it was remitted notes that the applicant
has lodged an application for a certificate
of compliance with council. This
material has not yet been lodged with the Tribunal, but the parties explain it
is also seeking
council’s agreement that the building is a dwelling.
Council has not yet made a decision on this.
parties agree that this preliminary question needs to be determined.
has advised it will make a decision on the certificate of compliance application
by 4pm on Monday 6 October and will advise
the Tribunal and the applicant of
this, together with any explanation as to why. Council will also provide a copy
of this application
to the Tribunal for its records.
Council agrees the building is a dwelling, the preliminary hearing will not be
Council does not agree the building is a dwelling, this is a matter that can be
discussed at the compulsory conference together
with the heritage reasons why
council refused the application. If the issues in dispute are not resolved at
the compulsory conference,
the preliminary hearing will proceed to consider
whether the building is a dwelling.
parties agree that the preliminary hearing is primarily a question of fact but
that it could possibly involve mixed considerations
of fact and law. Both
parties agree that the preliminary hearing can be heard by a planning member of
the Tribunal rather than a
legal member.
the preliminary hearing finds that the building is not a dwelling, the
council’s grounds of refusal in the application for
review will be
formally amended to include Council’s additional ground of refusal
foreshadowed in its report assessing the
remitted application. Otherwise, this
additional ground of refusal will fall away and no amendment will need to be
parties are aware that Amendment VC288 will come into effect on 16 October 2025
and this may affect this permit application.
It may mean the permit application
becomes a VicSmart application and the consideration of the merits as required
by the planning
scheme may change. Council wants to wait and consider this when
the changes come into effect. Hence, the parties are aware of this
and it will need to be considered further by them including its relevance to
this proceeding when it comes into effect.
The order arose from the
compulsory conference held on 15 October 2025, where the matter did not
On 20 June 2025 and 2 October
The orders are dated 23 June
2025 and 3 October 2025.
Being the definition of the
‘bed and breakfast’ land use term at clause 73.03: ‘A dwelling
used, by a resident
of the dwelling, to provide accommodation for persons away
from their normal place of residence’.
Refer to clause 63.11 of the
Ballarat Planning Scheme.
Reference was made to the
Tribunal’s decisions in
Quitt v Yarra Ranges SC
[2023] VCAT 94
Stuckey v Yarra Ranges SC
[2014] VCAT 295
where the Tribunal made
findings regarding the need for the bed and breakfast accommodation to have a
connection to the dwelling
on the land.
The building contains a
kitchen sink and food preparation facilities in the area shown as
‘bar’ on the building permit
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (318 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter