URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/270.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mazzeo v The King [2025] VSCA 270 (10 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCR 2025 0101
McLEISH and KAYE JJA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
30 October 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
10 November 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 270
JUDGMENT APPEALED
DPP v Mazzeo
[2025] VCC 196
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal – Sentence
– Burglary, theft, firearms offences and possession of drug of dependence
Aggregate sentence 12 months’ imprisonment – Whether judge
erred by imposing aggregate sentence – Applicant stole
imitation firearm
from neighbour’s property and exchanged it for methylamphetamine –
Charges founded on same facts –
Continuous offending constituting single
drug and firearm-related transaction – Offences not varying greatly in
Aggregate sentence avoided artificial sentencing exercise
– Leave to appeal refused.
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal –
Sentence – Manifest excess – Blackmail – Sentence of
12 months’ imprisonment
– Aggregate sentence 12 months’
imprisonment on separate indictment charging burglary, firearms offences and
drug of dependence – Total effective sentence 18 months’
imprisonment – Guilty plea – Applicant assisted
authorities in
relation to charges on second indictment – Aggregate sentence very
moderate – Most charges carrying maximum
10 years’ imprisonment
– Possession of firearms by prohibited person serious offending –
Blackmail planned and
calculated against vulnerable victim – Applicant
understated own contribution to blackmail while blaming co-offender –
Blackmail sentence modest – Order for 6 months’ cumulation well
within range – Applicant having extensive criminal
record – Sentence
well within range – Leave to appeal refused.
Sentencing Act
Director of Public Prosecutions v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 266
(2015) 47 VR 660
Hassall v The King
[2024] VSCA 163
[2025] VSCA 72
, referred to.
Mr R F Edney
Respondent:
Ms J Warren with Ms G Tweedy
Marshall Jovanovska Ralph
Respondent:
Ms A Hogan, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
applicant seeks leave to appeal against a sentence of imprisonment imposed in
the County Court after he pleaded guilty to a total
of seven charges. The
offending involved one charge of blackmail on 11 January 2022, and six charges
arising from a series of events
on 4 and 5 November 2023.
judge imposed an aggregate sentence of 12 months’ imprisonment in respect
of the later events, and a sentence also of 12
months’ imprisonment on the
blackmail charge. He ordered six months’ cumulation, resulting in a total
effective sentence
of 18 months’ imprisonment.
offending can be described comparatively briefly.
applicant, Walter Carter and Lance Haynes lived in the same set of units in
Seymour. Between December 2021 and early January 2022,
Mr Carter showed the
applicant photographs of a naked underaged female.
11 January 2022, the applicant and Mr Haynes visited Mr Carter in his unit.
Mr Haynes started discussing the photographs, and told
Mr Carter that he
and the applicant were going to report him to police. The applicant told Mr
Carter that he was a sergeant at arms
of the Hells Angels. He also told him that
he had secretly taped him when he was showing him the photographs.
applicant told Mr Carter that, if he and Mr Haynes were paid $50,000, they would
not go to the police. Mr Carter said that he
did not have $50,000. On being
asked by the applicant how much he did have, Mr Carter said that he had
‘maybe $25,000’.
The applicant turned to Mr Haynes and said,
‘up to you Lance, what do you think?’. They ended up demanding
Carter told the two men that he would not be able to get the money until the end
of the week at the earliest. The applicant said,
‘all right, $30,000 by
tomorrow, or $50,000 by the end of the week’. He then provided Mr Carter
with his banking details
and told him to transfer the money to that account.
Later that night, the applicant returned to Mr Carter’s unit and told
that he wanted $1,000 in cash. Mr Carter subsequently took $1,000 in cash to
the applicant’s unit and gave it to him (
charge 1 on indictment
No P11011439 — blackmail
24 February 2022, the applicant was arrested and interviewed at Seymour police
station. He described Mr Haynes as having made all
the demands for money.
second set of charges was the subject of a separate indictment. On 4 November
2023, the applicant, together with Benjamin Trent
and his partner Lauren
Barclay, discussed how to obtain money and/or drugs, specifically
methylamphetamine. A week earlier, the applicant’s
neighbour, Frank
Crowley, had shown him a firearm. The applicant knew that Mr Crowley was away
for an extended period and that his
unit was unoccupied.
applicant telephoned Chantelle Pearse, and they discussed the possibility of the
applicant stealing the firearm in order to exchange
it for drugs that Ms Pearse
would arrange. The applicant then told Mr Trent and Ms Barclay about the plan,
and they agreed to take
night, the three of them gained entry to Mr Crowley’s residence through
the back door (
charge 1 — burglary
). They found what they believed
to be a handgun, a handmade gun, and a box of approximately 100 rounds of .22
calibre ammunition,
and took these items back to the applicant’s unit
charge 2 — theft of firearm [handmade gun]; charge 3 — theft of
ammunition and imitation firearm [‘handgun’];
prohibited person possessing firearm; and charge 5 — prohibited person
possessing imitation firearm
applicant then contacted Ms Pearse and told her that he had the handgun for
sale. They agreed that they would meet at her home
and that she would facilitate
the transaction.
Pearse contacted Byron Moore to confirm the arrangement. He contacted two
associates, Andrew Cutajar and Nicholas Stephenson, who
agreed to purchase the
Pearse then called the applicant and told him that she had arranged for two men
to purchase the handgun, and that they were on
their way to Seymour.
the meantime, the applicant agreed with Mr Trent and Ms Barclay that Mr Trent
would retain the handmade gun and the ammunition.
that night, the applicant, Mr Trent and Ms Barclay went to Ms Pearse’s
the others went inside with
the handgun. A short time later, Mr Cutajar and Mr Stephenson arrived.
parties agreed on the price for the handgun, being one ounce (28 grams) of
methylamphetamine, valued at approximately $5,000,
plus $200 in cash.
handgun was missing the magazine, and the applicant told the buyers that they
would give it to them as soon as it was found.
Cutajar and Mr Stephenson produced the methylamphetamine, which was weighed, and
the applicant and Mr Trent each received 14 grams
possession of drug of dependence
handgun was handed over to Mr Cutajar and Mr Stephenson.
parties all believed that the handgun was an operable firearm. While it was
missing the magazine, there was no indication that
it was not a firearm. It
turned out, however, to be a gel blaster.
5 November 2023, police attended Ms Barclay’s home on an unrelated matter
and located items including the handmade gun, two
small calibre bullets and 13.7
grams of methylamphetamine.
7 November 2023, the applicant attended Seymour police station in respect of
these more recent events.. He made full admissions
and denied having known that
the handgun was not a real firearm when he obtained and sold it. He provided a
formal written statement
as to his involvement in the offending. The information
he provided against his interests was the basis of the case against him.
November 2023, Mr Trent provided a written statement that was consistent
with that of the applicant.
applicant’s statement also described events after the buyers identified
that the ‘handgun’ was a gel blaster,
and not a real firearm. The
applicant told police that, on the morning after the transaction, he was told
that his house was on fire.
He went home and saw that his unit was burnt out.
The next day, one of the buyers called the applicant and told him ‘we got
ya mate Ben, he squealed like a fucking pig’. The applicant said that he
was subsequently pursued by the buyers, one of whom
had been armed, and they had
smashed their way into a house where he was hiding.
Moore and Mr Stephenson were charged with that offending, among other
offences, and the applicant was required to give evidence
at their committal
hearing. Mr Cutajar was charged with offending that included trafficking
methylamphetamine and firearms offences.
Ms Pearse was charged with
trafficking methylamphetamine and proceeds of crime offences. At the time of the
hearing Mr Trent could
not be located and had not been charged. Ms Barclay
had been interviewed and released pending inquiries, and had also not been
applicant was sentenced as
Indictment P11011439
15 years’ imprisonment
12 months’ imprisonment
Indictment Q10353407
10 years’ imprisonment
Aggregate sentence 12 months’ imprisonment
Theft of firearm
15 years’ imprisonment
10 years’ imprisonment
Prohibited person in possession of
10 years’ imprisonment
Prohibited person in possession of imitation
10 years’ imprisonment
Possession of drug of dependence
(methylamphetamine)
5 years’ imprisonment
Total effective sentence
18 months’ imprisonment
Non-parole period
Pre-sentence detention declaration pursuant to
Sentencing Act
Section 6AAA
3 years’ imprisonment with a non-parole period of 2 years
Other relevant orders:
Compensation to Walter Carter $1,000
his sentencing remarks, the judge referred to the applicant’s extensive
criminal history. In particular, the applicant was
serving a community
correction order for an earlier offence of blackmail and extortion when he
committed the second set of offences.
It was for that reason that he was a
prohibited person under the
He had been
sentenced to numerous community correction orders and had served relatively
short periods in custody.
judge accepted that the applicant’s personal background attracted the
principles in
Bugmy v The
He had a limited IQ,
which the judge said exacerbated his situation. His major problem was his use of
methylamphetamine, and he had
committed the offences in order to fund that
applicant’s cooperation with police was noted, as was the fact that he
could not have been prosecuted on the second indictment
if he had not made the
admissions he did to police. He had given evidence at committal against other
co-accused persons, and had
undertaken to give evidence if required to do so in
future. The judge accepted that the applicant would find his time in custody
more onerous as a result, because he was probably going to serve his prison
sentence in protection.
applicant seeks leave to appeal on two grounds.
Ground 1 — aggregate
first ground contends that the imposition of an aggregate sentence on the second
set of charges was an ‘error in principle
that requires appellate
intervention’. In support of that ground, the applicant submitted that the
offending involved three
different kinds of criminality, namely
trespass/dishonesty, firearms and drugs. He also relied on the small number of
charges, the
disparate maximum penalties and the varying levels of seriousness
of the individual charges.
our view, this ground cannot be sustained.
Sentencing Act 1991
permits the court to impose an aggregate
sentence of imprisonment in respect of ‘two or more offences which are
founded on the
same facts, or form, or are a part of, a series of offences of
the same or a similar character’. Here, the five charges in
question were
proximate in time and formed part of a single narrative. They were
‘founded on the same facts’ within the
was therefore open to the judge to impose an aggregate
for the applicant properly accepted that the charges on the second indictment
were ‘founded on the same facts’.
It was submitted, however, that
this was not an appropriate case in which to exercise the power conferred by the
has been recognised that it is not appropriate to impose an aggregate sentence
where the indictment contains only a small number
of charges, or where the
charges vary significantly, either in the objective gravity of the conduct
involved, or in the manner in
which the offences were
Director of Public Prosecutions v Frewstal Pty Ltd
, Maxwell P referred to
the considerations relevant to deciding whether it is appropriate to impose an
aggregate sentence:
The kind of case for which an aggregate sentence is appropriate is one where
the number, similarity and proximity in time of the
offences is such that it
would be an artificial exercise to impose individual sentences and then, by
means of modest orders for cumulation,
to arrive at a total effective sentence
proportionate to the total criminality. The archetypical example is the case of
offences of burglary and theft, committed over a relatively short
period, where an aggregate sentence is a ‘more flexible and
pragmatic’ way of ‘reflecting all of the offender’s
is true that there were distinct sentencing considerations applicable to the
various offences. The burglary and theft involved
a violation of Mr
Crowley’s home and property, as well as his trust. The prohibited person
firearm offences raised public policy
considerations about the dangers presented
by unlawful possession of firearms. But the offending was continuous, other than
of about two hours before possession was taken of the methylamphetamine.
That was, however, the underlying motivation for the preceding
criminal conduct, and part of the plan which the applicant initiated and
arranged with Ms Pearse, and to which he committed
this way, the offences were part of, or incidental to, a single drug and
firearm-related transaction. The offences did not vary
greatly in the respective
gravity of the conduct involved. This was not a case where the individual
offences involved different kinds
or degrees of criminality which needed to be
accounted for on their own.
the circumstances, it would have been, to use the language of Maxwell P,
‘an artificial exercise to impose individual sentences
and then, by means
of modest orders for cumulation, to arrive at a total effective sentence
proportionate to the total criminality’.
That is especially so, given that
the judge saw a relatively short total term of imprisonment as appropriate for
the five offences.
The judge took the more pragmatic course, and we detect no
error in his having done so.
Ground 2 — manifest
second ground contends that the sentence was manifestly excessive. By way of
particulars, the applicant asserts that the judge
erred in his treatment of the
guilty plea and the applicant’s assistance to
authorities.
judge referred to both the guilty plea and the applicant’s assistance to
the authorities in unexceptionable terms. He acknowledged
the likelihood that
the applicant would serve his term of imprisonment in
protection.
The judge also
acknowledged the significance of the fact that the applicant would not have been
convicted of the charges on the second
indictment, if not for his having
volunteered the information about his own
This entitled the
applicant to a very significant reduction in
The applicant
contends, however, that the judge must have given inadequate weight to these
mitigating factors.
establish manifest excess, an applicant must show that the sentence imposed was
wholly outside the range of sentencing options
available to the
It must be concluded that
something must have gone obviously, plainly or badly wrong in the exercise of
the sentencing discretion.
ground involves a challenge to the exercise of a discretion which does not
depend on specific error, as articulated in
House v The
ground is not made out. The aggregate sentence of 12 months’ imprisonment,
imposed for serious offending involving a prohibited
person possessing firearms,
was very moderate. The maximum sentences for most of the offences for which the
aggregate sentence was
imposed were in the order of 10 years’
imprisonment. In essence, this offending involved the applicant, a prohibited
engaging in a number of firearms-related offences including a
transaction to obtain a drug of dependence. Possession of firearms,
or imitation
firearms, by prohibited persons is a serious matter, as this Court said in
Malovski v The King
Being a prohibited person in possession of a firearm is no mere technicality.
The maximum penalty of 10 years’ imprisonment
marks the offence as a very
serious one. The presence of firearms in the hands of those whom the legislature
has provided are the
very people who should not have access to them presents a
danger to the whole community. As this Court said in
Young v The King
is impossible to ignore the ubiquity of illegal firearms in the community and
the very great harm that they
Sentences should reflect
this fact and serve to deter prohibited persons from having resort to
blackmail offence was planned and calculated. The victim was vulnerable. The
fact that his own conduct was, as the judge termed
it, dishonourable, is not a
mitigating factor. After the blackmail of Mr Carter, the applicant had been
sentenced for another blackmail
offence, committed in 2019. The sentence of 12
months’ imprisonment was modest in the circumstances. The maximum penalty
15 years’ imprisonment and, in contrast to the offending in the second
indictment, the victim had gone to police and the applicant
did not offer his
assistance. Rather, he sought to understate his role and to blame Mr Haynes for
the offending. The applicant was,
none the less, likely to serve his term of
imprisonment in protection due to his assistance in respect of the offending in
indictment.
circumstances where the sentences imposed were modest, the order for cumulation
of only six months was itself well within range.
applicant has an extensive (albeit not continuous) criminal record including
offences of violence and dishonesty, and drug-related
offences. The case raised
the need for specific deterrence. The applicant was, however, fully entitled to
the benefit of his early
guilty plea and his cooperation with authorities,
without which his later offending would not have been able to be proved. As
he was likely as a result to serve his sentence in protection, and
this experience would be aggravated by his limited IQ.
addition, the applicant was entitled to some sentencing benefit as a result of
the delay in charging him for the blackmail offence
(in the order of 14 months),
which was not of his making. He was also able to call on
considerations as a result of his deprived and violent childhood. His prospects
of rehabilitation, on the other hand, depended largely
on whether he was able to
address his drug problem.
judge recognised all this, and we see no indication in the sentence, or the
judge’s remarks upon sentencing, that he did
not give proper regard to
these mitigating factors. In our view, the sentence would have been
significantly higher if that had been
all the circumstances, the sentence was well within the range available to the
judge and this ground is not established.
to appeal is refused.
Crimes Act 1958
Firearms Act 1996
Control of Weapons Act
Drugs, Poisons and
Controlled Substances Act 1981
s 73(1)(c).
Firearms Act
(definition of ‘prohibited person’ para (c)(iia)).
DPP v Mazzeo
[3] (Judge Chettle) (‘Sentencing Remarks’).
(2013) 249 CLR 571.
Sentencing Remarks [6],
Ibid [8], [11].
Although not directly
relevant to the question whether this course was appropriate, it may be noted
that no objection was made when
the judge raised the possibility of imposing an
aggregate sentence at the plea hearing (as he was required to do by
s 9(3)(a)).
Hassall v The King
[2024] VSCA 163
[60] (Priest and Kaye JJA), referring to
Fitzpatrick v
[2016] VSCA 63
[48] (Weinberg AP, Priest and Beach JJA);
[2017] VSCA 150
[87] (Ashley and Priest JJA);
Kerapa v The
[2017] VSCA 56
[12] (Redlich and Santamaria JJA).
[2015] VSCA 266
(2015) 47 VR 660
At the hearing of the
present application, the Court granted the applicant leave to amend this ground,
which had previously alleged
specific error on the part of the sentencing judge,
along the lines of the substituted particulars.
Sentencing remarks
[7]–[8], [11].
[2005] VSCA
[14] (Buchanan JA, Eames JA agreeing at [18] and Nettle JA agreeing at
[2007] VSCA 32
170 A Crim R 306
, 309–10 [13]–[15] (Maxwell P, Eames JA agreeing at
312 [22], Habersberger AJA agreeing at 312 [23]);
[2007] VSCA 32.
Ayol v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 151
[30] (Maxwell P), citing
Clarkson v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 157
, 384 [89] (Maxwell ACJ, Nettle, Neave, Redlich and Harper JJA).
(1936) 55 CLR 499
504–5 (Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ). See
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357, 370–1 [25] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
(2010) 242 CLR 520
, 538 [58] (French CJ, Gummow,
Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
[2024] VSCA 179
(Priest and Niall JJA).
[2025] VSCA 72
[78] (Priest,
McLeish and Orr JJA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (355 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter