URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:44:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
VR Entertainment Pty Ltd at VR Theme Park [2025] VicLiqComm 7; (4 August 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application by VR Entertainment Pty Ltd made on 4 April
section 153(1)
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
internal review of a delegate’s decision to refuse an application for a
renewable limited licence, for the premises
trading as VR Theme Park, located at
5/7 Garrety Road, Caroline Springs
Commission:
John Larkins, Chair
Mr Steven Brnovic, Commissioner
Ms Sue Timbs, Commissioner
Appearances
Directions Hearing:
Mr Hardeep Multani for the Internal Review
Mr Bruce Lowe for the Internal Review Applicant
Ms Sara Kong,
Counsel Assisting the Commission
Mr Hardeep Multani for the Internal Review Applicant
Sara Kong, Counsel Assisting the Commission
Date of Directions
13 May 2025
Date of Hearing:
19 June 2025
4 August 2025
Date of Reasons:
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the delegate and, in substitution, grant a renewable limited licence subject
the conditions as set out in Appendix A
Original Application
8 July 2024, liquor consultant, Mr Bruce Lowe of PAJ Liquor, on behalf of VR
Entertainment Pty Ltd (
) applied to the Victorian Liquor
Commission (
) under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for a renewable
limited licence (
) for premises located at 5/7 Garretty Road, Caroline
), trading as VR Theme Park (
Application
Premises is a virtual reality arcade and is regularly used for hosting
children’s birthday parties and other similar functions.
The patrons are
mainly young children with parents or guardians and teenagers or young
the Premises, is a separate, enclosed function room (Proposed Licensed Area).
The Proposed Licensed Area covers the Premises’
function room space only.
The storage space for liquor would be outside the Proposed Licensed Area.
space of the Proposed Licensed Area can accommodate up to 100 patrons.
reason for making the Original Application was because the Applicant wanted to
expand the nature of events hosted at the Premises
from primarily
children’s parties to also weddings, engagement parties, family functions,
and corporate events from within
the Proposed Licensed Area.
proposed trading hours were any day between 12 pm and 1 am (the following day),
with the Applicant proposing to host private and
pre-booked functions twice each
week for up to five or six hours (depending on customer demand).
range of liquor proposed to be supplied was broadly described as beer, wine and
18 September 2024, the Applicant clarified that liquor would be stored either
off-site or in a locked storeroom located on the
Premises but nevertheless
outside the Proposed Licensed Area.
was proposed to be made available at all times liquor would be supplied and
security would be provided, if required.
accordance with section 33(4), a copy of the Original Application was given to
the Chief Commissioner of Police and the local licensing
inspector1F
) and the Melton City Council (
) on 19 September 2024.
On 21 October 2024, Victoria Police informed the Commission that they did not
object to the grant of the Original
Application. No objection was received from
the Council.
14 March 2025, an authorised delegate of the Commission assessed the Original
Application and refused it (
Original Decision
). In summary, the delegate
was not satisfied as to the scale and scope of the proposed supply of liquor
being sufficiently limited
for the purposes of section 26(1). On the material
before the delegate, this was entirely understandable.
Application for Internal Review
4 April 2025, in accordance with section 153, the Applicant lodged an
application for internal review of the Original Decision
Application
Specifically,
the Applicant sought to have the delegate’s decision set aside and the
Commission grant an RLL.
a directions hearing on 13 May 2025, the Applicant was tasked with providing the
Commission with photographs of the Proposed
Licensed Area, a curriculum vitae
for each the Applicant’s directors, and all written submissions sought to
be relied on as
to the proposed scale and scope of the supply of liquor at the
20 May 2025, Mr Lowe informed the Commission in written submissions on behalf of
the Applicant:
(a) liquor would only be supplied at private pre-booked functions, which are
proposed to be held on any day of the week, between
6pm and 10pm;
(b) approximately 50 to 70 functions are proposed to be hosted each year;
(c) the functions would have up to approximately 50 to 80 guests;
(d) liquor would be limited to 2-3 varieties of red and white local wines, local
beers and domestic lagers, and basic spirits;
(e) food would accompany service of liquor at the functions;
(f) minors can only attend these functions accompanied by a parent or
(g) liquor would be stored in a locked room on the Premises; and
(h) there will be no live music at the functions but there may be background
music played through speakers.
Commissioners visited the Premises and the surrounding area on 16 June
hearing was held before the Commission on 19 June 2025 (
Applicant confirmed that liquor would be stored in a locked storeroom located
outside the Proposed Licensed Area, and/or within
the kitchen’s
refrigerators, which are not publicly accessible.
Additionally,
the Applicant informed the Commission that it would install a separate bar
console inside the Proposed Licensed Area
and liquor for the functions would be
kept in the console during functions with no public access.
Applicant also confirmed that there would always be at least one RSA-trained
staff member inside the Proposed Licensed Area and
approximately two or three
extra staff for the purpose of serving food and clearing tables. Other
RSA-trained staff members would
be present, if relief is needed for staff
working in the Proposed Licensed Area.
functions, the doors would be closed, and staff would ensure that liquor did not
leave the Proposed Licensed Area. Staff would
also monitor the Proposed Licensed
Area entrance to ensure that only those on the guest list could enter.
the Hearing, the Applicant submitted the following proposed conditions, if a RLL
were to be granted (
Amended Original Application
(a) events must be pre-booked and private;
(b) food must be provided throughout the functions;
(c) the liquor range must be limited to 3 red wines, 3 white wines, 3 beers, and
3 types of spirits;
(d) the functions can occur on any day of the year and at any time of the day
but with the finishing time not exceeding 11pm;
(e) no more than 6 functions could be hosted per calendar month;
(f) the functions can run for a maximum of 4 hours;
(g) the maximum number of guests at functions is 80 for seated events or 100 for
cocktail style events; and
(h) if more than 50 people were expected to attend an evening event, at least 2
RSA staff would be required in the Proposed Licensed
Area during the function.
Material before the Commission
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the materials before the
delegate. The Commission also received and considered
the following
(a) the Original Decision and reasons of the delegate dated 14 March 2025;
(b) the Review Application dated 4 April 2025;
(c) the Applicant’s submissions dated 20 May 2025;
(d) the curriculum vitae for the directors of the Applicant;
(e) photographs of the Proposed Licensed Area and storage space;
(f) a venue management plan dated 1 July 2025 and 7 July 2025;
(g) a plan of the proposed floor plan with a bar console in the Proposed
Licensed Area.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
Commission’s internal review power
2 of part 9 governs internal review applications. Under section 152, the
Original Decision is a reviewable decision.
Applicant is considered an eligible person to apply for review of the Original
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the Original Decision; or
(b) sets aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.2F
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Amended Original
Application. In this case, the Commission must decide whether to:
(a) grant the Amended Original Application and, if so, whether to do so subject
to conditions;3F
(b) refuse to grant the Amended Original Application.
Determination of an uncontested application
the LCR Act, an application for a licence may be contested or uncontested.
Pursuant to section 3(1), an uncontested application
is defined as:
an application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation
of a licence or BYO permit in respect of which no objection is received
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division for that
objection (or that period as extended under section
Original Application was uncontested, as no objections were received under
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that
Division for that
objection (or that period as extended under section 174).
to section 44(2), the Commission may refuse to grant the Amended Original
Application on certain grounds, including that:
(a) the granting of the application would detract from or be detrimental to the
amenity of the area in which the premises to which
the application relates are
situated;4F
(b) the granting of the application would be conducive to or encourage
the purposes of the LCR Act, the amenity of an area is defined as being the
quality that the area has of being pleasant and
agreeable.6F
Factors that may be
taken into account in determining whether granting a licence would detract from
or be detrimental to the amenity
of the area include:
(d) the possibility of nuisance of vandalism;
(e) the harmony and coherence of the environment;
(f) any other prescribed
the definition of “amenity” for the purposes of the LCR Act is not
limited by these factors.8F
44(4) provides that, before granting or refusing an uncontested application
under subsection (1), the Commission:
(a) may have regard to any matter the Commission considers relevant; and
(b) may make any enquiries the Commission considers appropriate.
Exercising the internal review power
172D(3) and 172U(3)(b) require the Commission, in exercising its internal review
power, to have regard to the objects of
the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines in respect of the regulation of liquor issued by the Minister.
objects of the LCR Act are set out in section 4(1) as
The objects of this Act are –
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by –
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of
liquor; and
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
35. Further, section 4(2) provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion,
must be exercised and
performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the
misuse and abuse of alcohol.
3(1) defines ‘harm’ as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol, including—
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury or
property damage.
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker;10F
(b) may consider further information, material or
evidence.11F
Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in section
44(2) are relevant considerations, the determination
of an uncontested
application is ultimately to be made pursuant to sections 44(1) and 157(1) at
the discretion of the Commission,
with reference to the objects of the LCR Act.
section 49, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the grant
of an application.
Conduct of an inquiry
44(4) provides that the Commission may have regard to any matter it considers
relevant and make any enquiries it considers
appropriate. The Commission is not
required to give any person an opportunity to be heard concerning the Review
Application.
172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit
and is bound by the rules of natural
Other relevant sections of the LCR Act
Limited Licences
limited licence may be a temporary limited licence or a RLL. Pursuant to
section 14(1B), a RLL authorises the licensee to supply
liquor at the times
determined by the Commission and specified on the licence, and it may be renewed
in accordance with the LCR Act.
A limited licence may further be subject to any
conditions determined by the Commission and specified on the licence.
26 provides that the Commission may grant a limited licence only if it is
satisfied that the scale and scope of the supply
of liquor the subject of the
licence is limited in nature (
Scale and Scope Requirement
Certain premises not to be licensed
section 22(1)(ca), the Commission must not grant a licence or BYO permit in
respect of premises that, in the opinion of the
Commission, are intended by the
occupier of the premises to be primarily used by people under the age of 18
years, unless the Commission
is satisfied that the grant of a licence or permit
would not present a specific risk of supply of liquor to a person under the age
of 18 years.
22(3A) states:
For the purposes of section 22(1)(ca), factors
that the Commission may consider include but are not limited to –
(a) Whether the proposed licence or permit authorises supply of liquor at a
time when the premises will not be primarily used by persons
under the age of 18
(b) Whether the proposed licence or permit provides that any person under the
age of 18 years must be accompanied by a responsible
adult at all times, during
which the proposed supply of liquor is to occur.
Reasons for decision on review
Issues for determination on review
making its decision on review, the Commission must determine the following
central issues:
(a) whether the Scale and Scope Requirement is met;
(b) whether the grant of a licence would present a specific risk of supply of
liquor to a person under the age of 18 years for the
purposes of section
(c) whether the granting the Amended Original Application would detract from or
be detrimental to the amenity of the area in which
the Premises is
situated;12F
(d) whether granting the Amended Original Application would be conducive to or
encourage harm; and
(e) having considered the previous issues, whether the Amended Original
Application should be granted or reused, having regard to
the objects of the LCR
of the above issues are discussed in turn.
Scale and Scope
Requirement
stated above, the Commission may only grant a RLL if it is satisfied that the
Scale and Scope Requirement is met. That is, the
scale and scope of the supply
of liquor is limited in
There are no
statutory signposts which prescribe specific factors for the Commission to
consider in determining whether the Scale
and Scope Requirement is met. On
previous occasions, the Commission has considered “the nature, location,
duration or frequency
of hours of operation of the licence in question” as
relevant to the Scale and Scope
Requirement.15F
the Hearing, the Applicant submitted that it intended to supply liquor in a
notably reduced manner than was initially proposed
in the Original Application.
Specifically, the Applicant intended to supply liquor in the manner specified in
its proposed licence
conditions set out in paragraph 21 above.
Commission notes that the Applicant’s proposed supply under the RLL would
be relatively modest given that the supply would
be no more than 24 hours
(total) across a whole month. It would be limited by time, to pre-booked
functions only (and not to members
of the public), and by the number of lines of
subject to the conditions set out in Appendix A, the Commission considers that
the nature of the proposed supply of liquor
would be sufficiently limited in
scale and scope and would therefore satisfy the requirements in section
Section 22(1)(ca)
stated above, while the Premises is open to people of all ages, it attracts a
younger demographic, and a significant number of
children attending with parents
or guardians.
is clear that the Applicant’s main business is offering virtual reality
experiences, arcade games, interactive sports, and
hosting children’s
birthday parties and other similar functions.
stated above, pursuant to section 22(1)(ca), the Commission must not grant a
licence or BYO permit in respect of premises that,
in the opinion of the
Commission, are intended by the occupier of the premises to be primarily used by
people under the age of 18
years, unless the Commission is satisfied that the
grant of a licence or permit would not present a specific risk of supply of
to a person under the age of 18 years.
is not the whole of the Premises that is proposed to be licensed; rather, the
application is for a licence with respect to a separate
function room within the
Premises. The application is not for the grant of a licence in respect of the
whole of the Premises; accordingly,
the Commission does not consider section
22(1)(ca) applies.
the Commission is satisfied from all information received that the Applicant
would have suitable procedures and controls
in place to ensure that the supply
of liquor for consumption in the Proposed Licensed Area at the Premises under a
licence would
not present a specific risk of supply of liquor to a person under
the age of 18 years. The Commission also notes that Victoria Police
raise any concerns in this regard. Additionally, the Commission has had regard
to the Applicant’s evidence regarding
liquor being stored in a locked
storeroom on the Premises and a separate bar console being installed in the
Proposed Licensed Area
with no public access.
Applicant has also advised that hosts for functions will be informed and
required to acknowledge their obligations to their guests,
ensuring liquor does
not leave the Proposed Licensed Area and minors must not be served liquor.
to the conditions in Appendix A, the Commission is satisfied that granting the
RLL would not present a specific risk of supply
of liquor to a person under the
age of 18 years for the purposes of section
Commission must also determine whether the grant of a RLL would detract from or
be detrimental to the amenity of the area in which
the Proposed Licensed Area
are located, which may give rise to a ground of refusal under section
noted above, the Commissioners visited the Premises and the surrounding area on
16 June 2025. This visit confirmed not only the
quality of the building for the
proposed operations but also the limited amenity impacts on what is otherwise an
industrial area
and shopping precinct.
Proposed Licensed Area is said to be soundproofed, and the Applicant informed
the Commission that there would be no live music
in the Proposed Licensed Area.
have been no objections received from Victoria Police or the Council to the
grant of an RLL.
proposed final trading hour under the Amended Original Application has been
reduced to 11pm (from 1am) to minimise any potential
impact to amenity that may
be associated with patrons leaving functions.
the Commission is satisfied that the grant of a RLL subject to the conditions
detailed in Appendix A would not detract from
or be detrimental to the amenity
of the area.
stated above, an application may be refused if granting the application would be
conducive to or encourage harm. Victoria Police
did not raise any concerns in
this regard.
Commission considers that the Applicant’s service of food with the supply
of liquor during the pre-booked and private functions
assists in the responsible
service of alcohol and should minimise any risks associated with excessive
alcohol consumption at the
Additionally,
the Commission notes from the Applicant’s evidence that liquor for the
functions will be stored in a locked storage
room and that there would always be
at least one RSA-trained staff member inside the Proposed Licensed Area. In the
event that there
are more than 50 guests, the Applicant advised that there will
be two RSA-trained staff members present in the Proposed Licensed
Commission has considered there is a risk of secondary supply of liquor to
minors in light of the Premises’ offering more
generally, and that minors
may enter and exit the Proposed Licensed Area during a function. It is necessary
that the Applicant implements
its understanding of the importance of complying
with responsible service of alcohol requirements and continued vigilance during
functions. To this end, the Applicant will be required to adopt and comply with
a venue management plan that includes key measures
to reduce the risk of harm to
minors (particularly by way of secondary supply), including with respect to
training of staff, appropriate
signage and provision of information to guests
subject to that requirement and the conditions in Appendix A, the Commission is
satisfied that granting the RLL would not
be conducive to or encourage
Objects of the LCR Act
the Commission is satisfied that the Amended Original Application meets the
requirements of section 26 and that no grounds
for refusal exist under section
22(1)(ca) or section 44(2), the Commission must exercise its discretion whether
or not to grant an
With the imposition of the conditions in
Appendix A, the Commission is satisfied that adequate controls will exist over
and consumption of liquor at the Proposed Licensed Area and that any
harm should be minimised. Accordingly, the Commission considers
that the grant
of a licence in this instance would not be contrary to the LCR Act’s
objects concerning harm minimisation.
the Commission also considers that granting the RLL would facilitate the
development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community
expectations in furtherance of the object outlined in section 4(1)(b).
Decision on review
contrast to the position before the delegate at which stage there was a distinct
and critical lack of information and based on
all the matters set out above, the
Commission on review has decided to set aside the delegate’s decision and,
in substitution,
grant a RLL for the Proposed Licensed Area subject to the
conditions set out in Appendix A.
The preceding 72
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Mr John Larkins
(Chair), Mr Steven Brnovic (Commissioner),
and Ms Sue Timbs
(Commissioner).
General information
Any reference to the
Liquor Regulator below is a reference to the Victorian Liquor Commission, or any
successor statutory office,
body or officer however named, under the
Control Reform Act 1998
(LCR Act) or successor legislation, that has powers
and carries out regulatory functions equivalent to the Victorian Liquor
Commission.
This licence is a renewable limited
licence and subject to the conditions specified in this licence authorises the
licensee to supply
liquor for consumption on the licensed premises during the
trading hours and in the manner specified below.
licensee will not cause or permit undue detriment to the amenity of the area to
arise out of or in connection with the use of
the premises to which the licence
relates during or immediately after the trading hours authorised by this
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
Venue Management Plan
The licensee must develop, implement, maintain and comply continuously
with a Venue Management Plan with respect to the licensed premises
include matters for the purposes of minimising harm arising from misuse and
abuse of alcohol and risk to minors, including
with respect to:
(a) signage internal and external to the licensed premises when there is a
private function. Signage to advise that liquor must not
leave the licensed
(b) house rules and function host acknowledgement of their responsibility
regarding consumption of liquor.
(c) minimum of one RSA trained staff required at all functions serving liquor.
In the event that there are more than 50 guests attending
a function, a minimum
of 2 RSA trained staff are required to be present in the function room.
The licensee must conduct and supervise all aspects of the management of the
licensed premises in accordance with the licensee’s
venue management plan,
as amended from time to time. The venue management plan must be retained on the
licensed premises in the possession
of the licensee, nominee, manager or other
person in charge.
The venue management plan must be available to an
authorised member of Victoria Police, or a person authorised in writing by the
if requested.
In the event there is any inconsistency with the
venue management plan and the licence, the conditions in this licence will
Pre-Booked functions
Up to 6 pre-booked functions may
be held on the licensed premises per calendar month. Such functions will be held
for a maximum duration
of 4 hours.
The Licensee is required to maintain a
register of the pre-booked functions to which this licence applies with the
register detailing
the date, time, number of guests, and name of the function
organiser which must be available to an authorised member of Victoria
a person authorised in writing by the Commission if requested.
The supply of liquor for pre-booked functions shall be limited
to no more than 3 types of red wine, 3 types of white wine, 3 types
of beer, and
3 types of spirits.
For the avoidance of doubt, the supply of liquor under
is limited to no more than for supply of liquor for
pre-booked functions only.
If liquor is stored outside the licensed premises, the
liquor must be stored in an area that is out of public view and locked or
inaccessible
to the public except when accessed to stock functions on the
licensed premises.
Provision of food
Food must be available
at all times that liquor is being supplied.
must be at least one RSA staff member on the licensed premises at all times for
a pre-booked function. Where there are more
than 50 guests attending a
pre-booked function, at least 2 RSA staff members are required on the licensed
premises at all times for
a pre-booked function.
The licensee must produce
any RSA certificates kept by the licensee for inspection which must be available
to an authorised member
of Victoria Police or a person authorised in writing by
the Commission if requested.
Maximum capacity for the licensed
100 patrons
Trading hours for the licensed
Monday to Sunday
Between 12pm and 11pm
Holidays Between
12pm and 11pm
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
As to the meaning of
“licensing inspector”, see section 3.
LCR Act, section 157(2) to (5)
Ibid, sections 44, 49 and
LCR Act, section 44(2)(b)(i).
LCR Act, section 44(2)(b)(ii).
LCR Act, section 3A.
section 3A(2).
Until a legislative amendment in 2018, the following factors were also included
as evidencing detriment to the amenity
of the area: (a) the presence (or
absence) of parking facilities; (b) traffic movement and density; (c) noise
section 3A(3).
See further
Kordister Pty
Ltd v Direction of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
, which confirms that
harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCRA and therefore the
primary consideration in liquor
licensing decisions (although not to the
exclusion of the other objects).
LCR Act, section 157(2)
Ibid, section 157(3).
LCR Act, sections
44(2)(b)(i).
LCR Act, sections 4 and
172D(3). The Commission notes that, in determining this matter, it has also
considered each of the grounds
set out in section 44(2).
LCR Act, section 26(1).
See decision of Fynix Pty
Ltd at 36A Vickers Street, Sebastapol premises (Liquor-Internal Review)
[2016] VCGLR 19, [61].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (876 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter