URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1606.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tok Holdings Pty Ltd v Marchionna (No 2) [2025] VCC 1606 (6 November 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
Case No. CI-22-05123
Tok Holdings Pty Ltd (ACN
006 559 066)
Richard Marchionna
HIS HONOUR JUDGE WISE
DATE OF HEARING
28 October 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT
6 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Tok Holdings Pty Ltd v Marchionna (No 2)
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1606
REASONS FOR
Subject: Review of a Decision of the Court Constituted by a Judicial
Catchwords: Retail Lease - Exercise of Option - Whether Notice Absolute and
Unqualified - Overholding - Statutory Continuation -
Guarantor Liability –
Retail Leases Act 2003
(Vic) Arrears And Interest – Mitigation.
Legislation Cited:
Retail Leases Act 2003
Cases Cited:
Tok Holdings Pty Ltd v Marchionna
[2025] VCC 539
Construction Pty Ltd v Profine Construction Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2020] VCC 1254
Lolly Pops (Harbourside) Pty Ltd v Wencog Pty Ltd
(1998) 9 BPR 16,361
[1998] NSWSC 304
Vered Nominees Pty Ltd v Scalex Pty Ltd
[2002] VCAT
Kavia Holdings Pty Ltd v Suntrack Holdings Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWSC 716
Quadling v Robinson
[1976] HCA 31
(1976) 137 CLR 192
Astor Theatre WA Pty Ltd v
Zimmermann Investments Pty Ltd
[2014] WASC 329
P G Kazis Nominees Pty
Ltd v Bakers II Pty Ltd
[2018] SADC 48
AZW International Pty Ltd v N J
Agius Pty Ltd
[2018] VCAT 1281
Sea One North Pty Ltd v Ignazia Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 343
APlus Capital Pty Ltd v Kontomichalos
Verraty Pty Ltd v Richmond Football Club Ltd
[2020] VSCA 267
Jane Corporation Pty Ltd v Commercial Road Developments Pty Ltd and Anor (Retail
[2007] VCAT 2120
Crown Melbourne v Cosmopolitan Hotel
(2016) CLR 1;
Legfin Pty Ltd v Anthony (Building and Property)
Pagica Pty Ltd atf the Oscinah Trust v Inlet Property Pty Ltd
(Building and Property
[2024] VCAT 830.
Judgment: For the plaintiff.
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
Ms S Weinberg
Tisher Liner FC Law
For the Defendant
Mr Richard Marchionna
Self-Represented
HIS HONOUR:
Introduction
proceeding is a review of a trial judgment of Judicial Registrar Bennett made on
6 May 2025 in
Tok Holdings Pty Ltd v Marchionna
[2025] VCC 539
) which will be referred to throughout this judgment.
judicial review is by way of a rehearing de novo, and as a consequence, I am not
bound by the Judicial Registrar’s reasons,
nor do I need to search for
error, as one would on an appeal by way of rehearing. The submissions made by
the defendant, both in
writing and orally before me today, address the
defendant’s reasons why it is he says that the judgment ought to be set
proceeding concerns shop 10-16 on the ground floor of the Trak Centre at 443-449
Toorak Road, Toorak (
the Premises
) and an associated parking space
the Carpark
). The plaintiff is the landlord. The tenant, Jorimar
Solutions Pty Ltd (
), has operated a restaurant called Funkies
from the Premises. The defendant, Mr Richard Marchionna, is Jorimar’s sole
runs the restaurant and guaranteed Jorimar’s obligations under
the lease and carpark licence.
plaintiff sues for unpaid rent for the Premises and unpaid licence fees for the
Carpark, together with legal costs. The central
issue is the legal basis on
which Jorimar has occupied the Premises since 1 April 2020.
31 March 2011, Jorimar leased the Premises from the then-owner, Paisley Ridge
Pty Ltd, for five years to 31 March 2016, with an
associated Carpark licence. Mr
Marchionna signed as director and guarantor. A Deed of Variation executed on 4
September 2015 extended
the lease from 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2020 and granted
an option for a further three years to 31 March 2023 (
the Option)
overholding provisions if the tenant remained in possession without
plaintiff became registered proprietor on 17 December 2018 and is entitled to
enforce the Varied Lease. It is accepted that the
Retail Leases Act
) applies, but this dispute is within the
landlord-guarantor exception in
section 89(4)(c)
and is therefore not within
VCAT’s exclusive jurisdiction.
plaintiff pleads that Jorimar exercised the option by a letter dated 26
September 2019 (
the September 2019 Letter
), and that an equitable lease
arose for the option term. It says that, from April 2023, Jorimar continued as a
monthly tenant under
the overholding provisions. Alternatively, if the option
was not exercised, Jorimar has been a month-to-month tenant since 1 April
under clause 10.1. The plaintiff says rent and licence fees remain unpaid and
the defendant is liable under his guarantee. The
claim is quantified by
reference to a ledger maintained by its managing agent.
defendant, who is self-represented, contends that the September 2019 letter was
conditional on a rent reduction and further lease
and was therefore ineffective.
He further argues that the plaintiff cannot rely on equity because it did not
act with clean hands,
including by failing to conduct the required market rent
review and by issuing misleading rent review letters in 2022. He says that
failure to comply with clause 11 renders the guarantee unenforceable and the
claim should be dismissed. He also disputes the quantum,
saying the plaintiff
belatedly credited interim COVID-era rent payments of $500 per week and
improperly increased rent from May 2022
based on an invalid appraisal. He says
Jorimar remained in occupation from April 2020 at the plaintiff’s request
pending rent
negotiations and that the plaintiff’s silence after March
2023 reasonably led him to believe the lease had ended. He maintains
Lease expired on 31 March 2020 and that no guarantee applied beyond that
Marchionna did not press all of these matters before me and it will be apparent
from my reasons below what matters were pressed.
is common ground that Jorimar already owed $42,948.86 in arrears as at 31 March
2020, which the defendant concedes. The plaintiff
does not pursue Carpark
licence fees after 1 April 2020, and from that date claims only unpaid rent.
The claim for legal costs was
orders dated 27 May 2025 Judicial Registrar Bennett ordered that:
(a) The defendant pay to the plaintiff the sum of $727,859.65.
(b) The defendant pay to the plaintiff interest on the principal sum owing as at
1 December 2022 ($345,629.15) at the penalty interest
rate of 10% per annum from
1 December 2022 to the date of judgment, being the sum of $85,981.17.
(c) The defendant pay the plaintiff’s costs of the proceeding, including
reserved costs but excluding the costs incurred by
the plaintiff on 31 July
2024, on the standard basis to be taxed in default of agreement.
The conduct of this review
parties were agreed that no witnesses would be called on this review, they
agreed that the transcript of the examination and
cross-examination of witnesses
should form part of the record that I might have to resort to in deciding the
the approach of his Honour Judge Woodward (as he then was) in
Construction Pty Ltd v Profine Construction Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2020] VCC 1254
in my view, it is proper in this case to give considerable weight to the JR
Reasons for the following reasons:
(a) The summary of the facts and argument is comprehensive;
(b) Save for any differences noted below, I consider that the JR Reasons
accurately and correctly set out the legal principles to
be applied; and
(c) Save for the fact that I reach a different conclusion on the issue of
whether the Option was effectively exercised, the conclusions
reached are
unimpeachable.
given these matters and the summary nature of these proceedings, it is neither
necessary nor appropriate for me to add substantively
to the JR Reasons just for
the sake of doing so. I therefore adopt without repeating the summary of facts
and argument, the analysis
of the law and, save as set out below, the conclusion
reached in the JR Reasons.
are really only four issues that arise for consideration in this review.
was the Option effectively exercised by the Tenant by the letter of 26 September
(a) For the reasons set out below, I find that the Option was effectively
if the Option was not so exercised, did the tenant remain in occupation of the
premises pursuant to the overholding provisions
of the Varied Lease from 1 April
2020 until 31 May 2025?
(a) For the reasons given in paragraphs 137 – 168 of the JR Reasons, which
I consider to be correct and adopt, the Tenant was
in occupation pursuant to the
overholding provisions of the Varied Lease.
(b) Further, given my answer to Issue 1, I also find that the tenant was in
occupation from 1 April 2023 until 30 June 2025, pursuant
to the overholding
provisions of the Varied Lease.
is Mr Marchionna liable as guarantor for the obligations of the
(a) For the reasons set out below, I find that he is.
what is the quantum for which Mr Marchionna is liable?
(a) The quantum was not seriously in dispute. The amount for which Mr
Marchionna is liable is as ordered by Judicial Registrar Bennett,
whose orders
will be confirmed.
Issue 1. Was the Option Exercised? Letter of 26 September 2019.
sole point upon which I depart from the JR Reasons concerns the proper
construction of the letter dated 26 September 2019. Judicial
Registrar Bennett
concluded that the letter did not constitute an absolute and unqualified
exercise of the option, and therefore
the option was not validly exercised. With
respect, I do not agree.
convenience, the text of the letter is reproduced below.
“Dear Donna
Re: Notification of exercise of option for Shops 10-16 Ground Floor Level,
Trak Centre
I am writing to advise that I am exercising the option that I am entitled to
for the further period of three years.
I am also advising that I would be receptive to a new lease for a minimum of
Business conditions have turned sharply down over the last 12 months and the
level of rent that the business can sustain needs to
be reviewed sharply down.
Sales are currently running at a level that to make the rent it takes 2 days
sales which is not sustainable.
The cause of the reduction in sales, according
to my observations and discussions with other traders in the village, is not due
competitive activity. In fact another establishment has recently shut down
because of a lack of general activity in the area.
I therefore request that for the new period the rent be $1500/week incl GST
and outgoings.
I have, as you know, been here in the village at Funkies for over 17 years
and have never before experienced worse trading conditions
or seen as many empty
Legal Principles
paragraphs 106 to 122 of the JR Decision, Judicial Registrar Bennett rightly
identified and analysed a number of authorities relevant
to the determination of
this issue.
paragraphs are replicated below.
(Harbourside) Pty Ltd v Wencog Pty
the plaintiff tenant
contended that it had validly exercised an option for a further lease term by
delivering to the landlord a covering
letter from its controlling director and
an enclosed notice.
The covering
letter made various complaints in the first two paragraphs, before going on to
“The enclosed lease renewal notice is therefore subject to me knowing
precisely what is likely to happen over the short to medium
term, what is the
plans in terms of merchandising mix and how is [the tenant] to be affected any
more than it is already.
What really irks me is that I am still being asked to pay for rental on a
property that is obviously in trouble and as far as I am
concerned I am renewing
my lease oblivious to the future. Please contact me at the earliest possible
[107] The enclosed notice was headed “Notice of Lease Renewal”
and commenced by stating: “Pursuant to the terms
of the lease be advised
that [the tenant] hereby elects forthwith to continue with the second further
term and exercises the option
to renew the lease of shop 283 Festival Market
Place at Darling Harbour.”
[108] Amongst other things, Young J was required to consider whether the
documents constituted an exercise of the option or were merely
a conditional
acceptance. In concluding that the tenant had exercised the option, his Honour
“It is not every acceptance which appears to have a condition attached
to it that should be classed as a qualified acceptance.
There may be an
acceptance which asks for matters to be reviewed so long as it is clear from the
whole of the context that if the
request is refused, the acceptor is prepared to
carry out the original contract
. Furthermore, there may be an acceptance
coupled with an offer to enter into a further collateral contract.
It seems to me that the ‘subject to’ matters referred to in the
[covering letter] are in the category of a general request
for consideration in
view of all the problems that the lessee has been experiencing through the
renovation works of the lessor and
should not be taken to be a condition
qualifying the acceptance.” (emphasis added)
Vered Nominees Pty Ltd v Scalex Pty
the tenant asserted
that it had not exercised an option to renew a lease, whereas the landlord
asserted that the tenant had done so.
The purported notice was contained in a
letter from the tenant’s solicitors headed “Option for Renewal of
14-18 Cremorne Street” and stated:
“We refer to the above matter and advise that we act on behalf of
Scalex Pty Ltd the Lessee of the above premises. Our client
has forwarded to us
a copy of your letter dated 8 November 1999 and we advise that our client wishes
to exercise the Option contained
in the Lease.
As per the terms of the lease, the rent for the first year will be the same
as the current rent, our client would prefer this rent
to remain the same for
the second year, but will be prepared to negotiate a reasonable
variation.”
[110] The tenant relied upon the “cardinal rule” that a notice of
exercise of an option must be clear and unequivocal
and that the exercise of the
option must be absolute and unqualified. It contended that, having regard to
the second paragraph quoted
above, the letter was simply an invitation to
continue negotiation as to what was the proper rental for year 2 of the option
rather than an acceptance of the irrevocable offer constituted by the
option to renew.
Deputy President
Macnamara, in concluding that the option had been exercised, rejected this
submission. Critical in his reasoning
was the fact that the lease provided that
the rental in the first year of the option period would be the same as the
rental under
the expiring lease, and in the second and third years was to be
agreed by the parties. Accordingly, the second paragraph of the
entirely consistent with the rental review machinery provided for by the lease
and therefore “asserts nothing which
is inconsistent with the terms of the
lease and the terms of the option to
Thus, the Deputy
President rejected the tenant’s submission that the second paragraph of
the letter was somehow repudiatory
of the terms of the
Rather, he held that,
“insofar as this letter of 1st December 1999 suggests a continuation of
negotiation, it is not at all
inconsistent with the letter in itself constituted
[sic] a clear and equivocal [scil: unequivocal] exercise of the
Kavia Holdings Pty Ltd v Suntrack Holdings Pty
the purported notice of
exercise of the option was contained in the second sentence of the following
paragraph of a six-paragraph
email from the tenant’s representative:
“I am just considering and it is probably worth the lessors while as
well, that we tie all the leases up for the full term that
we can expect. I
would like to have at least another 20 years with Jordons lease and tie that in
with Cohibar and Watershed so that
they are a composite asset in the books of
Kavia. There are benefits both ways by doing such an agreement.”
[112] Justice Pembroke
that, whilst the
primary issue was the understanding of a reasonable person in the lessor’s
position in the relevant context,
“the lessee cannot hedge its bets,
impose its own qualifications, or point to the need for further negotiations.
This is the
sense in which it is sometimes said that the notice must be
‘absolute and unqualified’:
Quadling v Robinson
[1976] HCA 31
at 200-201 (Gibbs J)”.
[113] His Honour went on to hold on a number of bases that the notice in
question did not constitute a valid exercise of the option,
because it would not
have been understood by a reasonable person in the lessor’s position as
being “an unqualified statement
of a desire to take a further lease of the
premises for the further term of years set out in the reference
One such basis
was that the paragraph set out above suggested that the author contemplated
further negotiation.
was that the second sentence proposed two qualifications in relation to the
lease: the first being that the author stated
he would like to have “at
least another 20 years” (in circumstances where the option provided for
only 20 years), and
the second being that he wished to tie the Jordons lease
(which was the subject of the option) with the other two leases (Cohibar
Watershed).
Justice Pembroke
observed that this would “involve alteration to some or all of the leases
to ensure, among other things,
that their expiry dates became
coincident”.
also other bases of invalidity which are not relevant for present purposes.
Astor Theatre WA Pty Ltd v Zimmermann Investments Pty Ltd
the relevant notice from the tenant
“Take notice that pursuant to clause 5(15)(a) of the Lease, and subject
to and conditional upon acceptance by the Lessor that
Mr Robert Denman shall not
be continuing as a Guarantor for the obligations of the Lessee for the First
Extended term, or any subsequent
extension of the Lease, the Lessee hereby
exercises its option to renew the Lease and requests an extension of the Term of
for the First Extended Term, being a further period of five (5) years
commencing on 2 September 2014.”
[115] Justice Chaney held
that the option had not been exercised, because the phrase “subject to and
conditional upon ... continuing as a Guarantor”
meant that the
“lessee was requesting a lease, or an extension of the term of the lease,
subject to different conditions and,
indeed, different parties, or at least not
all of the same parties, given that Mr Denman would have been effectively
released as
a party to the lease.”
P G Kazis Nominees Pty Ltd v Bakers II Pty
the landlord contended
that the relevant lease had been renewed for a second time by reason of the
tenant’s exercise of an
option, while the tenant contended that the option
had not been exercised. The notice in question was a letter from the
director stating, relevantly:
“I am writing to inform you of our intentions to extend our lease on
the property ... for a further 5 years starting March 2013.
We would also like
to add another 5 by 5 year lease to the existing lease. We see this extension
very important [sic] to us securing
our long-term goal in North Adelaide.
We would also like the same conditions as in the previous lease with the only
change being the carport in front of the bakery being
the bakeries premises. We
also require the lease to be registered this term. As your lawyer was
inadequate in providing the required
documents for the past 9 years, can we get
another person to draw the new lease up? ... ”
[117] After discussing other reasons why the letter did not constitute a
valid exercise of the option, Judge Chivell went on to
“Even if the letter purported to exercise the option, it was not
absolute and unqualified. In his letter, Mr Greven indicated
a desire to change
the existing lease by:
adding another 5-plus-5-year lease to the existing lease;
making the carport in front of the bakery ‘being’ the
bakery’s premises (which I take to mean that he wanted the
area of the
carport to be included in the demised premises);
having a new lease drawn up by someone other than the person who drew up the
having the lease registered on the title to the property.
These requested alterations were too substantial to be described as
constituting an absolute and unqualified request to renew the
then current lease
on the same terms. The right to renew in clause 4.8.1 of the lease was limited
to a renewal ‘on the same
terms and conditions as are herein
contained’.”
AZW International Pty Ltd v N J Agius Pty
the landlord contended
that the tenant had exercised an option to renew a lease, while the tenant
denied that it had done so. The
purported notice had been preceded by several
emails from the tenant to the landlord expressing concern about trading
at the relevant food court where the premises were located and
requesting that the rent not be increased. Three days before the
sent, the daughter of the tenant’s director, who acted as the agent of the
tenant, had telephoned the landlord and
said that the tenant would definitely
exercise the option. The landlord responded by asking for this to be confirmed
in an email.
The tenant then sent an email to the landlord which opened by
stating “Im [sic] writing this letter regarding out [sic] rental
issue.” The email went on to refer at some length and in general terms to
the downturn in customers at the food court and
the increasing difficulty in
running the business. The final paragraph stated:
“Ultimately, we are extremely grateful that you have always been
our situation and
appreciated and give us confidence
to continue operating the business. We are
willing to exercise option of further term and hoping you can still help and
us with the rental issue.”
[119] The landlord contended that, by this email, and in particular the final
sentence thereof, the tenant had exercised the option.
The tenant contended
that the option was not exercised and would only be exercised if the rent was
reduced. Senior Member Forde
that the words of the final
sentence of the email “were sufficiently clear to be an operative act as
opposed to a mere statement
of future intention” and that they
“constitute a clear and unequivocal act to exercise the option.”
She further
that the phrase
“and hoping you can still help and support us with the rental issue”
was “not a qualification or
reservation on the exercise of the
option”, but rather, “a repeat of previous requests by [the tenant]
of the Landlord
for rental relief” and that the email “does not make
the exercise of the option conditional upon rental relief”.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal concluded,
regard to all the circumstances of its receipt – including the
parties’ previous correspondence and the telephone
call to which I have
referred – that the email constituted an exercise of the option by the
Sea One North Pty Ltd v Ignazia Pty
the plaintiff tenant
denied that it had exercised a renewal option conferred by clause 22.1 of the
relevant lease, while the defendant
contended that the plaintiff had done so.
The purported notice was contained in an email from the tenant’s sole
director to
the landlord’s agent, which occurred in the course of various
communications regarding the issue of whether the tenant intended
to exercise
its option. The email stated:
“Just a further update re: the lease @ [the subject property].
I’ve now had the scope of the refurb works finalised with the
franchisor ... all of the works can be categorised as internal
flooring, joinery, internal painting, internal signage, furniture and the like)
... at least nothing that requires external
approval ... just a hefty amount of
So I am fine to now formally exercise the lease renewal option.
And in terms of getting to an agreed set of renewal terms, I have asked
Dennis Kalofonos to assist with the process ...”
[121] Justice Peden began by considering the relevant authorities, noting by
reference to
that “It is
well established that the valid exercise of an option must be absolute and
unqualified. The purported exercise
of an option will not be absolute and
unqualified if it would involve a variation of the terms of the
Her Honour went
on to conclude for a number of reasons that the option had not been exercised.
One such reason was that the language
of the penultimate paragraph communicated
that a path had been cleared for the future exercise of the option and not that
was thereby being exercised. More relevantly for present purposes,
another such reason was that in the final
“... [the author] does not speak with finality one would expect in
relation to an unequivocal exercise of an option to renew,
but instead envisages
a process by which the parties will be, ‘getting to an agreed set of
terms’. The process is to
be achieved with the assistance of Mr
Kalofonos. I consider there would be no need for the assistance of Mr
Kalofonos, a real estate
agent, if what Mr Barbour was agreeing to was a simple
exercise of the option on known terms.
In relation to the lease, there was no need for any further negotiation of
any terms. Instead, all terms had been determined ...”
[122] In concluding that the option had not been exercised, her Honour also
that the use of the word
“And” at the beginning of the final paragraph meant that that
paragraph naturally flowed from
the language of the penultimate paragraph.
Thus, the penultimate paragraph could not be read as unqualified by the final
The letter was therefore “not an unqualified exercise of the
option, but instead sets out the writer’s proposed process
forward.” Relatedly, Peden J
tenant’s] desire to negotiate terms is inconsistent with, or would require
the variation of, the actual terms
of cl 22.1, and is not an absolute and
unequivocal exercise of that right.”
was noted in the JR Reasons:
[101] There was no substantial dispute
between the parties as to the applicable legal principles concerning the
exercise of an option.
The plaintiff submitted, by reference to a number of
authorities, that the “cardinal rule” is that a notice purportedly
exercising an option must be clear and unequivocal, and that the exercise of the
option must be absolute and
unqualified.
This proposition is
uncontroversial and the defendant took no issue with it. Relatedly, both parties
agreed that an option cannot
be exercised conditionally or, put another way, a
purported conditional exercise of an option is not a valid exercise of an
[102] The plaintiff further submitted that that a notice purporting to to
exercise an option is to be construed objectively in the
way it would be
understood by a reasonable recipient, and that evidence of the parties'
subjective understanding of the effect of
the notice is
inadmissible.
These propositions
are well-settled and they were not challenged by the defendant.
my view, giving the September 2019 Letter an objective reading, as would be done
by a reasonable person receiving it, it is properly
to be understood as serving
three distinct purposes.
and most significantly, it contained an unequivocal and operative communication
of the present exercise of the option conferred
by clause 12 of the Varied
lease. The sentence “
I am writing to advise that I am exercising the
option that I am entitled to for the further period of three years
expressed as a present act of election, unqualified by any other matter. The
sentence stands alone and its meaning is
beyond doubt. This is reinforced when
regard is had to the subject line of the letter which indicates what must be the
primary purpose
of the letter as “
Re: Notification of exercise of
option for Shops 10-16 Ground Floor Level, Trak Centre
letter then continued to canvass two further matters. There are no words in
those subsidiary matters that indicate that they
are conditions placed upon the
otherwise unconditional exercise of the option in the first paragraph. A
reasonable recipient of
the letter would not have understood them to be
conditions placed upon that exercise of the option.
the letter conveyed the tenant’s willingness to enter into discussions for
a lease term beyond the option period by
stating that “I am also advising
that I would be receptive to a new lease for a minimum of 5 years”. I note
the word “also” which reinforces that the subject matter
of the first paragraph was standalone and this was a further
and different
matter. In submissions before me, Mr Marchionna disavowed any reliance on this
paragraph as placing a condition on
the exercise of the option in the first
Nevertheless,
it does provide context to understand what the tenant was doing in the second
and third to fourth paragraphs of the
letter. Objectively and reasonably read,
the second paragraph makes clear that notwithstanding that the tenant had
effectively exercised
the option – that is, that it had secured to itself
a term of three further years to which it was legally entitled and upon
terms of the Varied Lease – it wanted to engage the landlord in
discussions to obtain an extended term of 5 years and (by
the third subject
matter in the letter to which I will refer shortly) renegotiate the rent down,
if these were possible. However,
what is tolerably clear is that the exercise
of the option was the primary issue that the letter was directed to and the
clear that it was exercising that option then and there.
it advanced a proposal for the renegotiation of rent, referring to deteriorating
trading conditions and expressly requesting
that “for the new period the
rent be $1500/week incl GST and outgoings”. As I stated in the last
paragraph, I consider
this to be an expression of a desire to renegotiate the
rent that would apply to the term that had been renewed by the exercise of
option. It was not expressed to be a condition upon that exercise. Reading the
letter as a whole, the tenant was careful to
protect its right to obtain a
further three year term and thereafter to negotiate a lower rent, if it could.
But these matters were
not interdependent.
second and third matters are properly characterised as proposals for future
negotiation rather than conditions upon the act of
renewal. That distinction has
been repeatedly recognised in the authorities summarised above. In
, Young J upheld the validity of a renewal notwithstanding the
accompanying language in the covering letter which referred to the
notice being “subject to me knowing precisely what is likely to
happen” and “as far as I am concerned I
am renewing my lease
oblivious to the future”. Young J held that such statements amounted only
to requests for consideration
and not to conditions that qualified the
effectiveness of the exercise. Similarly, in
Vered Nominees
tenant’s solicitors stated that the client “wishes to
exercise” the option and then immediately expressed
a preference that the
rent remain the same into the second year, while being prepared to negotiate a
variation. That was still held
to be a clear and unequivocal exercise because
the lease itself contemplated agreement on rent for subsequent years and the
did not state that the renewal depended upon the rent position being
contrasted with those cases where the exercise was held to be invalid, the
different character of the present letter becomes
, the tenant did not confine itself to exercising the option
conferred by the existing lease but instead spoke of wanting “at
another 20 years” and tying together three separate leases. Justice
Pembroke expressly found that this amounted to a
contemplated alteration of the
existing contractual framework, not an acceptance of it. In
, the tenant’s purported exercise was expressly “subject
to and conditional upon” the landlord accepting the removal
guarantor, which the Court held would amount to different parties being bound
and hence a renewal only on new terms. In
Sea One North
, the tenant
stated “I am fine to now formally exercise the lease renewal option”
but immediately followed with reference
to “getting to an agreed set of
renewal terms” with assistance, which Justice Peden interpreted as
indicating that exercise
would occur only once further terms were agreed. In
each of those cases, the renewal was expressed as dependent on alteration to
existing contractual terms.
reading the September letter as a whole it bears the character that I have
described above. First, it was an unequivocal and
unconditional notice of
exercise then and there of the option that the tenant was legally entitled to.
It then sought to introduce
the notion of a longer term and a rent reduction as
secondary matters to be negotiated.
Accordingly,
I conclude that the option was validly exercised on 26 September 2019 and the
lease renewed for the period 1 April 2020
to 31 March 2023.
Marchionna made an argument that the plaintiff acted harshly, unconscionably and
without clean hands. This argument was articulated
in paragraphs 21 to 23 of
his written submissions dated 22 October 2025.
best I can understand them they allege that the plaintiff engaged in the
following misconduct:
(a) The plaintiff pursued the guarantor alone without pursuing the tenant as
(i) I reject that this constitutes any form of misconduct. The plaintiff is
entitled to pursue whichever defendant it considers
it has a legally enforceable
claim against to the exclusion of any other.
(b) The assertions in paragraph 22 of those written submissions do not make any
sense and I do not pause to comment on them further.
(c) The plaintiff pursued Mr Marchionna for the rent that prevailed pre-COVID in
the knowledge that this rental was uncommercial.
(i) I reject this submission. The tenant was liable to pay the rent contracted
for subject to such relief as it was entitled to
under the COVID rental relief
regulations. Mr Marchionna was liable as guarantor. There is nothing unfair or
inequitable in the
plaintiff pursuing its strict contractual rights.
(d) I also pause to consider all of these matters together, and for the same
reasons do not consider them to ground any form of relief
for Mr Marchionna.
Issue 2 – if the option was not validly exercised, did
the tenant overhold pursuant to clause 10.1 of the Lease
that conclusion were wrong, I would nevertheless adopt the Judicial
Registrar’s reasoning in paragraphs 137 to 168 of the
JR Reasons in
finding that the tenant remained in occupation of the premises with the
landlord’s permission such that the overholding
provisions in clause 10.1
of the Varied Lease were engaged.
my conclusion in paragraph
above, I would similarly hold that for the period following the expiry of the
further term on 31 March 2023, the tenant remained
in occupation of the premises
with the permission of the landlord from 1 April 2023 until it vacated on 30
June 2025 under the overholding
provisions in clause 10.1 of the Varied Lease.
wish to deal with one further argument advanced by Mr Marchionna before me. He
made a submission by reference to
of the RLA as in force from 24 August
2011 (Version No.15).
provision has the effect that if a tenant remains in possession of premises with
the landlord’s consent after a lease has
expired, “the lease
continues on the same terms and conditions until the date specified in the
landlord’s notice [given
under the RLA] or until a new lease is entered
Weinberg submitted that this was the wrong version of the RLA to which regard
should be had and directed my attention to
sections 10
of the RLA as in
force from 1 July 2017 (Version No.24).
provided that “If, in accordance with a retail premises lease, the
tenant continues to be in possession of the retail premises
for a period after
the lease has expired, the lease is taken to continue for the purposes of this
Act while the tenant is in possession
of the premises.”
Weinberg submitted that the purpose of this provision and the inclusion of the
words “for the purpose of this Act”
were tied to
, the effect of
which was to make leases for a term of less than 12 months (which would be
outside the remit of the RLA) subject to
the Act if the tenant remained in
possession with the consent of the landlord for an aggregate period of 12 months
or more taking
into account among other things the “the lease being
continued”.
Marchionna’s submission was that the effect of these provisions was that
any overholding by the tenant after the expiry of
the term on 31 March 2020 came
to be perforce of the statutory continuation of the lease rather than perforce
of the lease itself.
This, he said, led to the conclusion that the guarantee
within the lease did not extend to any liability of the tenant pursuant
a “statutory overholding”.
was asked to provide any authority that stood for such a proposition. He said
that he had such authorities but that they must
have fallen out of his bag and
therefore did not have them with him at the time he made his submissions. I
allowed him the opportunity
to provide any such authorities to my Chambers by
the end of the day.
Marchionna forwarded to my Chambers six
authorities.
I have reviewed
all of them. None of those authorities addressed the issue of whether the
statutory continuation of a lease under
the RLA works a discharge of a guarantee
of the primary lease obligations. Some of them did not address the question of a
of a lease at all.
bore on the question of whether an overholding pursuant to a lease, set
up a new lease, to the extent that it required the tenant
to decide to remain in
occupation after the expiry of the lease term and the landlord to agree. Thus
it was said to require a new
consensus between the parties. While this may be
so, it did not grapple with the question of whether a guarantee of the original
lease extended to the new lease constituted by the parties agreeing to the
tenant overholding. It also said nothing about the effect
RLA on such circumstances. As I will find below, the terms of the guarantee in
this case clearly extend to any overholding
by the tenant.
is unnecessary for me to delve into the transitional provisions of the RLA to
work out which of those provisions might apply.
This is because it is plain
that, regardless of which provision applies, the argument put by Mr Marchionna
fails for the simple reason that the effect of those provisions is not to create
any new or varied lease obligations upon the tenant
beyond those already present
in the Varied Lease. In both instances the provisions merely provide that the
expired lease “continues”
until some other event occurs. The terms
of the continued lease continue to apply with full force and effect from the
date of expiry.
the extent that the varied lease makes provision in clause 10.1 for the tenant
to become a monthly tenant at 1/12 of the prevailing
annual rental, by force of
the statutory provisions those terms continue to apply.
the extent that the guarantee in the Varied Lease (see clause 7 of the Deed of
Variation and clause 15.1 of the Lease) includes
a guarantee of the
tenant’s obligation during “any period of overholding after the end
of the term” (see clause
15.1.1 and 15.1.2), those terms continue to
can see no basis upon which it might be said that the guarantee is discharged
merely because the statute might provide for the “continuation”
the lease, particularly when the plain words of the guarantee contemplate its
application during such a period.
therefore conclude that the tenant remained in possession of the premises under
the overholding provisions of the Varied Lease and
was therefore liable to pay
rent as provided for in those provisions.
Issue 3 – Liability of Mr Marchionna as guarantor for the
obligations of the tenant
Registrar Bennett dealt with this matter at paragraphs [203] – [213]. I
agree with his reasoning and adopt them and
his conclusions.
do also note that to the extent that I have found that the Option was validly
exercised, the guarantee in clause 15.1.1 and 15.1.2
of the Varied Lease also
provide that the guarantee subsists in respect of the tenant’s liability
“for the term and any
renewed term or terms and during any period of
overholding ...”
I find that the guarantee liability includes that incurred during the renewed
terms as well as the period of overholding.
consequence is that Mr Marchionna as guarantor is liable to pay to the landlord
such amounts as the tenant was liable to pay.
Issue 4 - Quantum
the delivery of the JR Reasons, the plaintiff provided to the Court a document
entitled “Sum Owed by Guarantor”.
This contained a calculation
carried out in accordance with the findings made in the JR Reasons. Ms Weinberg
for the plaintiff
submitted that this was the basis upon which the plaintiff
pressed its claim before me.
Marchionna accepted that the sums set out in that document accurately recorded
all of the debits and credits applicable to the
did continue to agitate some form of argument that the credits ought to have
been applied to the debit balance earlier than they
were and this would have
extinguished any amounts for which he accepted that he was liable. This
argument really goes nowhere.
All credits and debits have been accounted for.
No contractual interest has been applied by the plaintiff. Interest is only
according to statute on the net sum that was owing at the commencement of
the proceeding, after the application of such credits and
debits as would fully
extinguish the amount that was admitted to be owing. Under those circumstances,
the argument fails.
Mr Marchionna made a vague argument that the plaintiff failed to mitigate its
damage by not moving to evict the tenant at
an earlier date.
note that Mr Marchionna has not pleaded that the plaintiff failed to mitigate
its damage nor particularised what steps it ought
to have taken in mitigation.
He did not make submissions before the Judicial Registrar on the point.
Evidence may well have been
led or examined which went to this question. He may
have been cross-examined on the tenant’s attitude had the landlord
to evict it. Under those circumstances it is my view that he cannot
make such an argument in closing submissions.
Conclusion and Orders
orders made by Judicial Registrar Bennett on 27 May 2025 should therefore be
will make the following orders.
(a) The Notice seeking review of a decision constituted by a Judicial Registrar
filed on 16 June 2025 is dismissed; and
(b) The orders of Judicial Registrar Bennett dated 27 May 2025 are confirmed.
to any matters that the parties bring to my attention on the question of costs,
I propose to order that the defendant pay
the plaintiff’s costs of the
proceeding (including reserved costs) on the standard basis, in default of
parties should submit draft orders to my chambers to reflect these reasons
within 7 days of today’s date.
there be any matters that require the Court’s further attention (including
in respect of costs) they should correspond
with my chambers within 7 days.
Certificate
I certify that these 22 pages are a true copy of the judgment of His Honour
Judge Wise delivered on 6 November 2025.
Dated: 6 November
Liam Crough
Associate to His Honour Judge Wise.
(1998) 9 BPR 16,361
[1998] NSWSC 304
(1998) 9 BPR 16,361
[1998] NSWSC 304
(1998) 9 BPR 16,361
[2002] VCAT 392.
[2002] VCAT 392
[2002] VCAT 392
[2002] VCAT 392
[2002] VCAT 392
[2011] NSWSC 716.
[2011] NSWSC 716
[2011] NSWSC 716
[2011] NSWSC 716
[2011] NSWSC 716
[2011] NSWSC 716
[2014] WASC 329
[2014] WASC 329
[2018] SADC 48.
[2018] SADC 48
[2018] VCAT 1281.
[2018] VCAT 1281
[2018] VCAT 1281
[2018] VCAT 1281
[2024] NSWSC 343.
[1976] HCA 31
(1976) 137 CLR 192
[2024] NSWSC 343
[2024] NSWSC 343
[2024] NSWSC 383
[2024] NSWSC 383
The plaintiff cited Croft,
Hay and Virgona,
Commercial Tenancy Law
(5th ed, 2024) at 450 [14.8] and
the authorities cited therein.
The plaintiff cited Croft,
Hay and Virgona,
Commercial Tenancy Law
(5th ed, ed, 2024) at 450 [14.8]
and the authorities cited therein.
APlus Capital Pty Ltd v
Kontomichalos
[2024] VSC 546
Verraty Pty Ltd v Richmond Football Club
[2020] VSCA 267
Corporation Pty Ltd v
Commercial Road Developments Pty Ltd and Anor (Retail Tenancies)
[2007] VCAT
Crown Melbourne v Cosmopolitan Hotel
(2016) CLR 1;
Ltd v Anthony (Building and Property)
[2015] VCAT 986
Pagica Pty Ltd atf
the Oscinah Trust v Inlet Property Pty Ltd (Building and Property
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (288 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter