URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/966.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
A.S.P Developments Pty Ltd v Moira SC [2025] VCAT 966 (6 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. P388/2025
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. 5/2022/310
Review of refusal to grant a permit.
Planning and
Environment Act 1987
(Vic). Moira Planning Scheme. Construction of two
dwellings on a lot. Township zone applies. Lot has two street frontages.
proposes two double garages and two cross overs to a street. Whether
design acceptable outcome having regard to neighbourhood character
and potential
to impact a street tree. Impact to on-street car parking. Impact to adjoining
dwelling’s solar system and amenity.
A.S.P Developments Pty Ltd
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Moira Shire Council
Omar Persaud
SUBJECT LAND
42 Clarke Street
BUNDALONG VIC 3730
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
17 October 2025
DATE OF ORDER
6 November-2025
A.S.P Developments Pty Ltd v Moira SC [2025] VCAT 966
Amendment of permit application
to clause 64(2) of Schedule 1 of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act
(Vic), permit application 5/2022/310 is amended
(a) substituting for the permit application plans, the following plans filed
with the Tribunal, being
Proposed Residential Development At: 42 Clarke
Street Bundalong
, Drawing No’s TP01 to TP09, Version H, dated
10.10.2025 prepared by BB Design Group; and
(b) provision of the following report, titled ‘Impact Assessment
Report’, dated 24 August 2025, prepared by Federation
Tree Care (Brooke
Ollingston, Consulting Arborist).
Permit granted
application P388/2025 the decision of the responsible authority is set
planning permit application 5/2022/310 a permit is granted and directed to be
issued for the land at 42 Clarke Street Bundalong
VIC 3730 in accordance with
the endorsed plans and the conditions set out in Appendix A. The permit
Planning scheme clause
Matter for which the permit has been granted
Clause 32.05-8
Construct two or more dwellings on a lot.
Senior Member
APPEARANCES
For A.S.P Developments Pty Ltd
Mitchell Belden, town planner, Plan Urban Pty Ltd.
For Moira Shire Council
Brodie Paul, town planner from BWP Planning.
For Omar Persaud
Omar Persaud, in person.
INFORMATION
Description of proposal
Development of the land with two, double storey dwellings in a side-by-side
arrangement with vehicle access from a rear boundary street.
Nature of proceeding
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
(Vic) – to review the refusal to grant a permit.
Planning scheme
Moira Planning Scheme.
Zone and overlays
Township Zone – clause 32.05.
Permit requirements
Construction of two or more dwellings on a lot – clause 32.05-8.
Relevant scheme policies and provisions
Clause 02.03-1, 02.03-6, 11.01-1L-01, 15.01-1S, 15.01-2S, 15.01-5S of the
Municipal Planning Strategy and Planning Policy Framework.
Clause 52.06 car parking.
Clause 53.03 residential reticulated gas service connection.
Clause 55 two or more dwellings on a lot and residential buildings.
Clause 65.01 (Decision guidelines) approval of an application or plan.
Land description
The subject land is a vacant single rectangular lot with boundaries to
Clarke Street and McCulloch Street of 16.84 metres and a depth
of 50.29 metres
yielding an area of 847 square metres (sqm).
The subject land is orientated along a North-Northeast to South-Southeast
axis. Clarke Street forms the southern boundary and is
nominated as the
frontage by way of the land’s street address.
The land rises slightly from the north McCulloch Street boundary and then
falls approximately 150mm from north to south with a south-east
cross fall of
not more than 100mm.
A street tree is located at the midpoint of the McCulloch Street boundary.
The corner lot to the east, which also extends from Clarke Street to
McCulloch Street, is developed with a double storey dwelling,
shed and two water
tanks. The shed and tanks are located along the northern, McCulloch Street
To the west is a vacant lot that also extends between Clarke and McCulloch
Streets and then other developed lots that face only to
Clarke Street.
WHAT IS THIS PROCEEDING ABOUT?
2022, A.S.P Developments Pty Ltd (‘applicant’) applied for planning
permission to construct two side by side double
storey dwellings on a lot known
as 42 Clarke Street, Bundalong (‘subject land’). Planning
permission is required for
a development of two or more dwellings on the subject
land because the Township Zone (‘TZ’) of the Moira Planning Scheme
(‘planning scheme’) applies to this land.
Moira Shire Council (‘council’) refused to grant a planning permit
in March 2025. It did so because it believed the
proposed design did not meet
certain objectives of clause 55 of the planning scheme which apply.
applicant seeks a review of this decision by the Tribunal
residents and adjoining land owners objected to the application for planning
permission. Some have responded to this application
for review but do not seek
to be parties to the proceeding. Mr Persaud is a neighbour who objects to the
proposal and is a party
to the proceeding. The non-party respondents apprehend
that the development will add to existing issues about car parking in the
and the use of dwellings in the area for short term rental accommodation. Some
also take issue with the design of the proposal,
maintaining it does not reflect
the neighbourhood character.
respect to his own property, Mr Persaud apprehends that the development will
overshadow solar panels on his dwelling and noise
from proposed pool pumps (the
development proposing a pool for each dwelling) and air conditioners would
impact the amenity of bedrooms
in his dwelling. He supports the council in its
opposition to the proposal on grounds of an inappropriate response to
neighbourhood
considered the applicant’s plans, the design response and weighed this
against the relevant clause 55 requirements and
other planning provisions, I
conclude the proposal would result in an acceptable planning outcome.
reasons explain why I have reached this conclusion.
PRELIMINARY MATTERS
Clause 55 before Planning Scheme Amendment VC267
6 March 2025 Planning Scheme Amendment VC267 was gazetted. This amendment
modified clause 55 and amongst other changes made various
consequential
amendments to residential zones about requirements for permits, references to
standards and application material.
The amendments commenced operation on 31
March 2025 (‘commencement date’).
VC267 amendment also inserted a transitional provision to the residential zones.
The transitional provision has the effect that
any permit application made
before the commencement date continues to be assessed under the provisions of
clause 55 that were in
force immediately before the commencement date.
permit application now the subject of this review was made before the
commencement date. Accordingly, the council’s assessment
assessment I make in this review are based on the provisions of clause 55 and
their operation immediately prior to VC267.
Accordingly,
the requirements of objectives and standards per clause 55 (as it was before
in this review apply as
A development:
Must meet all of
the objectives of this clause that apply to the application.
Should meet all
of the standards of this clause that apply to the application.
If a development meets standard B6, B7, B8, B17, B18, B19, B20, B21, B22, B27,
B28, B30 or B32, it is deemed to meet the objective
for that standard.
Where standard B6, B7, B8, B17, B18, B19, B20, B21, B22, B27, B28, B30 or B32 is
met the decision guidelines for that standard do
not apply to the application.
further the provisions of clause 55 operate as follows:
. An objective describes the desired outcome to be achieved in
the completed development.
. A standard contains the requirements to meet the objective. A
standard should normally be met. However, if the responsible authority
satisfied that an application for an alternative design solution meets the
objective, the alternative design solution may be considered.
Decision guidelines
. The decision guidelines set out the matters that the
responsible authority must consider before deciding if an application meets
objectives.
The amended plans considered in this hearing
to the hearing, the applicant circulated amended plans. These plans were
circulated in accordance with the Tribunal’s
procedures, outlined in
Practice Note PNPE-9. The plans were nominated as Version G dated 27 August
2025. These were to be relied
on by the applicant on the basis that the plans
would, at least partly, address the issues raised by the council’s grounds
of refusal.
week before the hearing was to commence the applicant circulated a new version H
of the plans dated 10 October 2025. The only difference
between the Version G
and H plans was that the applicant was correcting errors in the calculation of
the garden area, permeable surface
areas and site coverage. All these corrected
values comply with the relevant provisions of the scheme, with the corrections
minor changes in percentages.
there were no changes to the design layout from Version G and no objections from
the parties, I made an order to substitute the
version H plans as the plans on
which the planning permit application is now
WHAT ARE THE KEY ISSUES?
What is proposed?
ground floor plan of the proposal is shown
Figure 1: Ground floor plan (Extract from TP03, Version H of
the substituted plans).
setback of the garages from the McCulloch Street boundary is 1.488 metres. The
setback from the road verge is 7.488 metres (i.e.
approximately 7.5 metres).
elevations of the proposed built form (dwellings and garages) are shown below.
Figure 2: Building elevations (extracted from plan TP07,
Version H).
The Grounds of refusal
council refused to grant a permit on two grounds. In essence those grounds are
that the proposal fails to meet standards set
out under clause 55 of the
planning scheme and therefore fail to meet the associated objectives of those
standards the council says are not met are B1, B5, B13, B14, B17, B24 and B31 of
clauses 55.02-1, 55.02-5, 55.03-8, 55.03-9, 55.04-1,
55.04-8 and 55.06-1
respectively. These clauses and standards relate to the following features of
the proposed development:
Clause 55.02-1
and standard B1: Neighbourhood character objectives.
Clause 55.02-5,
and standard B5: Integration with the street objective.
Clause 55.03-8,
and standard B13: Landscaping objectives, specifically the B13 requirement to
‘protect any predominant landscape
features of the
neighbourhood’.
Clause 55.03-9,
and standard B14: Access objective.
Clause 55.04-1
and standard B17: Side and rear setbacks objective.
Clause 55.04-8
and standard B24: Noise impacts objectives.
Clause 55.06-1
and standard B31: Design detail objective.
a report to the council, the assessing planning officer identified the standards
to the above clauses were not met, therefore the
permission being sought
required variations to these standards. The officer’s report summarised
the variations as follows:
The primary areas of concern relate to the McCulloch Street frontage of the site
and the built form of the development, setbacks,
access and associated
landscaping. Re-design of car parking and accessways to ensure they are adequate
and do not negatively impact
the neighbourhood will result in a development that
complies with the planning scheme and respects the character of the area.
respect to neighbourhood character the report set out a description of
neighbourhood character said to apply to the area in and
around the subject
land. In assessing the response to the neighbourhood character, the officer
concluded that:
Modification is required to the form of development on the McCulloch Street
frontage to reduce bulk (eg provide a garage and car
port) and increase the
setback in order to reduce the frontage given over to accessway. [sic] This
could enable the retention of
the street tree, provision of some landscaping and
bring the development in line with the prevailing character in McCulloch Street.
officer put forward conditions that could be included in a permit to require
these modifications and recommended a permit be granted
on this basis.
council did not follow this recommendation. In the hearing I was told that the
council believed the conditions were too much,
amounting to a transformation of
the design. The council elected to refuse to grant a permit.
this hearing. the council’s grounds for refusal and opposition to this
proposal focused on the design response to McCullock
Street, by way of:
The massing of
the garages’ built form in relation to the standards of B1, B5, B31;
(width) of the accessways across the street frontage in relation to the
standards of B13 and B14; and
The potential
loss of the street tree and lack of landscaping at the McCulloch Street
interface as a matter generally related to neighbourhood
council acknowledged that the substituted plans meet the side setback of
standard B17, one of the grounds of refusal. It did
not pursue this ground in
the hearing.
council also acknowledged that the location of outdoor mechanical plant could
also be addressed by permit conditions. It also
did not press this ground in
the hearing.
this hearing the applicant agreed to a condition to move the pool plant to a new
location away from the bedroom windows of
Mr Persaud’s dwelling and that
air-conditioning units could be in positions facing the rear of the proposed
dwellings and away
from Mr Peraud’s dwelling. The council and Mr Persaud
indicated that they would be satisfied with these outcomes.
Respondents
Persaud objects to the proposal. He submits that:
area suffers from a lack of street car parking and is subject to significant
parking issues due to overflow parking demand from
the nearby boat ramp.
are no or inadequate footpaths on Clarke Street or Bailey and Ligar Streets
causing safety concerns between pedestrians and
car traffic.
proposal will generate more car traffic and in combination with existing traffic
and parking issues, will diminish the character
and liveability of Clarke Street
and surrounds.
two storey built form will impact his solar panels over December and February
development to be out of character with the town and any application for medium
density housing should wait until a proposed structure
plan for Bundalong is
apprehends disturbing noise impacts from the pool pumps located close to the
bedroom windows of his dwelling. He suggests a condition
on a permit (if one is
granted) to move the pool equipment to be near the garage(s), which as I have
noted earlier, the applicant
also apprehends the dwellings will be used for short term holiday rentals use,
compounding traffic, and noise concerns due to large
groups using the
accommodation.
non-party residents raise concerns about traffic impacts, the use of the
dwellings for short term holiday rentals, as well as
character concerns about
the development. They also believe the provision of car parking is insufficient
for this locality stating
the many residents or occupants store boats or other
recreational vehicles and need more than two car spaces per dwelling. They
deeper setbacks are required to provide more on-site parking.
The grounds of review
its statement of reasons for applying for a review, the applicant says, amongst
other things that:
The proposal
will contribute to a diversity of housing stock that assists in meeting the
demand from a diverse population in the context
where Bundalong is the fastest
growing town in Moira, has a moderate to high potential for growth and there is
demand from a diverse
population.
The proposal
complies with most of the clause 55 standards and fully complies with all the
objectives.
The proposal
provides an appropriate design response to the existing building forms and
character of the neighbourhood that is tempered,
appropriately sited and has an
appropriate height.
The proposal
complies with the parking requirements of clause 52.06 of the planning
applicant says that given the above, its proposal is consistent with the
planning policy framework (‘PPF’) and municipal
planning strategy
(‘MPS’) of the planning scheme, and decision guidelines of the TZ.
this proceeding the applicant now relies on the substituted plans as allowed by
my order in this proceeding. It maintains its
position, as set out above, while
submitting that:
The proposed changes have been made to address the grounds for refusal and
significant concerns that Council and the Objectors have
raised with the
proposal. The changes made will result in a more tempered design response and
development with a scale and massing,
that is more sympathetic to the existing
built form patterns in the a
its submissions, the applicant says these amendments significantly reduce the
scale and massing of the garages to address the council’s
respondents’ concerns, will provide more area for soft landscaping and
allow for the retention of the street tree.
applicant relies on the arborist report that accompanied the amending plans to
support this position. In this hearing it accepted
a condition to narrow the
width of the crossover to reduce the potential to impact the street tree’s
structural root zone (‘SRZ’)
and lessen the incursion into the
tree’s root protection zone (‘TPZ’).
written submissions were provided, and oral submissions were made in the hearing
in support of the applicant’s position.
I have considered these
submissions and where necessary, I address them in these reasons.
The key issues
submissions for the council and the applicant articulate how two dwellings on
the subject land aligns with settlement and housing
planning policies. As I
explain in these reasons, I agree with these submissions.
respect to the grounds arising from possible impacts to the street tree, the
applicant accepts a condition to reduce the width
of the cross overs to
accommodate the SRZ and TPZ and construct the cross overs using permeable paving
as recommended in the arborist
report. For reasons that I set out later and
council’s indication that this would be sufficient to address its
concerns, I
consider this to no longer be a matter in issue.
Persaud’s objections about noise impacts can be addressed by conditions
and so it is not necessary to respond to these in
detail here.
to Mr Persaud’s concerns about impacts on his solar panels, for reasons I
set out later, this is an aspect of the design
response that I find has been
acceptably addressed by the proposed design.
the above into account, the parties’ submissions and the relevant planning
controls, set out in the following part of
my reasons, it is clear that the
central issues in this proceeding are about the design response of the proposed
garages and the
associated vehicle accessways to the neighbourhood character of
McCulloch Street. To address these issues requires:
Establishing
what is the relevant neighbourhood character to apply to the interface on
McCulloch Street; and
whether the proposed design is acceptably ‘responsive’ to this
neighbourhood character.
PLANNING CONTROLS AND POLICY CONTEXT
The Township Zone
purposes of the TZ at clause 32.05 of the planning scheme include:
To implement the Municipal Planning Strategy and the Planning Policy
To provide for residential development and a range of commercial, industrial and
other uses in small towns.
To encourage development that is responsive to the neighbourhood character of
of the land for the dwellings is an ‘as of right,
clause 32.05-1. For this reason, as I explain later, the concern about the use
of the dwellings is not a relevant
matter in this proceeding.
permission for the construction of two or more dwellings on the subject land is
required under clause 32.05-8. Additionally,
under the terms of this clause,
the proposed development meet the requirements of clause 55 of the planning
scheme. As outlined
above, due to the operation of the transitional provisions
under this clause, the proposal is to be assessed against clause 55 that
place immediately prior to planning scheme amendment VC267.
to the matters in dispute in this proceeding, the decision guidelines for the TZ
at clause 32.05-15 encompass a consideration
The Municipal
Planning Strategy and the Planning Policy Framework.
The objectives
set out in a schedule to this zone.
The protection
and enhancement of the character of the town and surrounding area including the
retention of vegetation.
The availability
and provision of utility services, including sewerage, water, drainage,
electricity and telecommunications.
The design,
height, setback and appearance of the proposed buildings and works including
provision for solar access.
Provision of car
parking and landscaping.
The impact of
overshadowing on existing rooftop solar energy systems on dwellings on adjoining
lots in a Township Zone.
The objectives,
standards and decision guidelines of Clause 55.
Planning Policy and Strategies
response to the decision guidelines and purpose of the TZ, I here summarise the
relevant aspects of the MPS and PPF.
02.03-1 of the MPS identifies Bundalong as:
...a popular holiday destination that is the fastest growing small town in
Moira. It has a moderate to high growth capacity due to
the availability of a
lagoon based reticulated sewerage system and reticulated potable water.
02.03-6 identifies the following strategic issues for housing in
Moira’s ageing population and diverse population mix is likely to lead to
an increasing demand for a range of housing and community
This includes alternatives to traditional family housing, especially the
provision of medium density housing, accommodation to suit
the housing needs of
young people and affordable housing.
Increased housing options are needed particularly in the four large urban
centres of Cobram, Yarrawonga, Numurkah and Nathalia, where
there is greater
access to both physical and social services.
Council seeks to:
Encourage a
diverse range of housing options for the existing and future population.
Facilitate the
provision of housing that is affordable within walking distance to facilities or
where such facilities are accessible
by public transport.
council acknowledges that the proposal supports growth in Bundalong and would
provide diversification of housing stock to meet
demand. It is submitted that
the proposal is consistent with strategies in settlement policy at clause
11.01-1L-01 that:
Directs the
growth of small towns and settlements to those settlements where there are
existing community services and facilities.
development to settlements where reticulated sewerage systems are available to
protect water supply catchments.
Seeks to contain
development within settlement boundaries identified on relevant framework
residential development to infill residential land within settlement boundaries,
in this case within the settlement boundary
of Bundalong that is identified in
the relevant framework plan of this clause.
accept that this proposal addresses and responds to these and other elements of
settlement policy. It will contribute to a diversification
in housing typology.
There is no evidence that the proposal addresses the need for affordable
. However, that does not
detract from the fact that there is substantive positive support for medium
density development in Bundalong
under present planning policies.
find from an assessment of the PPF and MPS that there is no policy reason why
this medium density development is, in principle,
an unacceptable planning
proposal for the subject land’s location.
substance of grounds opposing this proposal are directed to the design response
to neighbourhood character.
15 of the planning scheme addresses urban design and neighbourhood character.
Relevant objectives include:
Creating urban
environments that are safe, healthy, functional and enjoyable and that
contribute to a sense of place and cultural
building design and siting outcomes that contribute positively to the local
context, enhance the public realm and support
environmentally sustainable
development.
Recognising,
supporting and protecting neighbourhood character, cultural identity, and sense
are no local planning policies under clause 15 that apply to Bundalong. The
character to be considered therefore is that drawn
from the surrounds of the
subject land. I turn to this context next.
THE SUBJECT LAND’S PHYSICAL CONTEXT
subject land’s location and cadastre context is shown below in Figure
Figure 3: The subject land’s location and local
cadastral context
imagery, reproduced in Figure 4 below, shows how many long blocks in this
neighbourhood of Bundalong have developed their frontage
to one street and
provide for rear access.
imagery similarly shows how lots facing to the Murray River have been developed
with dwellings addressing the river while parking
facilities and other utility
areas face the street.
Figure 4: Imagery of Bundalong developments within proximity
of the subject land (Source: Google maps, August 2025 image).
Neighbourhood character
council made extensive submissions about the assessment of neighbourhood
character guidance provided by
Planning Practice Note 43 Understanding
Neighbourhood Character
(‘PPN43’) and its assessment of neighbourhood character in
accordance with this practice note. I particularly note its
reliance on the
following guidance about the extent of an area that should be considered to
describe the relevant neighbourhood character:
In most cases, a complete pattern of existing lots and development for about
five sites or buildings up and down the street, across
the street and behind the
site in question should be sufficient to identify the features of the
neighbourhood that should influence
the design.
is not the whole of that guidance. This section of PPN43 goes on to
However, sometimes it may be necessary to look further than this, depending upon
the individual circumstances of the site and the
neighbourhood.
applicant urged that in accordance with this guidance the circumstances here
warranted a wider view of the neighbourhood. The
council’s response to
taking a wider view of the neighbourhood was that this would consider building
forms and other character
elements that it says would be inconsistent with the
character within 5 lots of the subject land.
my view the council’s position fails to take account of the unusual nature
of the subdivision layout and how this has influenced
the development of this
wider area. Here I refer to the fact that a wider view of the area, as shown in
Figure 4 above, clearly
shows numerous lots in this estate area have two street
boundaries within this area of Bundalong. This is the neighbourhood that
been created by the residential subdivision development in this area of
the large, long blocks of this estate were designed to have two street
interfaces and presentation of back-of-house conditions
is a consequence of that
layout. These cannot be ignored as anomalies, as submitted by the council,
given the number of lots that
have been developed in this manner. In my view
the arrangement of these lots and their development contribute to the
neighbourhood
character. Given the context of the subject land with a similar
cadastral layout, it is reasonable to take account of the character
outcomes of
development on these similarly arranged lots. To take a narrower view of what
influences neighbourhood character around
the subject land would be to ignore
this influence or contribution to the neighbourhood character.
the above, I find that there are sufficient relevant circumstances in this
context where a wider consideration of neighbourhood
character is appropriate as
provided for by PPN43.
this wider view of neighbourhood character is taken it can be seen that the
nature of the subdivision development has resulted
in the following
Lots with two
street boundaries being developed with single dwellings of which many have large
sheds or garages facing onto their
secondary street frontages.
A variety of
setbacks of these sheds or garages with those that are setback deeper providing
additional, open paved car spaces to
the street.
developed on the northern side of McCulloch Street generally face toward the
River Murray interface, with garages, open car
parking areas and other
utilitarian spaces facing McCulloch Street.
Limited areas of
low scale soft landscaping presenting to McCulloch Street.
such elements into account, I agree with submissions for the applicant that the
character along McCulloch Street is one that
includes large garages and shedding
that present to the street along with car parking or other sealed or paved
surfaces being a prominent
element in the streetscape.
also observe that the adjoining property presents two water tanks and a small
shed to McCulloch Street. This is an artefact of
this land being developed
before McCulloch Street was created. Nevertheless, these structures are also
elements in the streetscape
that should not be dismissed.
THE VARIATIONS TO CLAUSE 55 STANDARDS
Further details of the council’s grounds
grounds and its reasons for opposing the grant of permit in this hearing arise
from the following element of the design
of the two garages facing onto
McCulloch Street:
setback is 1.488 metres whereas other structures along McCulloch Street are said
to have ‘significantly greater’
setbacks, with most being over 5.5
metres and a similarly scaled structure at the front of 41 McCulloch Street
having a 7.5 metre
The shallow
setback is exacerbated by the extent of building form along the McCulloch Street
frontage. Even though the proposed height
of the garages and roller doors are
acceptable to the context of the subject land, the expanse of the building form,
at 88% of the
boundary to McCulloch Street, is said to be inappropriate in
combination with the setback.
The shallow
setback and likely pedestrian access to the rear yards between the separated
garages do not allow for sufficient landscaping
to soften the presentation of
building form. This is said to be at odds with the surrounding pattern of
deeper setback and landscaping
that is said to occur along McCulloch Street.
The concealed
roof line behind parapet walls, in combination with the other elements set out
above, exacerbates the prominence of
the built form.
The provision of
two 5.5 metre wide crossovers equates to a total accessway width of 65% of the
McCulloch Street frontage. This is
said to be ‘significantly’
greater than ‘all other properties’ it has taken into account as
part of the neighbourhood
character assessment where vehicle access accounts for
less than 40% of respective frontages.
of these elements, the council submits that the design response is not
appropriate to the neighbourhood character and therefore
does not meet the
various standards and objective of the various clauses I have set out earlier.
Analysis of the character response
considered the neighbourhood character, as detailed earlier, I find that the
design reflects elements of surrounding building
typology and built form
presentation to streets and the character of the subdivision for this area. My
reasons for these findings
disagree that the width and height of the built form of each garage will
dominate the street scape or appear out of context with
the neighbourhood
character. The boundary wall heights are modest, with the higher elements of
the building form being inboard and
would be seen in context of the higher
dwelling building form behind. Their height and presentation are consistent
with similar
elements I have referred to earlier.
2 metre wide separation between the garages extends some 10 metres into the
subject land. This break in the building form will
reduce the perception of
building mass. The break will provide open space to be grassed and can include
low scale soft landscaping.
the boundary to McCulloch Street will be an open space area of slightly over 4.5
metres by 1.45 metres for soft landscaping
as well as small garden areas to each
side boundary. I am satisfied that this open space will be sufficient for soft
landscaping
that will be consistent with other soft landscaping or garden
elements present along this street. It follows from my assessment
character that it is not necessary to fully filter or screen the presence of the
proposed garages. This is not an element
that would be consistent with or
necessary to respond to the neighbourhood character. Rather some planting of
low shrubs or the
like along with grassed verges is sufficient to respond to
this character and in my view can be accommodated within the rear setbacks
accommodating pedestrian access between the garages.
I address below, provision can be made for the retention of the street tree by
way of the permit conditions. The ability to retain
this tree will mean its
existing contribution to the public domain street character will be retained.
respect to the detailing of the garages, the design adopts light coloured
concrete render over brick with a parapet roof form that
reflects the modern
typology of the proposed dwellings. The overall development of the land will
therefore present a consistent
modern design typology reflects the detailing and typology of many of the new
dwellings along this street interface and would
contribute to the modern
building character that is emerging in this neighbourhood of Bundalong.
these reasons I find the proposal acceptably responds to the neighbourhood
character and context of this area of Bundalong.
follows that I do not agree with the grounds for the council’s refusal and
conclusions that the various character objectives
of clause 55 cited earlier are
not met. I conclude that they would be acceptably responded to as required
under the purposes of
the TZ, notwithstanding the variations sought to the
relevant standards of clause 55.
IMPACT ON THE STREET TREE
arboricultural assessment
street tree identifies it as a
‘Rosea’ or Pink-flowered yellow gum. It has been given a high tree
retention value in this assessment as one of an ‘avenue’
trees along McCulloch Street and its contribution to local streetscape and
visual amenity and biological values.
arborist assessment identifies that:
works to create the cross over will encroach 17.83% into the tree protection
zone of the yellow gum.
this encroachment exceeds 10% it is a major encroachment, but viability can be
maintained subject to the following recommendations
implemented:
Controlling
methods for excavation within the TPZ.
Appropriate
driveway construction methods, including use of permeable paving within the TPZ
and/or bridging techniques.
and management of the roots within the TPZ.
care and maintenance regime for 12 months after construction works are
council contends that the arborist report has underestimated the intrusion into
the TPZ stating that it is in fact 23.5% when
the flared splay of the cross
overs is taken into account. It cites the Australian Standard AS4790-2009 (now
AS4790-2025) that this
represents a major encroachment into the TPZ or notional
root zone of the street tree. It also contends that there is an encroachment
200 millimetres into the SRZ of the street tree.
identifying this level of encroachment, the council submits that it would accept
modifications to the width of the crossovers
to limit it to the degree
identified in the arborist report.
applicant did not contest a condition to meet the council’s position.
the absence of further detailed evidence about the differences the council has
identified it is difficult to determine whether
its position is correct.
However, when having regard to the arboricultural assessment and the Australian
Standard, it is true to
say that reducing the degree of encroachment to less
than 20% of the TPZ in combination with appropriate management of the TPZ can
applied to retain this street tree.
light of my overall decision to grant a permit, I have included conditions in
the permit to ensure plans are amended and appropriate
management of the TPZ
IMPACTS TO ON-STREET CAR PARKING
is evident from the respondents’ grounds that car parking issues on the
street are an existing problem. They apprehend further
impacts from overflow
car parking from the dwellings as well as the loss of street car parking on
McCulloch Street.
number of car parks provided in this design meets the requirements of clause
52.06. No application for planning permit has been
made to vary these
requirements. The question of whether the on-site car parking is adequate is
therefore not a matter that is relevant
to the grant of a planning permit and is
not before me.
said, the clause 55.03-9 access objective seeks to ensure the number of vehicle
crossovers respects neighbourhood character.
Standard B14 to this clause
refers, amongst other things, to locating crossovers to maximise retention of
street car parking and
the decision guidelines call for a consideration of the
reduction in on-street car parking spaces arising from this development.
width of the proposed cross overs amounts to the loss of two spaces. However,
at least one cross over would be required for any
development of the subject
land for a dwelling. As noted for the applicant, at a minimum one space would
be lost on either Clarke
Street or McCulloch Street in the event of the subject
land being developed.
real and substantive loss is one additional space.
loss of this on-street car parking is to be balanced with the diversification in
housing stock and the benefits that arise from
that outcome.
respect to the impact of on-street parking and the various parking issues raised
by Mr Persaud and other respondents, these are
matters for enforcement of road
and parking rules by the council or traffic authorities and not this proposal.
do not find that the loss of what is in substance one on-street car parking
space because of the two proposed crossovers is a sufficient
reason to refuse
this development a permit.
OTHER ISSUES
Overshadowing of solar panels
substituted plans include vertical overshadowing sections of Mr Persaud’s
property at the time of the equinox (22 September).
These shadow diagrams and
their assessment of the overshadowing of solar panels are intended to address
the decision guidelines
Persaud is critical of the diagrams because they are limited to shadows at the
equinox. He apprehends that over December and January
shadowing from the
building would impact the panels’ operation.
Persauds concerns are in fact unfounded.
as noted by the council and the applicant, the height of the proposed dwellings
is at or lower than the position of the solar
panel on the second storey roof of
his dwelling.
at the periods of concern expressed by Mr Persaud, i.e. December and January,
the sun sits higher in the sky than in the assessed
equinox periods. These
summer period angles are correctly shown on the plan TP03 for the window screen
shading devices. They apply
equally to the overshadowing diagram. At this
higher angle, shadows cast by the proposed building will be shorter than those
at the equinox and therefore would not impact his solar panel.
am satisfied Mr Persaud’s solar panels would not be unreasonably impacted
by the proposed dwellings.
Pool pumps and other noise sources
the hearing the applicant submitted that the impact of noise from domestic
services is a matter dealt with under the
Environment Protection Act 2017
(Vic) and associated regulations and guidelines. This is correct, in so far as
how noise from domestic sources is to be managed
under relevant regulations.
said, clause 55.04-8 as applies to this proposal has an objective to address
noise sources from a development that may affect
existing dwellings. Applying
standard B24 would have noise sources, such as mechanical plant, located away
from existing bedrooms.
condition to move the pool plant in this instance is an appropriate response to
remove it from the vicinity of the existing neighbouring
residential bedrooms.
There is ample room to accommodate this plant elsewhere within the property.
The applicant has indicated
that air conditioning units and any other mechanical
plant (heat pumps etc) can be shown on the plans to the council’s
satisfaction
before any works can commence. I have included appropriate
conditions to include the locations of external plant and equipment on
to ensure this occurs.
Use of the dwellings
respondents raise concerns that the dwellings could be used for short term or
holiday rental purposes. They apprehend amenity
impacts from such a use.
short, the use of the dwellings is not before me. As I have mentioned earlier
the use of the land for these dwellings does not
require planning permission.
Further, under clause 32.05-1, a bed and breakfast operation conducted by use is
as of right under
the planning scheme so long as certain specified conditions
forms of accommodation would require planning permission.
use of these dwellings for a bed and breakfast that does not meet the
conditions, or these other forms of accommodation, has not
been applied for.
Put simply, in the absence of any planning application for such a permission,
the use of the dwellings is not
relevant in this proceeding.
the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposed two dwelling development
is an acceptable planning outcome, and a permit
can be granted.
Accordingly,
I will direct that the decision of the responsible authority be set aside and a
permit be granted subject to the conditions
set out in Appendix A of this order.
conditions include those that follow from my reasons, as well as those I have
considered in the draft conditions put forward
by the council in this proceeding
on a without prejudice basis.
the record and to avoid doubt, I have directed that what was proposed condition
8 (now condition 12) about damage to existing
infrastructure is to be amended.
In my view the wording of the draft condition was akin to a permit note.
have also included conditions for the preparation of a tree protection plan to
manage the retention of the street tree.
have required this plan to be prepared and approved prior to the amended plans
being endorsed. This is because the tree protection
plan will need to outline
construction measure and dimensions for the cross overs that need to be
incorporated into the amended plans.
It is logical to approve the tree
protection plan first, or at the very least concurrently with, the endorsement
of the amended
design plans.
Senior Member
APPENDIX A – PERMIT DESCRIPTION AND CONDITIONS
PLANNING SCHEME
Moira Planning Scheme
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Moira Shire Council
ADDRESS OF THE LAND
42 Clarke Street
BUNDALONG VIC 3730
THE PERMIT ALLOWS:
Planning scheme clause
Matter for which the permit has been granted
Clause 32.05-8
Construct two or more dwellings on a lot
CONDITIONS TO APPLY TO THE PERMIT:
Amended Plans required
to the commencement of the development, plans amended to the satisfaction of the
Responsible Authority must be submitted to
and approved by the Responsible
Authority. When approved, the plans will be endorsed and will then form part of
the permit. The
plans must be generally in accordance with the plans
Proposed Residential Development At: 42 Clarke Street Bundalong
No’s TP01 to TP09, Version H, dated 10.10.2025 prepared by BB Design Group
but modified to show:
(a) A reduction in width of vehicle driveways at the McCulloch Street boundary
and the vehicle crossovers within the McCulloch Street
road reserve so as
encroach within the Structural Root Zone of the existing street tree within
McCulloch Street (i.e. a minimum 2.3m setback between
vehicle crossover and the
street tree trunk).
encroach into more than 18 per cent of the Tree Protection Zone of the existing
street tree within McCulloch Street.
(b) Use of permeable paving for each cross over in accordance with the
recommendations of the arborist report
Impact Assessment Report 42 Clarke St
Bundalong, VIC
prepared by Federation Tree Care, dated 24 August 2025.
(c) Notations and dimensions of the internal colorbond fence separating the rear
sections of the two dwelling show the fence tapering
down to a height of 1.2m at
the McCulloch Street boundary of the subject site.
(d) The location of the pool pump equipment for the dwelling on the eastern
interface with No 44 Clarke Street moved to be between
the pool and the rear of
the garage.
(e) The location of other external mechanical services, including but not
limited to air-conditioning units, to the satisfaction
of the Responsible
Authority and otherwise not adjacent the bedroom windows of existing dwellings
on the boundaries.
Landscaping plans to be submitted
to the commencement of the development, an amended Landscape Plan must be
submitted to and approved by the Responsible Authority.
When approved, the
Landscape Plan will be endorsed and will then form part of the permit. The
Landscape Plan must be generally
in accordance with the submitted Landscape Plan
L-TP1, prepared by Etched, dated 4 November 2022 but modified to show:
(a) Landscaping plantings to the McCulloch Street frontage of the site and at
least one (1) canopy tree within McCulloch Street
setback of each dwelling.
Stormwater drainage plans to be submitted
to the commencement of the development, stormwater drainage plans to the
satisfaction of the Responsible Authority must be submitted
to and be approved
by the Responsible Authority. The stormwater drainage plans to be submitted
must be certified by a registered
engineer in accordance with the
Professional Engineers Registration Act 2019
and meet the requirements of
the Infrastructure Design Manual (IDM, www.designmanual.com.au). The stormwater
drainage plans must
demonstrate:
(a) how the works on the land are to be drained and/or retarded;
(b) a maximum discharge rate from the site that is no greater than the
pre-development rate of runoff as determined by computations
to the satisfaction
of Council Engineering;
(c) how the stormwater drainage plans for the development incorporate measures
to enhance the quality of water discharged from the
site and to protect
downstream infrastructure and waterways; and
(d) how all roof water from buildings and surface water from hard paved areas is
collected and conveyed to a stormwater legal point
of discharge so as to prevent
stormwater nuisance to adjoining land.
Approved development
development as shown on the endorsed plans must not be altered without the prior
written consent of the Responsible Authority.
Works to be completed
to the completion or occupation of the dwellings, whichever occurs first, all
development shown on the endorsed plans, including
drainage, fencing,
landscaping and access construction, must be completed to the satisfaction of
the Responsible Authority.
Vehicle crossings
otherwise agreed to by the Responsible Authority in writing, vehicle crossings
that serve the subject land as shown on the
endorsed plans must be constructed
in accordance with the relevant Infrastructure Design Manual standard drawing
SD245 with the following
variations to these requirements:
(a) a maximum width of each cross over as required by condition 1(a) of this
permit; and
(b) the use of permeable paving as required by condition 1(c) of this permit;
all to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
Tree protection
amended plans are submitted for approval under condition 1 of this permit, a
Tree Protection Plan (‘TPP’) must
be submitted to, approved and
endorsed by the Responsible Authority. When endorsed the TPP will form part of
this permit. The TPP
must be prepared to the satisfaction of the Responsible
Authority by a suitably qualified arborist generally in accordance with
recommendations
contained in the report
Impact Assessment Report 42 Clarke St
Bundalong, VIC
prepared by Federation Tree Care, dated 24 August 2025 and
relevant requirements in Australian Standard
AS4970-2025 - Protection of
Trees on Development Sites
. The TPP must include but is not limited
(a) measures that must be incorporated into the design and construction of the
development to ensure the protection of the street
tree on McCulloch Street
(‘McCulloch St tree’) in accordance with Australian Standard
AS4970-2025 - Protection of Trees on Development Sites
but must ensure
proposed works do
not encroach into the tree protection zone
(‘TPZ’) of the McCulloch St tree by more than 18 per cent and do not
into the structural root zone (‘SRZ’);
(b) a plan that is drawn to scale showing the location and dimensions of a TPZ
and tree protection fencing for the McCulloch St tree;
(c) measure to manage the McCulloch St tree TPZ and tree protection fencing
during the construction of the development; and
(d) identify works or ground disturbance that must be supervised by a suitably
qualified arborist necessary to ensure the retention
of the McCulloch St tree.
the development starts, tree protection fencing must be erected around in
accordance with the endorsed TPP to the satisfaction
of the responsible
all times during the carrying out of any works associated with the development
approved under this permit all requirements of the
endorsed TPP must implemented
to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority.
Sediment control and soil and water management
must be conducted in accordance with the current version of the Environment
Protection Authority’s Publication 1834
Civil construction, building
and demolition guide
excavated or construction materials may be placed or stored outside the site
area or on the adjoining road reserves (except where
the materials are required
in connection with any road or footpath construction works).
No damage to existing infrastructure
to existing infrastructure that occurs as a result of this development must be
replaced, and the full cost met, by the developer,
to the specification and
satisfaction of Council.
External lighting
lighting must be located, designed and baffled so as not to adversely impact on
adjoining dwellings to the satisfaction of
the Responsible Authority.
No reticulated gas connection - dwellings
new dwelling allowed by this permit must not be connected to a reticulated gas
service (within the meaning of clause 53.03 of
the relevant planning scheme).
This condition continues to have force and effect after the development
authorised by this permit
has been completed.
Expiry - Development
permit as it relates to development (buildings and works) will expire if one of
the following circumstances applies:
(a) The development is not started within two (2) years of the issued date of
this permit.
(b) The development is not completed within four (4) years of the issued date of
this permit.
In accordance with
Planning and Environment Act 1987
an application may be submitted to the responsible authority for
an extension of the periods referred to in this condition
– End of conditions –
The submissions and evidence
of the parties, supporting exhibits and the statements of grounds filed have all
been considered in
the determination of the proceeding. In accordance with the
practice of the Tribunal, not all of this material will be cited or referred
in these reasons.
Requirements of Clause 55
(immediately prior to the commencement of Planning Scheme Amendment VC267).
Using the powers available at
clauses 62 and 64 of Schedule 1 of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 1998
As defined by
section 3AA
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Department of Environment,
Land, Water and Planning, January 2018.
Impact Assessment
, dated 24 August 2025, prepared by Federation Tree Care (Brooke
Ollingston, Consulting Arborist)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (7.01 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter