URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/vic/VicSAC/2024/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:23:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Reforming Sentence Deferrals in Victoria Final Report [2024] VicSAC 3; (14 May 2024)
Reforming Sentence Deferrals in Victoria: Final Report
Sentencing Advisory Council, May 2024
Acknowledgement of Country
Sentencing Advisory Council acknowledges the Traditional Owners of the lands and
waters on which we live and work, and we pay
our respects to them, their culture
and their Elders past and present.
Contributors
Stewart, Dr Paul McGorrery
Sentencing Advisory Council
Council Directors:
Fiona Dowsley, David Glynn,
Anoushka Jeronimus, Professor Marilyn McMahon, Dan Nicholson, Anne
O’Brien, Paul Smallwood, Wendy
Steendam, Nathan Watt
Chief Executive Officer:
Dr Paul McGorrery
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the many individuals and
organisations that took the time to contribute to this project over the last two
Many organisations met with us multiple times during the project, and we
thank them for their generosity. Their insights have been
invaluable in
identifying the key issues and options for reform, and in developing, testing
and framing our final recommendations.
We also extend our thanks to Court Services Victoria for providing the data
used in this report, and Melanie Hull for her research
assistance.
Executive summary and recommendations
Deferring (or postponing)
sentencing for a short time, up to 12 months, is one of the ways that courts can
achieve the various purposes
of sentencing in Victoria (for example, community
protection and rehabilitation) and ensure that judicial officers have all the
information
they need in deciding an appropriate sentence in a case.
Introduced in the adult criminal jurisdiction in 2002, sentence deferral has
evolved into a vital, but potentially underutilised,
part of the Victorian
sentencing landscape. Over the last two years, those who work in the criminal
justice system have told us that
sentence deferral can be a highly effective
therapeutic tool. Sentence deferral can support complex and vulnerable offenders
rehabilitation and can protect the community in the long term by
allowing offenders to participate in programs that reduce their
reoffending. In some cases, a person’s progress during the deferral period
can make the difference between receiving
a prison sentence and receiving a
community order.
This law reform project is the first examination of sentence deferrals in
Victoria since various legislative changes to the order
were made in 2012 (based
on our advice). We consulted stakeholders in the justice system to identify key
issues, conducted an online
survey of the legal profession and judiciary,
published a consultation paper, received and reviewed written submissions,
draft recommendations, and prepared this final report.
In this report, we make 10 recommendations for reform that have been informed
by our research, data analysis and consultation. In
developing these
recommendations, we were mindful not to ‘fix what isn’t
broken’, in particular, not to disrupt
the aspects of sentence deferral
that make it work well, especially its flexibility and lack of formality. We
have only made recommendations
where there was strong evidence for change.
Purposes of sentence deferral
Legislative purposes of sentence deferral:
Demonstrate
rehabilitation
addressing causes of offending
addressing victim impact
Sentencing legislation in Victoria currently outlines five
purposes for which a court can defer sentencing. Three relate to the
rehabilitation (assessment, demonstrating rehabilitation and
programs addressing causes of offending). Another (providing for participation
in a program addressing the impact of the offending on the victim) was
originally intended to enable restorative justice processes.
We were told,
however, that the broad wording of this purpose has created uncertainty. The
final purpose allows deferral ‘for
any ... purpose that the court
considers appropriate’. Notwithstanding this ‘catch-all’
purpose, we were persuaded
that there is merit in adding five new legislative
purposes of deferral:
Restorative
: This new purpose is directed at participation in a restorative
justice process, to provide much needed clarity about this use of
: Our data suggests that sentence deferral is currently
under-utilised for female offenders, while stakeholders told us that sentence
deferral can be a useful option in sentencing women, particularly those with
caregiving responsibilities. Victoria has the potential
to become a pioneer in
implementing human rights obligations in relation to the rights of the child by
specifically enabling courts
to defer sentencing if doing so would be in the
best interests of the offender’s unborn, newborn or dependent child.
and Torres Strait Islander people
: While data is not available about the
prevalence of sentence deferral for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people, sentence
deferral can be especially useful as a means of addressing some
of the systemic issues that cause over-incarceration and over-representation
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in the criminal justice system.
: In appropriate cases, sentence deferral can enable a person to
receive critical medical treatment or surgery while in the community
rather than
in custody. This reduces the traumatic experience of medical treatment by
enabling the person to recover in the community,
with family support if
available, and may ensure continuity of medical care.
: Sentence deferrals were originally introduced in the Victorian adult
that people in this group are primary recipients of sentence deferrals. A
legislative purpose would reflect the origins of
deferral as an option for young
adults and its importance for this group.
Recommendations 1 to 5
That the government amend section 83A of the
Sentencing Act
to add the following purposes of sentence deferral:
to allow the
offender and, where relevant, the victim to participate in a restorative justice
to consider or
reflect the best interests of the offender’s unborn, newborn or dependent
to allow the
offender to receive or recover from medically necessary treatment or
if the offender
is an Aboriginal person, for any reason relating to their cultural background,
responsibilities, particular needs,
or experience;
if the offender
is aged under 26, for any reason relating to their vulnerability, developmental
maturity, or rehabilitative, educational
or vocational needs.
Availability of sentence deferral
Sentence deferral is currently only available in the
Magistrates’ Court and County Court in Victoria. It is not available in
the Supreme Court, although the Supreme Court may informally defer sentencing
through its general power to adjourn proceedings. The
Supreme Court itself
outlined the benefits of making sentence deferral available in that court as an
additional tool in appropriate
cases, and there was strong support among other
stakeholders for extending the power to formally defer sentencing to the Supreme
Court. This is not only because non-custodial sentences are imposed in 17% of
cases in the Supreme Court but also because sentence
deferral can be just as
important (if not more so) in cases involving an actual or a possible prison
sentence. It would also ensure
that the Supreme Court did not need to resort to
its general adjournment power in order to defer sentencing, giving deferrals in
the Supreme Court the same clarity, consistency and approach that they currently
have in the County Court and Magistrates’
Court. The Supreme Court would
also exercise its discretion whether sentence deferral is appropriate in any
given case, as the other
courts already do.
Recommendation 6
That the Government amend
section 83A
Sentencing Act
(Vic) to allow sentence deferral in the
Supreme Court.
Sentence deferral in ‘the interests of
Currently, before a court can defer sentencing, it
must consider whether doing so is in the ‘best interests of the
and the offender must consent. In our consultations, and in
numerous submissions, stakeholders queried the priority given to the
offender’s interests. A more balanced approach to sentence deferral
decisions would incorporate the best interests of not only
the offender but also
others, such as any victims, the community and the offender’s child.
Therefore, we recommend that ‘the
interests of the offender’ be
substituted for ‘the interests of justice’. We note that the
offender would still
need to consent to the sentence deferral, which they would
be unlikely to do if it weren’t in their best interests. We have
suggested highlighting the purposes of deferral by elevating them to
Recommendation 7
That the Government amend
section 83A
Sentencing Act
(Vic) to replace ‘the interests of the
offender’ with ‘the interests of justice’, and to move the
of deferral into
section 83A(1).
Sentence deferral where prison is likely or inevitable
Currently in Victoria a court may defer sentencing
even if the offender is facing a likely or inevitable prison sentence.
Understandably,
though, courts are sometimes reluctant to defer sentencing in
such cases. One of the strongest themes we heard from stakeholders
is that those
are sometimes precisely the cases where deferral can be most valuable. For
someone facing a likely prison sentence,
performing well during deferral could
be the tipping point that keeps them out of prison and halts their offending
pathway. Even
for someone who will inevitably receive a prison sentence, there
may be good reasons to consider deferring sentence, such as enabling
offender to give birth outside prison or enabling an offender to receive
critical medical treatment or surgery. Given
the potential value of deferral in
these instances, and the need for express clarification to promote consistency,
section 83A
should be amended to confirm – as legislation in
the Australian Capital Territory does – that sentence deferral is
even if a prison sentence is likely or inevitable.
Recommendation 8
That the Government amend
section 83A
Sentencing Act
(Vic) to specify that a court may defer
sentencing even if it considers the seriousness of the offence justifies a
sentence of imprisonment.
Funding for deferral hearings
During our consultations, some legal practitioners
suggested that limited funding, and uncertainty around funding, can be barriers
to making deferral applications. To overcome any potential uncertainty, we
recommend that Victoria Legal Aid clarify its existing
fee structure as to which
deferral hearings are funded. We also recommend that Victoria Legal Aid consider
opportunities to change
its fee structure to better enable sentence deferrals,
while acknowledging that this may require additional resourcing to avoid
affecting other critical areas of Victoria Legal Aid’s
Recommendation 9
That Victoria Legal Aid:
clarify in its
existing fee structure the extent to which sentence deferral applications and
review hearings are funded; and
consider whether
there are opportunities for changes to the fee structure relating to sentence
deferral applications and review hearings.
Maximum length of sentence deferrals
Currently, courts may defer sentencing for up to 12
months. We heard some concerns that 12 months is not always long enough,
as certain rehabilitation programs can have long waiting lists, and
some programs go longer than a year. There was considerable support
increasing the maximum length of sentence deferrals. Ultimately, we decided that
this was best done as an extension to the initial
deferral period, rather than
as an increase in the maximum deferral period of 12 months. A requirement to
apply for an extension
of six months ensures that the court has an opportunity
to check on the offender’s progress as well as confirm the availability
and provision of programs and services.
We also heard that there is uncertainty, or at least discomfort, about courts
using their adjournment power once a deferral period
has expired. We believe it
would be helpful to clarify that the power to defer sentencing does not limit
any general powers of a
court to manage a case and adjourn proceedings as
Recommendation 10
That the Government amend
section 83A
Sentencing Act
permit the court
(on its own motion or on an application) to extend a sentence deferral for an
additional period of up to six months
in appropriate circumstances; and
clarify that
section 83A
does not limit any power that a court has to adjourn
proceedings.
The recommendations we didn’t make
Almost as important as explaining the rationale
behind the recommendations in this report is explaining the reasons we did not
certain recommendations. In our consultation paper, we asked several
questions, informed by our preliminary consultations, some of
which did not lead
to recommendations. In most instances, this is because there was insufficient
evidence or stakeholder support
to justify change. For example, we did not
recommend the introduction of formal deferral conditions or written deferral
did we recommend that courts be required to indicate the likely
sentence that an offender will face at the end of their deferral.
We also did
not recommend any change to the approach to judicial monitoring (through the
deferral review provision) or the current
approach to sentencing after a
deferral. The main opposition to each of these potential reforms was that they
could undermine the
flexibility that lies at the heart of the effectiveness of
deferral as a pre-sentence option.
Concluding observations
When used effectively, sentence deferral can be a
powerful tool that brings about real change, particularly for offenders who are
chronically disadvantaged or marginalised. The strengths of deferral are that it
provides a flexible approach that is responsive
to the individual circumstances
of each case; it ensures that courts are better informed when making sentencing
decisions, and it
better ensures that people have genuine opportunities to
rehabilitate, participate in the community, and reduce their own risk of
reoffending. Deferral can be especially useful for offenders who are on the cusp
of alternative sentencing options, for example:
a custodial
sentence versus a non-custodial sentence;
an adjourned
undertaking versus a community correction order; or
a sentence with
conviction versus a sentence without conviction.
The recommendations
in this report are intended to increase the effectiveness of deferral as a
therapeutic option for a broad range
of offenders and circumstances. The
recommendations are also intended to function as a package of reforms, many of
which are interrelated.
For example, we recommend clarifying that sentence
deferral is possible despite an inevitable prison sentence (Recommendation 8),
which is partly designed for cases where sentence deferral is in the best
interests of the offender’s child (Recommendation
Finally, the success of sentence deferral largely depends on the availability
of suitable, effective, accessible, and culturally safe
and appropriate programs
and services, although this consideration is outside the scope of our review.
Notwithstanding, we strongly
support any measures intended to improve access to
rehabilitation services, especially in regional Victoria. Investing in
rehabilitation
offers an alternate pathway out of the criminal justice system
for offenders who are marginalised or who have complex needs. And
investment enhances the protection of the community in the long term by
interrupting offending trajectories, including intergenerational
offending and incarceration.
deferral in Victoria
1.1 In late
2021, we committed to a law reform project investigating whether there is scope
to improve the use of sentence deferral
in Victoria. Our aim was to examine the
current use of sentence deferral in Victoria, identify any issues and
opportunities for reform,
and provide advice to the Attorney-General. In October
2022, we published a consultation paper, outlining key issues and asking a
series of consultation questions. This final report presents our
recommendations.
current form, sentence deferral is a pre-sentence option available under
Sentencing Act
(Vic) (‘the
’). After an offender has been found guilty of an offence,
allows the court to postpone (‘defer’) the offender’s
sentence for a specific purpose.
Section 83A(1)
If the Magistrates’ Court or County Court finds
a person guilty of an offence and—
(b) the court is of the opinion that sentencing should, in the interests of
the offender, be deferred; and
(c) the offender agrees to a deferral of sentencing—
the court may defer sentencing the offender for a period not exceeding 12
deferral commenced in Victoria in 1991 in the Children’s
It was introduced in the
Magistrates’ Court in 2000 for offenders aged 17–25 and expanded to
people of all ages and to
the County Court in
Sentence deferral is now an
established and vital part of the Victorian sentencing
Figure 1: Timeline of legislative deferral schemes in
Children’s Court
Deferral up to 4 months
Magistrates’ Court
Offenders aged 17 to 25
Deferral up to 6 months
Magistrates’ Court and County Court
All offenders
Deferral up to 12 months
Legislative purposes
deferral gives a person ‘an opportunity to address issues that have
contributed to their offending and to demonstrate
to the court that they are
taking serious steps to get their lives back on
The most common
reason courts defer sentencing is to give the offender an opportunity to
demonstrate their willingness and ability
rehabilitate.
Courts can defer
sentencing for other reasons, such as enabling a restorative justice process
between the victim and the offender
in appropriate
The offender must agree to
the deferral, and the deferral must be in the offender’s
court also has other ways to give the offender time before sentencing to address
factors that contributed to their offending. A
court may refer the person to the
Court Integrated Services Program, refer the case to the Assessment and Referral
Court, or transfer
the case to the Koori Court for a sentencing
conversation.
Courts also have a
general power to adjourn a criminal proceeding to any time and place, for any
purpose, and on any terms that the
court considers
appropriate.
This power can be used
to ‘informally’ defer sentencing. We have considered sentence
deferrals in the context of these
other pre-sentence options.
The benefits of sentence deferral
this project, we consulted a wide range of organisations and individuals about
the current operation of sentence
We also received 13
detailed and thoughtful submissions in response to our consultation paper.
Stakeholders were overwhelmingly positive
the following key benefits:
it can better
protect the community in the long term by supporting offenders in their
rehabilitation and providing earlier access
to rehabilitation;
it can address
the vulnerabilities and/or over-representation in custody of marginalised groups
by responding to the individual circumstances
and needs of the offender;
it can enable
offenders to avoid a conviction (and thereafter a criminal record) by allowing
them to demonstrate their rehabilitation
to the court;
it can prevent
people from escalating up the sentencing hierarchy by providing an opportunity
for people to engage with their deferral
and make a genuine effort to change
their behaviour;
it can provide
an alternative to an immediate prison sentence, in appropriate cases, by giving
offenders an opportunity to actively
demonstrate to the court their potential to
avoid further offending and to participate in programs;
facilitate restorative justice processes by allowing offenders and victims to
participate in programs that address the impact
of the offending on victims;
it can provide a
highly flexible response to offending, in terms of both duration and
requirements.
illustrate, stakeholders told us:
Deferrals enable flexibility in
the sentencing process and account for the fact that offenders typically achieve
relative rehabilitation
or progress towards it at different speeds depending on
their underlying issues. In my experience, the disposition ultimately arrived
following a deferral is far more effective and tailored to the individual than
one imposed immediately following plea submissions
... and thus is more likely
to lead to long-term benefits for the offender and community.
Online survey participant, March 2022
Sentencing deferrals, accompanied by accessible services, would assist
many people and reduce community risk going forward. With positive
achievements
throughout the deferred sentence noted in the sentencing disposition, sentencing
deferrals may be part of the broader
solution in addressing the critical and
enduring failures of our justice system.
Submission 1 (Victorian Alcohol and Drug Association)
[E]ffective use of deferred sentencing can act as a circuit breaker for
people in contact with the justice system.
Submission 3 (Jesuit Social Services)
Deferrals are a critical sentencing tool. They enable courts to take
flexible, problem-solving approaches to sentencing that consider
the individual
circumstances of each person. Deferring a sentence ... recognises that people
involved in the criminal justice system
may be at a crisis point in their lives.
Additional time in the community can support them to stabilise and take steps
towards rehabilitation.
Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid)
The CIJ supports the use of justice system mechanisms that provide
opportunities for the underlying causes of offending to be addressed,
offenders to be connected with support and treatment. ... [J]udicial officers
should have at their disposal a broad range
of sentencing tools and options to
enable them to craft orders that are tailored to the individual case and the
particular circumstances
of each offender.
Submission 8 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice)
[D]eferred sentencing has the potential to reduce crime rates and thereby
improve community safety, reduce costs to the State, and
improve the
socioeconomic wellbeing of offenders by helping them to ‘deal with factors
contributing to their criminal behaviour’,
which may stem from trauma,
poor mental health, or addiction.
Submission 10 (Law Institute of Victoria)
How are sentence deferrals currently used?
current use of sentence deferral was raised by a number of stakeholders during
consultation for this project. A regular theme
was that sentence deferral could,
and should, be used more
frequently.
In our consultation
paper, we examined the use of sentence deferral in Victoria based on the
available data.
Our findings are
summarised below.
Magistrates’ Court
the nine years from 2012 to 2020, the Magistrates’ Court sentenced 3,507
cases that were recorded as involving a sentence
deferral. However, due to data
limitations, the actual number of sentence deferrals may be
1.10 We found
that the recorded use of sentence deferrals increased steadily after the 2012
extension of sentence deferral to people
of all ages (see [1.2]): from 85 cases
in 2012 to 753 cases in 2019 (1% of all sentenced cases in 2019). A drop in the
use of deferral
in 2020 most likely reflects the effect of COVID-19 on court
operations.
1.11 We also
found that:
slightly under-represented in recorded sentence deferrals – women
constituted 19% of recorded deferral recipients
(682 women), whereas women
constituted 22% of all sentenced offenders;
deferral was well used for people aged 18–25 – 33% of recorded
deferral cases involved people aged 18–25,
whereas people aged 18–25
made up 25% of the general offender population, highlighting the importance of
sentence deferral
as an option for this age group;
the most common
principal offences in recorded deferral cases were assault and injury offences
(32% of deferral cases);
one-third of deferral cases involved family violence offending
deferral is sometimes perceived as a ‘low-end’ option for first-time
or low-level offenders, 68% of deferral
recipients had been convicted of other
offending in the three years prior to their deferral (only 32% had not), and
almost half of
all deferral cases resulted in a prison sentence (22%) or a
community correction order (26%).
County Court
is currently no available data on the use of sentence deferral in the County
Court. By reviewing sentencing remarks, we identified
32 deferral cases between
2012 and 2020, as well as a further 14 cases where the offender was sentenced
after an unsuccessful deferral
application.
the 32 identified deferral cases, most involved male offenders (27) and about
one-third involved offenders aged 18–25 (10).
In more than half of
deferral cases (17), courts imposed a prison sentence (17); in the other 15
cases, courts imposed 11 community
correction orders, two adjourned undertakings
and two wholly suspended
publishing our consultation paper, we have examined more recent sentencing
remarks (cases sentenced in 2021 and 2022) to identify
any changes in the use of
sentence deferrals in the County Court. We identified 20 deferral cases from
2021 and 18 deferral cases
from 2022. The total number of identified deferral
cases in those two years (38 cases) is higher than the total number in the years
between 2012 and 2020 (32 cases). This could suggest that sentence deferral is
already increasing in use, possibly as a result of
the extension of the Court
Integrated Services Program (CISP) to the County Court in January
The County Court agreed,
telling us that it ‘continues to see value in the utilisation of
sentencing deferrals in combination
Barriers to the effective use of sentence deferral
stakeholders were overwhelmingly positive about sentence deferral, they also
identified some barriers to its use, such
awareness among some members of the legal profession about the existence,
benefits, purposes and use of sentence deferral
(see further
inconsistent
judicial approaches to sentence
including an apparent
reluctance to defer sentencing in certain
potential effects on victims of delaying criminal proceedings by deferring
sentence, especially in family violence cases where
the offender may pose a
greater risk;
communication with victims about sentence deferrals, particularly in the summary
feeling ‘blindsided’ when
they discover that their matter has been deferred without their
though some of those
concerns have been addressed in the recent
Bail Amendment Act 2023
which commenced 12 February
availability of many services (such as housing) and programs (such as
men’s behaviour change programs) and long waiting
lists (see further
[3.52]–[3.54]);
availability of therapeutic courts where sentence deferral is more readily
and time pressures in
mainstream courts that limit the use of deferrals (see further
legal aid funding for deferral hearings, and client resistance to paying, or
inability to pay, a subsequent day fee for
a lawyer to attend court for a
1.16 We have
carefully considered all the issues and suggestions raised in consultation.
Where suggestions relate directly to sentence
deferral, and evidence and
consensus support changing the provision, we have recommended reforms aimed at
improving the operation
of sentence deferral. However, no matter how well
designed the sentence deferral scheme is, its success also depends on external
factors, especially the availability of suitable, effective, accessible, and
culturally safe and appropriate programs and services,
particularly in regional
Phases of the project
project was informed by stakeholder feedback about the strengths of sentence
deferrals, and the barriers to their effective
operation in the Victorian
criminal justice system. The project, which ran concurrently with our project on
adjourned undertakings,
had five phases:
Preliminary
consultation and research
: we examined court data, coded County Court
sentencing remarks to identify deferral cases, reviewed literature and case law,
met with stakeholders to identify key issues (December 2021–March
: we surveyed judicial officers and criminal law practitioners about
their perceptions of sentence deferral (February–March
Consultation
: we published a consultation paper on 11 October 2022 and received 13
submissions as well as feedback from other stakeholders.
recommendations and final consultation
: we developed draft recommendations
drawing on our consultation, research and data analysis; we then met with
stakeholders individually
and held a stakeholder roundtable on 10 August 2023 to
seek feedback on the draft recommendations (July–November 2023).
: we delivered this final report with recommendations to the
Attorney-General and published it on our website.
Human rights
a public statutory authority, the Council is required in making decisions to
give proper consideration to relevant human
In developing our
recommendations in this report, we have had regard to the various rights
enunciated in the
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities
reasons discussed throughout this report, we have reached the view that the
recommendations in this report would promote the
following rights under the
the right to
liberty and security of a person (section 21);
the right not to
be punished in a cruel, inhuman or degrading way
(section 10)
cultural rights
(section 19);
the right to
recognition and equality before the law
(section 8)
the protection
of families and children (section 17);
the right not to
have a person’s family unlawfully or arbitrarily interfered with
criminal proceedings, including the right to legal assistance and to be tried
without unreasonable delay (section 25).
The importance of consultation
1.19 Consultation
is an essential cornerstone of our work. It provides a crucial source of
evidence for the reforms that we consider.
From November 2021 to November 2023,
we met with over 20 organisations, many on multiple occasions, including
representatives of
the Supreme Court, County Court and Magistrates’ Court,
as well as police, defence lawyers, organisations that work with victims
crime, academics and community organisations. The aim of these consultations was
to seek views on issues affecting sentence deferrals
and potential areas for
improvement, and to test draft reform options. We also received 25 responses to
our online survey of the
legal profession and judiciary and 13 written
submissions in response to our public consultation paper. In August 2023, we
a roundtable to seek stakeholder feedback on the proposed reforms, and we
met with individual stakeholders between July and November
1.20 A full list
of the organisations and individuals we consulted and the submissions we
received is set out in the Appendix. The
knowledgeable, considered, and
practical input from stakeholders has been instrumental in both the
identification of issues and the
development of our recommendations.
Structure of this report
report is structured around the suggested reforms as follows:
Chapter 2: The
purposes of sentence deferral (Recommendations 1–5);
Availability of sentence deferral (Recommendations 6–9);
Maximum length of sentence deferral (Recommendation 10); and
Chapter 5: The
recommendations we didn’t
purposes of sentence deferral
2.1 This chapter
discusses the legislative purposes of sentence deferral. In it, we recommend
four new purposes of deferral be added
section 83A
. Each of the recommended new purposes relates to groups of people who
are vulnerable in some way in the criminal justice system.
We also recommend
adding another purpose to clarify that allowing restorative justice processes to
occur is an appropriate reason
to defer sentencing.
The current purposes of sentence deferral
Sentencing Act
has specified five distinct but overlapping
purposes for which a court may defer sentencing. A court may defer sentencing
offender’s capacity and prospects for rehabilitation to be assessed;
the offender to
demonstrate that rehabilitation has taken place;
the offender to
participate in a program addressing the underlying causes of the offending;
the offender to
participate in a program addressing the impact of the offending on the victim;
other purpose that the court considers appropriate in the
circumstances.
purposes are intended as both a guide and a safeguard to help ensure that courts
only defer sentencing when ‘it will be
of most benefit’ and
‘deferral is not used by defendants as a means of unnecessarily prolonging
proceedings’.
legislated purposes of sentence deferral are similar to those in comparable
the offender’s rehabilitative
prospects or needs;
allowing the
offender to address the causes of their behaviour, demonstrate rehabilitation or
undertake rehabilitative
interventions;
and allowing the
offender to take part in restorative justice processes or
agreements.
Catch-all purposes
(‘any other reason’) are also
Participants
in our online survey of legal practitioners and the judiciary identified
rehabilitation-focused purposes as the most
common current reason for sentence
No other purpose was
nominated as the most common reason for deferral.
consultation paper, we asked whether any reforms to the list of purposes were
warranted. Stakeholder feedback focused on:
the current
fourth legislative purpose (participation in a program addressing the impact on
the victim) and its relationship with
restorative justice; and
new purposes
that might usefully be added to
section 83A.
considering the range of additional purposes suggested in submissions, we
balanced two competing considerations:
legislative purpose signals parliament’s intent that sentence deferral be
available in particular circumstances, promoting
clarity, transparency and
consistency in its use.
already includes a catch-all purpose, permitting a court to defer
sentencing ‘for any other purpose that the court considers
appropriate in
the circumstances’. Not every purpose requires legislative inclusion. And
there are benefits to reducing legislative
complexity.
2.8 We have only
recommended new legislative purposes where there was a strong case for their
inclusion, including support from multiple
stakeholders.
Clarify restorative justice as a purpose of sentence
is growing support for restorative justice as a complementary process within the
criminal justice system,
recognition that sentence deferral can be a mechanism for utilising restorative
justice processes in a case.
fourth purpose of sentence deferral, set out in
section 83A(1A)(d)
, was intended
to give effect to our recommendation that a purpose of sentence deferral should
be ‘to allow the offender to
participate in restorative justice or other
However, the
wording of the provision (‘for the offender to participate in a program
addressing the impact of the offending
on the victim’) does not
specifically mention restorative justice.
Stakeholder views
Stakeholders
told us that the broader language of
section 83A(1A)(d)
creates uncertainty
which may lead to
inconsistency in its interpretation. The RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice (the
CIJ) noted that ‘there is
not universal agreement among sentencing judges
section 83A
Sentencing Act
to restorative
justice processes’ and ‘[s]ome judges have expressed a preference
for a specific legislative scheme to
support the process and their decision
making in this area’.
Stakeholders
who addressed this question supported amending
section 83A
to clarify that
enabling restorative justice processes is an appropriate purpose of sentence
To achieve this
change, stakeholders supported adding a new specific restorative justice
purpose, rather than clarifying the wording
of the current
participants unanimously supported amending
section 83A
to make it clear that
restorative justice is an intended purpose of sentence deferral. One participant
commented that, although ‘the
existing provision may have been intended to
enable participation in restorative justice, that hasn’t turned out to be
case’ and a specific restorative justice purpose ‘would assist
to make it a more viable
Legal Aid said that it would ‘send a clearer signal that deferred
sentences can be used to enable and facilitate a
restorative justice
Law Institute of Victoria told us that they are ‘strongly supportive of
bolstering the strength of existing pathways to
include restorative justice
processes in all aspects of the criminal justice
CIJ said that a specific restorative justice purpose would ‘send the
message that restorative justice is a valid feature
of the criminal justice
landscape’ and ‘raise awareness within the legal sector about the
restorative justice purpose
of the sentence deferral
Social Services said that ‘when appropriate, deferring a person’s
sentence so that they can demonstrate their willingness
to engage in
rehabilitation and restorative processes, while being held to account, can play
an important role in ... a justice system
that is based on the principles of
prevention, early intervention and restorative
was no opposition to a clarified restorative justice purpose. However, the CIJ
and Victim Services, Support and Reform (a business
unit of the Department of
Justice and Community Safety) expressed concern about the availability, capacity
and resourcing of suitable
restorative justice
Victim Services,
Support and Reform told us that ‘[t]here are only a small number of
restorative justice programs available’,
mostly for young offenders. They
said that ‘[e]ven where victims and offenders wish to engage in
[restorative justice] processes,
the programs have limited capacity’. They
highlighted the importance of adequate resourcing ‘to ensure it is a safe,
appropriate and restorative
The CIJ noted
that there are ‘currently a limited number of restorative justice
providers in Victoria’, commenting that:
[i]f there is an increased use of sentence deferrals for the purpose of
restorative justice, which, in the CIJ’s view, should
occur, greater
resourcing of the restorative justice sector will need to take
stakeholders suggested that a court should only be persuaded to defer sentencing
for a restorative justice process if certain
criteria are met. First, the court
should be satisfied that both the victim and the offender have agreed to
participate. Second,
an appropriate restorative justice provider is available.
Third, a restorative justice process can occur within a reasonable
As Victim Services,
Support and Reform observed, if the restorative justice process is
‘incomplete before the end of the sentence
deferral period, victims’
expectations will not be met and they may be left disappointed and/or
experiencing further
The CIJ also
emphasised the need for restorative justice processes to be
‘victim-oriented’, that is, ‘designed
to meet victims needs
and give them choice and agency in the
processes’.
The CIJ said
that, for some victims, it is important ‘that the offender knows that [the
victims] do not wish them ill, and
do not wish for them to be heavily
punished’, whereas for other victims, the sentence ‘is extremely
significant [and
the victims] feel very strongly that they would not want to
contribute in any way to a process that might result in a lighter sentence
the offender’.
commented that if restorative justice is offered through sentence deferral,
there needs to be clarity for victims about how
the process could affect the
sentence imposed:
the possible effect on the offender’s sentence should be clearly explained
to the victims (and to the offender). Victims who
have concerns about this
potential effect of the sentence might choose not to take part. However, given
that each victim has a different
experience and has different priorities, the
fact that some victims may object to offenders receiving sentencing benefits due
participation in restorative justice should not prevent those victims who
might want to engage in the process at a pre-sentence stage
The Council’s view
stakeholder feedback, we see merit in amending
section 83A
to make it clear that
restorative justice is a purpose of sentence deferral. In our view, it is
preferable to achieve this clarity
by adding a new purpose expressly providing
for restorative justice, rather than reframing the existing purpose set out in
section 83A(1A)(d).
Stakeholders told us that the existing purpose has evolved
in a different way, to support offenders accessing programs relating to
impact of their offending on
Stakeholders strongly
supported adding a new purpose on the basis that it would clarify that a
restorative justice process is an
appropriate reason to defer sentencing without
interrupting the current use of 83A(1A)(d).
2.15 We agree
that certain criteria should be met before a court defers sentencing for this
new purpose:
the court should
be satisfied that a plan is in place about how, when and where the restorative
justice process would occur, including
assurances that the process would occur
during the deferral period;
the victim must
agree to participate, to ensure the process is victim-focused and the victim has
choice and agency; and
the offender and
the victim must have had clearly explained to them how the process could affect
the sentence imposed.
is, however, more work to be done before restorative justice becomes a regular
feature of the criminal justice landscape in
Victoria. Among other things, as
the CIJ observed, it may be beneficial to introduce a legislative framework
governing when, how
and why restorative justice processes are
There is also an
identified need for greater availability of appropriate and sufficiently funded
restorative justice programs. For
sentence deferral to work effectively as a
mechanism to achieve restorative justice, these broader issues will need to be
Recommendation 1
That the Government amend
section 83A
Sentencing Act
to add the following purpose of sentence deferral:
‘to allow the offender and, where relevant, the victim to participate in
restorative justice process’.
Women and the interests of an offender’s unborn, newborn
or dependent child
our consultation paper, we identified that sentence deferral seems to be
underutilised for women, compared with men, potentially
due to women’s
different criminal trajectories and offending
Female offenders,
especially prisoners, have been identified as a particularly vulnerable group
increased likelihood that their offending stems from their own past trauma and
victimisation – such as childhood neglect
or abuse, and family violence
– and the ‘extreme distress’ that a prison sentence can cause
to women given their
often close link between poverty and their offending, ‘such as theft,
fraud, and minor drug related offences’ with
‘[o]nly a small
minority of women ... convicted of violent offences, and a large majority of
them [having] been victims of
themselves’;
female prisons being available, due to the low number of female prisoners,
meaning that women may be incarcerated far from their
children, family, and
other support networks;
breastfeeding, and sole or primary carer responsibilities for dependent
children, and the resulting grief and trauma caused
by women being separated
from their children – women often also have other carer roles, such as for
are more commonly primary carers and can suffer devastating loss of home, work
and children if sentenced to a custodial setting.
Pregnant women and women with
small children enter prison, sometimes for financial offending which means their
children suffer for
their offending.
Submission 7 (Professor Felicity Gerry KC)
lawyers, and policy-makers in Victoria and elsewhere have advocated for the
increased use of sentence deferral to enable
vulnerable women to address past
trauma, break the cycle of their offending, and mitigate the effects of custody
on their dependent
our consultation paper, we raised the possibility of introducing a legislative
purpose of sentence deferral aimed specifically
at offenders who are pregnant,
breastfeeding or sole or primary carers of dependent children.
Stakeholder views
Stakeholders
highlighted the important role that sentence deferral can play for women. They
also overwhelmingly supported a new legislative
purpose of sentence deferral
focusing on the interests and wellbeing of an offender’s dependent
They told us that a
specific legislative purpose would:
be consistent
with Australia’s human rights obligations (see further
‘attention to the availability’ of sentence deferral for offenders
with dependent children,
would promote consistency and transparency in the application of sentence
deferral; and
address the link between parental incarceration and negative outcomes for
children, reducing intergenerational trauma and cycles
primary or sole carers ‘on the borderline of imprisonment’, sentence
deferral could give them an opportunity ‘to
demonstrate responsibility and
a change in circumstances’ to remain in the
‘demonstrate their capacity to comply with community requirements [that]
the court may be
considering’.
For a parent
or guardian who faces an inevitable prison sentence, deferral may allow them
‘to make arrangements’, so
their ‘children are not further
negatively impacted’ by the prison
stakeholders advocated for a presumption in favour of sentence deferral if an
offender is the sole or primary carer of dependent
children, as recommended by
the UK Prison Reform Trust.
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service (VALS) advocated for a general presumption in
favour of deferral for women and/or non-violent
sole or primary carers of
children to address the link between incarceration and the removal of children
into care, noting that ‘Aboriginal
women are the fastest growing cohort in
Victoria’s prisons’ and incarceration is ‘a driver for the
high rates of
Aboriginal child
Similarly, Safe
and Equal recommended that sentencers should ‘take into consideration the
parenting and care-giver status of
women and non-violent parents when
sentencing, and only use custodial sentences as a last
Safe and Equal
particularly supported the use of sentence deferral for women who have
experienced family violence and/or have carer
responsibilities.
Felicity Gerry KC told us that custody should be reserved ‘for women in
only the most extreme of circumstances’
and that ‘in all but the
most serious of cases there should be a presumption against sending a pregnant
or perinatal women
And the Law
Institute of Victoria considered it ‘important that the negative impacts
of incarceration on women, pregnant offenders,
and those with dependent children
are mitigated as much as
[T]he offending behaviour of women is more likely to be rooted
in prior victimisation, which heightens the importance of their access
rehabilitative treatment to address underlying causes of criminal behaviour.
They are also more likely to have primary caring
responsibilities, meaning that
their incarceration will have higher costs for themselves, their children, the
community, and the
state. This is especially true for offenders who are pregnant
or breastfeeding. Incarceration is especially detrimental for these
because it risks failing to effectively treat root causes of offending while
simultaneously creating trauma through family
separation. Incarceration also
increases social marginalisation, reduces employment opportunities, and for
parents, increases the
likelihood of intergenerational patterns of
imprisonment.
Submission 10 (Law Institute of Victoria)
The Council’s view
have reached the view that
section 83A
should be amended to expressly enable
sentence deferral in appropriate cases if it would be in the best interests of
the offender’s
unborn, newborn or dependent child. This view is supported
by the compelling arguments made by stakeholders, the significant support
(and no opposition to) this amendment, research into the experiences of female
offenders and the children of incarcerated parents,
and Victoria’s human
rights obligations.
A new purpose would enable pregnancy and childbirth in the
specific legislative purpose of sentence deferral may facilitate an
offender’s pregnancy and childbirth in the community,
rather than in
prison, in appropriate cases, thereby reducing the risk of harm and trauma to
both the offender and their child (for
example, by enabling and supporting
breastfeeding and
attachment).
is not a safe space for pregnant woman and in all but the most serious of cases
there should be a presumption against sending
a pregnant or perinatal women to
prison ... Deferral for all but the most serious of cases is a logical
Submission 7 (Professor Felicity Gerry KC)
have been concerning examples of childbirth in Australian prisons. In Case Study
1, a woman in custody in Victoria gave birth
wearing handcuffs. In Western
Australia in 2018, an Aboriginal woman gave birth alone in a locked cell
‘[d]espite pleading
for help multiple times for over an
In another Western
Australian case, an Aboriginal mother was told that her three-day-old baby would
be removed from her due to insufficient
capacity in the prison
And in another
Victorian case highlighted by VALS, a woman’s one-day-old baby was taken
into care, preventing attachment and
breastfeeding, meaning (among other things)
that ‘her baby did not get
colostrum’.
Case Study 1: Pregnancy in custody
A client ... entered custody at Thomas Embling
Hospital, which is a high-security forensic mental health services institution.
spending approximately three months in custody she was transported to a
hospital to give birth. The birthing process was extremely
traumatic for our
client as she was forced to wear handcuffs for the entire process and was
surrounded by security officers. Upon
[our client] giving birth, her child was
removed by child protection services and she returned to Thomas Embling Hospital
remainder of her custodial sentence.
A sentence deferral would have allowed our client a humane and dignified
birthing process. The deferral period would have allowed
her to make appropriate
arrangements for her child so child protection involvement may also have been
avoided. There is ample research
to show that a mother’s physical and
emotional presence provides babies with protection from stress and supports
regulation, both of which are important to healthy brain development
and the child’s future well-being. Birthing out of custody
is critical for
mothers and children alike.
Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women)
A new purpose would provide another way to consider hardship to
an offender’s dependent children in the sentencing process
demonstrates that the children of incarcerated parents are vulnerable to
emotional and behavioural problems, separation from
siblings and extended
family, and social isolation, as well as ‘disrupted education, poor health
and unstable housing, all
of which are factors that heighten the risk of a young
person entering the child protection or justice
example, one New South Wales study found that 16.9% of adult prisoners and 52.6%
of young people in youth justice centres reported
that at least one of their
parents had been imprisoned.
previously incarcerated parent was more common for women, Aboriginal people,
younger people, and those with less schooling and/or
with experience of
out-of-home care.
concluded that there was a ‘need for interventions to support parents in
prison and at-risk children whose parents
incarcerated’.
the South Australian Commissioner for Children and Young People spoke to the
children of incarcerated parents, who said
that ‘everything changes’
when a parent goes to prison, ‘from what [children] eat and where they
live to how much
money they have and how they sleep, feel and
communicate’.
The children
described not eating because of different food, no longer being kissed
goodnight, losing contact with their friends,
having no money, and feeling
stressed and empty inside.
the harm caused to children by parental incarceration is well
documented,
as a sentencing
factor, hardship to an offender’s family must be ‘exceptional’
to justify mitigating the offender’s
Victoria’s 2022
Inquiry into Children Affected by Parental Incarceration
found that, as a
sentencing factor, ‘exceptional’ hardship to an offender’s
children is a ‘high bar’
that is rarely proven in
Sentence deferral
provides an alternate pathway to reduce harm to children in circumstances that
are not considered ‘exceptional’
or where there is insufficient
information to assess the likely effect of the offender’s incarceration on
their children, while
still enabling the final sentence to reflect the gravity
of the offence.
2022 inquiry
found that ‘children’s interests are
rarely considered across the justice
and that this
needs to change, particularly given that parental incarceration can be such an
adverse childhood experience.
The inquiry found that the separation of Aboriginal children from their
incarcerated parents ‘can disrupt connection to culture,
family’ and that the removal of children ‘from communities into out
of home care, particularly into non-Aboriginal
care placements, can perpetuate
the impacts of historic
The inquiry
recommended, among other things, that the Victorian Government ‘review the
justice system to identify points at
which children’s interests can be
better considered’.
Sentencing,
including pre-sentencing, could be one of those key points in the justice system
at which children’s interests could
be better considered. A specific
legislative purpose of sentence deferral, based on the best interests of an
offender’s unborn,
newborn or dependent child, would provide a mechanism
for recognising and addressing the effect of the sentencing process on an
children. Indeed, a recent New South Wales parliamentary
inquiry into children of imprisoned parents specifically said that ‘there
should be greater capacity for ... deferring offenders to non-custodial orders
and rehabilitative or early intervention
long-term fiscal costs of parental imprisonment and the lifelong impacts of
parental incarceration.
parliamentary inquiry noted that these measures would ‘better support the
children of parents who are facing potential
imprisonment’, would offer
‘parents a better opportunity at rehabilitation’ and was also
‘an important consideration
in addressing the overarching social,
intergenerational and fiscal costs of
recidivism’.
A new purpose would be consistent with Victoria’s human
rights obligations
introduction of a new purpose is also consistent with Victoria’s human
rights obligations, including under the Victorian
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities
and United Nations human rights instruments to which
Australia is a signatory:
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities
provides that ‘[e]very
child has the right, without discrimination, to such protection as is in the
child’s best interests
and is needed by the child by reason of being a
United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child
signatories to ‘ensure to the maximum extent possible the survival and
development of the child’;
upholds the child’s right to ‘the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of
and provides that
‘in all actions concerning children’, including actions undertaken
by courts and legislative bodies,
‘the best interests of the child shall
be a primary
consideration’.
United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-Custodial
Measures for Women Offenders
(‘the Bangkok Rules’) requires
signatories to provide that, before or on admission into custody, ‘women
with caretaking
responsibilities for children shall be permitted to make
arrangements for those children, including the possibility of a reasonable
suspension of detention, taking into account the best interests of the
‘[n]on-custodial sentences for pregnant women and women with dependent
children shall be preferred where possible
appropriate’.
2.31 The Council
of Europe has recommended that:
before a judicial order or a sentence is imposed on a parent, account shall be
taken of the rights and needs of their children and
the potential impact on
them. The judiciary should examine the possibility of a reasonable suspension of
pre-trial detention or the
execution of a prison sentence and their possible
replacement with community sanctions or measures ... Where a custodial sentence
is being contemplated, the rights and best interests of any affected children
should be taken into consideration and alternatives
to detention be used as far
as possible and appropriate, especially in the case of a parent who is a primary
all the above reasons, we are persuaded that there is merit in introducing a new
legislative purpose of sentence deferral to consider
and reflect the best
interests of an offender’s unborn, newborn or dependent
Sentence deferral
provides an opportunity to see offenders’ children not just as a
‘personal circumstance’ of an
but instead as
unique and individual persons in their own right who should not be harmed by
‘the sins and trauma of fathers
A legislative
purpose provides an alternative pathway in circumstances that may fall short of
the standard for considering hardship
to the offender’s family as a
mitigating circumstance.
2.33 A specific
legislative purpose may be useful in circumstances such as the following:
facilitate pregnancy and childbirth in the community rather than in prison,
thereby reducing the risk of harm and trauma to both
the offender and their
child or children (for example, by enabling and supporting breastfeeding and
attachment);
enable an offender in a ‘borderline imprisonment’ case to
demonstrate their ability to comply with community requirements
and remain in
the community with their
obtain a pre-sentence report about the potential consequences of a prison
sentence on the offender’s
enable caring arrangements to be put in place, including in circumstances where
a sole carer of children is facing an inevitable
2.34 We do,
though, note one caution about the use of sentence deferral in cases in which a
prison sentence is either borderline or
likely, as raised by a roundtable
participant and the Law Institute of Victoria:
the focus on ensuring that judges are aware deferrals can be ordered even where
terms of imprisonment will be imposed, may have the
unintended consequence of
making judges less disposed to not imposing a term of imprisonment owing to
hardship (for e.g., in the
case of breastfeeding) – a judge may defer
sentence for a year then impose a sentence, whereas otherwise they may have
another sentencing device that would not result in
imprisonment.
2.35 If a court
is considering a sentencing option other than prison due to exceptional hardship
arising from the person’s circumstances
relating to their children, the
court should not use deferral to stabilise the circumstances and thereby enable
a prison sentence.
If an alternative sentencing disposition is appropriate (for
example, a community correction order), it should still be imposed,
in line with
the principle of parsimony, which requires the least restrictive sentencing
option in all the circumstances. The overarching
aim of sentence deferral in
this context is to reduce harm to the children of sentenced offenders, improve
children’s long-term
outcomes, support the parent–child bond and, in
the longer term, protect the community by interrupting the cycle of
intergenerational
Recommendation 2
That the Government amend
section 83A
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) to add the following purpose of sentence
deferral: ‘to consider or reflect the best interests of the
unborn, newborn or dependent child’.
Medical treatment or surgery
deferral is sometimes used to enable an offender to receive or recover from
necessary medical treatment or
A potential reform
we tested with stakeholders was whether an express purpose to that effect should
be introduced to
section 83A
Sentencing Act
one example, in a 2015 case in the County Court, the offender had ‘Charcot
Marie Tooth Syndrome’, a ‘form of
peripheral neuropathy, in which
the feeling and motor control of the limbs is gradually
Prior to his
plea hearing, the offender had two hip replacement surgeries and after the
second was further hospitalised after developing
deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary
embolism and complications from pneumonia. The court deferred sentencing for
‘follow up treatment’. After the deferral,
he was sentenced to four years’ imprisonment.
another example, in a 2016 case in the County Court, the offender was remanded
in custody after pleading guilty to negligently
causing serious injury and
unlicensed driving. Due to the offender’s own serious injuries from the
incident, the court deferred
sentencing for about nine months to enable the
offender to receive leg-lengthening surgery, and medical treatment and
rehabilitation
for his right hand. A medical report tendered to the court had
emphasised that without the treatment, the offender might have been
permanent serious disability. At the end of the nine-month deferral period, the
court extended the deferral for another
three months for the offender to have
further procedures and treatment as the surgery had initially been unsuccessful.
additional three months, the court sentenced the offender to three
years’ imprisonment, stating that it fixed a shorter minimum
sentence than it would have
Stakeholder views
2.39 Roundtable
participants unanimously supported a new legislative purpose for necessary
surgery or medical treatment, though opinions
differed as to how the purpose
should be constructed. Participants variously suggested that medically necessary
treatment should
include matters such as:
recovering from
treatment (not just receiving treatment);
attending a
specialist medical appointment, particularly if the offender has been awaiting
an appointment for some time;
finishing a
partially complete National Disability Insurance Scheme assessment;
undertaking drug
treatment or participating in a withdrawal health check; and/or
undertaking
comprehensive health assessments before sentencing, particularly for Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people, to
ensure that undiagnosed medical issues are
detected and a treatment regime established, especially if the offender is
facing a possible
or likely prison
VALS told us that
undiagnosed or untreated medical conditions are a common factor in cases
involving deaths in custody (discussed
A sentence deferral
would enable Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to receive a
comprehensive health assessment and any
required treatment prior to sentencing,
which could improve their health outcomes as well as provide the court with
important information
relevant to their sentencing.
The Council’s view
our view it would be useful to expand the legislative purposes of deferral to
specify that sentencing may be deferred to enable
the offender to receive or
recover from medically necessary surgery or treatment (including mental health
treatment). Deferral for
treatment can provide the sentencing court with
additional information about the offender’s medical circumstances, such as
the severity of their condition, the progress of their treatment and their
ongoing medical needs.
offenders facing an inevitable prison sentence, sentence deferral could reduce
the trauma of medical treatment or surgery,
as well as decrease the
offender’s reliance on the prison service for recovery and rehabilitation.
It would also reduce the
burden on the prison system in organising treatment and
recovery in a custodial setting and would allow people to maintain contact
their regular treating physicians. For Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people, sentence deferral would enable them to
receive medical assessment and
treatment in the community, give them more agency in their health treatment, and
better enable them
to seek treatment and support that is culturally safe and
appropriate (see further [2.44]–[2.65]).
The period of
deferment can be used to assess the effects of voluntary treatment, after which
medical practitioners will be better
placed to make a recommendation when the
offender returns to court for sentencing ... A deferral offers an opportunity to
the seriousness of the [trauma] and whether this should affect the
sentence ultimately imposed.
Julian V. Roberts, ‘Deferred Sentencing: A Fresh Look at
an Old Concept’ (2022), 224 (citations omitted)
new purpose would also promote human rights obligations, such as the right to
which ‘includes
an obligation on the State to ensure that the health and wellbeing of people in
detention are adequately
cases, the health and wellbeing of people facing a prison sentence may be better
secured through medical assessment and/or
treatment in the community first.
2.43 Sentence
deferral has already been used at least twice in this way in Victoria. A
legislative purpose would clarify that medically
necessary treatment or surgery
is an appropriate reason for deferral and encourage consistency by ensuring
appropriate cases are
considered. Ultimately, the court has discretion to
determine whether it is appropriate to defer sentencing in all the circumstances
of the case, as with any deferral decision.
Recommendation 3
That the Government amend
section 83A
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) to add the following purpose of sentence
deferral: ‘to allow the offender to receive or recover from medically
treatment or surgery’.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
our consultation paper, we asked whether, and how, sentence deferral might play
a role in reducing the over-representation of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait
Islander peoples in the criminal justice system generally, and in prison
specifically.
Stakeholder views
submissions touched on the important role of sentence deferral as a
circuit-breaker to address the systemic issues that contribute
entrenchment of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in the criminal
justice system and their over-representation
VALS told us that
‘all avenues should be exhausted to prevent imprisonment of Aboriginal
people and ensure that “imprisonment
is a sanction of last
Social Services discussed the adverse government interventions to which
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have
been subjected since
colonisation, noting the ‘ongoing impacts of dispossession, structural
racism, intergenerational trauma
and disadvantage’ and the potential role
of sentence deferral to address over-representation in this
Similarly, the
Australian Community Support Organisation, Victoria Legal Aid and the Law and
Advocacy Centre for Women (LACW) discussed
the importance of sentence deferral
as a flexible tool to reduce the over-representation of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander
people in the criminal justice system. These organisations
highlighted the capacity of sentence deferral to provide access to tailored,
culturally responsive support and services that respond to the individual needs
of the offender and the factors that contributed
to the offending
Due to the inherent and well-known harm created by the carceral
system, VALS’ firm position is that all avenues should be exhausted
prevent imprisonment of Aboriginal people and ensure that ‘imprisonment is
a sanction of last resort’. This is further
supported by evidence
demonstrating that Aboriginal community based alternatives to prison are far
more effective at supporting healing
and promoting community safety.
Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service)
2.46 Case Study
2 shows the important role that sentence deferral can play to support Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people
in their rehabilitation journey.
Case Study 2
Through our clients, [Law and Advocacy Centre for
Women] has seen the potential that deferred sentences have to reduce the
overrepresentation
of First Nations people in prisons and facilitate
rehabilitative efforts. For example:
A LACW client who is First Nations was charged with an offence after which
she spent 89 days in custody on remand. The court was considering
sentencing her
to further time in custody but her sentence was deferred instead so she could
engage with support services in the
community to assess if the underlying causes
of her offending could be addressed. Our client engaged with an Aboriginal
Controlled Organisation which provided her with culturally-responsive
counselling for alcohol and other drug use and mental illness.
As a result of
receiving these supports, our client was able to demonstrate a significant shift
in her state of mind and circumstances.
Ultimately, the court imposed a good
behaviour bond.
The offending was clearly linked to our client’s struggles with mental
illness and drug use. The deferred sentence created the
motivation and means to
engage with support services, where previously this had not been available to
her. Through her engagement
in the community she was able to satisfy the court
of her prospects of rehabilitation and increase the sentencing options
Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women)
stakeholders supported the introduction of a purpose of sentence deferral
specific to the cultural backgrounds and the particular
needs and circumstances
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
and roundtable
participants unanimously supported this
For example:
Legal Service recommended a new purpose to ‘reduce the impact of
criminalisation on people who are marginalised, including
but not limited to ...
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
said that sentence deferrals ‘have the potential to be a vehicle’
for ending the over-representation of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander
people in the criminal justice system. LACW supported reforms to allow
‘consideration of a person’s
First Nations background in deciding
the availability of sentence deferral to promote community-based options instead
of incarceration’;
Legal Aid supported ‘the inclusion of a specific legislative purpose that
highlights the importance of considering
the cultural background and experience
of First Nations people in determining an application for a deferral, to support
suggested that courts should be legislatively required to consider ‘the
unique systemic and background factors affecting
Aboriginal peoples in relation
to sentence deferrals’ and emphasised that ‘this should be framed as
a mandatory legislative
requirement rather than a legislative
VALS further
recommended that
section 83A
should require courts to ‘demonstrate the
steps taken to discharge this obligation and provide reasons if an application
a sentence deferral for an Aboriginal person is not
Although the
reforms suggested by VALS extended beyond a legislative purpose, VALS supported
the recommendation to include a purpose
specific to Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people in the suite of new purposes recommended by the
2.49 Stakeholders
identified several functions and benefits of a specific purpose of sentence
deferral for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people.
A specific purpose may increase awareness and
consistency
specific purpose may support the increased use of sentence deferral in
appropriate cases by highlighting considerations relevant
to Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander
For example, sentence
deferral may assist in sentencing Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
who have kinship responsibilities,
such as caring for extended family or
A specific purpose may provide a mechanism for identifying
culturally safe and appropriate programs and services
deferral creates an opportunity to link Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people with culturally safe and appropriate
services and programs ‘which
connect them with culture and
community’.
opportunity ‘places the court in a better position to understand the
person’s rehabilitation prospects and to craft
an appropriate and tailored
sentence’ at the end of the deferral
In this way, sentence
deferral may ‘help address the complex, intersecting factors which drive
incarceration rates, particularly
where [deferral] facilitate[s] access to
culturally appropriate and targeted
interventions’.
I just raise that as one example, amongst the many, of the
continuing impacts of dispossession, segregation, subjugation, assimilation
policies, systemic racism and discrimination that Aboriginal communities have
suffered and that have led to disadvantage and further
trauma. Alongside that
history, of course, sits the amazing resilience, leadership and strength shown
by many of your community and
family and that your Elders have set as examples
and urge you to look towards for inspiration in the future.
DPP v Rotumah
[2022] VCC 1532
stakeholders pointed out that while deferral can broaden the opportunity for
linking an offender with culturally safe and
appropriate programs and services,
this opportunity depends on such programs being available, effective and
accessible, including
in regional
VALS told us that
‘Aboriginal specific rehabilitative programs, including drug and alcohol
or behaviour change programs, regularly
have limited capacity and long waiting
times for admission’.
In relation to sentence deferral, VALS emphasised that ‘there is a
critical need for funding reform to increase the capacity
of Aboriginal
organisations to develop, implement and evaluate culturally safe deferral
Social Services also emphasised the need for sentence deferral to be
‘accompanied by initiatives that are designed,
controlled, and delivered
by the Aboriginal community to ensure the best outcomes for Aboriginal people
involved with the justice
And both VALS
and the County Court supported extending the availability of the Court
Integrated Services Program (CISP) to ‘increase
participation from
marginalised groups such as Aboriginal
A specific purpose could facilitate attendance at funerals and
participation in sorry business
roundtable participant commented that a specific purpose of sentence deferral
would enable Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people to attend funerals and
participate in sorry business prior to
sentencing.
A consequence of
the lower life expectancy of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people is
that they are likely to more frequently
experience loss and grief throughout
their lifetime than non-Aboriginal people. The experience of frequent grief and
loss compounds
other trauma, as identified in a 1995 report on Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander mental health:
trauma and grief [are] the most serious issue, both related to past history of
loss and traumatisation, and to current frequent losses
as a result of high
mortality rates and ongoing losses through removal of children and
incarceration. Traumatic loss was seen as
a cause of mental health problems and
as a major problem in its own right, fundamental to Aboriginal health and
well-being.
importance of sorry business in the context of bail applications has also been
recognised in caselaw.
example, the Supreme Court of New South Wales commented that ‘the marking
of a death of a beloved person is an important
aspect of all human
cultures’ and ‘with regard to the cultures of First Nations people
of this country, funerals and
“sorry business” are exceptionally
important’.
case, the Supreme Court of Victoria noted that:
the applicant and his family are grieving the loss of his sister, and his period
of remand prevents him being with family and community
during the period of
grief. Part of the grieving process for the applicant’s community involves
being in the company of family
for extended periods after the loss. In that
context, the prohibition on visits by family members and others to prison would
the applicant’s period of remand even more
A specific purpose could facilitate a pre-sentence health
noted that a purpose of sentence deferral specific to Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people may also facilitate a practice
of getting comprehensive
health assessments prior to sentencing, particularly for people facing a prison
This purpose would
augment the health-based purpose discussed above (Recommendation 3). VALS noted
that Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people experience worse health
outcomes in the community, and they often do not get the same level of
assessment, treatment
and care as non-Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
VALS told us that
undiagnosed or untreated medical conditions are a particular issue for people in
custody and a preventable contributor
to Aboriginal deaths in custody. VALS
suggested that it should become standard practice for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander
people to get comprehensive health assessments prior to
sentencing and that this could be facilitated by sentence
A specific purpose could facilitate a community justice
stakeholders told us that a specific purpose would help to provide time for the
preparation of an ‘Indigenous experience
such as the
‘community justice reports’ currently being piloted by VALS. Such
reports are modelled on Canada’s
reports and aim
‘improve sentencing processes and outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander defendants’ and to reduce their
over-incarceration.
justice reports are a culturally specific pre-sentence report providing ‘a
more holistic account of individual circumstances,
including as they relate to a
person’s community, culture and
strengths’.
Community Justice Reports referrals made as part of a deferral
plan will allow the court to make a more culturally informed, grounded
holistic sentencing decision, increase the court’s ability to fully
‘see’ the person appearing before them,
and strengthen their ability
to take into account the ongoing impacts of colonisation, trauma and
dispossession on the person they
are sentencing, their family and their
community. Further, Community Justice Reports can empower courts to understand
an inherently protective factor, grounded in strength and resilience.
Submission 3 (Jesuit Social Services)
justice reports may be particularly useful combined with sentence
Sentencing can be
deferred to obtain a report and/or to create space prior to sentencing for an
offender to engage with the services
and programs set out in the
The reports include
‘recommendations to the court [about] therapeutic and culturally
appropriate sentences’,
and details about the community-based support options available to the person.
VALS emphasised that ‘Aboriginal people in the
justice system respond much
better to prevention, diversion and other justice programs when they are
community led and culturally
And in a 2022
case, the County Court discussed the benefits of community justice reports in
sentencing Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people, noting that the reports
provide the court ‘with an evidentiary basis to consider all of the
relevant circumstances
that have shaped [a person and their] responses through
already provides for pre-sentence reports to be prepared and considered when
courts defer sentencing.
However, community justice reports differ from other pre-sentence reports in
terms of content and focus; in particular, community
justice reports have the
capacity to include evidence ‘that relates directly to the unique
experiences of Aboriginal people
and the impacts of colonisation, particularly
from a community
perspective’.
justice reports are ‘consistent with recommendations from the Royal
Commission Into Aboriginal Deaths In Custody
relating to Aboriginal
participation and accessibility in the Court process’ and:
provide a wider lens that brings perspective on the collective experiences of
the individual, family and community. They provide
a relevant history of
colonisation and its impacts, as well as an outline of contemporary
interventions, circumstances, policies
and laws and their impacts on Aboriginal
communities.
The Council’s view
Council is persuaded by submissions highlighting the need for a purpose of
sentence deferral specific to the ‘unique systemic
and background factors
affecting Aboriginal
1991 report of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody called
attention to the systemic and policy issues that
contributed to the
‘disproportionate number of Aboriginal people being held in all forms of
custody and in most locations throughout
Australia’.
Commission emphasised the importance of including a broad range of sentencing
options in state justice systems to give
meaning to the requirement that
imprisonment is the sentence of last
Yet as recently as
2021–22, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people accounted for 19% of
Australian deaths in prison custody
but only 3% of the Australian
population.
Care and treatment that is culturally safe for Aboriginal people
and delivered by staff who are culturally competent is likely to
promote the
rights of Aboriginal people to enjoy their identity and culture by incorporating
Aboriginal cultural practices and holistic
understanding of health as well as
social, emotional, spiritual and cultural wellbeing and allowing Aboriginal
people to safely express
their culture and identity when seeking and receiving
Inquest into the Passing of Veronica Nelson
0021 (30 January 2023) 30–31
where a custodial sentence is unavoidable, a sentence deferral may be an
important first option. For example, sentence may be
deferred for the offender
to get a comprehensive health assessment to ensure that any underlying health
conditions are diagnosed
and treated (or at least a treatment regime is
established) prior to the offender entering custody. As discussed at [2.55],
is an established link between undiagnosed and/or untreated health
conditions and deaths in
In the findings of
the inquest into the death of Veronica Nelson, the Victorian Coroner identified
‘fundamental failings in
Veronica’s custodial
healthcare’
that she ‘did not have access to health services equivalent to those
available to her in the
community’.
deferral is one crucial mechanism for addressing this issue by providing an
alternate pathway for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people to obtain a
comprehensive health check and medical treatment prior to
sentencing.
accompanied by effective culturally safe and appropriate programs and services,
options such as sentence deferral provide
a mechanism for effecting genuine
change. A specific purpose for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people is
intended to ensure
that sentence deferral is considered in any case where
rehabilitation and risk to the community could be addressed through a deferral
and ultimately a community sentence.
Council takes the view that a specific purpose of sentence deferral for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people is a measure
‘taken for the
purpose of assisting or advancing persons or groups of persons disadvantaged
because of discrimination’
and therefore does not constitute
discrimination under the Victorian
Charter of Human
purpose would facilitate culturally safe medical assessments and treatments and
also protect human rights such as the right
to life and the cultural rights of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, including their right to maintain
kinship ties and
to enjoy their identity and
recommended specific purpose is intended to cover sentence deferral in a broad
range of circumstances, including those discussed
in this chapter, such as:
for the offender
to engage with a culturally safe and appropriate program or service;
for the offender
to attend a funeral and participate in sorry business;
for the offender
to obtain a comprehensive health check, attend a medical appointment or receive
medical advice or treatment;
preparation of a community justice report;
for the offender
to make arrangements where they have carer responsibilities such as parental,
kinship or Elder caring responsibilities;
for the offender
to access support that promotes their social and emotional wellbeing and
healing, and to address any experience of
trauma, including the effect of that
trauma on the offender’s development and capacity to avoid problematic
to address or
avoid systemic racism, increased disadvantage and postcolonial and
intergenerational trauma experienced by Aboriginal
people, including any
culturally inappropriate responses that may have worsened the effects of
to address the
risk that incarceration poses for Aboriginal people;
adults, in particular, to address issues arising from existing or previous
disruption to their living situation or education
and to support their need to
have a safe, stable and secure living arrangement.
wording of the recommendation was informed by our consultation, particularly
with VALS, who supported the specific purpose and
participants also unanimously supported the specific purpose and its proposed
recommendation is implemented, we suggest that the wording of the new purpose is
developed in further consultation with Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander
peoples and with Aboriginal Community Controlled Organisations including
Recommendation 4
That the Government amend
section 83A
Sentencing Act
to add the following purpose of sentence deferral:
‘If the offender is an Aboriginal person, for any reason relating to their
cultural background, responsibilities, particular needs, or
experience.’
Young adult offenders
discussed at [1.3], sentence deferral started in Victoria in 1991 as an option
for children, extending to the Magistrates’
Court in 2000 as an option for
young people aged 17–25. It wasn’t until 2012 that sentence deferral
was extended to all
adult offenders sentenced in the Magistrates’ Court
and County Court.
found that sentence deferral is well used for young adult offenders (offenders
aged 18–25 at sentencing), reflecting the
origins of sentence deferral in
Victoria. Young adult offenders comprised 33% of the deferral population from
2012 to 2020, but only
25% of the general offender population in the
Magistrates’ Court.
submissions highlighted the importance of sentence deferral as an option for
young adults.
For example,
Jesuit Social Services commented that:
[w]e believe sentence deferral is a key strategy to divert young adults away
from future contact with the adult justice system and
provides a crucial
opportunity to engage young adults with important supports to address factors
related to their offending.
2.69 Young adult
offenders differ from older adult offenders in several ways, as summarised in
our 2019 report
Rethinking Sentencing for Young Adult Offenders
The immaturity of adults in their late teens and early twenties is characterised
by incomplete neurological development and psychological
limitations that
include impaired understanding of consequences, impulsiveness, disproportionate
emotional arousal and disproportionate
reward sensitivity. These limitations can
lead to offending behavioural patterns that are typical of young people:
opportunistic,
public and often group-related.
There is mounting scientific evidence that young adults aged 18–25 are
developmentally distinct from older adults and should
be treated as such by the
justice system. Research in neurology and developmental psychology has
demonstrated that cognitive skills
and emotional intelligence continue to
develop into a person’s mid-20s, and even
that report, we observed that, compared to older adults, young adult offenders
have lower completion rates on community sentencing
orders and higher
reoffending rates. The most prolific offenders are also the most vulnerable.
However, research also shows that
‘young adult offenders generally reduce
their offending behaviour as they mature into adulthood, and most will
eventually stop’.
report suggested a new, specific sentencing factor relating to young adult
offenders’ developmental, or ‘psychobiological’
and concluded that:
[t]his natural desistance [in offending behaviour], along with the fact that
behaviour patterns are not as firmly entrenched in young
adults as in older
adults, means that young adult offenders can be more responsive to
rehabilitative interventions than older adults.
There is potential to improve
outcomes for both society and young adult offenders if they can be supported
into this reduction in
offending behaviour as early as possible. Criminogenic
environments, including prison, can be counterproductive to this process,
they can entrench patterns of offending
Figure 2: Developmental factors and milestones in transition to
adulthood (adapted from Columbia Justice Lab)
Emerging adulthood 1 – key milestones from youth to adult:
cognitive skills
independence
social ties
relationship
adulthood 2 – key milestones from youth to adult:
Risk-taking
Reward-seeking
like sentence deferral are therefore particularly important for young adult
offenders. A strength of sentence deferral for
this group is its capacity to
enable their rehabilitation in the community away from the criminogenic
influence of other offenders.
The possibility of a lesser sentence also provides
a powerful incentive for young adult offenders to demonstrate their willingness
and ability to rehabilitate. These benefits are illustrated in Case Study 3,
‘Ben’, provided by Victoria Legal Aid, who
considered that a
‘key benefit of deferred sentencing’ is the ability to support the
rehabilitation process ‘through
flexibility and problem-solving
approaches’.
Case Study 3: Ben
Ben, who is 18 years old, was placed into
residential care at age 12 when a parent was imprisoned. He grew up in a chaotic
environment,
eventually developing complex post-traumatic stress disorder. Ben
dropped out of school at age 16 and started getting into trouble
Ben committed his most serious offence of armed robbery when he was 18 years
old. At the time, he was on bail for property-related
offences. Ben spent
several days on remand and was then granted bail on strict conditions, including
being supervised by the youth
justice bail program.
Ben had faced significant hardship while on bail, including experiencing
bail program,
including stable accommodation, a diagnosis and access to mental health
At the plea hearing in the County Court, the judge found that Ben was
engaging well with youth justice and accepted that Ben’s
drivers of offending were being addressed through the mental health supports
arranged by youth justice. To enable the
treatment to continue, Ben’s
matter was deferred for a period of 6 months, and Ben remained subject to bail
conditions that
required him to continue to engage with youth justice, reside at
an address and abide by a curfew.
Ben was able to remain in the community and continue to access the support
provided by youth justice over the deferral period. These
supports allowed Ben
to remain out of trouble and comply with his bail conditions. At the sentence
hearing, the judge sentenced Ben
to a 24 month community correction order
without conviction. Ben managed to remain in the community, and access supports
and employment
despite the setbacks he faced.
Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid)
Stakeholder views
consultation paper found that deferral is regularly used for young adult
offenders (aged 18–25). Several submissions advocated
for a specific
purpose of sentence deferral focusing on the distinct rehabilitation challenges
and needs of this group.
supported the introduction of a new legislative purpose that would encourage
sentence deferral to ‘[s]upport young adults
aged 18–25 years to
access age-appropriate services’. VALS explained that such a purpose would
‘underline the importance
of sentence deferrals for young adults aged
18–25 years’, commenting that ‘opportunities for healing ...
are particularly
important for young offenders where all avenues for diversion
away from the criminal legal system must be
prioritised’.
participants unanimously supported a specific purpose for young adult offenders.
Participants emphasised the need for the
purpose to encompass a young
person’s vocational needs, which we have included in Recommendation 5, and
issues around youth
‘vulnerability’ in Recommendation
with the findings of our 2019
many submissions also
noted that there are insufficient specialist services for young adult offenders.
This is concerning given the
particular vulnerability of young adult offenders
and the importance of rehabilitation for this group. Endorsing Victoria Legal
submission, Youthlaw added that a lack of availability and access to
services can be a ‘real barrier’ to sentence deferral
adults. For example, Youthlaw commented that Youth Justice is ‘often not
available for young adults’ because
of limited resources and age
eligibility. Further, ‘CISP is often not available to young adults unless
there is a risk of a
imprisonment’.
Similarly, Jesuit Social Services called for funding for a ‘specialised
young adults case management and outreach service for
18–25 year olds
appearing in the adult courts with a focus on addressing needs holistically that
may be related to their court
The Council’s view
cannot overstate the importance of sentence deferral as a therapeutic option to
divert young adults away from the criminal
justice system. Successful
rehabilitation of young adult offenders benefits not only them but also the
community, which is spared
the consequences of potentially decades of criminal
behaviour and justice involvement.
2.76 We analysed
recorded deferral cases in the Magistrates’ Court from 2012 to 2020 and
found that sentence deferral is well
used for young adults, reflecting the
importance of deferral for this group. In light of this finding and our
consultation, we were
persuaded that a new, youth-related purpose of sentence
deferral should be inserted into
section 83A.
A youth-related purpose would
reflect the origins of deferral, ensuring that the young people for whom
deferral was initially designed
remain at the forefront of deferral practice. A
youth-related purpose would also serve as a reminder to practitioners and the
that they should explore any prospects to engage young adult offenders
in rehabilitation prior to sentencing.
youth-related purpose is designed to support sentence deferral in appropriate
cases for reasons including:
identifying and
accessing age-appropriate programs or services;
addressing the
offender’s vulnerabilities, such as homelessness or disconnection from
linking the
offender back into education, training or vocational opportunities;
recognising
issues relating to the offender’s developmental immaturity, such as their
impressionability or susceptibility to
be influenced by others; and
assessing or
considering their neurological, biological and psychosocial development and or
specific needs relating to their youth.
Recommendation 5
That the Government amend
section 83A
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) to add the following purpose of sentence
deferral: ‘If the offender is aged under 26, for any reason relating to
vulnerability, developmental maturity, or rehabilitative, educational or
vocational needs’.
Other suggestions for reform
2.78 Stakeholders
suggested a range of other purposes of sentence deferral, in addition to the
purposes recommended in this chapter.
Some suggestions covered similar ground
but were framed differently, such as a purpose framed around disadvantage that
was intended
to include groups like young adult offenders within its ambit. For
example, Fitzroy Legal Centre suggested an additional purpose
reduce the impact of criminalisation on people who are marginalised, including
but not limited to young adults, culturally and linguistically
diverse peoples,
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, people experiencing mental health
diagnoses, people experiencing addiction
to drugs or alcohol, and people
experiencing homelessness.
stakeholders went further than the purposes proposed in this chapter, for
example, explicitly including specific health
issues such as drug and alcohol
dependency or specific groups such as people from culturally and linguistically
diverse backgrounds.
2.80 In framing
the recommendations in this chapter, we have been mindful of the need to balance
two competing considerations: one,
the need to keep the deferral provision
relatively simple and the order itself flexible in scope, and two, the need to
provision provides adequate guidance to ensure that sentence deferral
is not overlooked in appropriate cases where it may be beneficial.
confident that other suggestions for reform to the purposes of sentence deferral
are adequately addressed by the new purposes
proposed in this chapter together
with the purposes already in
section 83A.
Availability
of sentence deferral
3.1 Currently,
section 83A
Sentencing Act
specifies that the Magistrates’
Court or County Court may defer an offender’s sentence if:
the court has
found the offender guilty of an offence;
the offender
agrees to deferral; and
court is of the opinion that deferral is in the interests of the
3.2 This chapter
explores these eligibility criteria, recommending changes to the availability of
sentence deferral and the matters
that a court must consider.
Extend sentence deferral to the Supreme Court
deferral became available in the Magistrates’ Court for offenders aged 17
to 25 in 2000 and on our recommendation was
extended to all adult offenders in
the Magistrates’ Court and the County Court in 2012 (see [1.3] and
[2.66]). At the time,
we decided not to recommend that the power to defer
sentencing be extended to the Supreme Court ‘due to the nature of the
dealt with in that
our consultation paper, we asked whether it is time to introduce sentence
deferral in the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court may
already informally defer
sentencing via the general power to adjourn criminal proceedings for any reason
the court considers
appropriate.
For example,
while the application was unsuccessful, in 2020 an offender applied to adjourn
proceedings for six months because of
the then unknown effect of COVID-19 on
In 2004, a young
adult offender’s plea hearing was adjourned for approximately six months
to enable him to continue his education
and rehabilitation in a youth unit at
Port Phillip Prison (the youth unit would not have been available to the
offender after sentencing).
And in 2023, an offender’s plea hearing was adjourned so he could continue
his progression on a community correction order
(Case Study 4).
Case Study 4
After the offender had pleaded guilty to aggravated
burglary. the offender’s counsel requested the longest period possible
the plea was listed. The offender was on bail, was subject to a community
correction order and was said to be progressing well with
the rehabilitative
aspects of that order. The plea hearing was listed for three months later. On
the plea, the offender’s counsel
urged the court to impose a non-custodial
disposition to avoid hindering the rehabilitation that was being achieved. That
was not accepted in the circumstances.
DPP v Fahal
[2023] VSC 272
Stakeholder views
stakeholders supported extending deferral to the Supreme Court, even if it would
only be used in rare cases.
The Supreme Court itself outlined the benefits of making sentence deferral
available as an additional tool in appropriate cases,
for example:
An accused may be charged with assist offender before the Court, but have played
a minor role in the offence, have pleaded guilty
and offered to give evidence
against the main offender but that trial is some time away. They may be linked
into a rehabilitation
service and potentially be at risk of retribution from
other offenders. Deferral of sentence may be a useful tool in such
situations.
3.6 While the
Supreme Court can informally defer sentencing via the general adjournment power,
stakeholders (especially the Law Institute
of Victoria) described several
shortcomings with this approach, which would be addressed by extending the power
section 83A
to the Supreme Court. For example:
current approach creates uncertainty about the ability or appropriateness of
informal deferrals in the Supreme Court under section
Procedure Act
, as ‘practitioners and Judges may not consider them to
be an available option, even in circumstances where they would be
appropriate’.
express power would ‘clearly signal that sentence deferrals are available
and can be made in that jurisdiction’, which
may address the current
uncertainty ‘if coupled with adequate education and
uncertainty
creates an associated risk that informal deferral will be inconsistently used
and not made available in all cases where
it might be appropriate. An express
power would increase consistency of use of deferral in the Supreme Court by
addressing the current
is no guidance in the Supreme Court about the appropriate reasons to adjourn,
how long to adjourn for, and any review processes.
An express deferral power
would regularise the use of deferral ‘by creating rules about when
[deferrals] are appropriate and
what conditions must be satisfied for [deferral]
to be ordered’, which would provide ‘clarity about when a sentence
is suitable and certainty about the
Supreme Court should have available to it ‘whatever sentencing or
pre-sentencing option is most appropriate to the case
‘allow for consistency in sentencing across jurisdictions and equitable
access to the benefits of a deferred
to Violence’s submission was the only one to oppose extending sentence
deferrals to the Supreme Court. No to Violence said
that offending heard in the
Supreme Court is too serious for sentence deferral to be
considered.
stakeholders noted, however, that while most cases heard in the Supreme Court
are very serious, less serious cases are also
heard in that
Our finding in
our consultation paper supports this view: 17% of people sentenced in the
Supreme Court do not receive a prison
The Supreme Court
explained that:
[m]aking this option available would be consistent with the range of matters
that come before the Court.
While the primary focus of the Court’s criminal jurisdiction is on very
serious cases, it does deal with lower level offending
in particular instances.
This will often be in the context of more serious offending by another offender.
The Court also deals with
cases where non-custodial sentences are warranted,
some without conviction.
Again while not common, the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
enables certain
summary offences to be dealt with by the Court. As a result some matters before
the Court are not necessarily more
serious than matters dealt with in the County
Court, or even in some instances the Magistrates’
Victoria Legal Aid noted that changes in the cases heard in the Supreme Court
have increased the relevance of sentence
deferral in that jurisdiction. Victoria
Legal Aid observed that ‘the biggest barrier to using sentence deferrals
in the Supreme
Court is the severity of charges and lengthy periods of
imprisonment’ but ‘an inevitable sentence of imprisonment should
always be a barrier to ... a sentence
Stakeholders
also acknowledged that the serious nature of most offending heard in the Supreme
Court increases the risk that sentence
deferral will cause trauma to victims.
However, as in other courts, the potential effect of delay would be relevant to
the Supreme
Court’s decision whether to defer sentencing, along with other
considerations. The Supreme Court said that ‘[t]he Court
is conscious of
the impact of delay on victims and weighs this with other relevant factors
including community
The Council’s view
are persuaded that there is merit in extending sentence deferral to the Supreme
Court. Making formal sentence deferral available
would provide transparency and
consistency to the process, rather than requiring the Supreme Court to fall back
on its general adjournment
powers. There was strong stakeholder support for
extending deferred sentencing to the Supreme Court, with only one submission
concerns about its use in serious cases. However, as described
throughout this report, there are a multitude of circumstances where
deferral would be appropriate, even if a prison sentence is inevitable. And the
Supreme Court does not only hear serious
cases that demand a prison sentence.
3.11 Ultimately,
if sentence deferral is extended to the Supreme Court, the discretion to defer
sentencing would rest with the sentencing
judge, who would determine whether it
was in the interests of justice (if Recommendation 7 is implemented), weighing
up all the circumstances
of the case including the purpose of the proposed
deferral, the effect of delay on the victim, the seriousness of the offence, the
likelihood of a prison sentence, the risk posed by the offender and the
interests of the community.
Recommendation 6
That the Government amend
section 83A
Sentencing Act
(Vic) to allow sentence deferral in the
Supreme Court.
The interests of justice
Sentencing Act
currently requires courts to consider the
‘interests of the offender’ in deciding whether to defer sentencing.
The offender’s
consent to the sentence deferral is also required.
3.13 During our
preliminary consultations and again in submissions, stakeholders raised the
issue of the priority given to the offender’s
interests as a requirement
for deferring sentence. In our consultation paper, we asked for feedback on this
requirement, exploring
issues such as whether the interests of the victim and/or
the interests of justice should be considered instead of, or as well as,
interests of the offender, or whether a different approach would be preferable
(such as removing this requirement altogether).
Stakeholder views
Law Institute of Victoria noted that the current requirement for a court to
consider the interests of the offender stemmed from
the origins of sentence
deferral, when it was an option exclusively available for children, and then for
young adult offenders, reflecting
the prominence of rehabilitation in sentencing
young people.
However, the
requirement did not change when sentence deferral was extended to older
offenders, despite other sentencing purposes
– such as just punishment and
community protection – often carrying more weight when sentencing that
Stakeholders
who addressed this question were divided, as were roundtable participants. The
County Court was of the view ‘that
the current criteria and considerations
... are sufficient’.
Other stakeholders, including roundtable participants, thought that change was
necessary but differed in their approach to what change
should occur. The main
alternatives suggested were to:
the ‘interests of the offender’ consideration (with applications
instead simply focusing on the purpose for which
the deferral was sought);
the ‘interests of the offender’ consideration but add more
considerations; or
the ‘interests of the offender’ consideration with a more balanced
‘interests of justice’ consideration.
Option 1: Removing the ‘interests of the offender’
consideration
option proposed simply removing the requirement to consider the interests of the
offender, with applications instead focusing
on the purpose(s) of the sentence
deferral. When we canvassed this option at our roundtable and in subsequent
consultation, there
was neither strong support nor opposition to it, but there
was generally a preference for the other two
One roundtable
participant said that the ‘interests of the offender’ should be
retained to highlight that the offender’s
needs and circumstances are
central to a deferral decision. Another observed that because the purposes of
deferral already extend
beyond an offender’s interests, there is a
‘potential conflict’ between some of the existing and proposed
of deferral and the legislative requirement to only consider the
interests of the offender. For example, a restorative justice process
proceed unless it is in the interests of the victim and the victim
Option 2: Adding further considerations in addition to the
‘interests of the offender’
stakeholders proposed amending
section 83A
to include additional mandatory
requirements that must be satisfied before a court defers sentencing. But the
Law Institute of Victoria
cautioned ‘that any such list not be so
prescriptive that it would unduly restrict judicial officers from exercising
discretion to defer a sentence ... in appropriate
There was also
no consensus about which considerations should be added or prioritised. The
suggested factors included:
impact of the criminal justice system on marginalised groups, especially
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, and the
unique systemic and
background factors affecting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
risks an offender may pose during a deferral period, especially in family
violence cases;
views or interests of, or possible effects on, the
the offender is a woman, is pregnant or breastfeeding, or is a primary
importance of treatment and harm reduction relating to alcohol and drug
dependence.
effectively address this overrepresentation, it is important to acknowledge that
the overrepresentation of First Nations people
in the criminal justice systems
is partly caused by systemic racism and unconscious bias in the application of
the law. To be effective,
reforms need to target those issues. The LIV submits
that systemic racism and unconscious bias could be targeted by requiring the
court to consider whether an offender is an Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait
Islander person in forming its opinion as to whether
a deferral is
appropriate.
Submission 10 (Law Institute of Victoria)
relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and the effect of
sentence deferral on victims received the most
support from stakeholders,
although they had mixed views
the inclusion of the
effect on the victim as a consideration.
to Violence said that ‘[v]ictim survivors might be consulted and their
views considered, should the Courts grant a deferred
Highlighting
the importance of considering the impact of deferral on the victim, the Supreme
Court noted that in adjourning sentencing
currently, the Court is
‘conscious of the impact of delay on victims and [weighs] this with other
relevant factors including
stakeholders expressed concern about a new legislative consideration relating to
the interests of, or effects on, the
Some viewed a new
consideration as unnecessary as there is already consideration of the
victim’s views or victim impact at
other stages, such as bail, sentence
indication and sentencing.
addition, one reason for introducing statutory purposes of deferral was as a
protection to ‘help to ensure that deferral
is not used by defendants as a
means of unnecessarily prolonging
proceedings’.
Legal Aid suggested that ‘any changes to how the interests of victims are
considered when determining whether to defer
sentence’ should be examined
in the context of the system-wide response to victims of crime, rather than
isolated to a specific
concern was the potential for further delay if courts were required to seek
direct victim input, particularly in the Magistrates’
Given existing
concerns around the potential for sentence deferral to add trauma to victims by
delaying finalisation of matters,
it may be counter-productive to compound delay
by postponing a deferral decision in order to contact the victim and seek their
However, in response to such concerns, the Victims of Crime Commissioner
I support legislative reform that would require the court to consider the needs
of victims when considering a sentence deferral.
While the high-volume nature of
the summary jurisdiction (where deferrals often occur) is often raised as a key
reason not to enhance
consideration of victims’ interests and
entitlements, I believe the operation of the justice system must continue to
to enhance victim
participation.
Victims of Crime Commissioner suggested that ‘prosecutors should have a
role in facilitating victim participation and informing
the court of
victims’ views or the possible effects of deferral on any victims’,
adding that ‘[v]ictims’
concerns may relate to impacts of delay and
safety concerns if the sentence is
concern related to the expectations of victims. Victim Services, Support and
Reform noted that involving victims in the deferral
decision risks further
traumatising them if they expect their views to influence the ultimate decision
(as opposed to their views
being one of several
considerations).
Services, Support and Reform instead supported requiring courts to consider the
‘interests of justice’ as a more
balanced approach:
Requiring the court to consider the interests of justice (which includes
consideration of the victim(s)’ interests as well
as risks to the
community), rather than just the offender’s interests, is a more balanced
way of determining the appropriateness
of sentence deferral in individual
matters than is currently the case. Considering ‘the interests of
justice’ is therefore
potentially another effective way of ensuring
victims are considered without requiring specific input from individual
Option 3: Replacing the ‘interests of the offender’
with the ‘interests of justice’
Stakeholders,
including some roundtable participants, gave the most support to the option of
replacing the ‘interests of the
offender’ with the ‘interests
of justice’.
argument for this option is that it would introduce more balance to the
court’s decision-making, by balancing the interests
of the offender with a
range of other considerations which could be developed in case
The views or potential
effects on the victim would be relevant, as would the interests of the broader
community and, for example,
the interests of any of the offender’s
dependent children. The County Court, for instance, said that it:
is generally supportive of the availability of deferrals being based on whether
it is in the interests of justice to do so. This
would appropriately apply to
the wide cohort that may be captured by the scheme, even where offences are
inherently serious.
Professor Arie Frieberg AM commented that an obligation to consider the
‘interests of justice’ would require
a judge to ‘balance the
risks to the community, the interests of the victim, and what’s good for
the defendant in terms
of their rehabilitation, and their likelihood of
reoffending’.
where an offender is pregnant or has dependent children, deferral may be in the
interests of justice in the long term by
the risk of intergenerational trauma or offending by providing for a child to be
brought up in circumstances outside of prison. So
there are longer term societal
benefits beyond having the baby with the mother, which is an important benefit
Law Institute of Victoria initially supported a list of statutory factors to
deferral was in the
interests of justice.
However, they ultimately favoured a simple requirement for courts to consider
‘the interests of justice’, especially
if the purposes of sentence
deferral were given more prominence in (‘moved to the front of’)
section 83A.
They commented
that it could become ‘quite convoluted’ to introduce a long list of
factors to assist courts in considering
what might be relevant in determining
whether sentence deferral would be in the interests of
The Council’s view
have reached the view that
section 83A
should be amended to better balance the
various potential interests affected by a court’s decision to defer
sentencing, so
that the decision does not exclusively focus on the interests of
the offender. As the Law Institute of Victoria noted, the current
requirement to
consider the interests of the offender reflects the origins of deferral as a
therapeutic option designed for children
and young adult offenders, for which
rehabilitation is generally the dominant purpose of sentencing. With deferral
now an option
for all adult offenders, we take the view that the requirement to
consider the ‘interests of the offender’ in
section 83A
replaced with a requirement to consider the ‘interests of justice’.
We intend the ‘interests of justice’
requirement to be interpreted
broadly on a case-by-case basis to account for matters including:
the interests of
the offender;
systemic and background factors affecting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
interests of the victim and the potentially adverse effect on them if sentencing
is deferred (particularly in family violence
cases, such as cases involving
coercive control, including ‘legal system
the seriousness
of the offence;
the risk posed
by the offender to the victim and the community (particularly in family violence
cases and/or cases where sentence
deferral will delay imprisonment or
supervision by Corrections Victoria);
the interests of
the community, including reducing the offender’s risk of reoffending;
interests of an offender’s unborn, newborn or dependent child; and
the need for
finality of criminal proceedings.
3.28 We note
that sentencing cannot be deferred without the offender’s consent.
Therefore, there is little risk that replacing
‘the interests of the
offender’ with ‘the interests of justice’ in
section 83A
result in a person’s sentence being deferred against their wishes.
were not persuaded that
section 83A
should be amended to specify a list of
considerations that courts should have regard to in deciding whether to defer
sentencing.
There was no consensus among stakeholders on whether
section 83A
should be amended to include such a list, and there was no consensus among
supporters of this approach on what the considerations
should be. And some of
the suggested considerations would be more appropriately elevated to apply to
all decisions under the
Sentencing Act
, not just those related to
sentence deferral (for example, the unique, systemic and background factors
affecting Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander
3.30 Our aim is
sentence deferral in appropriate cases. We harbour
concerns that mandating courts to consider a list of legislative factors may
inadvertently
create another barrier to the use of deferral. For those reasons,
we simply recommend replacing the ‘interests of the offender’
the ‘interests of justice’ and allowing courts, in their discretion,
to apply that well-known requirement on a case-by-case
basis. In addition, we
recommend that the purposes of deferral be moved into
section 83A(1)
highlight their prominence in decision-making.
Recommendation 7
That the Government amend
section 83A
Sentencing Act
(Vic) to replace ‘the interests of the
offender’ with ‘the interests of justice’, and to move the
of deferral into
section 83A(1).
Allow sentence deferral in appropriate cases even if a prison
sentence is likely or inevitable
courts in Victoria may defer sentencing even in cases where a prison sentence is
likely or inevitable. This is true in
most Australian
Legislation in
the Australian Capital Territory even specifies that ‘[a] court may make a
deferred sentence order whether or
not it considers that the seriousness of the
offence justifies a sentence of
imprisonment’.
although it is technically possible, courts in Victoria and elsewhere have
demonstrated an understandable reluctance to
defer sentencing where prison is
inevitable. For example:
I consider in this case that a sentence
of imprisonment is inevitable, and I refuse to defer sentencing you.
DPP v Swift
[2015] VCC 1588
Your counsel ... submitted that the sentence should be deferred to enable
you to complete participation in rehabilitation courses
... I am simply unable
to accede to that submission. It is inevitable that you will receive a custodial
sentence for this offence
and it should commence immediately.
Unpublished sentencing remarks provided to the Council
No good purpose will usually be served in deferring sentence ... if the
demands of punishment and general deterrence are so great
that a substantial
sentence of immediate imprisonment must be imposed even if the proposed
rehabilitation program is largely successful.
R v Wymond & Anor
[2013] SASCFC 12
[Y]ours was a sentence that could not involve anything but immediate
imprisonment. In those circumstances I found that it was most
inappropriate to
defer sentencing to allow you to commence on a pure rehabilitative process for
the next 12 months. Such would then
have meant that it would have been most
inappropriate to impose a period of imprisonment at that later stage.
DPP v Evangelistis
[2015] VCC 1192
a 2006 report, the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) discussed the
‘judicial debate regarding the circumstances in
which it is appropriate to
defer the sentencing of an
uncertainty about the use of deferral where a prison sentence is inevitable. The
ALRC commented that the New South Wales
Court of Criminal Appeal refused to
endorse the argument ‘that it is not appropriate to order the deferral of
a sentence in
circumstances where it is inevitable that the offender will be
sentenced to a period of full-time
imprisonment’.
our consultation paper, we asked whether
section 83A
should be amended to
clarify that a court may defer an offender’s sentence even if a prison
sentence is inevitable.
Stakeholder views
Law Institute of Victoria said that a current barrier to the use of deferral
‘is an apparent reluctance among some judicial
officers to use
them’, which may reflect ‘concerns regarding a risk of harm to
victims and/or that a deferred sentence
would be futile as a custodial sentence
will be required in any
And the County
Court said that clarity about ‘the perceived barrier of inevitable
custodial sentences’ would be ‘helpful
to the profession
Stakeholders
gave examples of circumstances where sentence deferral might be appropriate
despite the likelihood of a prison sentence,
suggesting that the Victorian
legislation should incorporate an approach similar to the Australian Capital
Territory to clarify that
deferral may be appropriate in such
Examples included:
for a restorative justice process, which ‘should not be limited to cases
where a community-based disposition is the
to connect a person ‘with services and programs that promote
rehabilitation at the earliest
opportunity’,
the person will ultimately be sentenced to prison. This ‘could have
significant benefits in reducing the risk of re-offending
and improving the
safety of custody’, for example, where ‘it enables a person to
attend drug rehabilitation prior to
serving a prison
the potential
for an offender’s efforts during the deferral period to lead to a shorter
sentence or shorter non-parole period,
even if a prison sentence is unavoidable;
for the new purposes outlined in Chapter 2, such as for medically necessary
treatment or surgery, or to give birth in the
community rather than in
Victoria Legal Aid noted that if
section 83A
is amended to clarify that deferral
can be used if prison is inevitable, judicial officers should be provided with
training that
highlights ‘the importance of informed consent being
obtained from clients before proceeding in this
most roundtable participants also supported this reform, provided that courts
made it clear to the offender that prison
inevitable.
If restorative justice programs are designed in response to
victims’ needs, questions of whether an offender is likely to receive
sentence of imprisonment or not should not determine whether a victim has the
opportunity to engage. ... [R]estorative justice
can offer significant benefits
for victims, including reducing the traumatic effects of crime. From a
victim-centred perspective,
it makes sense to make restorative justice broadly
available to all victims, regardless of the degree of seriousness of the offence
or the likely sentence that the offender will receive.
Submission 8 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice)
was some opposition to this proposed amendment, however. Victim Services,
Support and Reform did not support the suggested reform
because if offending is
serious enough to warrant a prison sentence, it would not be appropriate to
allow the offender to remain
Similarly, No to
Violence emphasised the need for courts to consider ‘any risk posed by an
offender reoffending while on a
deferred sentence, notably for family violence
offences’ and to ‘ensure the safety of the offender’s partner
former partner is
supporting the reform, other stakeholders had concerns about unintended
consequences. Both the Law Institute of Victoria and
a roundtable participant
were concerned that a legislative provision specifying that a court may defer
sentence even if the offence
seriousness justifies a prison sentence may
inadvertently ‘make it too easy to send an offender to prison after
The Council’s view
were persuaded that
section 83A
Sentencing Act
should be amended
to clarify that sentence deferral is permitted even if a prison sentence is
likely or inevitable. This is particularly
important given our earlier
recommendations for new purposes of deferral that envisage its use in situations
where the offender is
facing a prison sentence (for example, to allow a person
to give birth in the community). Further, courts will retain full discretion
determine whether a sentence deferral is appropriate in a particular case,
including (if Recommendation 7 is implemented) whether
it is in the interests of
justice. This recommendation is intended to augment the court’s
discretion.
suggested amendment will not make sentence deferral available as a matter of
course. On the contrary, an offender will still need
to show the court the
intended purpose of the deferral and (if Recommendation 7 is implemented) why
deferral is in the interests
of justice in the circumstances of the case. It is
likely that courts will continue to exercise a degree of caution in deciding
to defer sentencing in cases where a prison sentence is likely or
inevitable. Further, the considerations where a court is contemplating
punitive sentence may be different from the considerations where the court is
contemplating a therapeutic sentence. The public
interest in rehabilitating an
offender (and thereby protecting the community) must also be balanced with
‘the public interest
in having convicted persons serve their sentence as
practicable’.
a court defers sentencing even though a prison sentence is inevitable, it is
important not to give the offender false hope that
their behaviour during the
deferral period might allow them to avoid a prison
Before the offender
consents to the deferral, it may be appropriate to warn them that a prison
sentence is likely or
inevitable.
the suggested amendment is not intended to imply that a court should more
readily imprison an offender after a sentence deferral.
The principle of
parsimony dictates that imprisonment is a sentence of last resort that must not
be imposed unless a court is satisfied
that the purposes of sentencing cannot be
served by a less severe disposition. This principle is enshrined in the
Sentencing Act
a logical corollary of the right not to be deprived of liberty if there is
‘any less restrictive means reasonably available
to achieve the purpose
that the limitation seeks to
Recommendation 8
That the Government amend
section 83A
Sentencing Act
(Vic) to specify that a court may defer
sentencing even if it considers the seriousness of the offence justifies a
sentence of imprisonment.
The availability of legal aid funding for deferral
consultation revealed that another barrier to the use of sentence deferral was
limited or unclear access to funding for legal
representation at deferral
Stakeholder views
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service (VALS) has previously written that
‘legal aid grants do not cover adjournments, so private
lawyers may be
reluctant to ask that sentencing is
preliminary consultations, we encountered uncertainty among stakeholders about
what aspects of deferral were funded by
Victoria Legal Aid, for example, whether
review hearings were covered. Stakeholders also identified ‘inadequate
legal aid funding
for adjournments’ as a barrier to the use of
Law Institute of Victoria noted that ‘the practical effect of inadequate
funding’ is that if private lawyers aren’t
willing to appear for
free at subsequent deferral hearings, deferral may not be an option for their
clients and therefore ‘legal
aid funding rates must be increased to ensure
lawyers can perform this vital work for legal aid
Centre for Innovative Justice also advocated for legal service providers to
‘be adequately resourced to enable them
to offer holistic services to
their clients’, including funding for ‘multiple court appearances,
[which] is resource
intensive’ and to help clients connect to therapeutic,
rehabilitative and restorative justice services as well as with the
appearance itself.
Legal Aid’s submission set out its current fee structure, noting that it
funds appearances at initial applications
for sentence deferral and at the
sentencing hearing at the end of the deferral (claimable as an appearance on
sentence or adjournment
as per Table A of the
Victoria Legal
Aid also pays a lump sum preparation
It discussed the
‘ongoing and long-term challenges of increasing demand for legal
assistance due to increased investment in
the justice system in recent years
without adequate levels of consequential funding for VLA’, commenting that
while it could
explore ‘[a]dditional fees or different fee structures ...
to encourage increased applications for sentence deferrals in appropriate
cases’, this ‘would require additional funding to support changes to
existing fee
arrangements’.
Similarly, roundtable participants commented that if Victoria Legal Aid is
expected to provide additional funding for deferral hearings,
there should be a
commensurate increase in the funding provided to Victoria Legal Aid, so that the
funding of deferral hearings does
not occur at the expense of other legally
aided services.
The Council’s view
were persuaded by the uncertainty expressed by multiple stakeholders that there
is a need for Victoria Legal Aid to clarify
its existing fee structure in
relation to the funding of deferral hearings, regardless of whether Victoria
Legal Aid increases the
funding available for deferral hearings.
importantly, however, we recommend that Victoria Legal Aid consider whether
there are opportunities to change the fee structure
to ensure that adequate
funding is available to support sentence deferrals in appropriate cases. We
note, however, that without additional
funding, Victoria Legal Aid may not be
able to accommodate extra funding for deferral hearings.
Recommendation 9
That Victoria Legal Aid:
clarify in its
existing fee structure the extent to which sentence deferral applications and
review hearings are funded; and
consider whether
there are opportunities for changes to the fee structure relating to sentence
deferral applications and review hearings.
Other issues affecting the availability and use of
3.49 Stakeholders
identified several other barriers to the availability and use of sentence
deferral, some of which are outside the
scope of this review.
there is insufficient awareness and understanding of sentence deferral among
members of the legal profession. The Law Institute
of Victoria said that this
‘lack of awareness’ results in ‘a failure to identify
instances when a deferral might
be suitable, and in practitioners’
submissions being geared towards the finalisation of
Legal Aid also identified a ‘lack of understanding and awareness of
deferrals as a sentencing option’ noting
that this was ‘a major
driver of the low use of sentence deferrals’, and that this issue
‘cuts across the criminal
justice workforce and includes both
practitioners and the
judiciary’.
Legal Aid said that this lack of awareness results in ‘wide
variation’ in the use of sentence deferrals, for
example, in some cases
they are ‘used to promote therapeutic options and support the assessment
of prospects of rehabilitation’
while ‘in other similar
circumstances, deferrals do not appear to be considered as a potential
Institute of Victoria suggested that this ‘awareness gap ... could be
addressed by targeted education and
[T]the first barrier to the use of sentence deferrals is lack of
awareness that they exist. LIV members report that some judicial
officers and
practitioners appear unaware that sentence deferral is an option.
Submission 10 (Law Institute of Victoria)
there is a perception that judicial officers are under time pressure ‘to
clear the list rather than deferring
sentencing’.
Magistrates’ Court is a high-volume jurisdiction, hearing over 90% of
criminal matters in Victoria. Recent research found
that many magistrates in
Victoria considered administrative and listing pressures to be barriers to using
judicial monitoring under
the availability and effectiveness of sentence deferral hinge on offenders
having access to suitable programs and services.
One of the strongest themes to
emerge in submissions and consultation was the need for better availability (for
example, shorter
of appropriate (for
example, culturally safe)
rehabilitation programs and services (including residential rehabilitation),
particularly in regional
stakeholders identified the need to provide targeted programs and services for
marginalised cohorts. The Australian Multicultural
Foundation advocated for
appropriate treatment and programs for newly arrived migrants and
The Law Institute
of Victoria advocated for programs and services specifically for young people
and for women.
stakeholders emphasised the critical importance of investing in programs and
services that are culturally safe and appropriate
for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people. In our concurrent project on adjourned undertakings,
VALS told us that ‘Aboriginal
specific rehabilitative programs, including
drug and alcohol or behaviour change programs, regularly have limited capacity
waiting times for
admission’.
recommended that long-term funding be provided for community justice reports to
‘increase access to and use of sentence
deferrals for Aboriginal
Australian Community Support Organisation also highlighted the benefit of case
management or coordination-type support, noting
that the effectiveness of
sentence deferrals is ‘vastly diminished’ if recipients ‘are
unable to navigate, access
and engage effectively with supports in the
community’.
address deficits in program availability, stakeholders proposed expanding the
availability of the Court Integrated Services
so that it is
available for the full potential period of sentence deferral (12
it is available in
regional County Court cases;
and it is available in all Magistrates’ Court
3.54 The success
of sentence deferral as a therapeutic option depends on the availability and
accessibility of effective, culturally
safe and appropriate programs and
services, particularly in regional Victoria. More broadly, such programs and
services are critical
to the meaningfulness of rehabilitation as a purpose of
sentencing. Without such programs, offenders with complex needs will continue
churn through the criminal justice system. We support any efforts to improve
access to programs and services, particularly for
marginalised and
over-represented groups in the criminal justice system and in regional Victoria.
[D]eferred sentences are not pursued in rural and regional areas
because of a lack of access to services. This experience is reinforced
and research that demonstrates a limited availability of local community
services and programs compared with metropolitan
areas. For example, our
clients’ experience in rural and remote areas [is] that medical practices
are not taking new patients
and there are long waiting lists for bulk billing
psychologists. In rural and regional areas, we also see instances where sentence
deferrals are accompanied by conditions or the opportunity to engage with
services that people cannot comply with during the period
of the order because
of delays in accessing services. This is particularly common for in demand
services such as Men’s Behavioural
Change Programs. In such cases,
people’s sentences continue to be deferred and they remain engaged with
the court system through
no fault of their own.
The impact of a lack of access to services is that sentence deferrals are
underused, given the increased risk of people remaining
on a court order, with
little support or opportunity to meaningfully demonstrate rehabilitation. In
turn, this can mean people are
deprived of the opportunity to move down the
sentencing hierarchy and can ultimately remain engaged with the criminal justice
in more intensive ways.
Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and
WEstjustice
length of sentence deferral
4.1 This chapter
looks at the current maximum length of sentence deferral and whether it might be
appropriate to extend that length
in certain circumstances.
Should the maximum deferral period increase?
sentence deferral was first introduced in the adult jurisdiction, the maximum
deferral period was six months. The government
increased it to 12 months in
2010, based on our
recommendation.
Consultation
at the time revealed mixed feelings about extending the maximum deferral period,
with stakeholders mindful of the need
to balance timely finalisation of criminal
proceedings with timeframes that allow the purposes of deferral to be
current 12-month maximum in Victoria is the same as the maximum deferral period
in New South Wales, South Australia and the Australian
though in South
Australia a deferral can exceed the 12-month maximum if that timeframe would
prevent the offender from participating
in a relevant intervention
In 2006, the
Australian Law Reform Commission also recommended a 12-month deferral period in
federal cases.
In contrast,
the maximum deferral period is shorter in England and Wales (six months), longer
in Tasmania (two years) and discretionary
in Scotland (‘for a period ...
as the court may
determine’).
is no reliable data about the typical lengths of sentence deferrals in practice.
When asked about the typical deferral period,
participants in our online survey
of practitioners and the judiciary most frequently responded six months (eight
participants), though
answers ranged from one month (one participant) to 12
months (three participants).
our consultation paper, we asked whether there should be any changes to the
12-month maximum length of sentence
Stakeholder views
Stakeholders
generally supported increasing the maximum length of sentence
telling us that the
12-month limit can cause difficulties in cases where programs have long
waitlists and subsequently an offender
has a limited opportunity to demonstrate
their rehabilitative potential before the deferral period has
4.7 Although
most stakeholders agreed that the maximum length should increase, they differed
as to how that should be achieved, or
how long the maximum length should be. Two
main options emerged from submissions:
the maximum deferral period either for all courts or in the higher courts
(allowing a sentence to be deferred for the longer
period from the
an extension in appropriate circumstances by allowing an application for more
time at the end of the initial 12-month deferral
period, functionally mandating
a review hearing before an extension can
Option 1: Increase the maximum length of sentence deferral at
County Court, the Australian Community Support Organisation (ACSO) and the Law
and Advocacy Centre for Women (LACW) supported
a simple increase in the maximum
length of sentence deferral. LACW suggested that deferral periods over 12 months
should be available
‘where it is reasonable’, particularly for
‘people who have trouble accessing services because they live rurally
require services that are in short supply (e.g. residential rehabilitation
facilities that accommodate
children)’.
Court suggested ‘an extension of the deferral period, eg, to 18 months,
particularly to ensure that offenders with
special needs are adequately provided
The County Court
suggested that a longer maximum length of sentence deferral was preferable to an
extension power as ‘allowing
applications for extensions while retaining
the 12-month maximum term may ... cause uncertainty and unexpected delays in
proceedings’.
suggested a 2-year maximum deferral period to:
allow sufficient time for an effective worker-client relationship to be
established, for the participant to gain access to relevant
services and achieve
a level of stabilisation (including in housing and relationships), and for the
court to genuinely assess a participant’s
level of engagement and
prospects of rehabilitation.
Women in the justice system commonly face significant
instability and adversity due to the complexity of gender-specific issues such
as trauma, homelessness and family violence ... As such, a lengthier deferrals
period may also be required for supports to meaningfully
make a change in these
circumstances.
Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women)
Option 2: Retain the current maximum length of sentence
deferral but add an extension power
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service (VALS), the Law Institute of Victoria,
Fitzroy Legal Service and Victoria Legal Aid (endorsed
by Youthlaw and
WEstjustice) supported an extension power. They referred to the need to balance
meaningful participation in a rehabilitation
program with finality of
proceedings.
mentioned the frequent lack of program and service availability, particularly in
regional and rural areas. While acknowledging
that ‘an extension of the
deferral may be appropriate in some limited cases’, VALS commented that
‘the underlying
reasons for a lack of appropriate support services must
also be addressed’. In particular, VALS called for funding ‘to
increase the capacity of Aboriginal organisations to develop, implement and
evaluate culturally safe deferral
the entire period of a sentence deferral cannot exceed 12 months. In our view,
there are benefits in allowing a court to
extend this period, in limited
circumstances and if there are good reasons to do so. ...[P]articularly in rural
and regional areas,
there are instances where sentence deferrals contain
conditions that cannot be complied with during the period of the order because
of delays in accessing services. This is particularly common when conditions
relate to services with high demand and long waiting
lists, such as Men’s
Behaviour Change Programs. This change would promote increased access to
deferrals in such instances.
VLA supports an exception but considers it should
be constructed narrowly and used cautiously. The current 12 month maximum
facilitates
certainty and finality of sentencing proceedings. Delays in
finalising sentencing can be detrimental to everyone involved in the
justice process, including:
● prolonging the victim’s interaction with the criminal
justice system
● exposure of an accused person to the potential consequences of
Victoria’s bail laws for an extended period of time and
the risk of remand
● reducing the ability of the system to provide timely and efficient
Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and
WEstjustice
Law Institute of Victoria advocated for a power to extend a deferral to 18
months ‘in exceptional circumstances to allow
those who may need more time
to engage with rehabilitative services to do so’. Noting that some cases
required additional time
due to the offender’s complex needs, the Law
Institute of Victoria also emphasised the need to ensure ‘that people are
kept in the justice system for no longer than is strictly necessary ... to
minimise the criminogenic impact [of] interaction with
the criminal justice
Legal Service advocated for an exception to the 12-month maximum for offenders
entering residential rehabilitation. A precedent
for this is the equivalent
provision in South Australia, which permits a court to defer sentencing for
longer than the 12-month maximum
if the offender is, or will be, participating
in an intervention program and the court is satisfied that the offender’s
participation
(or agreement to participate) demonstrates ‘a commitment to
addressing the problems out of which their offending arose’
the longer deferral period wasn’t granted, the offender would be prevented
from completing, or participating
in, the intervention program; and their
rehabilitation would be
prejudiced’.
on our consultation and research, we developed a draft recommendation for a new
power for a court to extend a deferral for six
months at a review at the end of
the 12-month deferral period. The County Court, the Law Institute of Victoria
and Emeritus Professor
Arie Freiberg all supported this
recommendation,
as did most
roundtable participants, although some participants had concerns about the
mandatory review. One participant said that,
in their experience, sentence
deferrals usually involve judicial monitoring, so they did not think a mandatory
review after 12 months
was necessary. Another participant raised concerns that a
review may ‘lead to a punitive response ... [if] the offender is
using’, because there remains ‘an expectation of abstinence that is
a deep systemic misunderstanding of treatment
– the greater the engagement
with a person the better the
Court sees merit in the extension mechanism after a 12-month period. Sentence
deferrals in the County Court generally contain
a ‘built-in’
monitoring system that allows a judge to observe progress. This extension power
would be helpful in circumstances
where there are waiting periods for services,
for example.
In the Court’s experience, anything around a 12-month period
(particularly whilst on CISP), is on the long side, but still considers
months maximum as an appropriate length of time for a deferral should the case
require it. The Court notes that it is also important
... that finality in
proceedings is important for all involved.
Email from County Court of Victoria to Sentencing Advisory
Council (26 October 2023)
Relationship between deferral and adjournment
addition to their power to defer sentencing, courts have a general power to
adjourn criminal proceedings as they see
This can be (and has
been) used as a mechanism to achieve an ‘informal deferral’. We
heard, however, that there is sometimes
uncertainty, or at least discomfort,
an offender
has only a few weeks of treatment left but the deferral is about to
therefore considered whether
section 83A
should be amended to clarify that it
does not limit a court’s general power to adjourn proceedings. The
equivalent provision
in South Australia includes such a
clarification.
participants generally supported (and did not oppose) this suggestion.
Similarly, the Law Institute of Victoria, Emeritus
Professor Arie Frieberg and
the County Court supported this
with the County
Court noting that clarification ‘is important and would enable judges to
utilise that power where appropriate,
depending on the circumstances of the
The Council’s view
see merit in enabling sentencing to be deferred for a period longer than 12
months in appropriate cases. In some cases, 12 months
may be insufficient due to
long waiting lists for programs and services, which may delay an
offender’s access to treatment
or support through no fault of their own.
Even with immediate access, a program may go beyond 12 months (for example, a
residential
drug and alcohol rehabilitation
4.18 We do,
however, share the concerns raised by some stakeholders about balancing the need
for finality with the potential value
of a longer deferral period. The community
may benefit in the long term from the offender being provided with more time for
rehabilitation, but this is not the only consideration. The impact of any
additional delay on the victim and the need for finality
of proceedings must
also be considered. We agree that the appropriate policy solution is to enable a
six-month extension of deferral
in appropriate circumstances, which would
require a hearing where the court could check in on the offender’s
progress as well
as the extent of their access of the intended programs and
our consultation on our proposed recommendations, several stakeholders asked
whether the extension power would allow
six-month extensions of
a deferral.
We have reached
the view that a maximum six-month extension period is the most appropriate means
of balancing the various competing
interests. We agree with the County Court
that a maximum deferral period of 18 months (12 months with a six-month
extension) is ‘an
appropriate length of time for a deferral should the
case require it’ and that ‘finality in proceedings is [also]
4.20 Turning
finally to the relationship between sentence deferral and a court’s
general adjournment power, we see merit in
clarifying that the power to defer
sentencing does not limit the power to adjourn matters. There are various
reasons why it may be
necessary and appropriate to adjourn a matter after the
deferral period (even if it was the
deferral period). A court
should not be constrained from adjourning a matter in appropriate circumstances
simply because the offender’s
sentence has previously been deferred.
Recommendation 10
That the Government amend
section 83A
Sentencing Act
permit the court
(on its own motion or on an application) to extend a sentence deferral for an
additional period of up to six months
in appropriate circumstances; and
clarify that
section 83A
does not limit any power that a court has to adjourn
proceedings.
recommendations we didn’t make
5.1 Some of the
issues that we discussed in our consultation paper have not resulted in
recommendations. We consider it important
to explain our reasoning in relation
to these issues, both because stakeholders took the time to provide us with
their insights,
and because it is as important for bodies such as ours to
highlight the recommendations we don’t make as much as the recommendations
5.2 In our view,
good policy recommendations should:
evidence-based;
avoid trying to
‘fix what isn’t broken’ or making changes for the sake of
be capable of
practical implementation (including being supported by the stakeholders whose
buy-in would be critical to implementation);
focus on the
topic at hand, rather than drifting into broader areas.
Should sentence deferral orders have conditions?
Sentencing Act
does not currently allow courts to impose
conditions on offenders whose sentence has been deferred. Instead, the offender
is released
either on bail or on their own undertaking to attend court when
The expectations of
an offender during the deferral period are typically communicated verbally in
court. However, as the Law Institute
of Victoria highlighted in their
submission, deferral commitments are sometimes ordered as conditions of
In contrast, the
equivalent provision in the Australian Capital Territory permits courts to add
‘any condition the court considers
appropriate’ on a sentence
deferral order, taking into account the purposes of the
our 2008 report, we recommended against formal deferral conditions, saying that
we did ‘not support courts being permitted
to impose formal obligations on
the offender as a condition of
Instead, we
concluded that ‘[i]f the court is of the view that conditions are required
to ensure an offender’s compliance
with the order, then in our view it
should proceed straight to
sentencing’.
revisited this issue in our consultation paper, in large part because we were
told that if courts want to formalise deferral requirements,
in some cases they
have to resort to imposing the requirements as bail
conditions.
There is a degree
of tension between the purposes of bail conditions (which focus on reducing the
risk to the community)
the purposes of deferral (which mainly focus on
rehabilitation).
We were also
told that imposing deferral requirements as bail conditions puts people at risk
of being in a ‘reverse onus bail
position’ (i.e. the offender would
need to convince the court to release them) for any indictable offence allegedly
during the period of deferral, which could further entrench them in
the criminal justice system.
In this context, formal deferral conditions were suggested as a pathway away
from incorporating deferral requirements in bail orders,
thereby limiting the
potential consequences of imperfect compliance.
Stakeholder views
Stakeholders
were divided as to whether formal conditions of sentence deferral should be
introduced. Most stakeholders who addressed
this question opposed the
introduction of formal deferral
conditions.
Victoria Legal
Aid, for example, preferred the current approach as ‘sufficient in
balancing the competing priorities of monitoring
compliance, managing risk and
maintaining flexibility’, in part because formal deferral conditions may
over-emphasise compliance
over progress, which ‘can be detrimental as
people’s trajectory through rehabilitation is not linear and may involve
5.7 The Law
Institute of Victoria originally supported deferral conditions due to concerns
there is tension
in the current practice of making deferral commitments conditions of bail
‘because the rehabilitative purpose
underlying sentence deferrals sits
uneasily with the consequences of violating bail conditions, which are
bail conditions ... to impose deferral conditions [may] undermine prospects of
long-term rehabilitation as setbacks can
be punished harshly’;
on verbal communication in court about the court’s expectations of the
offender ‘may be confusing for offenders’
as court hearings
‘can be intimidating and overwhelming, and anything less than a clearly
formulated, recorded set of conditions
creates the potential for
misapprehensions or
miscommunications’.
Law Institute of Victoria supported the introduction of formal deferral
conditions on the proviso that ‘compliance with
deferral conditions is
prohibited from being a condition of
Felicity Gerry KC supported the introduction of deferral conditions on the same
proviso. However, the Law Institute of
Victoria ultimately supported our
decision to not recommend the introduction of formal deferral conditions given
strong stakeholder
opposition and recent bail reform
Emeritus Professor
Arie Freiberg and the County Court also supported this
The Council’s view
were originally of the view, like the Law Institute of Victoria and Professor
Felicity Gerry KC, that it would be useful to
introduce formal deferral
conditions, providing it was clear that the intent was to stop the unnecessary
incorporation of deferral
commitments into bail orders, thus limiting the
potential consequences of imperfect compliance. However, given opposition from
key stakeholders, recent bail reforms, and concerns that formal
conditions would change the nature of deferral to be more like a
order, we were not persuaded that there is a sufficiently strong case for
Should people on deferral have access to justice plans?
our consultation paper, we explored the issue of whether justice plans should be
available for people during sentence
Justice plans are
specialised plans of support services for people with an intellectual disability
(as defined in legislation).
was considerable stakeholder support for extending the availability of justice
plans to offenders on sentence
However, there was
a degree of tension between this support and the lack of support for formal
deferral conditions (see [5.3]–[5.9]),
as conditions are the mechanism by
which justice plans would be attached to sentence deferrals.
agree that there would be benefits to allowing offenders on sentence deferrals
to commence their justice plan
the deferral period. However, we
are mindful of the strong stakeholder feedback that it is inappropriate for a
pre-sentence order
to have formal conditions. As Freiberg and Morgan have
argued, some conditions are more properly imposed as part of a ‘formal
sentence’ rather than as a ‘conditional non-sentence’ such as
a sentence deferral.
the lines between pre-sentence options and sentencing orders risks subjecting
people to disproportionately more onerous
conditions than might have been
appropriate had those same people simply been sentenced. We have therefore not
recommended introducing
justice plans as a condition of sentence deferrals. We
do, though, also note that one of the reasons to defer sentencing is to enable
person’s rehabilitation to be assessed, so deferring sentence to allow a
suitability assessment for a justice plan is already
possible under the current
section 83A.
Should written deferral plans be introduced?
our consultation paper, we also asked whether it might be useful to introduce
some form of written deferral plan, that is, a documented
agreement of what the
person has said they plan to achieve during the deferral
Currently in
Victoria, there is a verbal communication between the court and the offender
are not provided to the offender in a
written document. In comparison, courts in both the Australian Capital Territory
and in England
and Wales must give a copy of the deferral order to the
Stakeholder views
5.14 Stakeholders
were strongly divided on this question.
saw merit in providing offenders with a written deferral plan in appropriate
Their primary argument
was that it would allow an offender to understand and remember their
commitments, and ensure that the offender
and court have a shared understanding
of the purposes of the
Jesuit Social
Services, for instance, emphasised the especial importance of this shared
understanding ‘for people appearing
before the courts who may have an
Acquired Brain Injury, a neurodisability, a developmental language disorder
(DLD) and those who
have English as a second
roundtable participant also said that ‘in the absence of a written
document, [a person] may be confused or not truly [be]
aware of what’s
been agreed to’.
number of stakeholders added that a formal deferral plan would better ensure
‘systems and individual
accountability’,
particularly if there is judicial monitoring along the
5.16 Fitzroy
Legal Service broadly supported written deferral plans, but also said:
we would want to see this measure not only outline the consequences of
non-compliance, but also the means by which people meet the
requirements. An
example of this could be the names and phone numbers of the service providers
that the person is required to engage
with. Similarly, we recommend that the
plan includes the positive consequences of compliance, not just the negative
ramifications
non-compliance.
stakeholders, however, held strong concerns about the risks of introducing
written deferral plans.
primary concern was that written deferral plans would organically function like
quasi-court orders, replacing the therapeutic
intent of sentence deferral with a
compliance mindset. Several roundtable participants were concerned that, despite
the best of intentions,
an offender may fail to successfully engage with the
programs or services and this could inadvertently become an aggravating factor
at sentencing (for example, because it demonstrates reduced rehabilitative
prospects).
Victoria Legal
Aid were concerned that formal deferral plans ‘would reduce the
flexibility of the order and place an emphasis
on compliance and as a result,
the impact of potential breaches’. Victoria Legal Aid explained that this
could be harmful,
especially as offenders can experience setbacks during their
rehabilitation.
Law Institute of Victoria initially supported the introduction of deferral plans
to assist offenders to ‘understand what
is expected of them’.
However, they also cautioned that including details in the plan about the
potential consequences of non-compliance
may ‘translate into a threat of
punishment if an offender is not compliant, which may undermine the
rehabilitative purpose
of sentence
deferrals’.
When we met
with representatives of the Law Institute of Victoria to outline our draft
recommendations, they supported our decision
to not recommend the introduction
of written deferral plans, especially in light of other stakeholders’
The Council’s view
5.19 Overall,
we did not feel there was sufficient support to introduce mandatory written
deferral plans. We note, however, that there
is no legislative barrier to
practitioners and courts developing a written deferral plan in appropriate
cases. Victoria Legal Aid
has a useful precedent letter that is sent to clients
when sentencing has been deferred. This could easily be adapted into a deferral
plan that practitioners could provide to the court when applying for deferral
and amended as necessary if the court agrees to defer
sentencing, with a copy
provided to the offender.
Should the approach to judicial monitoring change?
deferring sentence, courts may set a date (before the deferral end date) for the
offender to reappear for review of the
This is a form of
judicial monitoring, which ‘involves a judicial officer monitoring an
offender’s ... treatment or compliance
via specially listed
At a review
hearing, the court may:
take no further
action (allowing the sentence deferral to continue); or
the sentence deferral and sentence the
our consultation paper, we asked whether there might be scope to improve or
increase the use of judicial monitoring during sentence
there was general support for the use of judicial monitoring in appropriate
cases, stakeholders largely suggested educative
efforts over any law reform, as
well as appropriate resourcing of courts and legal service providers to enable
judicial monitoring
The County Court, for example, described judicial monitoring as ‘an
important part of the deferred sentence scheme’ but
also said it is
already possible under
We witnessed
ourselves the benefits of judicial monitoring during sentence deferrals when the
Magistrates’ Court allowed us
to observe a half day of review
Ultimately,
we reached the view that there is no need for legislative reform. We have
already witnessed an increase in the use of
judicial monitoring over
In addition, the
concept of judicial monitoring applies far more broadly than just sentence
deferrals (for example, for people on
adjourned undertakings or community
correction orders) and any measures to increase or improve the use of judicial
monitoring would
be better considered in its broader context. We have therefore
not made any recommendations about the use of judicial monitoring
for sentence
deferral. We simply reiterate the vital importance of judicial monitoring as a
sentencing tool and note that its continued
expansion requires an increase in
resources for affected agencies.
Should an offender be told the likely sentence after
in the Australian Capital
in Victoria there
is no express requirement for a court to state the penalty it might impose if
the offender does well during their
sentence deferral. There is also no
prohibition on courts doing
In our consultation
paper, we asked whether courts should be expressly permitted or required to tell
the offender the sentence that
they can expect if they successfully engage with
the deferral.
Stakeholder
views were strongly divided.
Social Services, No to Violence and Fitzroy Legal Service all supported a
requirement for courts to specify the sentence that
the offender could expect if
they did (or did not) engage well with their
Jesuit Social
Services and Fitzroy Legal Service emphasised the impact of uncertainty on
offenders with a background of complex trauma.
Fitzroy Legal Service noted that
‘the impact of having an unknown sentence hanging over a person’s
head should not be
underestimated’ and that ‘even clients who are
not at risk of imprisonment are usually highly anxious about this possibility
until their case
finalises’.
contrast, the County Court, Victoria Legal Aid, the Law Institute of Victoria,
the Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service and the Law
and Advocacy Centre for Women
held concerns about a requirement for courts to specify the sentence that the
offender could expect
if they engage with their
These organisations
observed that an offender’s circumstances can change drastically during a
deferral. Offenders may be charged
with other offences that pre-date the
deferral; although such offences don’t constitute non-engagement they can
the sentencing exercise. Or offenders may only partially engage with
deferral but have reasons for their lacklustre engagement.
and contact with the criminal justice process is highly stressful. Often, the
added layer of not knowing what may happen at
court heightens the significant
stress and burden of contact with the justice system that for many people is
compounded by trauma,
adverse life experiences and unstable living circumstances
By clearly communicating what a person can expect as a sentencing outcome
following successful completion of a deferral plan, this
allows individuals to
plan their future, and also may encourage motivation to address deferral plan
conditions.
Submission 3 (Jesuit Social Services)
Requiring a Court to make an express statement to an offender of the
consequences of not engaging on a deferral of sentence may not
be beneficial. It
may effectively constrain the Court in terms of the ultimate sentence the Court
could impose.
A broad range of positive and negative circumstances may occur whilst an
offender is on a deferral. The Court considers that communications
courtroom can equally provide an incentive to participate in the program and set
the expectation without imposing conditions
on the offender to
participate.
Submission 2 (County Court of Victoria)
5.27 Given the
lack of consensus on this issue, including some strong opposition, we were not
persuaded that there was a sufficiently
compelling case to amend the
Sentencing Act
to require courts to specify the sentence that the
offender could expect if they engage well during the deferral period. That said,
we see no legislative barrier to courts specifying the likely sentence in
appropriate cases, even in the absence of legislative reform.
Sentencing after deferral
sentencing an offender after a sentence deferral, the court must have regard to,
among other things, the offender’s behaviour
during the deferral
In our consultation
paper, we asked about the extent to which the principle of proportionality
should come into play, both at the
time of deferral (‘will these
requirements be more onerous than the sentence I might otherwise impose?’)
and at the time
of sentencing (‘have the requirements been so onerous that
they should be reflected in the sentence
imposed?’).
Stakeholders
were keen to emphasise that in having regard to the offender’s behaviour,
courts should ensure that the final sentence
reflects the sum of the
offender’s obligations during the deferral to ensure that the sentence is
proportionate in all the
circumstances, while also ensuring that offenders are
not penalised for mis-steps. The County Court said that while ‘positive
progress’ on deferral ‘could be taken into account ... it may be
counter-intuitive to have a negative impact on an offender
if they do not take
up the opportunity’.
The County Court and Victoria Legal Aid emphasised that, rather than being
viewed as an aggravating factor in the final sentence,
any non-compliance
‘could be more appropriately regarded as an absence of
mitigation’.
the Law Institute of Victoria took the view that the extent of an
offender’s compliance with their deferral should
be ‘reflected in
mitigation in sentencing’ because ‘[c]ompliance with rehabilitative
conditions, some of which
may be quite onerous, is suggestive of genuine remorse
and/or an intention to address problematic behaviour, and this should be
recognised’.
where an offender’s engagement with their deferral fell short, Jesuit
Social Services emphasised the need to understand
the barriers to engagement
‘holistically in the context of each person’s living circumstances
and needs’, noting
that barriers to engagement ‘could include
limited access to services, lengthy waitlists, and experiences of homelessness,
mental health concerns and serious health
experiencing drug and alcohol dependency, the Victorian Alcohol and Drug
Association also emphasised the need to understand
that it ‘is a chronic
relapsing condition’ and ‘[p]eople should not be penalised for not
succeeding in a therapeutic
[alcohol and other drug] related
agree that an offender’s behaviour on deferral should be capable of having
a mitigating effect on any sentence imposed. But
in order to not punish someone
for trying to take an opportunity to rehabilitate, a failure to adequately
engage with deferral requirements
should not be treated as an aggravating
As this approach is
consistent with
section 83A(3)
Sentencing Act
we see no need for
our consultation paper, we also asked whether
section 83A
should be amended to
provide that where an offender had engaged positively with their deferral,
rehabilitation should become the
predominant purpose of
sentencing.
This approach was
suggested during our preliminary consultation and would be consistent with other
sentencing schemes that elevate
particular sentencing purposes in particular
circumstances. This approach also would be consistent with the rehabilitative
of deferral and would acknowledge the requirements on the offender
during the deferral period.
submissions favoured this
For example, the
Victorian Alcohol and Drug Association commented that sentencing ‘should
seek to prioritise rehabilitation
and in doing so, ensure that people have
access to the supports necessary to have the best chance to achieve that
in that context sentence deferrals ‘accompanied by
accessible services, would assist many people and reduce community risk
Victoria Legal Aid said that ‘one of the key purposes of a deferral is to
allow the offender to demonstrate rehabilitation’
but that in their
practice experience, sufficient weight was not always given to rehabilitation,
‘particularly where there
are onerous bail conditions, and a lengthy
period of deferral has been completed’. On this basis, Victoria Legal Aid
a legislative provision that where a person has engaged with their
deferral, ‘rehabilitation becomes the primary purpose of
sentence’, noting that ‘[t]his prioritisation already exists for
children and young people and drug treatment
5.33 There was,
though, also strong opposition. There were significant concerns that a
legislative provision would be inconsistent
with the principles of totality and
proportionality and fetter judicial discretion. The County Court considered
while rehabilitation is an important factor for deferrals of sentence, it may
not necessarily need to be the primary purpose. This
approach may not be in line
with other sentencing principles relevant to the particular offending.
Sentencing Act
makes provision for an offender to make appropriate
submissions to persuade a judge in passing the ultimate sentence that
rehabilitation
should be the primary consideration, leaving the sentencing
discretion unaffected. This approach may be more in line with the overall
sentencing regime, without disrupting the nature of a deferral of sentence being
primarily therapeutic.
5.34 Similarly,
the Law Institute of Victoria said that:
rehabilitation should not become the primary purpose of sentencing in instances
where an offender has engaged positively with the
conditions of their deferred
The LIV considers that doing so would be inappropriate and counterproductive to
established sentencing principles. Facts of individual
cases vary widely, and
there should not be a one size fits all approach to sentencing. Judicial
officers are best placed to consider
all relevant matters under the instinctive
sentencing synthesis in order to determine a suitable sentence in light of
whatever sentencing
purpose is most relevant, be that just punishment,
denunciation, deterrence, or rehabilitation. The LIV further notes that positive
compliance is already a factor that the Court will take into account and to
which it will attribute weight under existing sentencing
principles.
5.35 We agree
with the County Court and the Law Institute of Victoria that amending
to prioritise rehabilitation simply because sentencing has been deferred
would unnecessarily fetter judicial discretion. There is
no evidence to suggest
that courts are not giving due weight to an offender’s rehabilitative
potential after sentence deferral;
indeed, in the vast majority of cases, the
reason that the court has deferred sentencing is to better understand the
rehabilitative potential. Moreover, a significant proportion of
cases involving sentence deferral in the Magistrates’ Court
were family
violence cases (see [1.11]). In many of these cases, it would be inappropriate
to elevate rehabilitation above other
sentencing purposes such as deterrence and
denunciation. Similarly, it would be inappropriate to legislatively prioritise
rehabilitation
as a sentencing purpose due to the increasing use of sentence
deferral in the County Court and our recommendation to extend sentence
to the Supreme Court. For these reasons, we see no cause to interfere with the
ability of courts to appropriately apply
their discretion to balance the
competing purposes of sentencing in
Sentencing Act
taking into account all the circumstances of the
Appendix: Consultation and submissions
Council consulted the following organisations throughout the project, often on
multiple occasions:
Community Support Organisation (ACSO)
Multicultural Foundation
County Court of
Criminal Bar
Association
Department of
Justice and Community Safety (DJCS)
Department of
Fairness, Families and Housing (DFFH)
Federation of
Community Legal Centres
Fitzroy Legal
Forensicare
Jesuit Social
Judicial College
of Victoria
Law and Advocacy
Centre for Women Inc
Law Institute of
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria
Supreme Court of
Representatives
of the Victims of Crime Commissioner
Victoria Legal
Aboriginal Legal Service
are grateful to them for so generously sharing their time and expertise.
3 December 2021
Meeting with County Court
9 December 2021
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
10 December 2021
Meeting with Law Institute of Victoria
14 December 2021
Meeting with County Court
15 December 2021
Meeting with Law Institute of Victoria
16 December 2021
Meeting with Victoria Police
21 December 2021
Meeting with Federation of Community Legal Centres
22 December 2021
Meeting with Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service
17 January 2022
Meeting with Department of Justice and Community Safety
17 January 2021
Meeting with Department of Families, Fairness and Housing
18 January 2022
Meeting with County Court
19 January 2022
Meeting with Victoria Police
19 January 2022
Meeting with Victoria Legal Aid
21 January 2022
Meeting with Office of Public Prosecutions
21 January 2022
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
25 January 2022
Meeting with Criminal Bar Association
15 February 2022
Meeting with Centre for Forensic Behavioural Science
23 February 2022
Magistrates’ Court Observation and Meeting with Magistrates’
30 March 2022
Meeting with Judicial College of Victoria
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
2 September 2022
Meeting with No to Violence
2 September 2022
Meeting with Safe and Equal
5 September 2022
Meeting with Jesuit Social Services
5 September 2022
Meeting with Australian Multicultural Foundation
9 September 2022
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
13 September 2022
Meeting with Australian Community Support Organisation
13 September 2022
Meeting with Victim Services, Support and Reform (a business unit within
the Department of Justice and Community Safety)
13 September 2022
Meeting with Vacro
26 September 2022
Meeting with Fitzroy Legal Service
6 December 2022
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
21 February 2023
Meeting with Department of Families, Fairness and Housing
28 February 2023
Meeting with Law Institute of Victoria
5 June 2023
Meeting with Supreme Court
4 August 2023
Meeting with Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service
10 August 2023
Stakeholder Roundtable: attended by representatives of the Australian
Community Support Organisation (ACSO); RMIT Centre for Innovative
Criminal Bar Association; Jesuit Social Services; Law and Advocacy Centre for
Women Ltd; Victorian Alcohol and Drug Association
(VAADA); Victoria Police;
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service; Victoria Legal Aid, Youthlaw and Professor
Felicity Gerry KC.
22 August 2023
Meeting with representative of the Victims of Crime Commissioner
28 August 2023
Meeting with Emeritus Professor Arie Freiberg
4 September 2023
Meeting with Law Institute of Victoria
10 October 2023
Meeting with representatives of the County Court
Submissions
The Council received the following public
submissions, which we published on our website.
Submission number
Organisation
Victorian Alcohol and Drug Association
County Court of Victoria
Jesuit Social Services
Australian Community Support Organisation
Victoria Legal Aid
No to Violence
Felicity Gerry KC
RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice
Law Institute of Victoria
Fitzroy Legal Service
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service
Law and Advocacy Centre for Women
The Council also received written comments on selective issues from the
Supreme Court of Victoria and the Victims of Crime Commissioner.
Bibliography
Laura, Tricia Scott, Hilary Thomas and Kathy Weston, ‘Pregnancy and
Childbirth in English Prisons: Institutional Ignominy
and the Pains of
Imprisonment’ (2020) 42(3)
Sociology of Health & Illness
Amber Community, ‘Education’ (ambercommunity.org.au, 2024)
<https://ambercommunity.org.au/education/>.
Australian Association for Restorative Justice,
Submission to the
Parliamentary Inquiry into the Victorian Criminal Justice System
(Australian
Association for Restorative Justice, 2021).
Australian Institute of Criminology,
Deaths in Custody in Australia
, Statistical Report 41 (Australian Institute of Criminology,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of
Federal Offenders,
Report 103 (Australian Law Reform Commission, 2006).
Barry, Lisa C., Kathryn B. Adams, Danielle Zaugg and Deborah Noujaim,
‘Health-Care Needs of Older Women Prisoners: Perspectives
Healthcare Workers Who Care for Them’ (2019) 32(2)
Journal of Women
Children of Prisoners Europe,
Keeping Children in Mind: Moving from
‘Child-Blind’ to Child-Friendly Justice During a Parent’s
Criminal Sentencing
(Children of Prisoners Europe, 2019).
Committee on Children and Young People, Parliament of New South Wales,
Support for Children of Imprisoned Parents in New South Wales
(Parliament
of New South Wales, 2022).
Commonwealth of Australia,
Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in
Custody, Final Report
, vol. 1 (Australian Government Publishing Service,
Council of Europe,
Recommendation CM/Rec (2018) 5 of the Committee of
Ministers to Member States Concerning Children with Imprisoned Parents
(Council of Europe, 2018).
County Court of Victoria, ‘Accused Persons Now Have the Ability to
Access the Court’s CISP upon Making a Bail Application,
Bail Variation,
Plea of Guilty or Deferral of Sentence in the County Court’, Media Release
(11 January 2021)
<https://www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/news-and-media/news-listing/2021-01-11-court-integrated-services-program-cisp-pilot-launched>.
County Court of Victoria, ‘Court Integrated Services Program (CISP)
Pilot Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Support’
(countycourt.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/going-court/criminal-division/court-integrated-services-program>.
Department of Justice and Community Safety, Corrections Victoria,
The Victorian Prison System
(Department of Justice and Community Safety,
Douglas, Heather, ‘Legal Systems Abuse and Coercive Control’
Criminology and Criminal Justice
England and Wales Ministry of Justice,
A Smarter Approach to
(England and Wales Ministry of Justice, 2020).
Epstein, Rona, Geraldine Brown and Maria Garcia de Frutos,
Pregnant Women in Prison?
(Coventry University, 2021).
Freiberg, Arie,
Fox and Freiberg’s Sentencing: State and Federal Law
in Victoria
(3rd ed., Thomson Reuters, 2014).
Freiberg, Arie,
Pathways to Justice: Sentencing Review 2002
(Department of Justice, 2002).
Freiberg, Arie and Neil Morgan, ‘Between Bail and Sentence: The
Conflation of Dispositional Options’
(2004) 15(3)
Current Issues in
Criminal Justice
Gerry, Felicity, ‘Deferred Sentences – Used Again but Not Used
Enough’ (2017) 181(21)
Criminal Law and Justice Weekly
Gerry, Felicity and Lyndon Harris,
Women in Prison: Is the Justice System
Fit for Purpose?
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 2016).
Handtke, Violet, Wiebke Bretschneider, Bernice Elger and Tenzin Wangmo,
‘Easily Forgotten: Elderly Female Prisoners’ (2015)
of Aging Studie
Hooper, Carol A.,
Abuse, Interventions and Women in Prison: A Literature
(HM Prison Service, Women’s Estate Policy Unit, 2003).
Human Rights Law Centre, ‘Aboriginal Baby to Stay with Her Mother at
Bandyup Women’s Prison’, Media Release (27
April 2018)
<https://www.hrlc.org.au/news/2018/4/27/aboriginal-baby-to-stay-with-her-mother-at-bandyup-womens-prison>.
Inspector of Custodial Services (WA), ‘The Birth at Bandyup
Women’s Prison in March 2018’, Media Release (12 December
<https://www.oics.wa.gov.au/reports/the-birth-at-bandyup-womens-prison-in-march-2018/>.
Legal and Social Issues Committee, Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into
Children Affected by Parental Incarceration
(Parliament of Victoria, 2022).
McMahon, Marilyn,
No Bail, More Jail? Breaking the Nexus Between Community
Protection and Escalating Pre-Trial Detention
(Parliamentary Library &
Information Service, Department of Parliamentary Services Victoria, 2019).
Minson, Shona,
Safeguarding Children When Sentencing Parents: Information
for Primary Carers Facing Sentencing in a Criminal Court
, Briefing Paper
(University of Oxford and Centre for Criminology, 2018).
Minson, Shona,
Safeguarding Children When Sentencing Parents: Information
for Sentencers
, Briefing Paper (University of Oxford and Centre for
Criminology, 2020).
Minson, Shona, Rebecca Nadin and Jenny Earle,
Sentencing of Mothers:
Improving the Sentencing Process and Outcomes for Women with Dependent Children
– A Discussion Paper
(Prison Reform Trust, 2015).
Mitchell, K. Bryne and Kevin Howells, ‘The Psychological Needs of Women
Prisoners: Implications for Rehabilitation and Management’
(2002) 9(1)
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
Molony, K.P and Lars F. Moller, ‘Good Practice for Mental Health
Programming for Women in Prison: Reframing the Parameters’
(2009) 123(6)
Journal of Public Health
Rémond, Marc, Reem Zeki, Kelly Austin, Julia Bowman, Jennifer
Galousiz, Kelly-Anne Stewart and Elizabeth Sullivan,
Intergenerational
Incarceration in New South Wales: Characteristics of People in Prison
Experiencing Parental Imprisonment
, Trends & Issues in Crime and
Criminal Justice no. 663 (Australian Institute of Criminology, 2023).
RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice,
It’s Healing to Hear Another
Person’s Story and Also To Tell Your Own Story: Report on the CIJ’s
Restorative Justice
Conferencing Pilot Program
(RMIT Centre for Innovative
Justice, 2019).
RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice,
Submission to the Victorian Law Reform
Commission Review on Improving the Justice System Response to Sexual
(RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice, 2021).
Roberts, Julian V., ‘Deferred Sentencing: A Fresh Look at an Old
Concept’ (2022) 3(1)
Criminal Law Review
Safe and Equal,
Submission to the Inquiry into Children Affected by
Parental Incarceration
(Safe and Equal, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reforming Sentence Deferrals in Victoria:
Consultation Paper
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Rethinking Sentencing for Young Adult
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2019).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Family Violence
Intervention Orders and Safety Notices
(Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Personal Safety
Intervention Orders in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Stalking in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Suspended Sentences and Intermediate
Sentencing Orders: Suspended Sentences, Final Report –
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2008).
Sentencing Advisory Council
, Swift, Certain and Fair Approaches to
Sentencing Family Violence Offenders: Discussion Paper
(Sentencing Advisory
Council, 2017).
South Australian Commissioner for Children and Young People,
Dots: Considering the Impact of Parental Incarceration on Children and Young
(South Australian Commissioner for Children and Young People,
State of Victoria, Royal Commission into Family Violence,
Report and Recommendations
(State of Victoria, 2016).
Swan, Pat and Beverley Raphael,
‘Ways Forward’: National
Consultancy Report on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Mental Health
(Australian Government Publishing Service, 1995).
Trood, Michael, Benjamin L. Spivak, Diane Sivasubramaniam and Stephane
Shepherd, ‘Magistrates’ Experiences of Judicial
Supervision in
Mainstream Courts’ (2022) 31(3)
Journal of Judicial Administration
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Addressing Over-Incarceration:
Discussion Paper
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service, 2017).
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service, ‘Community Justice Reports’
(vals.org.au, 2023)
<https://www.vals.org.au/aboriginal-community-justice-reports/>.
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Nuther-mooyoop to the Yoorrook Justice
Commission: Criminal Legal System
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Submission to
Sentencing Act
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service, 2020).
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Submission to Sentencing Advisory
Council’s Consultation on Adjourned Undertakings Reform
Aboriginal Legal Service, 2022).
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Submission to the Commission for
Children and Young People Inquiry: Our Youth, Our Way
(Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service, 2019).
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Submission to the Inquiry into
Children of Imprisoned Parents
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Submission to the Inquiry into
Victoria’s Criminal Justice System
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal
Service, 2021).
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Improving the Justice System Response to
Sexual Offences: Report
(Victorian Law Reform Commission, 2021).
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process
(Victorian Law Reform Commission, 2016).
Victoria Legal Aid,
VLA Handbook for Lawyers
<https://www.handbook.vla.vic.gov.au/>.
Wynne-Jones, Megan, Anthony Hillin, Danielle Byers, Donna Stanley, Vanessa
Edwige and Tom Brideson, ‘Aboriginal Grief and Loss:
A Review of the
Literature’ (2016) 16(3)
Australian Indigenous HealthBulletin
Yoorrook Justice Commission,
Yoorrook for Justice: Report into
Victoria’s Child Protection and Criminal Justice Systems
Yoorrook Justice Commission,
Transcript of Day 8 – Wurrek
(Yoorrook Justice Commission, 2022).
DPP v Evangelistis
[2015] VCC 1192
DPP v Fahal
[2023] VSC 272
DPP v Hampson
[2015] VCC 916
DPP v Mawien
[2018] VCC 565
DPP v Mayoum
[2017] VCC 442
DPP v Rotumah
[2022] VCC 1532
DPP v Schembri
[2019] VCC 1774
DPP v Swift
[2015] VCC 1588
DPP v Tirris
[2022] VCC 1575
DPP v Villis
[2021] VCC 684
DPP v Wharton
[2014] VCC 1844
Guest v DPP
[2020] VSC 218
Inquest into the Passing of Veronica Nelson,
COR 2020 0021 (30 January
McGrath v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 134
[2020] VSC 187
[2013] VSC 48
[2014] VSC 361
[2004] VSC 25
Interstate and overseas
DPP (NSW) v PH
[2022] NSWSC 1245
[2009] NSWCCA 6
R v Edwards
[2011] QCA 331
R v Farrell
[2014] NSWCCA 30
[2014] NSWCCA 263
[2010] ACTSC 64
[2002] NSWCCA 381
R v Rayment
[2010] NSWCCA 85
R v Thompson
[2012] SASCFC 149
[2001] NSWCCA 522
R v Trindall
[2002] NSWCCA 364
R v Wymond & Anor
[2013] SASCFC 12
[2007] ZACC 18
Legislation and regulations
Bail Act 1977
Bail Amendment Act 2023
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Children and Young Persons Act 1989
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing (Amendment) Act 1999
Sentencing Amendment Act 2010
Interstate and overseas
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995
Sentencing Act 2002
Sentencing Act 2017
Sentencing Act 1997
Sentencing Act 2020
Sentencing Act 1995
Convention on the Rights of the Child
opened for signature 20
1989, UNTS 1577
(entered into force 2 September 1990)
United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and
Non-Custodial Measures for Women Offenders,
GA Res 65/229, 3rd Comm, 65th
sess, Agenda Item 105, UN Doc A/65/457 (16 March 2011)
Quasi-legislative materials
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative
Assembly, 16 August 2023 (Anthony Carbines, Minister for Police, Minister for
Crime Prevention, Minister for Racing).
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 2 September
2010 (Rob Hulls, Attorney-General).
Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative Assembly, 22 April 1999
(Rob Hulls, Shadow Attorney-General).
Published by the Sentencing Advisory Council
Melbourne, Victoria,
© Copyright State of Victoria, Sentencing Advisory Council, 2024
This publication is protected by the laws of copyright. No part may
reproduced by any process except in accordance with the provisions
ISBN 978-1-925071-77-1 (Online)
Authorised by the Sentencing Advisory Council,
Level 3, 333 Queen Street,
Melbourne VIC 3000
Copyedited and typeset by Catherine Jeffreys AE.
and Young Persons Act 1989
, repealed by
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
(Vic) s 601. Sentence deferral is now available in the
Children’s Court under
section 414
Children, Youth and Families
(Vic). We did not examine the Children’s Court deferral
(Amendment) Act 1999
Sentencing Amendment Act 2010
Sentence deferral is also available in several other jurisdictions in
Australia and elsewhere: Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reforming Sentence
Deferrals in Victoria: Consultation Paper
(2022) (hereafter
Consultation Paper
Advisory Council,
Suspended Sentences and Intermediate Sentencing Orders:
Suspended Sentences, Final Report –
Victoria, Parliamentary Debates, Legislative Assembly, 22 April 1999, 561 (Rob
Hulls, Shadow Attorney-General).
Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal
Report 103 (2006) 227; Julian V. Roberts, ‘Deferred
Sentencing: A Fresh Look at an Old Concept’ (2022) 3(1)
Criminal Law
210, 211. Participants in our online survey of legal practitioners
and the judiciary also identified rehabilitation-focused purposes
as the most
common reason for sentence deferrals:
Consultation Paper
s 83A(1A)(d).
Consultation Paper
Procedure Act 2009
–(2). Upon adjourning the
proceeding, the court may allow the accused to go at large, remand the accused
in custody, or grant
or extend bail.
Appendix for a list of organisations consulted during the sentence deferrals
example, 23 of the 24 participants in our online survey of the legal profession
and judiciary thought that sentence deferrals
should be more common:
Consultation Paper
13. Several roundtable participants also commented
that sentence deferrals could be more frequently used: Stakeholder Roundtable
(10 August 2023).
limitations in Courtlink mean that while the recorded deferrals are a reliable
sample, some, or many, deferral cases would
not have been captured (see
Consultation Paper
4, 16). Improved recording and collection of data on
sentence deferrals would enable a more exhaustive examination in any future
Consultation Paper
family violence flag is typically transferred from Victoria Police’s LEAP
and indicates that at least one
of the offences in the case occurred in a family violence context. 2016 is the
first full calendar
year for which family violence flags were reliable. This
rate of 35% is more than triple the rate of family violence indicators in
Magistrates’ Court cases (11%): Sentencing Advisory Council
Certain and Fair Approaches to Sentencing Family Violence Offenders: Discussion
Consultation
Consultation Paper
Court of Victoria, ‘Court Integrated Services Program (CISP) Pilot
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Support’
(countycourt.vic.gov.au,
2022); County Court of Victoria, ‘Accused Persons Now Have the Ability to
Access the Court’s
CISP upon Making a Bail Application, Bail Variation,
Plea of Guilty or Deferral of Sentence in the County Court’, Media Release
(11 January 2021).
from County Court of Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (26 October
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9
(Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5 (Victoria
Legal Aid)); Submission 10 (Law
Institute of Victoria); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service).
13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
with Safe and Equal (2 September 2022); Submission 6 (No to Violence);
Consultation Paper
14. The Supreme Court of Victoria noted that the Court
‘is conscious of the impact of delay on victims and weighs this with
relevant factors including community benefits’, citing the following
examples in the context of the adjournment power:
McGrath v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 134
[2014] VSC 361:
Email from Supreme Court
of Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (26 June 2023).
with representative of the Victims of Crime Commissioner (22 August 2023).
3 (Jesuit Social Services); Submission 4 (Australian Community Support
Organisation); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid),
endorsed by Youthlaw and
WEstjustice; Submission 7 (Professor Felicity Gerry KC); Submission 9 (Youthlaw)
(endorsing Submission 5
(Victoria Legal Aid)); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal
Service); Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service); Submission 13 (Law
and Advocacy Centre for Women).
example, stakeholders identified that extending a person’s period on bail
can place that person at enhanced risk of being
remanded if they commit an
indictable offence while on bail and become subject to reverse-onus bail
provisions. The new legislation
narrows the application of the reverse-onus
provisions:
Bail Amendment Act 2023
; Victoria,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 16 August 2023, 2890 (Anthony Carbines,
Minister for Police, Minister for Crime Prevention, Minister for Racing).
13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women).
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service); Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal
8 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice); Submission 10 (Law Institute of
Victoria); Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service). See also
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Submission to
Sentencing Act
of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
These purposes were inserted into the
Sentencing Act
based on our advice from 2008: Sentencing Advisory Council
(2008), above n 3, 274. The New South Wales provision is very similar:
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Advisory Council (2008), above n 3, 274.
for example,
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
s 11(1)(a).
also Australian Law Reform Commission (2006), above n 4, 227; Roberts (2022),
above n 4, 211.
for example,
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
ss 11(1)(a)
ss 29(1)(a)
Sentencing Act 1997
–(b). In England and Wales, sentence deferral is permitted to
allow a court ‘to have regard to the offender’s conduct
conviction ... or any change in the offender’s circumstances’, which
would include consideration of the offender’s
rehabilitative efforts:
Sentencing Act 2020
(UK) s 3(1). See also Australian Law Reform
Commission (2006), above n 4, 227; Roberts (2022), above n 4, 211.
for example,
Sentencing Act 2002
(NZ) s 25(1)(b);
Sentencing Act
(UK) s 3(b).
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Sentencing Act 2017
Sentencing Act 1997
s 57A(2)(d).
Zealand, sentencing can also be deferred ‘to enable inquiries to be made
or to determine the most suitable method of
dealing with the case’:
Sentencing Act 2002
(NZ) s 25(1)(a). See also
Sentencing Act 1995
s 16(1)(a).
And in England and Wales, sentence deferral is permitted to
allow a court ‘to have regard to the offender’s conduct after
conviction ... or any change in the offender’s circumstances’:
Sentencing Act 2020
(UK) s 3(1).
Survey of legal practitioners and the judiciary (February 2022). The most common
purposes were identified as the offender demonstrating
that rehabilitation has
taken place (10 participants), the offender participating in a rehabilitation
program (8 participants) or
the offender having their rehabilitative prospects
assessed (6 participants).
for example, Australian Association for Restorative Justice,
Submission to
the Parliamentary Inquiry into the Victorian Criminal Justice System
1–8; State of Victoria, Royal Commission into Family Violence,
IV: Report and Recommendations
(2016) 135; Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Improving the Justice System Response to Sexual Offences: Report
Law Reform Commission (2021), above n 36, 210–211; Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial Process
(2016) 177; Sentencing Advisory Council (2008), above n 3, 202,
267–269, 275; RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice,
It’s Healing to
Hear Another Person’s Story and Also To Tell Your Own Story: Report on the
CIJ’s Restorative Justice
Conferencing Pilot Program
England and Wales Ministry of Justice,
A Smarter Approach to Sentencing
Advisory Council (2008), above n 3, 275 (Recommendation 13–3).
Consultation
29; Submission 8 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice). See also
Victorian Law Reform Commission (2016), above n 37, 177; RMIT Centre
Innovative Justice,
Submission to the Victorian Law Reform Commission Review
on Improving the Justice System Response to Sexual Offences
Centre for Innovative Justice (2021), above n 39, 24.
3 (Jesuit Social Services); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by
Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 8 (RMIT
Centre for Innovative Justice);
Meeting with Law Institute of Victoria (4 September 2023); Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023); Submission 8 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice);
Meeting with Law Institute of Victoria
(4 September 2023); Meeting with County
Court of Victoria (10 October 2023); Email from County Court of Victoria to
Sentencing Advisory
Council (26 October 2023). Meeting with Professor Arie
Frieberg (28 August 2023).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice.
with Law Institute of Victoria (4 September 2023).
8 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice).
3 (Jesuit Social Services).
8 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice); Email from Victim Services, Support and
Reform to Sentencing Advisory Council (19
December 2022).
from Victim Services, Support and Reform to Sentencing Advisory Council (19
December 2022).
8 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice).
8 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice); Email from Victim Services, Support and
Reform to Sentencing Advisory Council (19
December 2022).
from Victim Services, Support and Reform to Sentencing Advisory Council (19
December 2022).
8 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice).
8 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice).
8 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice).
such program is a road trauma awareness seminar, which is ‘designed to
educate drivers on the potential and actual outcomes
of traffic offences and the
reality of road trauma’: Amber Community, ‘Education’
(ambercommunity.org.au, 2024).
8 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice).
Consultation
of Justice and Community Safety, Corrections Victoria,
Women in the Victorian
Prison System
(2019) 3; Felicity Gerry and Lyndon Harris,
Prison: Is the Justice System Fit for Purpose?
(2016) 3, 8–12; Lisa C.
Barry et al., ‘Health-Care Needs of Older Women Prisoners: Perspectives of
the Healthcare Workers
Who Care for Them’ (2019) 32(2)
Journal of Women
183, 184; England and Wales Ministry of Justice (2020), above n
37, 52, 109; Violet Handtke et al., ‘Easily Forgotten: Elderly
Prisoners’ (2015) 32(1)
Journal of Aging Studies
Submission 7 (Professor Felicity Gerry KC); Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy
Centre for Women); Submission 3 (Jesuit
Social Services); Submission 12
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service), referring to Yoorrook Justice Commission,
Transcript of Day 8 – Wurrek Tyerrang
(2022) 462.
7 (Professor Felicity Gerry KC).
and Harris (2016), above n 59, 8–12; Barry et al. (2019), above n 59, 184;
England and Wales Ministry of Justice (2020),
above n 37, 109; Handtke et al.
(2015), above n 59, 1–2; Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal
Service), citing Yoorrook
Justice Commission,
Transcript of Day 8 –
Wurrek Tyerrang
(2023) 462.
of Justice and Community Safety, Corrections Victoria (2019), above n 59, 5;
Gerry and Harris (2016), above n 59, 8–12;
Barry et al. (2019), above n
59, 184; England and Wales Ministry of Justice (2020), above n 37, 109; Handtke
et al. (2015), above
n 59, 1–2; Submission 7 (Professor Felicity Gerry
KC); Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service), citing Yoorrook
Commission,
Transcript of Day 8 – Wurrek Tyerrang
(2023) 462;
Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women); Submission 3 (Jesuit Social
Services); Submission 10 (Law Institute
of Victoria).
for example, England and Wales Ministry of Justice (2020), above n 37, 12, 36,
38, 52; Submission 7 (Professor Felicity Gerry
KC); Shona Minson et al.,
Sentencing of Mothers: Improving the Sentencing Process and Outcomes for
Women with Dependent Children – A Discussion Paper
(2015) 17; Rona
Epstein et al.,
Why Are Pregnant Women in Prison?
(2021); Roberts (2022),
above n 4, 224.
2 (County Court of Victoria); Submission 3 (Jesuit Social Services); Submission
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw
and WEstjustice; Submission 7
(Professor Felicity Gerry KC); Submission 9 (Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5
(Victoria Legal Aid));
Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service);
Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women); Meeting with Law Institute
Victoria (4 September 2023); Meeting with Emeritus Professor Arie Frieberg (28
August 2023); Email from Victim Services, Support
and Reform to Sentencing
Advisory Council (19 December 2022); Stakeholder Roundtable (10 August
2 (County Court of Victoria).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal
Service), citing Council of Europe,
Recommendation CM/Rec (2018) 5 of the
Committee of Ministers to Member States Concerning Children with Imprisoned
(2018) [10].
2 (County Court of Victoria).
et al. (2015), above n 63, 17. See also Felicity Gerry, ‘Deferred
Sentences – Used Again but Not Used Enough’
(2017) 181(21) Criminal
Law and Justice Weekly 358; Legal and Social Issues Committee, Parliament of
Victoria, Inquiry into Children
Affected by Parental Incarceration (2022)
2 (County Court of Victoria).
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service), citing Council of Europe (2018), above
n 66, [10]; Safe and Equal,
Submission to the Inquiry into Children Affected
by Parental Incarceration
(2022) 13; Submission 7 (Professor Felicity Gerry
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service), citing Council of Europe (2018), above
n 66, [10].
and Equal (2022), above n 70, 13.
with Safe and Equal (2 September 2022).
7 (Professor Felicity Gerry KC).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
for example, Submission 7 (Professor Felicity Gerry KC); Submission 13 (Law and
Advocacy Centre for Women), citing K. P. Moloney
and Lars F. Moller, ‘Good
Practice for Mental Health Programming for Women in Prison: Reframing the
Parameters’ (2009)
Journal of Public Health
431; Mitchell K.
Bryne and Kevin Howells, ‘The Psychological Needs of Women Prisoners:
Implications for Rehabilitation and
Management’
(2002) 9(1)
Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law
Even where a prison sentence is inevitable, courts
have recognised sentence deferral as a mechanism to enable the offender to make
arrangements so that they can maintain attachment with their baby and continue
breastfeeding while in prison:
R v Edwards
[2011] QCA 331
[2001] NSWCCA 522.
See also Carol A. Hooper,
Abuse, Interventions
and Women in Prison: A Literature Review
of Custodial Services (WA), ‘The Birth at Bandyup Women’s Prison in
March 2018’, Media Release (12 December
2018). See also Laura Abbott et
al., ‘Pregnancy and Childbirth in English Prisons: Institutional Ignominy
and the Pains of
Imprisonment’ (2020) 42(3)
Sociology of Health &
Rights Law Centre, ‘Aboriginal Baby to Stay with Her Mother at Bandyup
Women’s Prison’, Media Release (27
April 2018).
Aboriginal Legal Service,
Submission to the Inquiry into Children of
Imprisoned Parents
13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women). See also Submission 7 (Professor
Felicity Gerry KC); Legal and Social Issues Committee
(2022), above n 68; South
Australian Commissioner for Children and Young People,
Join the Dots:
Considering the Impact of Parental Incarceration on Children and Young
(2022); Committee on Children and Young People, Parliament of New
South Wales,
Support for Children of Imprisoned Parents in New South
(2022); Marc Rémond et al.,
Intergenerational Incarceration
in New South Wales: Characteristics of People in Prison Experiencing Parental
Imprisonment
, Trends & Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice no. 663
et al. (2023), above n 80, 1.
Australian Commissioner for Children and Young People (2022), above n 80,
for example, Legal and Social Issues Committee (2022), above n 68; South
Australian Commissioner for Children and Young People
(2022), above n 80;
Committee on Children and Young People (2022), above n 80; Rémond et al.
(2023), above n 80, 1.
(1996) 90 A Crim R 510
Arie Freiberg
Freiberg’s Sentencing: State and Federal Law in Victoria
2014) 420–423;
[2001] NSWCCA 522
(14 December 2001)
and Social Issues Committee (2022), above n 68 (Finding 35).
23–30. See also South Australian Commissioner for Children and Young
People (2022), above n 80, 22–25.
and Social Issues Committee (2022), above n 68, 30.
on Children and Young People (2022), above n 80, 66.
of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Convention on the Rights of the Child
, opened for signature 20 November
1989, UNTS 1577
(ratified in December 1990), Article 6.2. On the application of
this right in a criminal law context, see
[2001] NSWCCA 522
R v Edwards
[2011] QCA 331
Convention on the Rights of the Child
, opened for signature 20 November
1989, UNTS 1577
(ratified in December 1990), Article 24.1.
Convention on the Rights of the Child
, opened for signature 20 November
1989, UNTS 1577
(ratified in December 1990), Article 3.1. On the application of
this right in a criminal law context, see
[2001] NSWCCA 522
R v Edwards
[2011] QCA 331
Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-Custodial Measures
for Women Offenders (‘the Bangkok Rules’)
, GA Res 65/229, UN Doc
A/RES/65/457 (6 October 2010, adopted 21 December 2010), Rule 2.2.
Rule 64. See also Shona Minson,
Safeguarding Children When
Sentencing Parents: Information for Sentencers
, Briefing Paper (2020);
Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service), citing Council of Europe
(2018), above n 66, [10].
of Europe (2018), above n 66, [10], cited in Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service).
intend ‘child’ to include the offender’s child through avenues
such as adoption, foster care, permanent care,
kindship care, and other similar
circumstances.
of Prisoners Europe,
Keeping Children in Mind: Moving from
‘Child-Blind’ to Child-Friendly Justice During a Parent’s
Criminal Sentencing
[2007] ZACC 18
for example, Submission 7 (Professor Felicity Gerry KC); Submission 13 (Law and
Advocacy Centre for Women), citing Moloney and
Moller (2009), above n 76; Bryne
and Howells (2002), above n 76. Even where a prison sentence is inevitable,
courts have recognised
sentence deferral as a mechanism to enable a person to
make arrangements so that they can maintain attachment with their baby and
continue breastfeeding while serving a prison sentence:
R v Edwards
[2011] QCA 331
[2001] NSWCCA 522.
See also Hooper (2003),
above n 76.
borderline imprisonment cases, the UK Prison Reform Trust has recommended a
presumption in favour of deferral to enable an offender
who is the primary or
sole carer of dependent children to demonstrate their ability to comply with
community requirements and remain
in the community with their children: Minson
et al. (2015), above n 63, 17. See also Gerry (2017), above n 68, 358; Legal and
Issues Committee (2022), above n 68, 124.
group of organisations in England and Wales has developed a briefing paper
‘designed to help parents who are awaiting a sentencing
hearing in a
criminal court’ by prompting them to consider information that might
assist the court, such as who will care for
their children if they are
imprisoned, whether any dependent children will need to change school, whether
any dependent children
have particular health or emotional needs, and whether
their children are able to visit them while in prison: Shona Minson,
Safeguarding Children When Sentencing Parents: Information for Primary Carers
Facing Sentencing in a Criminal Court
, Briefing Paper (2018).
for example, Submission 2 (County Court of Victoria) (sentence deferral may
allow offenders ‘to make arrangements, so children
are not further
negatively impacted by a parent or guardian being imprisoned’). The UK
Prison Reform Trust has recommended
a presumption in favour of deferral where a
sole carer is facing a prison sentence, to ‘allow arrangements to be made
children’ which ‘would reduce the trauma commonly
experienced by both mother and children’: Minson et al. (2015),
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023); Email from Law Institute of Victoria to Sentencing
Advisory Council (15 September 2023).
Consultation
DPP v Hampson
[2015] VCC 916
R v Trindall
; Roberts (2022), above n 4, 224; Australian Law Reform Commission
(2006), above n 4, 227.
[2015] VCC 916
Unpublished
sentencing remarks provided to the Council.
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
into the Passing of Veronica Nelson,
COR 2020 0021 (30 January 2023) 305.
See also Yoorrook Justice Commission,
Yoorrook for Justice: Report into
Victoria’s Child Protection and Criminal Justice Systems
(2023) 267;
Pitalev v Russia
(European Court of Human Rights, Fifth Section,
Application No 34393/03, 30 October 2009) [54].
Consultation
for example, Submission 2 (County Court of Victoria); Submission 3 (Jesuit
Social Services); Submission 4 (Australian Community
Support Organisation);
Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice;
Submission 6 (No to Violence); Submission
9 (Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5
(Victoria Legal Aid)); Submission 10 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission 11
(Fitzroy Legal
Service); Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service);
Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women).
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
3 (Jesuit Social Services).
4 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal
Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice;
Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy
Centre for Women).
3 (Jesuit Social Services); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by
Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9 (Youthlaw)
(endorsing Submission 5
(Victoria Legal Aid)); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service); Meeting with Law
Institute of Victoria (4 September
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service).
13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9
(Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5 (Victoria
Legal Aid)).
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
with Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service (4 August 2023).
for example, Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and
WEstjustice; Submission 9 (Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission
5 (Victoria Legal
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9
(Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5 (Victoria
Legal Aid)).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9
(Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5 (Victoria
Legal Aid)).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9
(Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5 (Victoria
Legal Aid)).
for example, Submission 2 (County Court of Victoria); Submission 3 (Jesuit
Social Services); Submission 4 (Australian Community
Support Organisation);
Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice;
Submission 6 (No to Violence); Submission
9 (Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5
(Victoria Legal Aid)); Submission 10 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission 11
(Fitzroy Legal
Service); Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service);
Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women).
Aboriginal Legal Service,
Submission to Sentencing Advisory Council’s
Consultation on Adjourned Undertakings Reform
(2022) 12. See also Victorian
Aboriginal Legal Service,
Nuther-mooyoop to the Yoorrook Justice Commission:
Criminal Legal System
(2022); Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Submission to the Inquiry into Victoria’s Criminal Justice System
(2021); Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Submission to the Commission for
Children and Young People Inquiry: Our Youth, Our Way
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
3 (Jesuit Social Services).
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service); Submission 2 (County Court of
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
Wynne-Jones et al., ‘Aboriginal Grief and Loss: A Review of the
Literature’ (2016) 16(3)
Australian Indigenous HealthBulletin
citing Pat Swan and Beverley Raphael, ‘
Ways Forward’: National
Consultancy Report on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Mental Health
for example,
[2020] VSC 187 (Kaye
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW) v PH
[2022] NSWSC 1245 (Button
of Public Prosecutions (NSW) v PH
[2022] NSWSC 1245 (Button
[2020] VSC 187 (Kaye
with Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service (4 August 2023).
with Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service (4 August 2023).
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service); Meeting with Victorian Aboriginal Legal
Service (4 August 2023). See also
Inquest into the Passing of Veronica
COR 2020 0021 (30 January 2023) 305.
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service). See also Submission 3 (Jesuit Social
Services); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid),
endorsed by Youthlaw and
WEstjustice; Submission 9 (Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5 (Victoria Legal
Aboriginal Legal Service, ‘Community Justice Reports’ (vals.org.au,
2023) (referred to in Submission 3 (Jesuit
Social Services).
3 (Jesuit Social Services); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by
Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9 (Youthlaw).
3 (Jesuit Social Services); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by
Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9 (Youthlaw)
(endorsing Submission 5
(Victoria Legal Aid)); Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service (2023), above n 149.
See also Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service,
Addressing Over-Incarceration:
Discussion Paper
Aboriginal Legal Service (2017), above n 152, 6–7.
Community justice reports are ‘prepared by independent, Aboriginal
community writers and researchers’ who ‘consult
with the offender,
their family and relevant community members (with permission)’. Community
justice reports also include ‘academic
information relevant to the
person’s experience[,] for example, inter-generational trauma and the
impacts of child removal’:
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service (2023),
above n 149.
[2022] VCC 1575
[126]–[129].
ss 83A(2)(c)
Aboriginal Legal Service (2017), above n 152, 6–7.
[2022] VCC 1575
[125], [126]–[129]. The Yoorrook Justice
Commission’s report recommended that the
Sentencing Act
to ‘require courts to take into account the unique systemic and background
factors affecting First Peoples’,
and ‘require the use of
Gladue-style reports for this purpose’: Yoorrook Justice Commission
(2023), above n 117, 37 (Recommendation
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
Commonwealth
of Australia,
Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody, Final
, vol. 1 (1991) [9.1.1].
Institute of Criminology,
Deaths in Custody in Australia 2021–22,
Statistical Report 41 (2022) 7; Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023); Meeting with Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service (4
August 2023).
into the Passing of Veronica Nelson,
COR 2020 0021 (30 January 2023)
into the Passing of Veronica Nelson,
COR 2020 0021 (30 January 2023) 3,
of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
example, Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 2
September 2010, 3600 (Rob Hulls, Attorney-General); Victoria,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 16 August 2023, 2895–2896 (Anthony
Carbines, Minister for Police, Minister for Crime Prevention, Minister
of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
into the Passing of Veronica Nelson,
COR 2020 0021 (30 January 2023)
with Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service (4 August 2023); Email from Victorian
Aboriginal Legal Service to Sentencing Advisory
Council (9 October 2023).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
Consultation
3 (Jesuit Social Services); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by
Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9 (Youthlaw)
(endorsing Submission 5
(Victoria Legal Aid)); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service); Submission 12
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
3 (Jesuit Social Services).
Advisory Council,
Rethinking Sentencing for Young Adult Offenders
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9
(Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5 (Victoria
Legal Aid)). These benefits are
also illustrated in Case Study 1 of our consultation paper (based on
[2014] VCC 1844):
Consultation paper
3 (Jesuit Social Services); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by
Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9 (Youthlaw);
Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal
Service); Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
Advisory Council (2019), above n 173, 1, 65, 73.
9 (Youthlaw).
3 (Jesuit Social Services).
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service).
(1). The need for the offender’s consent is
consistent with case law stating that deferring a sentence without good reason
constitutes
undue delay, which is unfair to the offender and may constitute a
miscarriage of justice:
[2002] NSWCCA 381
[30]. See also
[2014] NSWCCA 263
[2010] ACTSC 64
R v Farrell
[2014] NSWCCA 30
[34], [53].
Advisory Council (2008), above n 3, 274.
Procedure Act 2009
[2020] VSC 218.
[2004] VSC 25
[2]. Although this is a useful example, the wording of
section 83A makes it unlikely that sentence deferral would be used for an
offender who remained in custody.
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 7
(Professor Felicity Gerry KC); Submission 9
(Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5
(Victoria Legal Aid)); Submission 10 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission 11
(Fitzroy Legal
Service); Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women);
Stakeholder Roundtable (10 August 2023).
from Supreme Court of Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (26 June
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice.
6 (No to Violence).
from Supreme Court of Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (26 June 2023);
Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid).
Consultation
from Supreme Court of Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (26 June
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice.
from Supreme Court of Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (26 June 2023),
providing the following examples in the context
of the adjournment power:
McGrath v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 134
the Court of Appeal in
considering the appropriateness of refusing an application for an adjournment
noted there was a legitimate
public interest in seeking to expedite the
finalisation of the plea hearing in order to reduce the stress and distress
which it could
be expected to cause to the family of the deceased victim. In
[2014] VSC 361
the Court adjourned sentencing as a result of
the death of the offender’s father on the day listed for sentence, but
the interest of the deceased victim’s family in having the matter
proceed had been considered’.
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
2 (County Court of Victoria).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9
(Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5 (Victoria
Legal Aid)); Submission 10 (Law
Institute of Victoria); Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
6 (No to Violence).
from Victims of Crime Commissioner to Sentencing Advisory Council (4 August
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
1 (Victorian Alcohol and Drug Association).
from Victims of Crime Commissioner to Sentencing Advisory Council (4 August
2023); Submission 6 (No to Violence).
7 (Professor Felicity Gerry KC); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service);
Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women).
6 (No to Violence).
from Supreme Court of Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (26 June 2023),
providing two cases as examples in the context
of the adjournment power: see
above n 203.
7 (Professor Felicity Gerry KC); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service);
Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women).
13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women).
Advisory Council (2008), above n 3, 274.
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9
(Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5 (Victoria
Legal Aid)).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9
(Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5 (Victoria
Legal Aid)); Submission 11 (Fitzroy
Legal Service); Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service); Submission
13 (Law and Advocacy
Centre for Women).
from Victims of Crime Commissioner to Sentencing Advisory Council (4 August
from Victims of Crime Commissioner to Sentencing Advisory Council (4 August
from Victim Services, Support and Reform to Sentencing Advisory Council (19
December 2022).
from Victim Services, Support and Reform to Sentencing Advisory Council (19
December 2022).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria); Email from Victim Services, Support and Reform
to Sentencing Advisory Council (19 December
2022); Email from County Court of
Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (26 October 2023); Meeting with Emeritus
Professor Arie
Frieberg AM (28 August 2023); Stakeholder Roundtable (10 August
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
from County Court of Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (26 October
with Emeritus Professor Arie Frieberg (28 August 2023).
with Emeritus Professor Arie Frieberg (28 August 2023).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
with Law Institute of Victoria (4 September 2023).
with Law Institute of Victoria (4 September 2023).
for example, Heather Douglas, ‘Legal Systems Abuse and Coercive
Control’ (2017)
Criminology and Criminal Justice
18(1). The article
explores the nexus between family violence victims’ experience of the
legal system and their experience
of coercive control.
Aboriginal Legal Service (2022), above n 136, 55 (Recommendation 22).
for example,
Sentencing Act 1995
Crimes (Sentencing)
[2013] SASCFC
R v Rayment
[2010] NSWCCA 85
[22], [160];
[2009] NSWCCA 6
R v Trindall
[2002] NSWCCA 364
[62], [64].
(Sentencing) Act 2005
DPP v Schembri
[2019] VCC 1774
DPP v Villis
Law Reform Commission (2006), above n 4, 228.
(citation omitted).
Consultation
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
from County Court of Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (26 October
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 8 (RMIT
Centre for Innovative Justice); Submission
9 (Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5
(Victoria Legal Aid)); Submission 10 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission 11
(Fitzroy Legal
Service); Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service);
Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women); Stakeholder Roundtable
August 2023).
8 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice.
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service). Similarly, a roundtable participant said that
sentence deferral can enable medically supported
withdrawal from drug dependency
prior to entering custody, which is likely to be less traumatic and more
effective than ‘withdrawing
in the cells’: Stakeholder Roundtable
(10 August 2023).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice.
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
from Victim Services, Support and Reform to Sentencing Advisory Council (19
December 2022).
6 (No to Violence).
from Law Institute of Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (15 September
2023); Stakeholder Roundtable (10 August 2023).
See further
[2.34]–[2.35].
Mexican States v Cabal
[2001] HCA 60
[2002] NSWCCA 381
[29]–[30]. See also
R v Thompson
[2012] SASCFC 149
(2014), above n 87, 198. See also Australian Law Reform Commission (2006), above
n 4, 228 (citations omitted): ‘a court
should clearly inform an offender
if he or she will be ordered to serve a period of full-time imprisonment when
sentenced’.
of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Consultation
14–15. Note that Sentencing Advisory Council Director Dan
Nicholson, who is also Executive Director of Criminal Law at Victoria
declared a potential conflict of interest in relation to Victoria Legal Aid
funding of deferral hearings and recused himself
from the discussion and
decision-making process in relation to Recommendation 9.
Aboriginal Legal Service (2020), above n 27, 9.
for example, Submission 10 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission 8 (RMIT
Centre for Innovative Justice).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria). The Law Institute of Victoria added that legal
fees can also be a barrier for privately
funded clients who may resist paying a
subsequent day fee for a deferral hearing.
8 (RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice. Victoria Legal
Aid’s fees for summary proceedings are
set out in Table A of the
Handbook for Lawyers
: Victoria Legal Aid, ‘Table A – Fees for
Summary Criminal Proceedings’,
VLA Handbook for Lawyers
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice.
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice.
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice.
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice.
10 (Law Institute of Victoria). See also Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid),
endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice); Submission
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal
Service); Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women).
Aboriginal Legal Service (2020), above n 27, 9; Email from Youthlaw to
Sentencing Advisory Council (15 August 2023).
Trood et al., ‘Magistrates’ Experiences of Judicial Supervision in
Mainstream Courts’ (2022) 31(3)
Journal of Judicial Administration
1 (Victorian Alcohol and Drug Association); Submission 4 (ACSO COATS);
Submission 6 (No to Violence); Submission 12 (Victorian
Aboriginal Legal
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 12
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
2 (County Court of Victoria); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by
Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 10 (Law
Institute of Victoria); Submission
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service); Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre
for Women).
with Australian Multicultural Foundation (5 September 2022).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
Aboriginal Legal Service (2022), above n 136, 12. See also Submission 12
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service); Victorian
Aboriginal Legal Service (2019),
above n 136; Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service (2021), above n 136; Victorian
Aboriginal Legal
Service (2022), above n 136; Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid),
endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 10 (Law Institute
of Victoria);
Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women).
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service). See further [2.49].
4 (Australian Community Support Organisation).
aims to reduce the likelihood of reoffending by addressing offenders’
health and/or social needs and assisting them to
access support services.
2 (County Court of Victoria); Submission 3 (Jesuit Social Services).
2 (County Court of Victoria).
3 (Jesuit Social Services).
Amendment Act 2010
Sentencing Act 1991
; Sentencing Advisory Council (2008), above n 3, 275 (Recommendation
1). These same recommendations had been made six years earlier:
Arie Freiberg,
Pathways to Justice: Sentencing Review 2002
(Recommendation 46).
Advisory Council (2008), above n 3, 269–273.
(Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
Sentencing Act 2017
See further [4.12].
Australian Law Reform Commission commented that a maximum deferral period of 12
months ‘strikes an appropriate balance between
the need for flexibility to
enable a court to achieve individualised justice and the need to avoid excessive
delay in the resolution
of criminal proceedings’: Australian Law Reform
Commission (2006), above n 4, 229.
(UK) s 5(2);
Sentencing Act 1997
Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995
Survey (February 2022).
Consultation
2 (County Court of Victoria); Submission 4 (Australian Community Support
Organisation); Submission 7 (Professor Felicity
Gerry KC); Submission 13 (Law
and Advocacy Centre for Women); Stakeholder Roundtable (10 August 2023).
2 (County Court of Victoria); Submission 4 (Australian Community Support
Organisation); Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy
Centre for Women).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9
(Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5 (Victoria
Legal Aid)); Submission 10 (Law
Institute of Victoria); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service); Submission 12
(Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service).
13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for Women).
2 (County Court of Victoria).
2 (County Court of Victoria).
4 (Australian Community Support Organisation).
12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
with Law Institute of Victoria (4 September 2023); Email from Law Institute of
Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (15
September 2023); Meeting with
Emeritus Professor Arie Frieberg (28 August 2023); Email from County Court of
Victoria to Sentencing
Advisory Council (26 October 2023).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
Procedure Act 2009
–(2). See also [1.5], [3.4].
with Law Institute of Victoria (4 September 2023); Email from Law Institute of
Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (15
September 2023); Meeting with
Emeritus Professor Arie Frieberg (28 August 2023); Email from County Court of
Victoria to Sentencing
Advisory Council (26 October 2023).
from County Court of Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (26 October
for example,
DPP v Wharton
[2014] VCC 1844
, in which the offender was
sentenced at the end of a 16-month residential rehabilitation program, for which
sentencing was deferred.
with Law Institute of Victoria (4 September 2023); Stakeholder Roundtable (10
August 2023).
from County Court of Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (26 October
s 83A(2)(b).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
(Sentencing) Act 2005
Advisory Council (2008), above n 3, 274.
Consultation
; Marilyn McMahon,
No Bail, More Jail? Breaking
the Nexus Between Community Protection and Escalating Pre-Trial Detention
3 (Jesuit Social Services). Since we published our consultation paper,
significant bail reforms have been introduced that
go some way to mitigating
these concerns:
Bail Amendment Act 2023
(Vic) ss 39–41.
4 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal
Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice;
Submission 9 (Youthlaw); Submission
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service); Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice.
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
with Law Institute of Victoria (4 September 2023); Email from Law Institute of
Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council (15
September 2023).
with Emeritus Professor Arie Frieberg (28 August 2023); Email from County Court
of Victoria to Sentencing Advisory Council
(26 October 2023).
Consultation
2 (County Court of Victoria); Submission 4 (Australian Community Support
Organisation); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid),
endorsed by Youthlaw and
WEstjustice; Submission 9 (Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5 (Victoria Legal
Aid)); Submission 12 (Victorian
Aboriginal Legal Service); Submission 13 (Law
and Advocacy Centre for Women). The Australian Law Reform Commission has also
recommended
that justice plans be available during deferral periods: Australian
Law Reform Commission (2006), above n 4, 62.
Freiberg and Neil Morgan, ‘Between Bail and Sentence: The Conflation of
Dispositional Options’
(2004) 15(3)
Current Issues in Criminal
Consultation
(Sentencing) Act 2005
Sentencing Act 2020
2 (County Court of Victoria); Submission 3 (Jesuit Social Services); Submission
6 (No to Violence); Submission 7 (Professor
Felicity Gerry KC); Submission 11
(Fitzroy Legal Service); Stakeholder Roundtable (10 August 2023).
2 (County Court of Victoria); Submission 3 (Jesuit Social Services).
3 (Jesuit Social
. Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
6 (No to Violence).
2 (County Court of Victoria); Submission 7 (Professor Felicity Gerry KC).
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9
(Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5 (Victoria
Legal Aid)); Submission 12
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service); Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for
Stakeholder
Roundtable (10 August 2023).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice.
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
with Law Institute of Victoria (4 September 2023).
et al. (2022), above n 274.
Consultation
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9
(Youthlaw) (endorsing Submission 5 (Victoria
Legal Aid)); Submission 10 (Law
Institute of Victoria); Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service);
Submission 13 (Law and
Advocacy Centre for Women).
2 (County Court of Victoria).
further Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in
Victoria: Consultation Paper
for example, ibid 36–39; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Breaches of Family Violence Intervention Orders and Safety Notices
70–71; Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Breaches of Personal
Safety Intervention Orders in Victoria
(2022) 58–59; Sentencing
Advisory Council,
Sentencing Stalking in Victoria
(Sentencing) Act 2005
for example,
Consultation Paper
DPP v Mayoum
DPP v Mawien
[2018] VCC 565
[21], [30].
Consultation
3 (Jesuit Social Services); Submission 6 (No to Violence); Submission 11
(Fitzroy Legal Service).
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service).
2 (County Court of Victoria); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by
Youthlaw and WEstjustice; Submission 9 (Youthlaw)
(endorsing Submission 5
(Victoria Legal Aid)); Submission 10 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission 12
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal
Service); Submission 13 (Law and Advocacy Centre for
Consultation
55. See further Roberts (2022), above n 4, 217.
2 (County Court of Victoria).
2 (County Court of Victoria). See also Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid),
endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice.
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
3 (Jesuit Social Services).
1 (Victorian Alcohol and Drug Association).
is the approach taken in England and Wales: Roberts (2022), above n 4, 222.
Consultation
1 (Victorian Alcohol and Drug Association); Submission 3 (Jesuit Social
Services); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed
by Youthlaw and
WEstjustice; Submission 7 (Professor Felicity Gerry KC); Submission 9 (Youthlaw)
(endorsing Submission 5 (Victoria
Legal Aid)); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal
Service); Submission 12 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service); Submission 13 (Law
and Advocacy
Centre for Women).
1 (Victorian Alcohol and Drug Association).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid), endorsed by Youthlaw and WEstjustice.
2 (County Court of Victoria).
10 (Law Institute of Victoria).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (0.986 MB)
PDF format (2.58 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter