URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2025/693.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re Cassar Family Trust [2025] VSC 693 (12 November 2025)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
TRUSTS, EQUITY AND PROBATE LIST
S ECI 2025 01930
ACN 663 642 046 PTY LTD (ACN 663 642 046) in its
capacity as trustee of the Cassar Family Trust & ANOR
(according to the
attached Schedule)
MICHAEL ANTHONY CASSAR (in both his personal
capacity and in his capacity of the purposed trustee of the Cassar Family Trust)
(according to the attached Schedule)
Barrett AsJ
DATE OF HEARING
6 November 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT
12 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Re Cassar Family Trust
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VSC 693
FAMILY TRUST – Deceased was appointor of family trust –
Provision in trust deed that, upon the appointor’s death,
appointor’s legal personal representative to become appointor, or if no
legal personal representative, then the trustee
to become appointor –
Power of appointment exercisable by written instrument – Executor granted
probate on basis of forged
will – Previous trustee appointed the executor
as new trustee – Executor purported to exercise powers as trustee –
Probate revoked and alternative legal personal representative appointed by Court
[2022] VSC 126
– Whether executor’s
appointment and actions as trustee valid – Held: Executor’s
appointment as trustee invalid
because no written instrument – Executor
was trustee
de son tort
of trust property with obligations to
beneficiaries but no authority to exercise powers of trustee under the
settlement –
Jasmine Trustees v Wells & Hind
[2008] Ch 194
Actions taken by executor invalid and void –
Plaintiffs entitled to declarations and relief sought.
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiffs
Watson Hughes Lawyers
For the First Defendant
For the Second Defendant
Jacqueline M. Lewis Lawyers
OF CONTENTS
HIS HONOUR:
Introduction
Cassar died on 14 October 2011. He was survived by his partner, Sandra Cassar
’), and their four children, Michael, Paul, Francis
and Teresa.
3 February 2012, the first defendant in this proceeding, Michael Cassar
’), obtained probate of a will dated 24 September
2009 by which he was named sole executor and beneficiary. The estate was
comprised of numerous properties. Between 13 September 2012 and 4 December
2015, Michael transferred many of the estate properties
to himself. The will
was a forgery. Proceedings have already concluded in which declarations as to
forgery, and in relation to
various property transactions, were
Essentially, the validity of
Michael’s actions as executor and beneficiary have been successfully
challenged by reason of
Michael being appointed by a forged will.
current proceeding concerns Michael’s involvement in the Cassar Family
’). The Trust was established by undated deed
’). A property at 371 Fitzroy Street was
transferred to the trustee on 31 May 2002, so it seems the Trust was settled by
at the latest. By the terms of the Trust Deed, Raymond Cassar
’), Frank’s brother, was named trustee and
Frank was named appointor. Clause 16.1 of the Trust Deed provides:
16.1 The Appointor and on the death or resignation of the last surviving
Appointor such other person as the Appointor shall have
appointed to act as
Appointor and on default of such appointment his or her legal personal
representatives shall be entitled by instrument
in writing at any time and from
time to time:
16.1.1 To remove any Trustee hereof
16.1.2 To appoint any additional Trustee or Trustees
16.1.3 To appoint a new Trustee or Trustees in the place of any Trustee who
resigns abandons the appointment or ceases to be a trustee
by operation of law.
16.1.4 If and so long as the Appointor is a General Beneficiary the Appointor
shall not be eligible to be appointed as a Trustee
16.1.5 If there is no Appointor named in the Schedule or if at any time there
is no one entitled to exercise the power of removal
and appointment, the
statutory and other rights of removing and appointing Trustees may be exercised
by the Trustee or by the legal
personal representatives of the last surviving
Trustee or (if the Trustee be a Corporation) the Administrator or the liquidator
the Trustee and in the event that a Trustee shall be removed or cease to act
by reason of any of the matters set out in Clause 16.3
the power to appoint a
new Trustee shall be exercised by majority vote of the Specified Beneficiaries
and if there be a deadlock
that cannot be resolved by mediation by the Settlor
or the Legal Personal Representative of the Settlor as the case shall require.
plaintiffs submit that on 13 September 2012, Raymond purported to retire as
trustee and appoint Michael as trustee, but no instrument
in writing has been
produced. The Trust Deed does not grant the trustee the power to appoint a
replacement trustee save in circumstances
described in cl 16.5. Since his
appointment as trustee, Michael has exercised various powers in relation to the
Trust which give
rise to the relief sought in this proceeding.
Proceedings
9 September 2019, McMillan J made orders restraining Michael from dealing with
the estate or trust property. The orders relevantly
include the
OTHER MATTERS:
inventory also states that at the time of his death, the property known as 371
Fitzroy Street, Fitzroy ... was held on trust for
the deceased by Raymond
September 2012, the property know as 371 Fitzroy Street was transferred to
[Michael] in his capacity as the trustee of the Cassar
Family Trust and the said
property remains registered as such.
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
in his capacity as trustee of the Cassar Family Trust (or in any other capacity)
and his servants and agents be restrained
form selling or further encumbering or
further dealing with any proprietary interest in the property known as 371
Fitzroy Street
... other than by agreement with the defendant or until further
18 March 2022 in
Moore J found that the will dated 24
September 2009 was a forgery, that probate should be revoked, and that letters
of administration
on intestacy should be granted to
Orders were made
accordingly. On 15 July 2022, Moore J declared that the will was a forgery.
11 November 2022, Sandra issued proceeding (S ECI 2022 04625) seeking orders
setting aside transfers of properties and shares made
by Michael in purported
exercise of his powers as executor and trustee under the forged will. On 26
August 2024, Gorton J delivered
reasons for the return of the properties and
shares to the estate.
September 2024, Gorton J declared various transactions void, and made
consequential orders for the return of property and shares
19 August 2022, Michael executed a Deed of Variation of the Trust
Deed of Variation
’) in his purported capacity ‘as
trustee of the trust’ pursuant to the variation power in clause 19 of the
Deed. The operative provision of the Deed of Variation is as follows:
effect from the date of this Deed the Trustee amends the Deed by inserting the
following clause after clause 16.1.5
16.1.6 If the Appointor named in the Schedule has died, the Trustee shall have
the power to appoint an Appointor in substitution
of the legal personal
representative of the Appointor named in the Schedule by instrument in writing
at any time and from time to
19 August 2022, Michael also executed a document headed ‘Exercise of Power
of Appointment of New Appointor’ by which
he purported to exercise the
power of appointment under cl. 16.1.6 to appoint his wife, being second
defendant in this proceeding,
Samantha Jade Barber
’), as appointor of the Trust.
12 July 2024, Sandra, in her capacity as Frank’s legal personal
representative, and by operation of clause 16.1 as appointor,
executed a Deed of
Appointment and Removal. The recitals record the history of the matter
including that Sandra is legal personal
representative and therefore the
appointor of the Trust by the terms of the Trust Deed. The Deed of Appointment
and Removal relevantly
effect from the date of execution of this Deed, pursuant to clause 16.1 of the
Trust Deed, Sandra Cassar, as the legal personal
representative of the deceased,
(a) removes Michael Cassar as the trustee of the Cassar Family Trust;
(b) appoints ACN 663 642 046 Pty Ltd as trustee of the Cassar Family trust.
originating motion filed on 10 April 2025, the plaintiffs seek the following
declarations from the Court:
(a) that Michael’s appointment as trustee of the Trust by Raymond is
(b) that Michael’s Deed of Variation and Deed of Appointment are void and
of no effect;
(c) that Samantha’s appointment as appointor of the Trust is void and of
(d) that Sandra is appointor;
(e) that the appointment of ACN 663 642 046 Pty Ltd as trustee of the Trust is
valid, and that it is the trustee;
(f) the transfer of 371 Fitzroy Street from Raymond to Michael on or about 13
September 2012 is void and of no effect; and
(g) 371 Fitzroy Street is held on trust for ACN 663 642 046 as trustee of the
plaintiffs seek orders:
(a) pursuant to
Trustee Act 1958
vesting assets
of the Trust in the new trustee;
(b) pursuant to
Transfer of Land Act 1958
directing the Registrar of Titles to correct the register regarding 371
Fitzroy Street;
(c) that Michael file and serve a true and just account of his administration of
(d) that Michael deliver up all documents and records in his possession, custody
or control relating to the assets and affairs of
the Trust; and
(e) that Michael pay the costs of the proceeding.
plaintiffs rely on the affidavit of Nicholas Simon Hughes sworn on 30 May 2025
and 5 November 2025 and written submissions filed
on 17 October 2025 and
5 November 2025.
did not appear at the hearing. Samantha appeared by her legal representative
and indicated that she did not resist the orders
sought. The plaintiffs
indicated that they would not seek costs from her without giving her notice. On
that basis, Samanatha was
excused from further attending the hearing.
Consideration
Michael become Trustee?
16.1 of the Trust Deed grants the power of appointment to:
(a) the appointor named in the schedule, being Frank; or
(b) such person as the appointor appointed during his lifetime; or
(c) if the named appointor has died, then to the appointor’s personal
legal representative; or
(d) if there is no one entitled to exercise the power of appointment, the
trustee or the legal personal representatives of the last
trustee (cl 16.5).
16.1 also requires that the power of appointment be exercised ‘by
instrument in writing’.
Mr Hughes’ affidavit sworn on 30 May 2025, he deposes that on 13 September
2012, Raymond ‘purportedly retired as trustee
... and appointed Michael
as trustee...’
The plaintiffs’ submissions contain a similar statement. It is
unclear what this is based on, but as discussed below, it
does not appear there
is any written evidence of such retirement and appointment. Michael has not
appeared nor adduced any such
evidence in this proceeding.
to the Trust Deed’s terms, Raymond can only have had the power to appoint
Michael as trustee if Frank appointed Raymond
as appointor during his lifetime,
or if there was no one else entitled to exercise the power of appointment at the
time of the exercise
of that power. In this case, there is no evidence that
Frank appointed Raymond as appointor during his lifetime, so there is no
to conclude that he had such a power for that reason.
Michael’s appointment as executor was based on a forged will, and was
therefore invalid, then on 13 September 2012, there
was no one entitled to
exercise the power of appointment because: Frank was deceased; he had not
appointed anyone else during his
lifetime; and there was no validly appointed
legal personal representative. In those circumstances, by operation of cl
16.1.5, Raymond,
as trustee, held the power of appointment at 13 September 2012.
However, by the terms of the Trust Deed, that power had to be exercised
instrument in writing. In this case, there is no evidence that he did so. On 5
November 2025, Sandra, as Frank’s legal
personal representative, executed
a Deed of Removal in which it is recited that Raymond purportedly resigned and
appointed Michael
as trustee of the Trust on 13 September 2022. However, the
Deed of Removal goes on to say that the trustee has not been able to
written instrument to that effect. In those circumstances, I am not satisfied
that Michael was validly appointed as trustee
of the Trust.
that is correct, then Michael did not become trustee of the settlement, and so
was not entitled to exercise any powers granted
to the trustee of the
settlement. However, by his de facto control of trust property, he was trustee
de son tort
of that property. In that role, he was subject to the
liabilities of a trustee, that is, he was ‘obliged to hold the property
for, and to account to, the
beneficiaries.’
Michael Validly Vary the Deed and Appoint Samantha as
he was not validly appointed as trustee, Michael could not validly exercise any
power to execute the Deed of Variation, and accordingly,
Michael’s actions
in purporting to do so were void and of no effect. Consequently, Michael had no
power to appoint Samantha
as appointor as the exercise of that power was based
on the invalid execution of the Deed of Variation to the Trust Deed.
371 Fitzroy Street Validly Transferred to Michael?
Michael was not validly appointed as trustee, the property at 371 Fitzroy Street
was not validly transferred to him in that capacity.
Cassar v Cassar,
Gorton J discussed the fraud exception to indefeasibility in the context of
the property transfers Michael effected as executor and
found that all the
transfers were fraudulent because they were ‘effected under the auspices
of a grant known to have been obtained
by fraud and were purporting to give
effect to a will that was known to be fraudulent ... Fraud existed at every
Justice Gorton
declared that such transactions were void in circumstances where the purported
power to make such transfers was based
on a forged will, and ordered the
Registrar of Titles to correct the register. I consider that the same rationale
applies in relation
to 371 Fitzroy Street in this case, and that the plaintiffs
are entitled to similar orders and declarations. At the least, Michael
not receive the property in the capacity of trustee of the Trust, as he
purported to, having regard to the invalidity of his
appointment as trustee.
Even if 371 Fitzroy Street was validly transferred to Michael, in the
circumstances, and having regard to
the revocation of probate and change of
trustee, Michael would in no sense be entitled to retain that title.
plaintiffs should confirm that the final form of order is acceptable to the
Registrar of Titles.
Sandra the Appointor and has she Validly Appointed ACN 663 642 046 as
discussed above, the terms of the Trust Deed provide that Frank is the
appointor, and in the event of his death, his legal personal
representative
becomes appointor. Upon Sandra’s appointment as legal personal
representative by orders made on 18 March 2022,
she then became appointor
of the Trust by operation of clause 16.1. In that role, Sandra validly
exercised her power of appointment
to appoint ACN 663 642 046 as trustee of the
those reasons, the plaintiffs are entitled to the declarations and orders
sought. I will hear the plaintiffs as to the precise
form of order
including as to costs. If costs are sought against any of the defendants, they
will have an opportunity to be heard.
SCHEDULE OF PARTIES
S ECI 2025 01930
ACN 663 642 046 PTY LTD (ACN 663 642 046) in its capacity as trustee of the
Cassar Family Trust
First Plaintiff
SANDRA ANNE CASSAR
Second Plaintiff
MICHAEL ANTHONY CASSAR (in both his personal capacity and in his capacity
of the purposed trustee of the Cassar Family Trust)
First Defendant
SAMANTHA JADE BARBER
Second Defendant
REGISTRAR OF TITLES
Third Defendant
Cassar v Cassar (Preliminary Questions)
[2024] VSC 502
Cassar v Cassar
Cassar v Cassar
Affidavit of Nicholas Simon
Hughes sworn on 30 May 2025, [22].
Jasmine Ltd v Wells &
[2007] EWHC 38 (Ch)
; [2008] Ch 194. [42].
Cassar v Cassar
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (282 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter