URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2006/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:35:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
07-053 [2006] VMHRB 8 (18 October 2006)
In the review of P
An involuntary patient at
Community Mental Health Clinic
[2006] VMHRB
Date of Hearing:
18 October 2006
Board Members
Dr A Cidoni
Ms V McCutcheon
Involuntary patient –
Mental Health Act 1986
(1)(c) – protection of members of the public– distress caused to
On 12 July 2006, a single member Board conducted an annual review and a
review of the extension of P’s community treatment order,
the current term
of which is for 12 months from 14 June 2006. P did not attend the hearing, but
the Board determined that the criteria
section 8(1)
of the Act were met, and
ordered an early review before a full Board in three months to allow for a
further review of P’s medical
condition and treatment, and whether the
criteria for involuntary status were satisfied. At the current hearing, P again
Report on Involuntary Status
, P had been diagnosed with
schizophrenia, after her first contact with mental health services in 1997 when
she overdosed with temazepam.
This followed the unexpected accidental death of
her husband.
Dr GP explained that, during the four years that the clinic has been involved
in P’s care, she was discharged from the community
treatment order and, by
agreement, voluntarily treated by her general practitioner with advice to trial
her off medication once a
consistent stable period on oral medication had
elapsed. The general practitioner followed this advice, took her off the
medication,
and unfortunately P became unwell and went missing for several
weeks. She was eventually found interstate. This incident created
significant
trauma for her children at the time, and has continued to affect their mental
state. It has been reported to him that
the children have ongoing mental health
problems which are attributed to their mother’s disappearance, and that
they are receiving
counselling, according to the case manager, JC. The
community treatment order has largely been in place to reassure the family that
P will receive ongoing treatment.
Dr GP stated that P is happy with her current treatment, but conceded his
view that she did not have full insight, and was not keen
on the depot
injection. However, he explained in some detail why he was uncomfortable about
the community treatment order. In his
view, there was no evidence that
compliance was ever an issue with P, although there was some difficulty in the
past caused by passive
non-compliance resulting from negative symptoms, which
clearly heightened the concerns of the case manager and family. He had offered
to discuss these issues with the family, and had invited JC and the family to
attend the hearing to discuss the impact of the past
situation with the
In summary, in relation to the concern expressed by the case manager and
P’s family, Dr GP put to the Board that he was unclear
in his own mind
essentially to protect non-resident children
from possible non-physical harm.
(1) The Board noted that there was uncontradicted medical evidence supporting
the fact that P has suffered from a psychotic illness,
diagnosed as
schizophrenia, since 1997, with several significant relapses and
hospitalisations. The Board was satisfied that P suffers
from a mental illness
characterised by a significant disturbance of thought and mood, currently well
controlled on a combination
of antipsychotic medications. This criterion was
therefore met.
(2) The Board was satisfied that the clinic is currently providing P with
effective treatment in the form of depot and oral medications,
close monitoring
by the case manager and liaison with family and P’s general practitioner.
Notwithstanding the improvement
in her positive symptoms, the Board was
satisfied that P’s illness requires consistent, assertive and ongoing
treatment to
prevent any further relapses. This criterion was therefore
(3) The Board was satisfied from the clear evidence provided by the treating
team that the major risk issues in respect of P relate
to her own physical and
mental health, in that her capacity for self care deteriorates significantly in
the event of a deterioration
in the effectiveness of her mental health treatment
regime. The several most recent relapses have exposed P to significant
vulnerability
both from lack of self care and, in one case, P travelling
interstate without proper planning and without her family being aware
whereabouts. This criterion was, in the Board’s view, therefore met,
irrespective of any other considerations.
(4) Essentially, this Board agreed with the principles, analysis and test
enunciated by the Board in
Re the review of MW
(1987) 1 MHRBD (Vic) 14 at
17. In applying those principles and test to the legitimate concerns expressed
by JC in respect of the
past actions of P in going missing and interstate
without the family’s knowledge during a psychotic relapse, the Board noted
that P’s actions were in no way deliberate or volitional, but resulted
directly from the effects of the relapse of her illness.
It is entirely unclear
whether such a situation could or would repeat itself, and if it did, whether it
would have a similar effect
on the children now that they are considerably
older. That they have had ongoing difficulties is, to say the least,
unfortunate,
but to require P to remain on an involuntary order for an extended
period in the absence of any opposition or ambivalence on P’s
continued treatment as prescribed and provided by the treating team, in this
Board’s view, is unjustifiable.
(5) Further, unlike most of the examples cited by the Board in
this instance, P is not, and has not been for a number of years, the sole or
primary caregiver of the children. Clearly, therefore,
it is more difficult to
sustain the argument that the effects of P’s mental illness can satisfy
test. Notwithstanding the psychological impact of a past event,
there is no evidence that P is currently engaging, or has recently
engaged, in
conduct, or represents such a burden to care for, that significant injury is
likely to the children.
accepts the possibility of significant
impairment of mental health alone as a risk that would give rise to
being met. However, this Board considers that the conduct or burden of care
would have to be continuing at such a level as to sustain
the harm to the
children. There is no evidence of such continuing conduct or burden of care in
(6) Whilst the Board can understand the continuing concerns that the children
may in the future again suffer psychological trauma
similar to that experienced
during a previous psychotic relapse, there is no evidence of current or imminent
risk of the repetition
of such an event. At best, those concerns involve an
indirect and contingent harm that may, and hopefully will, never occur. In
Board’s view, such a historical risk cannot satisfy the
the circumstances of P’s and her children’s situation.
(7) Therefore, accepting
analysis that, to satisfy the
"protection of members of the public" requirement found in
section 8(1)(c)
is necessary is that there be a significant impairment of mental or physical
health, which may be of a permanent or temporary
nature, the Board found that,
in this case, particularly given the current care and residence arrangements of
the children, there
is no evidence of continuing conduct by P that could be
implicated in any ongoing impairment of the children’s mental health,
indeed any evidence that P is likely in the foreseeable future to avoid
treatment for her mental illness in circumstances that
would be likely to lead
to a similar deterioration in her mental state and consequential actions that
might cause similar effects
on the children.
(8) In all the circumstances, and taking into account the evidence that P has
never refused treatment, or on her own volition failed
to comply with it, it
appeared to the Board that P has sufficient understanding of her illness and
commitment to the treatment program
to be able to provide an informed consent to
continuing that treatment. This criterion was therefore not met.
Review of involuntary status – The Board found the continued treatment
of P as an involuntary patient was not necessary.
P was unrepresented
Date of Decision:
18 October 2006
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
Clarendon Community Mental Health Clinic
HEARING NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
18 October 2006
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER REVIEW:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: Mr J Lesser
Community Member: Ms V McCutcheon
Psychiatrist Member: Dr A Cidoni
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 18 October 2006:
Doctor: Dr GP (by conference telephone)
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was not satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order was
The Board therefore discharged P from the community treatment order.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
18 October 2006
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P was discharged from the community treatment order. Therefore P ceases
to be an involuntary patient.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
on Involuntary Status dated 6 September 2006 prepared by Dr DK and presented to
Plan of P dated 8 July 2006, prepared by case manager, JC and presented to the
4. Oral evidence at the hearing.
, if the Board is satisfied that a person subject to a community
treatment order does not satisfy the criteria specified in
, the Board must
discharge the person from the community treatment order. Therefore, the Board
considered:
P appear to be mentally ill; and
P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P subject to a
community treatment order necessary for her health
or safety (whether to prevent
a deterioration in her physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the
protection of members
of the public; and
P refused or is she unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of her freedom of decision and action?
, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
DISCUSSION:
On 12 July 2006, a single member Board conducted an
annual review and a review of the extension of P’s community treatment
the current term of which is for 12 months from 14 June 2006. P did not
attend the hearing, but the Board determined that the criteria
section 8(1)
were met, and ordered an early review before a full Board in three
months. Explaining the reason for the early review order, the
Board provided
the following guidance to the full Board:
“ - the consultant psychiatrist to further review P’s medical
condition and treatment, with particular attention being given to whether the
criteria for involuntary treatment are satisfied,
- a full Board, so as to enable the psychiatrist member to assess P’s
mental state etc, (and)
- P to attend”.
At the hearing on 18 October 2006, P chose not to attend the hearing. Dr GP,
P’s consultant psychiatrist, attended on behalf
of the clinic.
Evidence of the treating team
Report on Involuntary Status
been diagnosed with schizophrenia, after her first contact with mental health
services in 1997 when she overdosed with temazepam.
This followed the
unexpected accidental death of her husband. She reportedly had been unwell for
some months prior to the incident.
After the death of her husband, P’s
ability to cope with her children’s needs decreased significantly and her
psychotic symptoms dramatically increased. Dr DK noted that “her
disorganised behaviour and ill planned travelling in the
past have significant
impact on mental health of her children”. This was later amplified as
“Two of her children already have significant mental health issues as a
result of her disorganised, unpredictable and odd behaviour”.
In summary, the report described P’s current mental state as symptom
free, and her mood within the normal range, but noted that
she has “poor
insight into her condition and significantly impaired judgement. P requires
prompting with personal hygiene
and a great deal of incoaragment (sic) with
day-to-day living activities”. P’s current treatment was described
as antipsychotic
medication in the form of a two weekly injection and tablets
nightly, follow-up by the clinic and ongoing psychoeducation and support
improve function.
Turning to risk issues, the report noted “a past history of suicidal
attempt when psychotic” and “paranoid ideations
and delusions
involving her family”. Dr DK’s view was that P is not capable of
giving informed consent to treatment
as “patient has little insight into
her illness and needs for medications”.
In relation to treatment in a less restrictive manner, P’s social
circumstances were described as “patient lives alone
in her house.
Children have been in the care of her sister for last 8 years. Her money
managed by an Administrator”. P’s
attitude to treatment was
described as “at the present patient is cooperative with the
treatment”. Supports were described
as “Case manager has been
appointed who is involved in her care. She also has a housekeeper who addresses
her day-to-day needs
and help her with personal hydiene (sic)”. The basis
for continued involuntary treatment was summarised as follows:
“I believe that less restrictive treatment would result in non
compliance with medication and relapse”
At the hearing, Dr GP explained that the early review resulted from his
discussion with the Board member during the July hearing and
the fact that he
had known P for approximately 12 months only. He confirmed the history
described in the medical report, particularly
the need for the children to be
cared for by other family members since P’s first psychotic breakdown
following the death of
her husband, from which there has been no full
However, Dr GP further explained that, during the four years that the clinic
has been involved in her care, she was discharged from
the community treatment
order and, by agreement, voluntarily treated by her general practitioner with
advice to trial her off medication
once a consistent stable period on oral
medication had elapsed. The general practitioner followed this advice, took her
medication, and unfortunately P became unwell and went missing for
several weeks. She was eventually found interstate. This incident
significant trauma for her children at the time, and has continued to affect
their mental state. It has been reported to
him that the children have ongoing
mental health problems which are attributed to their mother’s
disappearance, and that they
are receiving counselling, according to the case
manager, JC. The community treatment order has largely been in place to
the family that P will receive ongoing treatment.
Dr GP described P’s current medical picture in terms of ongoing
negative symptoms that reduce her capacity for self care. This
required an
admission last year, partly to arrange for her house to be cleaned. Since then,
a full-time housekeeper has been appointed
to maintain and assist P.
Dr GP stated that P is happy with her current treatment, but conceded his
view that she did not have full insight, and was not keen
on the depot
injection. However, he explained in some detail why he was uncomfortable about
the community treatment order. In his
view, there was no evidence that
compliance was ever an issue with P, although there was some difficulty in the
past caused by passive
non-compliance resulting from negative symptoms, which
clearly heightened the concerns of the case manager and family. He had offered
to discuss these issues with the family, and had invited JC and the family to
attend the hearing to discuss the impact of the past
situation with the
Dr GP went on to explain that, without the community treatment order, he
would expect P’s case to be handed over to the general
practitioner and
that P would remain on long-term treatment. The underlying picture of her
mental illness is much clearer now than
in the past, so hopefully a repetition
of the problems that occurred can be avoided. P is happy to go along with the
recommendations. Dr GP reinforced that JC is still concerned,
particularly about the mental health of the children, who are now
16, 14 and 10
years old. Whilst they have regular contact with their mother, who visits and
spends time with them, he was aware
that on occasions it has been a difficult
social interaction with the children. However, except on one occasion, which
one daughter, P denied ever threatening or harming the children.
In answer to specific questions from the Board, Dr GP stated that the last
positive symptoms of schizophrenia involved active delusions
in 2001, since when
they have been held by the medication over a period of years. Self-neglect last
year was the most recent sign
of the impact of the illness, although there was
evidence of cognitive damage and residual negative symptoms. Most recently, the
bulk of the treatment has been provided by the clinic, rather than the general
practitioner, although any handover would be gradual.
Dr GP conceded that
conceded that there appeared to be
an innate anxiety that has resulted from the
trauma caused by P’s disappearance when she last became significantly
In summary, in relation to the concern expressed by the case manager and
P’s family, Dr GP put to the Board that he was unclear
in his own mind
essentially to protect non-resident children
from possible non-physical harm.
Other evidence
In P’s clinical files, there were numerous
of at the hearing. In several instances, there was also advice to the
family about the Board hearing, and the possibility that the
Board may decide to
discharge P from the community treatment order. There did not appear to be any
specific reference in the notes
to discussion about the family attending the
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board considered the exclusionary criteria in
and decided that
these were not relevant in this case.
The Board noted that there was uncontradicted medical evidence supporting the
fact that P has suffered from a psychotic illness, diagnosed
as schizophrenia,
since 1997, with several significant relapses and hospitalisations. The Board
was satisfied that P suffers from
a mental illness characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought and mood, currently well controlled on a
combination of antipsychotic
medications. This criterion was therefore met.
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
The Board was satisfied that the clinic is currently providing P with
effective treatment in the form of depot and oral medications,
close monitoring
by the case manager and liaison with family and P’s general practitioner.
Notwithstanding the improvement
in her positive symptoms, the Board was
satisfied that P’s illness requires consistent, assertive and ongoing
treatment to
prevent any further relapses. This criterion was therefore
Because of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment
of P subject to a community treatment order necessary for her health
(whether to prevent a deterioration in her physical or mental condition or
otherwise) or for the protection of members
of the public?
Dr GP made it clear to the Board that he personally had significant concerns
treatment order in
P’s case, notwithstanding the legitimate concerns expressed by JC and the
family about P’s continued
well-being and that of the mental health of her
children. He sought to involve the Board in determining whether the criterion
respect of “for the protection of members of the public” included
the notion of protecting P’s children’s
mental health from anxiety
that appears to have affected them for several years since P went missing during
a psychotic relapse.
Before specifically turning to that issue, the Board was satisfied from the
clear evidence provided by the treating team that the
major risk issues in
respect of P relate to her own physical and mental health, in that her capacity
for self care deteriorates significantly
in the event of a deterioration in the
effectiveness of her mental health treatment regime. The several most recent
relapses have
exposed P to significant vulnerability both from lack of self care
and, in one case, P travelling interstate without proper planning
and without
her family being aware of her whereabouts. This criterion was, in the
Board’s view, therefore met, irrespective
of any other considerations.
Historically, the Board has formulated a number of tests around criterion
8(1)(c). One relates specifically to the risk of non-compliance
with treatment
by a patient. In
Re the review of MF
(1993) 2 MHRBD (Vic) 81, the Board
stated that a substantial risk of non-compliance has to be shown before
criterion 8(1)(c) is met.
The Board said:
“Firstly non-compliance must be shown to be likely from the
patient’s immediate past record of treatment or an established
non-compliance.
Secondly, the risk of non-compliance must not be too remote. For example, a
stated intention to cease medication some time in the
future would be too remote
to constitute a present risk.
Finally, even if there is a substantial risk of non-compliance, in order for
the criterion to be fulfilled, it must be established
that the consequences of
non-compliance must be significant, in that it has been demonstrated, on a
present admission or in the past,
that if the patient does not receive the
proposed treatment his or her condition will significantly
deteriorate.”
Based on Dr GP’s analysis of past events, which appeared to be fairly
presented, the Board could not be satisfied that P of
her own volition had at
any time ceased medication or treatment in such a way as to suggest that she had
been non-compliant, or that,
in the future, she was reasonably likely to be
non-compliant. The major relapse that has presented the family with such
considerable
subsequent challenges occurred within a planned handover
arrangement with the general practitioner and subject to the advice of the
treating team. The fact that it was unsuccessful is very unfortunate but, as Dr
GP conceded, has clarified the significance of P’s
schizophrenia and
informed in a very real way the future requirements for ongoing and assertive
Previous Case Law
Turning specifically to the Dr GP’s
submission, the Board reviewed the previous case law. In
Re the review of MW
(1987) 1 MHRBD (Vic) 14 at 17, the Board considered the meaning of the
phrase “protection of members of the public” at
some length. In
part, it stated:
“In the review of
case the critical issue was the meaning
of the phrase "protection of members of the public" which occurs in
provides no definition of the phrase and as far as
the Board is aware there has been no definition of that phrase in any reported
decision on a similar provision in other jurisdictions.
Mr Proctor who appeared for
before the Board submitted that the
Board should only be satisfied that there was a need for "protection of members
of the public"
if as a result of mental illness, there was a real risk that a
person would become a danger to members of the public. In developing
submission Mr Proctor drew the Board's attention to various passages in Hansard
where the need to protect the community was
debated within the context of the
Mental Health Bills (see Assembly, 30 May 1985, p. 71 and 73; Assembly, 28
November 1985, p. 2611
- 12; Assembly, 18 March 1986, p. 327-28; Assembly, 19
March 1986 p. 399). He also relied on para. 5.7 of the Report of the
Consultative
Council on Review of Mental Health Legislation, December 1981 which
provides that:
"...It is not the function of mental health legislation to offer long-term
protection to relatives or others in the community... In
general, we consider
involuntary admission to be appropriate when there is a risk of immediate harm
to self or others consequent
upon mental illness. Problems arise in efforts to
define the limits of the terms "harm" or "danger"... a proper balance needs to
be struck between the civil rights of the individual and the safety and
well-being of himself, his family and the general community.
A human set of
criteria needs to be sufficiently narrow to prevent the unnecessary detention of
those who are mentally ill but can
be adequately managed in the community, and
sufficiently broad to encompass those who because of their mental illness are a
and immediate danger to themselves or others..."
Finally, Mr Proctor drew the Board's attention to the decision of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales in
[1983] 1 NSWLR 138.
In that case
one of the issues to be determined by the Court was the operation of
and in particular the meaning of the phrase "...requires care, treatment or
control ... in the public interest". In that case Powell
J held that (at p.
"...A person "requires care treatment or control ... in the public interest"
if it appears that there is a real risk that, unless
such care treatment or
control be given or exercised, the person could so conduct himself or herself as
to inflict significant injury
on some person, or cause significant damage to
property, or otherwise commit or cause the commission of some significant breach
the peace: it would not, however, be sufficient, in my view, that the
person's conduct or probable conduct constituted or would constitute
nuisance or annoyance."
The authorized psychiatrist and Dr KP were invited by the Board to make
submissions on the meaning that should be given to the phrase:
"protection of
members of the public" and a submission was made by the authorized psychiatrist.
He expressed the concerns that caring
professionals have in application of the
criteria in the
. He expressed the need to protect members of the public from
psychological as well as physical injury. He raised the traumatic consequences
that can occur in families caring for the mentally ill and in particular
schizophrenics. He suggested that there may be a need to
protect families from
the enormous financial burdens that caring for a mentally ill person place on
them. Finally, he suggested there
is a need to protect members of the public
against a continuous and persistent irritation caused by the conduct of a
mentally ill
In order to test the limits that should be placed on
section 8(1)(c)
Board formulated five questions, based on discussion in Brenda Hoggett's Mental
Health Law, 2nd ed. 1984, 63. The questions were:
simply contemplate that members of the public be protected from physical
applied to protecting families from the enormous physical and mental strain
which caring for a mentally disordered relative, particularly
a senile parent
can impose?
applied to protecting families from the emotional and sometimes financial
suffering caused by living with someone who is clearly
going out of his or her
apply to protect children from the developmental damage that can be caused to
them by parents who cannot cater adequately for their
intellectual and emotional
apply to protect neighbours from nuisance and
irritation?
After considering the submission made to it
the Board came to the conclusion that the test proposed by Mr Proctor should not
by it because of the uncertainty that would arise from the use of the
word "danger". Danger is a legal concept often introduced into
statutes on the
faith that it has some clear meaning and that there is a relatively precise
manner by which future dangerous conduct
by a person can be predicted.
The problem is that the use of the word "danger" raises more questions that
it answers. Danger from what? Danger to whom? How immediate
must the danger
The Board prefers to adopt the approach taken by Powell J. in
(supra) and define "protection of members of the public" by reference
to more concrete and determinate factors. While agreeing with
the general
approach taken by Powell J. the Board does not accept the test as laid down by
him as being applicable in Victoria.
The legislation being reviewed by Powell J required a definition of the
phrase "requires care treatment or control ... in the public
interest". The
words "public interest" have a much wider operation than the words "protection
of members of the public" which appear
section 8(1)(c)
"Public interest" could clearly include property damage alone because that
would represent an interest valued by members of the public.
On the other hand
the words "members of the public" can only contemplate people and not property.
If Parliament intended that property
be protected by this legislation the words
"and their property” or similar words would have been included in
The Board is therefore of the opinion "protection of members of the public"
section 8(1)(c)
applies only to the prevention of injury to people who make
up the public. In this context "injury" means physical and psychological
emotional injury and this is consistent with the approach taken by the courts in
the criminal law of assault
[1953] 2 ALL E.R. 529
The situation becomes more difficult when one examines the effect of the
mentally ill person's conduct on friends, neighbours and
relatives. The Board
accepts in principle that caring for mentally disordered relative can impose an
enormous physical and mental
strain on relatives. It accepts that such strain
can, if severe enough, constitute an injury from which the friends, relatives or
neighbours, as members of the public would need to be protected. The major
problem is to determine what level or degree of strain
is sufficient.
In the Board's opinion mere inconvenience, embarrassment or intermittent
strains are not enough. What is necessary is that there be
a significant
impairment of mental or physical health. The impairment may be of a permanent or
temporary nature provided that it
can reasonably be considered as
significant.
Similarly in the case of emotional and financial suffering that can be caused
to friends or relatives caring for a mentally ill person,
the Board accepts that
this can give rise to significant impairment of physical and mental health, and
if that stage is reached then
the need to protect members of the public under
section 8(1)(c)
The protection of children of a mentally ill person from developmental damage
can rarely, if ever, give rise to need for protection
section 8(1)(c)
. In such circumstances there are other avenues open under the law for
the protection of the interests of the child. It would only
be in the extremely
rare case where all such avenues had been exhausted, and the child was still at
risk of significant developmental
damage that
section 8(1)(c)
possibly apply.
When applying the concept of "protection of members of the public" the Board
must consider such matters as:-
What conduct
will this person probably engage in as a result of his or her mental
How persistent
or intense is such conduct likely to be?
circumstances is such conduct likely to occur?
Who is likely to
be affected by such conduct?
How are such
people likely to be affected?
How long is the
person likely to engage in such conduct?
It is after a consideration
of these matters (which are not intended to be an exhaustive list) and the
application of the test set
out above that the Board must be satisfied that an
involuntary patient represents a danger to members of the public.
SUMMARY OF THE TEST
In the opinion of the Board the phrase "protection of members of the public"
section 8(1)(c)
Mental Health Act 1986
applies when:
A person who appears to be suffering from a mental illness, engages in
conduct or represents such a burden to care for, that significant
likely to be caused to a member or members of the public as a result of that
conduct or the giving of that care;
Injury includes any significant impairment of mental, physical or emotional
health whether permanent or of a temporary nature.
The test is not met by:
- Mere nuisance or irritation caused to members of the public.
- Property damage alone.”
Application to P’s case
Essentially, this Board agrees with the principles,
analysis and test enunciated by the Board in
. In applying those
principles and test to the legitimate concerns expressed by JC in respect of the
past actions of P in going missing
and interstate without the family’s
knowledge during a psychotic relapse, the Board noted that P’s actions
way deliberate or volitional, but resulted directly from the effects
of the relapse of her illness. It is entirely unclear whether
such a situation
could or would repeat itself, and if it did, whether it would have a similar
effect on the children now that they
are considerably older. That they have had
ongoing difficulties is, to say the least, unfortunate, but to require P to
an involuntary order for an extended period in the absence of any
opposition or ambivalence on P’s behalf to continued treatment
prescribed and provided by the treating team, in this Board’s view, is
unjustifiable.
Further, unlike most of the examples cited by the Board in
instance, P is not, and has not been for a number of years, the sole or primary
caregiver of the children. Clearly, therefore,
it is more difficult to sustain
the argument that the effects of P’s mental illness can satisfy the
test. Notwithstanding the psychological impact of a past event, there
is no evidence that P is currently engaging, or has recently
engaged, in
conduct, or represents such a burden to care for, that significant injury is
likely to the children.
accepts the possibility of significant
impairment of mental health alone as a risk that would give rise to
being met. However, this Board considers that the conduct or burden of care
would have to be continuing at such a level as to sustain
the harm to the
children. There is no evidence of such continuing conduct or burden of care in
Doubtless, in the past when she first became unwell, P’s incapacity to
undertake the role of sole caregiver may have caused
some physical, as well as
psychological, harm to her children. However, in the intervening years, all
efforts have been made to
protect P’s children from any direct harm
associated with the impact of her mental illness on her capacity to maintain and
care for her children at an appropriate level.
Whilst the Board can understand the continuing concerns that the children may
in the future again suffer psychological trauma similar
to that experienced
during a previous psychotic relapse, there is no evidence of current or imminent
risk of the repetition of such
an event. At best, those concerns involve an
indirect and contingent harm that may, and hopefully will, never occur. In the
view, such a historical risk cannot satisfy the
the circumstances of P’s and her children’s situation.
Therefore, accepting
analysis that, to satisfy the
"protection of members of the public" requirement found in
section 8(1)(c)
is necessary is that there be a significant impairment of mental or physical
health, which may be of a permanent or temporary
nature, the Board found that,
in this case, particularly given the current care and residence arrangements of
the children, there
is no evidence of continuing conduct by P that could be
implicated in any ongoing impairment of the children’s mental health,
indeed any evidence that P is likely in the foreseeable future to avoid
treatment for her mental illness in circumstances that
would be likely to lead
to a similar deterioration in her mental state and consequential actions that
might cause similar effects
on the children.
Has P refused or is she unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness?
Dr GP stated that, in his view, P did not have full insight into her illness
and the need for treatment. However, he was adamant
that P is well engaged in
and consenting to the treatment program, happy and compliant with the oral
medication, and willing to follow
the advice and requirements of the treating
team. This was despite the fact that she is not keen on the depot injection.
very confident that this situation would prevail irrespective of
involuntary status.
In all the circumstances, and taking into account the evidence that P has
never refused treatment, or on her own volition failed to
comply with it, it
appeared to the Board that P has sufficient understanding of her illness and
commitment to the treatment program
to be able to provide an informed consent to
continuing that treatment. This criterion was therefore not met.
The confidence of the Board that P will remain in effective treatment for the
foreseeable future was reinforced by the supports in
place through the treating
team and the family that will allow the treating team to quickly respond to and
act on any signs of deterioration
or relapse.
Section 8(1)(e)
Is P unable to receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a
manner less restrictive of her freedom of decision and action?
The Board acknowledged the excellent and important support that has been put
in place to assist P to function adequately in the community
in as independent
circumstances as possible. However, because of its above decision, it was
unnecessary for the Board to make a
finding in respect of this criterion.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient’s treatment plan, the
Board must be satisfied that the requirements of
met. The Board considered each of the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
The Board had before it a treatment plan prepared by JC and authorised by Dr
GP on 8 July 2006, which outlined most of the treatment
issues raised in the
hearing, namely continuing medication, monitoring compliance and mental state,
and encouraging self care and
regular reviews by the general practitioner. The
Board noted that the plan was to be reviewed in three months and, in the light
of its decision, expects that a review would be timely.
Having said that, the Board acknowledged that the treatment plan does not
accord with P’s desire to cease taking the depot medication,
satisfied that the treating team have been attempting to accommodate her
expressed views as far as possible, consistent
with their obligation to maintain
effective treatment of P’s illness. No doubt, the next step will be a
discussion of a gradual
and well timed move towards a shared care arrangement
with the general practitioner under the guidance of the treating team.
In any event, the Board was satisfied that the treatment plan sufficiently
complies with the statutory requirements.
Section 35A(1)(b)
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
It was clear to the Board that the current treatment plan has been working
effectively to reduce the impact of the symptoms of P’s
disorder. In particular, it was noted that the current symptoms are far less
prevalent and distressing than those described
in the past, when P was not
receiving treatment in the form of ongoing medication. The Board was satisfied
that this improvement
is the direct result of P receiving regular medication in
accordance with the treatment plan, which is clearly being implemented
treating team.
Therefore, the Board was satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has
complied with
in making, reviewing or revising the plan, and the plan is
capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
As a result, as all the
criteria were not met, the Board made the
determination set out on page 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (132 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter