URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VLPT/2005/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:33:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Law Institute of Victoria Limited V Lim [2005] VLPT 6 (14 April 2005)
[2005] VLPT 6
Tribunal reference: T0056 of
Name, address, and reference
Chuen Ren LIM
practitioner:
Charge referred by: Law Institute of Victoria
RPA reference: VLR/04/1092
CONCERNING A
brought before the Tribunal by Law Institute of Victoria Limited
Chuen Ren LIM
(“the legal practitioner”).
REASONS OF LEGAL PROFESSION TRIBUNAL FOR DECISION GIVEN ON
14 APRIL 2005
(Section 409 Legal Practice Act)
Mr. Lim is charged with misconduct in that he wilfully or recklessly
contravened section 178(1) of the
Legal Practice Act 1996
, which so far
as is relevant provides as follows:
“A legal practitioner ..... who does not hold a practising certificate
authorising the receipt of trust money must not receive
It is common ground that Mr. Lim held a
practising certificate when he received the trust monies concerned, but not a
practising certificate
that authorised him to receive trust money.
evidence of Mr. Lim, and documents tendered with the consent of the parties,
establish that:
(i) Mr. Lim wished to open a trust account for use in conjunction with his
practice, although in particular to enable him to receive
trust monies in a
matter where he acted for a company Flomad Pty Ltd;
(ii) Mr. Lim obtained the written consent of an auditor, Mr. Chiu, to act as
auditor of Mr. Lim’s trust account. The letter
of consent is dated 18
January 2003;
(iii) Mr. Lim opened a bank account entitled “Lim & Associates
Statutory Trust Acc” on 5 March 2003;
(iv) on 7 March 2003 Mr. Lim wrote a letter to the Legal Practice Board
notifying the Board that he had opened the account and setting
out particulars
of the account;
(v) on 7 March 2003 Mr. Lim wrote a letter to the Legal Practitioners Liability
Committee advising the Committee that he had opened
a trust account, and stating
that “my firm has just been instructed in a litigation matter and the
gross fees will exceed the
$40,000 limit”. Mr. Lim was referring to the
matter in which he acted for Flomad Pty Ltd, and he provided his letter of
notification
to the Legal Practitioners Liability Committee because he was aware
that gross fees in excess of $40,000 would require him to pay
an increased
premium for professional indemnity insurance;
(vi) on 7 March 2003 the Legal Practice Board sent a letter of reply to Mr. Lim.
The letter was headed “Practitioner Authorisation
for Opening of Statutory
Deposit Account”. It set out particulars of the account opened by Mr. Lim
and then added:
”Please return this authorisation to the Legal Practice Board duly signed,
confirming your Trust Account details and authorising
the Legal Practice Board
to arrange the opening of a Statutory Deposit Account to be linked to your Trust
Mr. Lim referred to this letter as a letter from the Legal Practice Board
authorising the opening of his trust account, but that
is an inaccurate
description of the letter. It was a letter asking Mr. Lim for authority to
enable the Legal Practice Board to open
a Statutory Deposit Account so that
interest on the Statutory Deposit Account could be paid by the bank to the
I accept that the letter did not indicate to Mr. Lim that he had done anything
wrong in opening a trust account, or that he should
have obtained a practising
certificate authorising the receipt of trust money before he opened the
(vii) on 13 and 17 March 2003 Mr. Lim wrote letters to Flomad Pty Ltd, both of
which contained the following
“We request that you provide further funds into our trust account to avoid
disruption of the
(viii) so far as is relevant for the purposes of these proceedings, trust monies
were deposited into the account on eleven occasions,
the first on 6 March 2003
and the last on 23 April 2003. Most of the deposits were made electronically by
Flomad Pty Ltd, although
a few were made by Mr. Lim.
Mr. Meldrum QC appeared with Mr. Guzzo for Mr. Lim. Mr. Meldrum
submitted that all of the trust monies received by Mr. Lim had been
into the trust account opened by Mr. Lim, and that Mr. Lim had a complete
defence to the charge because of section 178(4)(a)
of the Act which provides as
“(4) Sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) do not apply in the case of a receipt
of money by a legal practitioner or interstate practitioner
if the practitioner
as soon as practicable after receipt–
(a) pays the money into a trust account; or
Mr. Meldrum referred to the definition of “trust
account” in section 3 of the Act, which provides as follows:
“trust account” means the trust account required to be established
by a legal practitioner, a firm or an approved clerk
under Part 6;”
Mr. Meldrum then submitted, as I understood him, that
trust account” referred to in the definition is
trust account opened by Mr. Lim, and no other account. He contended
that paragraph (a) of sub-section 178(4) would have no operation
if it did not
trust account required to be opened by a legal practitioner who
received trust money. I ruled that the opening of a trust account
absolve a legal practitioner, by necessity or otherwise, from the requirement to
hold a practising certificate authorising
the receipt of trust monies before
operating the account. I gave the ruling orally, as follows:
“Mr Meldrum has made a submission that a defence is available to Mr Lim,
as I understand it, under sub-section 4(a) of section
178 of the Act in that
trust monies were paid into a bank account the opening of which was authorised
by the Legal Practice Board.
The charge brought against Mr Lim is that he contravened section 178(1) of the
Act by receiving trust money when he did not hold
a practising certificate
authorising the receipt of trust money. I have said in other similar cases
within the last week that section
178(1) must require something more than mere
receipt of trust money, particularly as it does have criminal sanctions for its
contravention,
because a legal practitioner must be able to simply return the
money immediately without being in contravention of section 178(1).
that, of course, I have in mind a different situation than occurs in this
matter, namely that the trust monies may not
have been solicited by the legal
practitioner who received them.
Now a legal practitioner who is not authorised to receive trust monies may deal
with trust monies received in two other ways, additional
to simply returning the
money. Under sub-section (4)(a) the legal practitioner who receives the money
may pay the money into a trust
account. The use of the words trust account in
that paragraph causes one to consider the definition of trust account in section
3 of the Act. The definition of a “trust account” is that it
“means the trust account required to be established
practitioner,
approved clerk under Part 6” of
the Act. The trust account consequently may be one established by a legal
practitioner, a
firm or an approved clerk other than the legal practitioner who
has received the money.
The definition of “trust account” does adopt the terminology of
“the trust account
to be established”. Of course,
there is no requirement that a trust account be established simply because a
legal practitioner
holds a practising certificate authorising the receipt of
trust monies. A trust account is required to be established only if the
practitioner is authorised to hold trust monies and wishes to hold trust
The second way, additional way, in which a legal practitioner who receives trust
money, but does not hold a practising certificate
authorising its receipt,
arises under or is authorised by paragraph (b) of section 178(4) which allows
the practitioner to give the
money to a legal practitioner authorised to receive
trust money, or to an approved clerk.
The terminology in paragraph (b) is legal practitioner “
authorised to
receive trust money
”. The terminology therefore effectively is
different to that in paragraph (a) which, through adopting the definition of a
trust account, talks of trust account “
required to be
established
”, but I do not see a difference of that kind as
restricting the operation of paragraph (a). Trust money can be paid by the
legal practitioner who receives the money directly into a trust account of
another practitioner who is authorised to receive trust
I accept that it would be appropriate, because the money is trust money, for the
practitioner who received the money to obtain the
consent of his client to the
depositing of the trust money into the trust account of another practitioner,
but that is just part
of the process of availing oneself of the exception
created by paragraph (a). Of course, the same authority would no doubt be
if a practitioner wished to avail himself or herself of the exception
in paragraph (b).
I do not see Mr Lim as being in a position to avail himself of the exception
provided by section 178(4)(a) by paying the money into
a bank account opened by
him, apparently with the authority of the Legal Practice Board, in circumstances
where he did not hold a
practising certificate authorising the receipt of trust
monies. In other words there is room for the operation of paragraph (a)
allowing Mr Lim to avoid the requirement of section 178(1) by depositing the
monies into an account of his own.”
Mr. Meldrum then
submitted that any contravention of section 178(1) was not a wilful or reckless
contravention. The following additional
evidence of Mr. Lim was relevant to
this further submission:
(i) Mr. Lim previously had held practising certificates authorising the receipt
of trust monies, both when in partnership and when
a sole practitioner;
(ii) Mr. Lim commenced to act for Flomad Pty Ltd on 5 or 6 March 2003. The case
was complex, and had not been properly prepared.
It had been fixed for hearing
on 11 March 2003;
(iii) Mr. Lim wished to receive trust monies from Flomad Pty Ltd, and opened a
trust account after being informed by the Legal Practice
Board that he could do
(iv) Mr. Lim knew that the
Legal Practice Act
dealt with trust accounts,
but he did not consult the Act or the Rules made under the Act;
(v) Mr. Lim commenced to receive trust monies from Flomad, most of which were
deposited by Flomad Pty Ltd electronically into the
trust account, but some of
which was deposited by Mr. Lim;
(vi) Mr. Lim received a practising certificate renewal form for the period 1
July 2003 to 30 June 2004. He filled in the form, which
includes the
handwritten date “14/04/03”, and amended the form. One of his
amendments was to change the words “Principal
without trust” to
“Principal with trust” in the section headed “Type of
Mr. Lim said that it “did not occur” to him when he filled in the
renewal form that he was not authorised to receive
trust monies. He said that
he amended the renewal form because he thought that the Law Institute had made a
Mr. Lim then said that although he was then receiving trust monies, and thought
that the Law Institute had made a mistake, he did
not contact the Law Institute
(vii) Mr. Lim said that he “did not turn” his mind to the
restriction on his practising certificate until about 29 April
2003, when he was
attending to administrative matters. He immediately made an application to vary
his practising certificate to
enable the receipt of trust monies.
I ruled upon this submission orally, as
“I do not see Mr Lim as having acted wilfully prior to 14 April 2003. He
clearly knew what he wanted to achieve and set about
seeking to achieve it, so
far as he went, in an appropriate manner. I also am not satisfied that Mr Lim
was reckless prior to 14
April 2003. He had previously held practising
certificates that authorised the receipt of trust monies. He had previously
trust accounts. He had previously undergone the course of instruction
conducted by the Law Institute and, so far as he went, he
handled the steps that
he took in an appropriate manner. In those circumstances I do not see him as
being reckless prior to 14 April
2003 simply on the basis that he did not look
properly into the Act and the Trust Account Practice Rules.
The turning point in this matter is the renewal form completed by Mr Lim on 14
April 2003. The renewal form showed Mr Lim to be
the holder of a practising
certificate which did not authorise the receipt of trust monies. Mr Lim altered
the renewal form to replace
the word “without” trust monies with the
word “with” trust monies”. It must have become apparent
him at that stage that the Law Institute considered him to at that time hold a
practising certificate that did not authorise the
receipt of trust monies, and
it must have been apparent to him that the renewal form related to a practising
certificate to commence
from 1 July 2003. Mr Lim gave evidence, which I
accept, that he believed that the Law Institute must have made a mistake, but he
did not make any enquiry of the Law Institute at that stage. He simply
continued to receive two amounts of trust money after that
date. I would be
satisfied that Mr Lim was reckless in his contravention of section 178(1) in
respect of the trust monies received
on 16 and 23 April 2003. However, those
deposits were received a very short time after 14 April 2003 and Mr Lim did act
in rectifying the situation when he varied his practising certificate
on 29 April 2003 to permit the receipt of trust monies.
In those circumstances I will deal with this solitary charge as one of
unsatisfactory conduct, a power given to me by section 161
I made the following orders in
respect of the finding of unsatisfactory conduct:
1. The legal practitioner is reprimanded for his failure to comply with a
fundamental requirement of the
Legal Practice Act 1996
2. The legal practitioner is to pay a fine of $500 to the Legal Practice Board
within 21 days after receipt of a copy of this order.
3. The legal practitioner is to pay to Law Institute of Victoria by 16 June 2005
its costs of these proceedings, fixed by the Tribunal
[Signed: Malcolm Howell]
..............................................................................................
and Member of the Legal Profession Tribunal
1. Copies of this document will be provided by the Tribunal to the legal
practitioner, the legal practitioner’s recognised
professional
association, the Legal Ombudsman, the complainant and the Legal Practice
2. More information about the operation of the Tribunal can be found on the
Tribunal’s website at
www.legalpt.vic.gov.au
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (655 KB)
Plain text (ASCII) (23.5 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter