URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2021/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Yin Yam Pty Ltd at Yin Yam premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2021] VCGLR 22 (3 August 2021)
Decision and reasons
for decision
In the matter of an application by Yin Yam Pty Ltd under
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for internal review of a decision to
refuse to grant a renewable limited licence for the premises located at 2/14
Apex drive, Truganina,
Commission:
Ms Helen Versey, Deputy Chair
Ms Danielle Huntersmith, Commissioner
Mr Andrew Scott, Commissioner
Date of Decision:
Date of Reasons:
The Commission has determined to affirm the decision of the
Delegate and refuse to grant the application for a renewable limited licence.
Helen Versey
1. On 16 October 2020, Yin Yam Pty Ltd (
to the Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation (
) for a renewable limited licence (
Application
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
) for the premises
located at 2/14 Apex Drive, Truganina, Victoria (
The Applicant sought a licence to supply and deliver packaged liquor ordered via
the internet from the Applicant’s online
grocery store, trading as Yin Yam
Food and Beverage.
2. The Applicant sought to supply Asian liquors from the online store, with
trading hours of between 12pm and 10pm on any day for
liquor to be delivered.
3. On 16 October 2020, a delegate of the Commission (
notified the Applicant’s representative and associate, that the following
documents needed to be lodged with the Commission
by 25 November 2020:
completed application questionnaire for one of the Applicant’s directors,
Mr Hong La Le;
of display, pursuant to section 34(7) of the LCR Act;
of completion of the Commission’s training standard new entrant training
to ensure applicants for a liquor licence
have adequate knowledge of the LCR
details about how the Applicant proposes the supply of liquor will be limited in
scale and scope; and
submissions
regarding exceptional circumstances for seeking trading hours that are outside
of standard ordinary packaged liquor trading
4. On 19 October 2020, the Applicant’s representative submitted Mr
Le’s completed application questionnaire and informed
the Commission that
the Applicant was yet to establish how the proposed liquor supply would be
5. Pursuant to section 33(3), at the discretion of the Commission, on 16
October 2020 a copy of the Application was provided to the
Wyndham City Council
) and to Victoria Police for comment.
6. On 20 October 2020, Victoria Police was provided with a copy of the
application questionnaire for Mr Le. Upon receiving this information,
October 2020, Victoria Police lodged an objection to the Application on the
grounds that the Applicant would need to provide
an amended application which
provided information about the director and 50% shareholder of Feelgood Products
Pty Ltd, being the
company which owns 100% of the shares in the Applicant.
7. On 28 October 2020, the Applicant provided the Commission with the
following information in response to the objection from Victoria
organisational chart detailing roles and responsibilities of company directors,
stating that Feelgood Products Pty Ltd is a trustee
company for the Feelgood
Products Trust which 100% owns Yin Yam, this being a family trust structure;
director of the Applicant, Kim Kha, holds the role of secretary (and 50%
shareholder of Feelgood Products Pty Ltd) the role also
includes office
administration, finance, accounting/bookkeeping and corporate
compliance.
8. On 11 November 2020, the Applicant provided the following further
information to the Commission:
explanation that only the directors of the Applicant take a salary from the
trustee company;
Tran was previously a director of the Applicant but ceased this role on 27
August 2020 because of other directorship commitments;
amended declaration of associates form for the Applicant, which declared Tran as
an associate of the Applicant.
9. On 25 November 2020, Victoria Police lodged an amended objection to the
Application, on the grounds that the Applicant is unsuitable
to hold a licence
due to the Applicant having an unsuitable associate in Tran, due to his prior
criminal history.
10. The Applicant did not make any further submissions in response to the
amended objection from Victoria Police, on the suitability
Applicant’s associate Tran.
11. On 28 January 2021, the Delegate refused to grant the Application on the
grounds that there was insufficient information provided
to complete an
assessment under the LCR Act (
). In particular
the Delegate noted that the Applicant:
not provide all information as requested by the Commission; and
not make submissions in response to the objection from Victoria Police regarding
Application for Internal Review
12. On 24 February 2021, the Applicant lodged an application for internal
Application
) seeking that the Commission set aside
the decision of the Delegate and grant the Application.
13. The Applicant made the following submission in support of the Review
Application:
admits his criminal past, his only offence being knowingly using a false
document, for which he was fined $15,000;
is a suitable person, he is the director of two companies that hold liquor
licences, and he has only one declared conviction
for an offence that occurred
Le, as a director of the Applicant, had now completed new entrant training, and
a copy of the certificate of completion was provided;
Applicant proposes the following scale and scope limitations for the
supply Asian liquors via online sales only;
sale will encompass no more than 24 x 375ml containers of beer and/or cider
and/or pre-mix spirits; and/or 12 x 700ml bottles
of wine per person per day;
and/or 1 x 700ml of spirits; and
the Applicant’s view, the combination of the above two limitations is
consistent with previous Commission approved on-line
businesses operating under
a renewable limited licence;
Applicant seeks to supply liquor within the following trading hours, which no
longer require submissions on exceptional circumstances
because the hours are
consistent with similar licences permitting the supply of packaged liquor:
can be made online at any time of the day;
will be limited to: on any day (except Good Friday and Christmas Day) between 12
noon and 10 pm.
14. On 26 March 2021, Victoria Police informed the Commission that it
maintained an objection to the Review Application due to the
Applicant being
unsuitable due to having an unsuitable associate.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
15. Division 2 Part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications.
The Original Decision is a reviewable decision under section
152, and the
Applicant is an eligible person to apply for a review of that decision. The
Review Application is made under section
153 of the LCR Act.
16. Pursuant to 157(1) of the LCR Act, the task before the Commission with
respect to the Review Application is to make a fresh decision
or varies the reviewable decision; or
aside the reviewable decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers appropriate.
17. Under the LCR Act, an application to grant a licence may be contested or
uncontested. Pursuant to section 3(1) of the LCR Act
a contested application
“an application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation of
a licence or BYO permit in respect of which any objections
are received under
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in the Division for those
objections (or that period as extended
under section 174)”.
18. As Victoria Police maintains its objection, the Review Application is a
contested application.
19. Accordingly, the Commission on internal review stands in the shoes of the
original decision maker and must make a fresh decision
with respect to the
Application. The Commission must either:
the application (and may do so subject to
conditions);
to grant the application.
20. In doing so, the Commission must consider all the information, material
and evidence that was before the original decision
The Commission may also
consider further information, material or evidence in making a
Exercising the internal review power
21. Section 9(3) of the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation Act
) provides:
“The Commission must, when performing functions or duties or
exercising its powers under the Gambling Regulation Act 2003, the
Liquor Control
Reform Act 1998
Casino Control Act 1991
Racing Act 1958
or any other
Act, have regard to the objects of the Act conferring functions on the
Commission”
22. Accordingly, in exercising its discretion to either grant or refuse a
contested application under section 47(1) of the LCR Act,
the Commission must
have regard to the objects of the LCR Act.
23. The objects of the LCR Act are set out in section 4(1), which provides:
“(1) The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes
to, and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products;
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and
reducing risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.”
24. Section 4(2) of the LCR Act provides further that:
“It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority,
discretion, jurisdiction and duty conferred or imposed by this
Act must be
exercised and performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks
associated with the misuse and abuse of alcohol.”
Determination of a contested application
25. Where an application is a contested application, pursuant to section
47(1) of the LCR Act:
“Subject to Division 3, the Commission must, after the period for
making an objection under Division 5 has expired, including
any extension of
time granted for making an objection, grant or refuse a contested
application.”
26. Section 47(2) of the LCR Act provides that the Commission may refuse to
grant a contested application on any of grounds set out
in section 44(2).
27. Section 44(2)(a) of the LCR Act provides the
following grounds for refusal –
“in the case of a grant or transfer of a licence or BYO permit, that
the applicant or proposed transferee is not a suitable
person to hold or carry
on business under the licence or BYO permit;”
28. Section 44(3)(a) of the LCR Act provides –
“Without limiting the reasons why a person is not a suitable person
to hold, or carry on business under, a licence or BYO permit,
a person is not a
suitable person to hold, or carry on business under, a licence or BYO permit if
the person or, if the person is
a body corporate, any director of the person
has, within the preceding 3 years —
(a) been convicted, whether in Victoria or elsewhere, of an offence of
supplying liquor without a licence or of supplying adulterated
liquor or of an
offence against any law relating to customs or excise;”
29. Section 44(4) of the LCR Act provides that before granting or refusing a
contested application under subsection (1), the Commission
“(a) ...have regard to any matter the Commission considers relevant;
(b) make any enquiries the Commission considers appropriate but is not
required to give any person an opportunity to be heard concerning
application.”
30. The Court of Appeal of the Victorian Supreme Court has made it clear in
Kordister Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
harm minimisation is a fundamental principle of the LCR Act and can properly be
regarded as
“the primary regulatory object of the Act and therefore the
primary consideration in liquor licensing
However, as
was also noted by the Court of Appeal
, “this is not to say ... that it
[harm minimisation] is to be taken into account, or given such weight, to the
exclusion of
31. The Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in
section 44(2) are relevant considerations, the ultimate
determination of a
contested application is to be made pursuant to sections 44(1), 47(1) and 157(1)
at the discretion of the Commission
with reference to the objects of the LCR
32. Under section 49 of the LCR Act, the Commission may impose any condition
it thinks fit on the grant of an application.
Conduct of an inquiry
33. Section 34 of the VCGLR Act provides that subject to that Act, gambling
legislation or liquor legislation, the Commission may
conduct any inquiry in any
manner it considers appropriate. During the conduct of an inquiry, section 25(3)
of the VCGLR Act provides
that the Commission is not bound by the rules of
evidence, however, must comply with the rules of natural justice.
Material before the Commission
34. The Commission on review had before it and considered, all materials
received by the Delegate. In addition, the Commission received
and considered
the following:
Decision and reasons of the Delegate, dated 20 March 2020;
Application
for Internal Review and supporting submissions, made on behalf of the Applicant
by Mr Rob Steane;
Submissions
from Victoria Police dated 22 June 2021, in response to a request made by the
Commission regarding whether Victoria Police
was able to provide any further
information to support the objection to the Application with regard to
suitability; and
submissions dated 12 July 2021 made on behalf of the Applicant by Mr Rob Steane,
in response to a request for further information
made by the
Commission.
35. With the Applicant’s consent, the Commission decided that a public
hearing was not required and determined the matter on
the papers.
Reasons for decision on review
Issues for determination on review
36. In deciding whether to affirm, vary or set aside the Original Decision
and in turn grant or refuse the Application that is the
subject of the Review
Application, the key issues to be determined by the Commission in this matter
are whether:
licence is limited in scale and scope;
Applicant is a suitable person to hold a liquor licence;
of the provisions of section 44(2) of the LCR Act justify the Application being
37. In exercising its ultimate discretion to grant or refuse the Application,
the Commission must have regard to the objects of the
LCR Act, with particular
regard to the object of harm minimisation.
Limited scale and scope
38. Section 14 of the LCR Act provides that a
renewable limited licence “
authorises the licensee to supply liquor at
the times determined by the Commission and specified in the licence
However, unlike other categories of licence, limited licences are subject to the
additional restriction found at section
26 of the LCR Act, “
scale and scope of the supply of liquor the subject of the licence is limited in
the Scale and Scope Requirement
39. There are no statutory signposts which prescribe specific factors for the
Commission to consider in determining whether the Scale
and Scope Requirement is
met. On previous occasions the Commission has considered
the nature,
location, duration or frequency of the hours of operation of a licence in
as relevant to the Scale and Scope
Requirement.
40. Section 26(1) of the LCR Act gives the Commission a wide discretion to
determine, as a question of fact, whether the Scale and
Scope Requirement is
met. In the decision of
, VCAT considered that there was no warrant
for an interpretation that the limitation in question need to “contemplate
substantial
significant
restriction”,
however this
does not mean that the Commission cannot consider whether a limitation is
substantial
significant
in the exercise of its discretion to
determine whether the Scale and Scope Requirement is met.
41. The first limitation proffered by the Applicant was to supply only Asian
liquors for online sales.
42. On 12 July 2021, the Commission sought further information from the
Applicant, specifically whether the Applicant intended to
limit the lines of
liquor that would be supplied, and if so what that limit would be.
43. On 12 July 2021, the Applicant via Mr Steane reiterated that the liquor
proposed for supply will be “’
Asian themed or
products, sourced from China, Philippines, Thailand,
Malaysia, Indonesia, and Vietnam, which is consistent with their other
44. The second limitation proffered by the Applicant was the limits on the
quantity of liquor supplied, that being:
“that no one sale
will encompass more than –
• 24 x 375ml containers of beer, and/or ciders, and/or pre-mixed
spirits AND/OR
• 12 x 700ml bottles of wine per person, per day.
• 1 x 700ml bottle of spirits.”
45. On 12 July 2021, the Commission sought further clarification on the
proposed liquor for supply as it was unclear from the Applicant’s
submissions what the total quantity of liquor per sale would be available to
46. On 12 July 2021, the Applicant via Mr Steane submitted the proposal is to
allow customers to purchase:
“24 x 375ml containers of beer, and/or ciders, and/or pre-mixed
spirits AND
12 x 700ml bottles of wine per person, per day.
1 x 700ml bottle of spirits.
So, potentially a case of beer, a case of ciders, a case of pre-mixed
spirits, 12 bottles of wine and a bottle of spirits.”
47. The Applicant submitted that a sale consisting
of all liquor products would be rare and provided the Commission with copies of
renewable limited licences that have been recently approved, in support of the
proposed limits. The licences cited in support of
the Applicant’s
submissions were:
number 36151671 –
Solly’s Online Grocery
number 36147876 –
Deliveroo Australia
number 36163149 –
Cadell Food Service
number 36161228 –
All Australian
48. The Commission notes that each application must be considered on its
merits and in particular on the application of the scale
and scope limitations
and other relevant circumstances. Further, whilst the Commission aims for
consistency in its decision-making,
it is not bound by its earlier decisions.
49. In assessing the Scale and Scope Requirement for the Review Application,
the Commission considered the following
the liquor proposed for supply was limited in the type or lines of liquor
proposed for supply;
the Application proposed sufficient transactional limits to quantity or volume,
or customer limitations; and
the Application was limited by other factors, for example, membership
requirements or the geographic area for supply.
50. The Commission notes that the Applicant’s business model is
described as an online grocery store specialising in Asian products
and delivers
Australia wide. The Applicant now seeks to offer customers the option to
purchase Asian liquor via the online grocery
store. The Applicant is proposing
to supply a wide range of liquor, being wine, beer, cider, premixed spirits, and
51. Asia is a large geographic region. When limiting this to the specific
countries the Applicant has listed, China, Philippines,
Thailand, Malaysia,
Indonesia, and Vietnam, this remains a large geographic region for sourcing
lines of liquor to supply given the
Applicant has offered no further limitation
on the lines of liquor proposed for supply.
52. Accordingly, the Commission is of the view that the proposal to only
limit lines of liquor to “
Asian themed or oriented products
constitutes nothing more than a minimal limitation in scope.
53. The Commission went on to consider whether the Application was limited in
scope with regard to proposed transactional limits proposed
by the Applicant.
54. In undertaking this assessment, the Commission considered the
Applicant’s proposed transactional limits on the supply of
noted the following:
Applicant’s proposed transaction limits would allow for a total of 85
items of liquor to be sold per transaction;
Applicant has not proposed that there is a daily limit on the number of liquor
sales per customer, other than for 12 bottles of
transactional limits proposed by the Applicant of a total of 85 items of liquor
per transaction, (and with no limitation on lines,
or number of transactions per
customer per day (other than in relation to wine) are significantly in excess of
the quantities permitted
under the licences listed above at paragraph
licences provided by the Applicant in support of the Review Application appear
to have been granted to supply liquor at the higher
end of what the Commission
considers to be limited in scale and scope.
55. The Commission also noted that the Applicant had not proposed any
limitation on who may order, the base such as with a membership
or account-based
sales business model, as was the case with some of the licence examples offered
by the Applicant.
56. On carefully considering all evidence before it, based on the reasons set
out above the Commission is of the view that the proposed
supply of liquor is
not limited in scale and scope and accordingly does not satisfy the requirements
under section 26 of the LCR
Suitability of the Applicant
57. Given that the Commission is not satisfied that
the Review Application meets the requirements under section 26 of the LCR Act,
in this instance the Commission is of the view that it is not necessary to
consider whether the Applicant is suitable to hold a liquor
Decision on review
58. Based on the reasons detailed above and having
regard to the objects of the LCR Act, the Commission has determined to affirm
Original Decision and refuse to grant the renewable limited licence subject
of the Review Application.
The preceding fifty-eight (58) paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Decision of Ms Helen Versey (Deputy Chair) Ms Danielle
Huntersmith
(Commissioner) and Mr Andrew Scott (Commissioner).
Sections 44, 49 and 157 of the
Sections 44 and 157 of the LCR
Section 157(2) of the LCR Act.
See section 157(3) of the LCR
There are no objects specified
in the VCGLR Act itself.
, at [19] per Warren CJ and Osborn JA; [188] per Tate JA.
, at [188] per Tate JA.
See decision of
Pty Ltd at 36A Vickers Street, Sebastapol premises
(Liquor-internal
review) [2016] VCGLR 19 (25 July 2016) At [61].
Club 8 Pty Limited v
Director of Liquor Licensing (Occupational and Business Regulation
[2009] VCAT
These factors were most
recently considered by the Commission in the application for internal review by
Australia Liquor Wholesale
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (53.7 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter