URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICCAT/1998/1309.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lane & Ors v Stonnington CC Lane & Ors v Stonnington CC [1998] VICCAT 1309 (22 December 1998)
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NOS. 1998/78531 & 1998/92579
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. 633-98
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON TUESDAY 22ND DECEMBER 1998
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NO. 1998/7351
Nature of Application
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NO. 1998/92579
Nature of Application
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING
CONDITIONS TO BE REVIEWED
APPEARANCES
REASONS FOR ORDER (1998/92579)
Tribunal Application No. 1998/92579
Tribunal Application No. 1998/78531
IN THE VICTORIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION
PLANNING LIST
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NOS. 1998/78531 & 1998/92579
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. 633-98
HEARD AT MELBOURNE ON TUESDAY 22ND DECEMBER 1998
Dr Judy Atkinson, Member
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NO. 1998/7351
Applicant for Review/Objectors D Lane and ors
Responsible Authority City of Stonnington
Respondent/Permit Applicant Grouse Fleming Bate Architects
Nature of Application
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
for review of a decision to grant a permit.
TRIBUNAL APPLICATION NO. 1998/92579
Applicant for Review/Permit Applicant Grouse Fleming Bate Architects
Responsible Authority City of Stonnington
Respondent/Objector C. Greco
Nature of Application
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
for review of conditions in a permit.
Alterations and second storey extension to existing dwelling
1 Eileen Street,
PLANNING SCHEME AND ZONING
Stonnington Planning Scheme - Residential C Zone and within an Urban
Conservation Zone.
CONDITIONS TO BE REVIEWED
3. a) the first floor bedroom windows on the eastern elevation obscured by
solid translucent screens or perforated panels or trellis
which have a maximum
of 25% openings.
b) the master bedroom and the ensuite setback a minimum of 2 metres from the
southern boundary.
e) the deletion of the timber screen.
APPEARANCES
Mrs Linda Paterson appeared for the Permit Applicant.
There was no appearance on behalf of the Responsible Authority.
There are two matters before the Tribunal, the first being a review sought by
objectors of a decision by the City of Stonnington
to grant a permit for
alterations and extensions to a dwelling at 1 Eileen Street, Armadale. The
second is an application for review
of conditions imposed by the Council in its
Notice of Decision to Grant.
In respect of the first matter (1998/78531), Elaine Kerr and others, including
David Lane and Concetta Greco lodged a group application
on 5th October 1998.
Concetta Greco also lodged a separate application on October 8th.
A fax was received from the owners of the property on 28th October, seeking an
early hearing on the basis of financial hardship.
This was approved and the
parties were advised by letter dated 16th November that the hearing would be
held on 22nd December.
On 11th November, however, Elaine Kerr had written to the Tribunal advising
"Please note I am withdrawing my objection to proposed
alterations/extensions situated at 1 Eileen St, Armadale 3143."
She had previously requested that future correspondence on this matter should
be sent to David Lane. David Lane subsequently wrote
an undated letter which
was received at the Tribunal on 15th December, advising that:
"Following recent discussions with the owners and architect in respect of
the proposed additions I hereby withdraw my objections to
the proposed
additions."
A letter dated 24th November had in the meantime been received from Concetta
Greco, which advised the Tribunal that:
"Please be advised that I no longer wish to pursue Appeal No. 1998/078531 -
1 Eileen Street, Armadale scheduled for 22nd December,
Finally, there is also a letter on the files from the permit applicants, Grouse
Fleming Bate, Architects, informing the Tribunal
they had organised a residents
meeting on 10th November, and attaching notes of the meeting together with
amended drawings which
bear the date June 1998. One of these drawings is
signed by the remaining objector from the original group application, Barbara
Cornish, indicating her consent.
For the sake of completeness, it is noted that further names were included on
later correspondence on behalf of the group application.
However, this was
after the closing date for lodging applications, and in some cases the persons
signing had not been objectors
to the original application. There was no
attempt to pursue their status as parties in this matter by any of these
At the hearing there was no appearance by any of the objectors seeking a review
of Council's Notice of Decision to Grant. The Tribunal
will therefore formally
dismiss this application.
That leaves the application 1998/92579 for review of the conditions which are
set out above.
This was lodged on 26th November by the owners of the property Linda and Ian
Paterson. They were subsequently advised their application
had been lodged out
of time, and they would need to seek an extension and the consent of the
Responsible Authority. As the application
for a permit had been made in the
name of their architects, they were also advised that they would have to apply
to either amend
their application for review by substituting the name of their
architects or apply to substitute their names as the permit applicants.
The Council consented to an extension, which was granted on the 4th December.
A letter was sent the same day to all parties advising
that the hearing in
respect of this application would be held on 22nd December. The Tribunal notes
that this letter did not indicate
it would be a joint hearing with the earlier
application.
On the 16th December, Concetta Greco advised that she wished to contest the
application for review of conditions.
The City of Stonnington sent a fax to the Registrar on 21st December ie the day
before the hearing on Tuesday 22nd December. This
noted that all of the
objectors had withdrawn their objection on the basis of amended plan, and that
on this basis, Council had reached
agreement with the applicants on amended
conditions which were set out in the fax, and would consent to the Tribunal
amending the
conditions accordingly.
At the time set down for the hearing, there was no appearance by either the
City of Stonnington or the objector. A staff member
informed the Tribunal that
the Council was advised they would need to attend the hearing which would
proceed as scheduled.
The Tribunal was also told that Mrs Greco, the respondent objector in this
matter, had telephoned the day of the hearing to ask when
the conditions
hearing was scheduled. On being told it had been set down for the same day as
the objectors hearing, she claimed
that she had not been advised of this and
requested an opportunity to make a written submission to the Tribunal before a
Mrs Linda Patterson appeared at the hearing, and with her agreement the hearing
proceeded. She made an oral submission explaining
the amended conditions,
supported by photographs and a detailed locality plan showing the site,
building envelope of the existing
dwelling and proposed extensions and
footprint of dwellings on adjoining allotments.
The Tribunal reserved its decision, indicating to Mrs Paterson that it would
consider the circumstances of any submission forwarded
by Mrs Greco in the
light of the amended conditions.
Having considered the files, the Tribunal considers it should take Mrs Greco's
submission into account. Although it appears Mrs
Greco was in fact advised of
the date the conditions application would be heard, it seems likely that she
received this prior to
being advised the Patersons had even lodged this second
application, in view of the fact that it was sent on 4th December, ie the
day the Council faxed its consent to an extension of time and it was approved
by a Deputy President of the Tribunal.
The notice makes no mention of this being a joint hearing for both
applications. Under the circumstances, therefore, the Tribunal
considers Mrs
Greco not unreasonably, assumed this was a further notice regarding the
objectors application.
In any event, having read Mrs Greco's submission the Tribunal finds that there
is no reason the amended conditions should be of concern
to this objector. The
reasons for this are set out below.
REASONS FOR ORDER (1998/92579)
The Paterson property at 1 Eileen Street fronts the east side of the street,
one property south of Rose Street. The back yard of
the Greco property at 34A
Rose Street, runs across its rear (eastern) boundary, with the Greco house
extending just south of the
northern side boundary of the Paterson land.
There are three conditions at issue, and two of these, 3a and 3e, concern
screening of east-facing first floor bedroom windows, which
was required by
Council to protect the privacy of adjoining properties to the east, including
the Greco's which is directly east.
The plans submitted with the application proposed construction of a
free-standing arched pergola frame, some 1.4m out from the bedroom
question. This was to support an existing Wisteria vine, presumably intended
to provide a vegetation screening to limit
views over adjoining properties.
The officer's report on the application noted that it would take several years
to achieve the desired screening, and that in any
event, as the Wisteria is
deciduous the screening would not be adequate for at least six months of the
In accordance with this report, Condition (3a) was imposed requiring the
windows to be
"obscured by solid translucent screens or perforated panels or
trellis which have a maximum of 25% openings"
. Condition 3e apparently
requires deletion of the pergola frame this was intended to replace. The
Tribunal says apparently, because
this condition refers to it as a
Mrs Greco's submission argued that the screening required by Council was
necessary to protect her privacy.
The Patersons object to fixed screening attached to the windows, but have
agreed to attaching perforated panels or trellis screening
to the pergola
frame, and to also incorporate an evergreen creeper to grow over the frame, in
addition to the Wisteria.
The amended Condition 3a) put forward by Council reads:
"3a) The first floor bedroom windows on the eastern elevation screened with
the timber screen indicated on Plan No. 9814/TP03 dated
June, 1998. The screen
must be planted with the existing Wisteria and an additional evergreen climber.
The screen must be fitted
with lattice or a perforated screen, with a maximum
of 25% openings, in order to screen views from these windows within 9 metres
and beyond a 45 degree angle from the plane of the wall containing the
The Tribunal considers this condition will adequately screen the upper floor
windows and maintain the privacy of adjoining properties
including the
As the pergola frame is to be retained there is no reason for Condition 3e)
although the Council's submission suggested it should
be replaced to read:
"3e) The timber pergola retained and planted with the existing Wisteria and
an additional evergreen climber."
The Tribunal can see no reason for this condition which only repeats what has
been proposed in 3a).
The remaining condition at issue requires the upper storey addition to be set
back 2m from the southern boundary, in lieu of the
1.8m proposed. The Council
has agreed to the 1.8m setback. Mrs Greco submitted in relation to this
condition that she would be
"quite happy for the VCAT, the Responsible
Authority and the Applicant to come to some agreement which may alter this
permit condition"
. She noted that in an urban conservation area, the
height, location and bulk of the proposal was a consideration.
The upper storey addition is at the rear of the dwelling and located above the
existing dwelling where it is attached to the adjoining
dwelling to the south.
Under the circumstances, the Tribunal agrees that a 1.8m setback is
appropriate.
Finally, the Tribunal was informed that further negotiations between the
parties had resulted in agreement on two further minor changes
to the original
application. These involve rendering of the western wall of a storage facility
which faces the street at the end
of the driveway, and a picket style for the
gate proposed between this and the side boundary. The Council supported a
further condition
to this effect, which the Tribunal agrees will improve the
front view of the development from Eileen Street and the condition as
by the Responsible Authority will therefore be added as Condition 3f).
The application for review of the permit conditions will therefore be allowed,
with the conditions amended in line with the above.
Before concluding, the Tribunal feels obliged to comment on the Council's
actions in these matters. It failed to appear at the hearing,
despite advice from Tribunal staff that they were required to attend and given
that there was an objector who had not
consented to the amended conditions
proposed by the Council. Moreover, the files suggest that Council has been
tardy to say the
least, in responding to other requests from Tribunal staff.
The original application was lodged on 3rd October. The Registrar forwarded a
letter to the Council dated 30th October, pointing
out that as the information
required by Practice Direction 2 had not been provided, it was required to
attend a Mention Hearing set
down for 13th November.
Following lodging of the second application on 26th November, further attempts
were apparently made to obtain the necessary information.
A fax was finally
forwarded on 30th November, pointing out that notwithstanding the 30th October
letter, the information was still
outstanding and that action may be taken in
consideration of
"Council's contempt of a direction of the Tribunal"
the information was not provided. The application plans and other information
required under Practice Direction 2 was finally
received at the Tribunal on 4th
It is also noted that the letter sent to the Tribunal by Council and setting
out the amended conditions which they had agreed to,
is dated (Thursday) 17th
December. However, this was only received in facsimile form at the Tribunal on
the 21st December, ie. on
the Monday, the day before the hearing. A hearing
may well have been avoided if this information had been received earlier.
staff would have had an opportunity to contact the only objector to
see if she consented to the amended conditions, in which case
determination may have sufficed.
Tribunal Application No. 1998/92579
The order of the Tribunal is that the application for review is allowed in part
and it is directed that the conditions contained
in Council's Notice of
Decision to Grant dated 16th September 1998 are amended as follows:
1. Condition 3a) is deleted and replaced by:
"3a) The first floor bedroom windows on the eastern elevation screened with
the timber screen indicate don Plan No. 9814/TP03 dated
June, 1998. The screen
must be planted with the existing Wisteria and an additional evergreen climber.
The screen must be fitted
with lattice or a perforated screen, with a maximum
of 25% openings, in order to screen views from these windows within 9 metres
and beyond a 45 degree angle from the plane of the wall containing the
2. Condition 3b) is amended by replacing 2m where it appears with 1.8m.
3. Condition 3e) is deleted and the following condition renumbered
accordingly.
4. A further condition is added as follows:
"3f) The western wall of the storage cupboard rendered and the side gate
constructed in a picket style."
Tribunal Application No. 1998/78531
The order of the Tribunal is that the application for review is disallowed and
a permit is granted in accordance with the above.
It is noted that this is a
formal determination made in the circumstances set out above and that the
Tribunal has not considered
the merits of the case.
J M ATKINSON
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter