URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VADT/1998/55.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hill v Australian Packaging Solutions Pty Ltd [1998] VADT 55 (30 June 1998)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
No. 10 of 1998
Melanie Hill
COMPLAINANT
Australian Packaging Solutions Pty Ltd
FIRST NAMED RESPONDENT
Jim Tosevski
SECOND NAMED RESPONDENT
REASONS FOR DECISION ON AN APPLICATION UNDER SECTION 109 OF THE
OPPORTUNITY ACT 1995
30 June 1998
Ms Cate McKenzie
The Proceeding
On 13 March 1997 Ms Hill lodged a complaint with the Equal Opportunity
Commission ("The Commission") under the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
("The Act").
On 30 January 1998 the Commission referred the complaint to this Tribunal. In
doing so, it acted under s117 of the Act
on the basis that the complaint was not
conciliable. It acted at the Complainant's request.
A Preliminary Conference was listed for 18 March 1998. However, that
conference did not take place because, on that date, the Respondents
have the complaint struck out under s109 of the Act.
The Tribunal commenced to hear the application on 18 March 1998. For that
purpose it was constituted by the President pursuant to
s182 of the Act. The
President gave directions to enable the parties to file and serve written
submissions on the application. Those
written submissions were subsequently
filed and served.
On 28 April 1998 the Tribunal heard oral submissions from the parties. It
gave leave to Ms Callil-Roberts, Solicitor, to appear for
the Complainant, and
to Mr Halfpenny, Solicitor, to appear for the Respondents.
In brief, the complaint claims sexual harassment in employment.
I first set out the relevant legislation and the legal principles applying to
the determination of applications under s109. The Respondents'
application under
that section is on all the grounds mentioned in that section- that is, that the
complaint is frivolous, vexatious,
misconceived or lacking in substance. I do
not need to set out the relevant provisions of the Act relating to the
prohibition of
sexual harassment in various fields of activity, because the
Respondents did not apply to have the complaint struck out on the basis
was incapable of constituting a contravention of the Act or that it was
misconceived for any reason based on the provisions
of the Act. The Respondents'
claim is that the complaint is totally lacking in substance.
I then summarise the material before me. Finally, I consider the submissions
made by the parties.
The Legislation
Section 109(1) of the Act provides-
Respondent may apply to Tribunal to strike out
(1) A respondent may apply in writing to the Tribunal to have a complaint or
any part of it struck out on the grounds that it is frivolous,
misconceived or lacking in substance
Applications under Section 109
De Vos v City of Kingston
(ADT of Vic, 3 January 1997 at pp 9-11),
the Tribunal set out the principles governing applications under s109-
"Section 109 of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
and Section 44C of the
Opportunity Act 1984
permit a Respondent to apply to have a complaint struck out
on certain grounds. A Respondent cannot apply to have a complaint struck
after the hearing of the complaint has commenced or when the complaint is in the
process of being conciliated. The grounds on
which the application may be made
are that the complaint is frivolous, vexatious, misconceived or lacking in
substance. The hearing
of an application to strike out a complaint must commence
within a time specified in the Act. Under s44C of the 1984 Act, the hearing
commence within 7 days of the making of the application. Under s109 of the 1995
Act, the hearing must commence within 14 days
after the making of the
application. An application to strike out a complaint made under either of these
Acts must be heard expeditiously.
On an application under either of these Acts
to strike out a complaint, the Tribunal must give the parties an opportunity to
written and oral submissions, but otherwise its procedure is in its
discretion. Some of the rules governing the final hearing of
complaints do not
apply to the hearing of an application to strike out a complaint (compare
s44C(3) of the 1984 Act and s109(4) of
the 1995 Act). For example, the
provisions relating to the hearing of complaints and governing the joinder of
parties and the entitlement
to give oral evidence do not apply to strike out
applications (1984 Act ss52-55; 1995 Act ss144, 145 and 147). Section 109 of the
1995 Act makes it clear that certain provisions of the Act apply equally to
hearings of complaints and hearings of applications to
strike out complaints.
For example, on both kinds of proceedings, the Tribunal is required to act
fairly (s141), is not bound by
rules of evidence (s142), may make a technical
amendment to a complaint (s146), may receive oral evidence (s148), and may
documents (s149).
Section 44C of the 1984 Act has been discussed extensively by the Court of
Appeal of the Victorian Supreme Court in
State Electricity Commission of
Victoria v Rabel
(18 December 1996, Tadgell, Ormiston and Phillips JJA). The
judgements in that case make it clear that Their Honours regarded the
propositions they set out as applying equally to s109 of the 1995 Act and s44C
of the 1984 Act. we summarise those propositions as
Section 44C and s109 permit the making of
an interlocutory application at a preliminary stage. The procedure to be adopted
in determining
such an application is in the Tribunal's discretion. In
determining the procedure to be adopted, the Tribunal must bear in mind that
proceeding is not the full hearing of the complaint, and that the Act requires
the proceeding to be determined expeditiously.
At the Tribunal's discretion, the
proceeding may be determined on the pleadings and submissions alone, or also by
allowing the parties
to put forward affidavit material, or to give oral
evidence. The procedure that the Tribunal adopts is in its discretion and will
depend on the circumstances of the particular
If on a strike out application a
Complainant indicates to the Tribunal that the whole of the Complainant's case
is contained in the
material then put before the Tribunal by the Complainant,
the Tribunal is entitled to determine the application by asking whether,
the material before it, there is a question of real substance to go to a full
However, if a Complainant
indicates that there is other evidence he or she can call to support his claim
and the Tribunal on the application
does not permit that evidence to be called,
the Tribunal cannot determine the application on the basis that the
Complainant's material
contains the whole of his or her case (
, judgement of Phillips JA at pp17-20; with which Tadgell and Ormiston
JJA agreed).
An application to strike out a
complaint is similar to an application to the Supreme Court in civil proceedings
for summary dismissal
of those proceedings (see for example Rules of Supreme
Court Order 23.01 and Williams, Civil Procedure in Victoria, Volume 1, pp
3415-29). Both are applications designed to prevent abuses of process. However,
it is a serious matter for the Tribunal, on an interlocutory
proceeding which
will generally not involve the hearing of oral evidence, to deprive a litigant
of the chance to have his or her
complaint heard in the ordinary course
Rabel's case
, judgement of Tadgell JA pages 1 and
The Respondent bears the onus of showing
that the Complainant's case ought not be allowed to proceed.
To succeed on the application, the
Respondent must show the Complainant's case is obviously hopeless or could on no
reasonable view
justify relief. The Tribunal's power to strike out a complaint
should be exercised consistently with the objectives of the Act.
In dealing with an application to strike
out a complaint, a clear distinction must be drawn between the complaint or
claim itself
and the evidence which is to be given in support of it. A complaint
cannot be struck out as lacking in substance because it does
not in itself
contain the evidence that supports the claims it makes (
Rabel's case
judgement of Tadgell JA at page 3).
for determining whether a complaint is frivolous, vexatious, misconceived or
lacking in substance under s109 and s44C is
different from that applied in other
Anti-Discrimination jurisdictions, where similar words are used but in a
different legislative
context. It is similar to that applied by the Supreme
Court in civil proceedings in determining whether proceedings are frivolous,
vexatious or an abuse of process under Order 23.01 of the Supreme Court Rules. A
complaint can be struck out under s109 or s44C if
it is obviously unsustainable
in law or in fact. This will include, but is not limited to, a case where a
complaint can be said to
disclose no reasonable cause of action, or where the
Respondent can show a good defence sufficient to warrant the summary termination
of the complaint (
Rabel's case
, judgement of Ormiston JA pages
The Tribunal must be cautious before
striking out a complaint. The Tribunal must be satisfied that the claim is
obviously untenable,
undoubtedly hopeless, before it can be struck out
Rabel's case
, judgement of Ormiston JA pp
The Tribunal should not apply
technical, artificial or mechanical rules in coming to a view about the case
that a Complainant wishes
to advance (
Rabel's case
, judgment of Tadgell
JA at p3)."
I would add one comment. If the material before me
shows that there is a dispute between the parties as to a fact in issue and does
not assist the Tribunal to resolve that dispute, then it is hard to see how the
Respondent will have satisfied the Tribunal that
the complaint should be struck
out under s109. Rather, it should proceed to a full hearing, where evidence on
the matter can be called
and tested by cross-examination.
The material before the Tribunal
The Tribunal has before it-
The complaint;
The written and oral submissions of
the parties in relation to the application.
I now summarise the
assertions contained in the complaint.
Ms Hill was employed with the first named Respondent ("APS") from 26 June
1995 to 21 November 1996. She worked as a receptionist and
secretary and also
performed other general duties such as sales, telemarketing, and cleaning and
other duties in the APS factory.
Ms Hill asserts that, on one occasion, one of
the factory workers tried to kiss her. She spoke to her supervisor, Jim
Tosevski, about
this incident, and he told her that it was up to her whether the
worker was sacked. Ms Hill indicated that she did not want the worker
Hill alleges that, after this conversation with Mr Tosevski, Mr Tosevski behaved
in the following way-
Approximately 5 or 6 times during
her employment, he called her "tits" and commented on her weight;
On one occasion, when she had asked to
wear jeans to work, he said "I don't care what you wear as long as you look
On one occasion he told her he
had dreamt about her the previous night;
On "a couple" of occasions, while Ms
Hill was working at her desk, Mr Tosevski came up behind her and massaged her
On one occasion, after Ms
Hill asked Mr Tosevski to buy her a plain shirt on one of his business trips to
Malaysia and offered to
pay for it, Mr Tosevski brought to work and showed her a
shirt with "sexual references" printed on it;
Ms Hill was given a teddy bear by her
work mates for her 21st birthday. Her work mates signed the teddy bear. Mr
Tosevski signed it
on its lips.
occasion, Mr Tosevski discussed in front of her the "dirty" movies he had
brought back from Malaysia;
November 1996 Ms Hill, for the second time, asked Mr Tosevski for an increase in
pay. After indicating that "Shirley" (whom
I presume, from reading the complaint
as a whole, is Mr Tosevski's business partner) would not agree to this, Mr
Tosevski came around
Ms Hill's desk to where she was standing and rubbed her
face and cheek and said "I will have to think of some cash jobs for
In her complaint, Ms Hill asserts that, when this behavior
occurred, she either walked away or showed by the way she looked at Mr
her disapproval of this behavior. On 21 November 1996, she asked for a reference
from "Shirley". She has not returned to
APS since that day. She asserts that she
feels too uncomfortable to continue to work with Mr Tosevski. She asserts that
incident of 20 November 1996, she developed dermatitis on her scalp
and face and began to have trouble sleeping. She asserts that
she has had
medical treatment for both these conditions. She asserts that her treating
doctor has recommended that she not return
to APS. She asserts that the behavior
of Mr Tosevski has greatly upset her.
In their submissions, the Respondents deny all the behavior alleged by Ms
Hill. They assert that there is no corroborating evidence,
that the complaint
was not lodged until after Ms Hill's employment ceased, and that she has a
"medical history" which shows that
she has made unfounded complaints of sexual
harassment against family members and male friends and is "unstable, unreliable
and unemployable".
They also claim that her complaint is baseless, after taking
into account her conduct at various functions organised by APS, her
comments at
her workplace about sexual liaisons, and her conduct with a worker at the
workplace, occurring when her employer was
It is not in dispute that, before lodging this complaint, Ms Hill instituted
proceedings against the Respondents in the Australian
Industrial Relations Court
for unfair dismissal, and subsequently discontinued those proceedings.
The Submissions
The Respondents first submit that it would be inequitable for this Tribunal
to hear this complaint because Ms Hill has already commenced
and discontinued
proceedings in relation to the termination of her employment before the
Industrial Relations Court. The Respondents
conceded that there was no estoppel.
The Respondents put no material before the Tribunal to show why it would be
inequitable for
the Tribunal not to hear this complaint. The Tribunal is not
relitigating the matter, because the matter never came on for hearing
Industrial Relations Court. The Respondents did not explain to the Tribunal the
grounds of the unfair dismissal application,
so that there is no material before
the Tribunal to show that this claim of sexual harassment during employment and
eventual termination
of employment on that ground is based on the same
allegations as were made in the proceeding for unfair dismissal. The legislative
criteria for proceedings under the Act and under what was then the
Relations Act 1988
of the Commonwealth are different. In any event, this
complaint also concerns conduct alleged to have occurred during employment,
rather than simply the termination of employment.
It is then submitted for the Respondents that this complaint is baseless
because Ms Hill's evidence is uncorroborated and for a number
of other reasons
that affect her credibility. The matters alleged against her credibility are of
a serious and damaging nature. There
is no affidavit material in the
Respondents' submissions to support these allegations. I reject this submission
of the Respondents.
On a reading of
case, (cited above), a
complaint can only be struck out as lacking substance at this preliminary stage
where it is clearly unsustainable
or manifestly hopeless. The complaint is an
initiating document. It is not evidence. It is only required to contain details
alleged contravention of the Act
Although the Tribunal has a
discretion to permit evidence to be given on a "strike out" application under
, the parties have no entitlement to call that evidence. Certainly, a clear
distinction must be drawn between proceedings on an application
the full hearing of the complaint. The matters raised by the Respondents are
relevant to the evidence that the Complainant might
call at a full hearing of
the complaint, and to the credibility of that evidence. In the way they are now
put, they are not relevant
to an application under
Mere assertions,
particularly assertions of this damaging kind, are not enough to satisfy the
Tribunal that the complaint is clearly
unsustainable in fact. On the contrary,
the material before me indicates that the parties are in clear dispute as to
almost all the
facts in issue, and that the matter ought to proceed to a full
hearing where evidence can be called and tested.
The Respondents sought to rely on
in Re Vernazza
([1959] 2 ALL ER 200)
as a case which I should use, it was submitted, as authority for determining
that this complaint is vexatious.
That case concerned the last of a long line of
unsuccessful proceedings by which a person sought to challenge dismissal from
employment.
Proceedings of a similar nature in respect of this subject were
instituted by that person over a 20 year period. The court was asked
that no further such proceedings could be instituted without the leave of the
court. This case has no application to the
present complaint. Only one previous
proceeding has been brought by this Complainant in the Australian Industrial
Relations Court,
and it is not clear from the material that the grounds of claim
in that proceeding were the same as the grounds of claim in the complaint.
any event, the complaint covers a wider subject matter.
There is no suggestion in the material before me that this complaint was
bought for a purpose other than the adjudication of rights
under the Act.
The Respondents did not seek costs. Costs were sought on behalf of Ms Hill on
the basis that this application is baseless, is without
foundation and should
never have been made. After examining the material before me, I agree with this
submission. The Tribunal has
a clear discretion as to the award of costs. The
Tribunal has held that, in this jurisdiction, a rule that costs automatically
the event is inappropriate. However, the Tribunal will consider the award
of costs if there are circumstances to justify the award,
apart from the fact of
a party having won (
Murphy v Colorific Lithographics Pty Ltd
Vic, 22 January 1997).
In this case, in my view, the Respondent's application is without foundation
and ought not to have been made. I award costs of the
application in favour of
the Complainant.
I conclude that this application fails. The applicants are to pay the
Complainant's costs in relation to the application. At this
stage of the
complaint process, there has been no relief formulated by the Complainant.
Accordingly, I consider it appropriate that
the costs be determined on scale A
of the County Court scale of costs.
This complaint will now proceed to Preliminary Conference.
On an application under Section 109 of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
Act"), and on reading the complaint and the material filed by the parties in
relation to the application, and on hearing Ms
Callil-Roberts, Solicitor, for
the Complainant and Mr Halfpenny, Solicitor, for the Respondents, THIS TRIBUNAL
(CONSTITUTED BY THE
PRESIDENT PURSUANT TO SECTION 182 OF THE ACT) DOES
That this application is
Pursuant to Section 138 of the Act,
that the Respondents are to pay the Complainant's costs in relation to the
application under Section
109 of the Act and in relation to the Complainant's
application for costs.
That the costs
referred to in paragraph 2 are on a party/party basis and, in default of
agreement, are to be assessed on Scale A of
the County Court Scale of
That, in default of agreement, the
costs referred to in paragraph 2 are to be taxed or settled by the
That the Respondents are to pay
the costs referred to in paragraph 2 and fixed in accordance with paragraphs 3
and 4 in accordance
with any agreement between the parties or, in default of
agreement, on or before a date fixed by the
That the parties have general
liberty to apply.
That this complaint is to
be placed in the Tribunal's list of Preliminary Conferences, according to its
usual practice.
Dated this 30th day of June 1998.
Ms Cate McKenzie
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (40.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter