URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/38.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Frankston C165fran (PSA) [2025] PPV 38 (12 August 2025)
Frankston Planning Scheme Amendment C165fran
Corrections Amendment
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
12 August 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
Frankston Planning Scheme Amendment C165fran
Corrections Amendment
12 August 2025
Sally Conway, Chair
List of Figures
Glossary and abbreviations
Frankston City Council
Department of Transport and Planning
Environmental Significance Overlay Schedule 1
Environmental Significance Overlay Schedule 4
Frankston Metropolitan Activity Centre
Public Conservation and Resource Zone
Planning Scheme
Frankston Planning Scheme
Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule 5
Supporting Information
Corrections Amendment – Planning Scheme Amendment C165fran –
Supporting Information
Amendment summary
The Amendment
Frankston Planning Scheme Amendment C165fran
Common name
Corrections Amendment
Brief description
Corrections and updates including:
- updating zone
and overlay maps
overlay schedules
spelling errors and ensuring consistency in terminology
Subject land
Various properties across Frankston as set out in Chapter 1.1 (ii)
The Proponent
Frankston City Council
Planning Authority
Frankston City Council
Authorisation
24 October 2024, with conditions
23 January to 3 March 2025
Submissions
Received from:
1. Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action (DEECA) –
2. Frankston Beach Association
3. (Withdrawn)
4. Fogale Group Pty Ltd
5. (Withdrawn)
6. Country Fire Authority (CFA) - Support
Panel process
Sally Conway
Directions Hearing
By video conference, 30 June 2025
Panel Hearing
Not required (considered through written process)
Site inspections
Not required
Frankston Planning Scheme PSA C165fran [2025] PPV
Date of this report
12 August 2025
Executive summary
Frankston Planning
Scheme Amendment C165fran (the Amendment) proposes several changes to correct
existing errors, update property
addresses and remove outdated content.
It also proposes to:
rezone land in
the Frankston Nature Reserve and Pines Flora and Fauna Reserve to Public
Conservation and Resource Zone (PCRZ) to reflect
the use of the site as public
open space with ecological significance
rezone existing
unreserved land adjacent to the Pines Flora and Fauna Reserve to PCRZ to reflect
its informal use as part of the Reserve
partially rezone
land at 5-7 Sunderland Court, Seaford to General Residential Zone to reflect its
existing use and align the zone
and property boundary
partially rezone
land at 54-55 Wells Road, Seaford to Industrial 1 Zone to reflect its existing
Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule 5 (SLO5) to 16 Frost Street and 23 Sutton
Crescent, Carrum Downs
remove the SLO5
from several properties as listed in Table 1 to the SLO5.
corrections will improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the Planning
Corrections amendments can be confusing for the general community. These
amendments often propose numerous, unrelated changes to
a planning scheme that
are issue specific and affect only select clauses or maps. Such is the case for
this Amendment.
Many of the issues raised in submissions to this Amendment were outside its
scope and therefore unable to be considered by the Panel.
This sometimes occurs
when it is not easy to discern the changes being proposed. The Panel found the
background document titled
‘Corrections Amendment – Planning Scheme
Amendment C165fran – Supporting Information’ useful in clearly
understanding
the changes being proposed and it was unfortunate that it was not
exhibited alongside the Amendment. It contained more ‘user
friendly’ detail than the Explanatory Report, was presented in a less
technical manner, and included pictures as visual aids.
The Panel encourages
Council to continue to prepare this type of supporting document for future
corrections amendments.
Key issues raised in submissions relevant to the Amendment included:
the proposed
rezoning of land at 40N Ballarto Road, Frankston (as part of the Pines Flora and
Fauna Reserve)
the removal of
the SLO5 from listed properties.
The Panel considers it is
appropriate to:
rezone land at
40N Ballarto Road, Frankston to the Public Conservation and Resource Zone to
reflect its use as part, or informally
part, of the Pines Flora and Fauna
Reserve, reflecting its role as an area of ecological significance
remove the SLO5
from sites that no longer contain trees in need of
protection.
Overall, the Amendment is consistent with relevant
Ministerial Directions, is well founded and strategically justified.
Recommendations
Based on the reasons set out in this Report, the
Panel recommends that Council:
1 Introduction
1.1 The Amendment
(i) Amendment description
purpose of the Amendment is to make various corrections to the Frankston
Planning Scheme.
Specifically, the Amendment proposes to:
amend Clause
15.01-5L (Preferred Neighbourhood Character) and Clause 02.04 (Strategic
framework plans) to correct wording and remove
outdated references
rezone land in
the Frankston Nature Reserve and Pines Flora and Fauna Reserve to Public
Conservation and Resource Zone (PCRZ) to reflect
the use of the site as public
open space with ecological significance
rezone existing
unreserved land adjacent to the Pines Flora and Fauna Reserve to PCRZ to reflect
its informal use as part of the Reserve
partially rezone
land at 5-7 Sunderland Court, Seaford to General Residential Zone to reflect its
existing use and align the zone
and property boundary
partially rezone
land at 54-55 Wells Road, Seaford to Industrial 1 Zone to reflect its existing
Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule 5 (SLO5) to 16 Frost Street and 23 Sutton
Crescent, Carrum Downs which were inadvertently
Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule 2 to reduce requirements to prune
Significant Landscape Overlay Schedules 1-6 to correct spelling mistakes,
clarify wording, correctly identify tree species,
delete trees from the mapping
and tables which have been removed and correctly identify property
Environmental Significance Overlay Schedule 4 (ESO4) to correct spelling
mistakes, clarify wording and correctly identify
property addresses.
(ii) The subject land
The Amendment applies to several properties across
Proposed zoning changes apply to land shown in Figures 1 and 2.
rezoned to PCRZ – Frankston Nature Reserve
Source: Document 2, Council submission
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figures 1 and 2 have been
removed from this version of the report. Contact Planning
Panels Victoria to
obtain a complete copy of the report.
rezoned to PCRZ – Pines Flora and Fauna Reserve area
Source: Document 2, Council submission
Land affected by the proposed changes to the application of the SLO5 are
shown in Figure 3.
Land affected
by changes to the SLO5
Source: Document 2, Council submission
1.2 Background
Chronology of events
28 October 2024
Council received Ministerial authorisation to prepare Amendment C165fran,
subject to two conditions.
22 January – 3 March 2025
Public exhibition of the Amendment. Six submissions were received. One
supported the Amendment, two supported the Amendment subject
to changes, and
three objected to the Amendment. Following discussions with Council officers,
submissions 3 and 5 were withdrawn.
2 June 2025
Council considered the submissions to the Amendment and resolved to request
the Minister for Planning to appoint an independent planning
panel to consider
submission.
11 June 2025
The Minister for Planning appointed a Panel to consider the submissions to
the Amendment.
1.3 Procedural issues
Panel held an online Directions Hearing on 30 June 2025 to discuss procedural
matters for the Panel process. One party, Frankston
City Council, requested to
be heard by the Panel. No other submitter attended the Directions Hearing or
completed a request to be
heard form.
At the Directions Hearing, Council requested the Panel process be conducted
through a written process. Given the absence of any other
party to Panel
proceedings, the Panel agreed to this request.
1.4 The Panel’s approach
Panel has assessed the Amendment against the principles of net community benefit
and sustainable development, as set out in Clause
71.02-3 (Integrated decision
making) of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment. All submissions and materials have
been considered
by the Panel in reaching its conclusions, regardless of whether they are
specifically mentioned in the Report.
1.5 Limitations
Submissions raised
several issues outside the scope of this Amendment, including:
depiction of the
land parcel formerly identified as the proposed Safe Boat Harbour on planning
scheme maps
planning controls applying to foreshore land, including the Special Use Zone
review of the
health and retention value of existing trees listed in the
These issues raise matters, or affect land parcels, which are
not within the scope of this Amendment and have therefore not been considered
2 Strategic issues
2.1 Planning context
chapter identifies planning context relevant to the Amendment.
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
- section 4 of
Municipal Planning Strategy
- Clause 02.04
(Strategic Framework Maps)
Planning Policy Framework
15.01-5L (Preferred Neighbourhood Character)
Planning scheme provisions
Residential Zone
- Industrial 1
Conservation and Resource Zone
- Significant
Landscape Overlay
- Environmental
Significance Overlay
Ministerial directions
- Ministerial
Direction 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments)
Planning practice notes
Practice Note 46: Strategic Assessment Guidelines, September 2022
2.2 Strategic justification
(i) The issue
issue is whether the Amendment is appropriate and strategically justified.
(ii) Submissions
Council submitted the purpose of a
‘corrections amendment’ is to improve the operation of a planning
scheme and ensure
decisions are made within a clear legislative framework. It
said the Amendment will reduce confusion for users by:
instances where single properties are in multiple zones
appropriate zones to public land
confusing terms in overlay provisions
correct property addresses for sites with protected trees.
submission disputed the strategic justification for the Amendment, one
submission was concerned the Amendment was premature.
It submitted it would be
prudent to delay the Amendment pending the outcome of Amendment C160fran, which
proposed to apply the Activity
Centre Zone to the Frankston Metropolitan
Activity Centre (FMAC). It noted the maps presented in the exhibited Clause
02.04 (Strategic
Framework Plans) displayed both the existing and proposed
configuration for the FMAC and were confusing.
Council explained the Amendment was exhibited while Amendment C160fran was
under active consideration by the Minister for Planning
and therefore the
proposed FMAC boundary was used in the two maps being amended as part of
Amendment C165fran:
Clause 02.04-2
Open space & recreation network map
Clause 02.04-5
Economic development framework map.
Other maps in Clause 02.04 were
not part of the Amendment and therefore did not show revised boundaries for the
FMAC. Amendment C160fran
has now been approved and therefore the boundary shown
for the FMAC will be consistent.
Proposed changes to the Planning Scheme were most clearly explained in the
document referred to the Panel titled ‘Corrections
Amendment –
Planning Scheme Amendment C165fran – Supporting Information’
(Supporting Information document). This
document was not exhibited with the
In response to Panel Direction 1c) which requested an explanation of the
purpose of this document and why it was not exhibited, Council
the document was
prepared by Council officers to justify the proposed corrections to the Planning
it was attached
to the Council report dated 12 August 2024, where Council resolved to request
Ministerial authorisation to prepare
the Amendment
it was submitted
for exhibition purposes alongside the Amendment documentation
exhibition of the Amendment, Council officers became aware it had not been
exhibited with the Amendment documents and requested
the Department of Transport
and Planning (DTP) to upload the document on the DTP Planning Scheme Amendments
the DTP did not
upload the document and subsequently advised:
The amendment
documents for C165fran exhibited on the DTP website met all the relevant
requirements of the
Planning and Environment Act
and Regulations. DTP did not
consider that the exhibition of the “Corrections Amendment –
Planning Scheme Amendment C165fran
– Supporting Information”
document was necessary given the explanatory report included very detailed
information about
what was being proposed by the amendment.’
Council officers
provided a hard copy of the document to a submitter in follow up discussions as
they were seeking further detail
proposed only very minor formatting changes to Clause 02.04 following exhibition
of the Amendment (refer Document 4).
(iii) Discussion
The Amendment proposes several changes to the
Planning Scheme to correct existing errors and remove outdated content, and this
improve its efficiency and effectiveness.
Corrections amendments can be confusing for the general community. These
amendments often propose numerous, unrelated changes to
a planning scheme that
are issue specific and affect only select clauses or maps. Such is the case for
this Amendment. Corrections
may be clear and obvious to regular users of the
planning scheme but difficult to understand for others.
Many of the issues raised in submissions to this Amendment were outside its
scope and therefore unable to be considered by the Panel.
This sometimes occurs
when it is not easy to discern the changes being proposed. It unfortunate the
background document titled
‘Corrections Amendment – Planning Scheme
Amendment C165fran – Supporting Information’ was not exhibited
the Amendment. It contained more ‘user friendly’ detail
than the Explanatory Report, was presented in a less technical
manner, and
included pictures as visual aids. The Panel found it useful in clearly
understanding the changes being proposed and
encourages Council to continue to
prepare this type of supporting document for future corrections amendments.
Nonetheless, the Explanatory Report did set out the proposed changes in some
detail and exhibition of the Amendment did meet the requirements
of Ministerial
Directions 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments) and 15 (The planning scheme
amendment process).
Overall, the Amendment is well founded and strategically justified.
The more substantive changes proposed by the Amendment, including the
rezoning of land forming part of the Pines Flora and Fauna Reserve
removal of the Significant Landscape Overlay Schedule 5 (SLO5) from selected
sites are discussed in the following chapters.
(iv) Conclusions and recommendation
For the reasons set out in this report, the Panel
concludes that the Amendment:
is consistent
with the relevant Ministerial Directions
is well founded
and strategically justified
should proceed
generally as exhibited and include the formatting correction presented by
Council in the Day 1 version of Clause 02.04
(Document 4).
recommends Council:
Frankston Planning Scheme Amendment C165 as exhibited, subject to replacing
‘02.04-0’ with ’02.04-1’
3 40N Ballarto Road, Frankston
(i) The issue
issue is whether land at 40N Ballarto Road, Frankston should be zoned to
(ii) Background
The Amendment proposes to rezone part of the land at
40N Ballarto Road from Public Use Zone 7 ‘Other public use’ to the
PCRZ. The affected parcels are all part of the Pines Flora and Fauna Reserve
and include:
2086/PP2619
2053/PP2619
2051/PP2619
2173/PP2619
2052/PP2619
4 shows the parcel of land known as 40N Ballarto Road, and Figure 5 shows the
portion of land affected by the proposed rezoning
to PCRZ (currently zoned
Public Use Zone 7).
40N Ballarto
Road, Frankston (red outline)
Source: Vicplan 30 July 2025
Source: Exhibited Amendment Map (003znMap05)
(iii) Submissions
One submission opposed rezoning land parcels at 40N
Ballarto Road to PCRZ and submitted:
the site was
once the primary government research facility but has been abandoned and
buildings on site are in various levels of decay
the current
Public Use Zone 7 would align with its current use but is not ideal
the Reserve has
been allowed to grow over this area for years creating a possible fire
rezoning to PCRZ
would impact the current use of facilities which exist upon the site, and its
possible expansion
the land should
- rezoned to the
new Precinct Zone
within the metropolitan growth boundary
- developed as
an affordable diverse hub, including housing, for the economic and social
wellbeing of the community.
Council explained:
land at 42N
Ballarto Road was the site of the research facility (the rectangular parcel to
the north of the proposed PCRZ is shown
on Figure 5) and not land at 40N
Ballarto Road
land at 42N
Ballarto Road is not included in this Amendment and is the subject of Amendment
C155fran, considered by the Victorian
Government Land Standing Advisory
Committee in 2024 and is currently on hold
land forming
part of this Amendment is part of the Pines Flora and Fauna Reserve
the Frankston
Open Space Strategy 2016-36 identifies the Reserve as regional open space
Parks Victoria
requested Council to rezone the land to PCRZ to support consistent land
management.
Council submitted:
the subject
important role in protecting biodiversity and providing recreational
opportunities benefiting community’s health
- is Crown land
and is not ‘surplus’
- is outside the
Urban Growth Boundary
- is constrained
by several overlays including the Bushfire Management Overlay, Environmental
Significance Overlay – Schedule
1 (ESO1), with a small section within the
Land Subject to Inundation Overlay
suitable for social or affordable housing because it is not well located near
services or public transport, or within an
800-metre walkable catchment of the
there are no
designated priority precincts in the Frankston municipality, and it is therefore
inappropriate to apply the Precinct
(iv) Discussion
Rezoning land at 40N Ballarto Road, Frankston to
PCRZ is supported to reflect its status as part of the Pines Flora and Fauna
The ‘Reservation Purpose’ of affected parcels of land at 40N
Ballarto Road is ‘Preservation of an Area of Ecological
Significance’. The Panel notes that land southeast of the Peninsula Link
Freeway proposed for rezoning to PCRZ (but not part
of 40N Ballarto Road) is not
reserved as such, however it is understood that all of the land proposed for
rezoning informally functions
as part of the Reserve and has ecological
significance. This is evidenced by the application of the ESO1 to all of the
The land is not considered suitable for future housing development. It is
outside the metropolitan Urban Growth Boundary which can
only be amended by a
majority vote in both houses of Parliament. This is not a recommended course of
action for this land given:
the ESO1 applies
to the whole of the land and a large part of it has been identified as having a
vegetation rating of State level
significance
the Bushfire
Management Overlay applies to the site, recognising its high risk for potential
it is not well
located for social or affordable housing regarding the availability of public
transport and proximity to activity centres.
(v) Conclusions
The Panel concludes:
appropriate to rezone land at 40 Ballarto Road to Public Conservation and
Resource Zone to reflect its status as part of the
Pines Flora and Fauna Reserve
and an area with ecological significance.
appropriate to consider the land for housing development because it:
- is outside the
metropolitan Urban Growth Boundary
- has ecological
significance and a high risk for potential bushfire
- is not well
located for social or affordable house as it is not close to public transport or
an activity centre.
4 Removal of the SLO5 from listed sites
(i) The issue
issue is whether it is appropriate and justified to remove the SLO5 from listed
(ii) Submissions
One submission raised concern that:
there was no
explanation given for the removal of trees on sites listed in the Amendment,
where it was proposed to remove the SLO5
the loss of tree
coverage and habitat in Carrum Downs is concerning, noting tree canopy cover in
that area is the lowest in the Frankston
municipality.
explained the Amendment proposes to remove 50 trees from Table 1 in the SLO5
because the trees no longer exist on the listed
properties, for reasons that are
mostly unknown. It agreed canopy trees are valued in Carrum Downs, given the
low canopy cover in
this area and that a separate Amendment C156fran
(Biodiversity policy update) addresses this issue by including broad policy
considerations
to improve canopy tree cover.
(iii) Discussion
It is appropriate to remove the SLO5 from sites that
no longer contain trees in need of protection. The reason for the removal of
the trees is not a matter for this planning scheme amendment process. Where
trees have been removed illegally, Council may utilise
planning enforcement
processes to address the situation.
(iv) Conclusion
The Panel concludes it is appropriate to remove the
SLO5 from the listed sites as part of this Amendment because these sites no
contain trees that require protection.
A Document list
Description
Provided by
Panel Directions
Planning Panels Victoria (PPV)
Council submission
Frankston City Council (Council)
Explanatory Report – Day 1 version
Strategic Framework Plans – Day 1 version
Letter to Council requesting further information
7 August 25
Email response to Document 5 with further information, including two
attachments
11 August 25
Email to clarify reservation status of Parcel 2086/PP2619
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (17.7 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter