URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2021/41.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Abbott Sons Pty Ltd at Exeter Cellars premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2021] VCGLR 41 (16 December 2021)
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an application by Abbott Sons Pty Ltd under
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for an internal review of the decision to
refuse to grant a temporary limited licence to extend trading hours for the
premises trading
as Exeter Cellars, located at Shop 1-3, 401 Maroondah Highway,
Croydon North
Commission:
Ross Kennedy PSM, Chair
Danielle Huntersmith, Commissioner Des Powell AM, Commissioner
Date of Hearing: Date of Decision: Date of Reasons:
21 December 2021
The Commission has determined to affirm the decision of the
delegate and has refused to grant the temporary limited licence.
Ross Kennedy PSM
Cellars is a bottle shop and liquor store located at Shop 1-3, 401 Maroondah
Highway, Croydon North
(the Premises).
14 October 2021, Abbott Sons Pty Ltd
(the Applicant)
application with the Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation
(the Commission)
for a temporary limited licence
(the Original
Application)
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for the Premises.
Applicant holds a packaged liquor licence for the Premises, # 32005886
4. The Licence permits the supply of packaged liquor during the
following hours
(the Existing Trading Hours):
I On any day other than Sunday,
Good Friday, ANZAC Day or Christmas day Between 9am and 11pm
Sunday ANZAC Day
Between 1Oam and 11pm Between 12noon and 11pm
Original Application sought a temporary limited licence to extend the Existing
Trading Hours so that the Applicant could supply
liquor on Christmas Day 2021
between the hours of 1Oam and 10pm
(the Proposed Temporary Licence Trading
Proposed Temporary Licence Trading Hours fall outside of 'ordinary trading
hours' as defined in section 3 of the LCR Act in relation
to a packaged liquor
licence. Section 3 provides that 'ordinary trading hours' are:
.in relation to
packed liquor licence or late night (packaged
liquor) licence
(i) the hours between
and 11pm on each day, other than Sunday,
Good Friday, ANZAC Day or Christmas Day;
(ii) the hours between 10am and 11pm on Sunday; and
(iii) the hours between 12noon and 11pm on ANZAC Day...
Minister for Consumer Affairs, Gaming and Liquor Regulation has published
guidelines representing the policy of the Victorian
Government concerning the
trading hours of liquor licences that allow the sale of packaged liquor
Guidelines).
The Guidelines state that the grant of a licence
permitting the provision of packaged liquor from licensed premises during hours
of 'ordinary trading hours' should only be granted in exceptional
circumstances, which are to be demonstrated by the Applicant.
section 9(4) of the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Regulation Act 2011
(the VCGLR Act),
the Commission must have regard to any
decision-making guidelines issued by the Minister when exercising its internal
review function
for this matter.
Original Application Was submitted through the online liquor portal, and no
supporting documents were attached.
On 25 October 2021, an authorised delegate of the Commission
wrote to the Applicant via email requesting additional supporting
information to assist in determining the Original Application. In
this email,
the Delegate highlighted that the Commission was required to have regard to the
Guidelines in determining the Original
Application and invited the Applicant to
provide a submission showing the exceptional circumstances that applied in this
1 All references to legislation are references to the LCR Act unless stated
2 The Guidelines are dated 7 June 2012 and are titled the "Grant of Licences for
the Sale of Packaged Liquor".
the email, the Delegate specified the following information in relation to
making a submission for exceptional circumstances:
"Please keep in mind that for
circumstance to be considered
exceptional, the relevant circumstances must be:
not regular,
routine or normally encountered."
the same day, the Applicant's director, Mr Vinit Abbott, provided submissions in
response to the Delegate's request, via email,
in which he
location of the Premises is convenient to local
other shops along the strip are open for trading on Christmas
of the Applicant's customers for Christmas Day will consist of essential workers
and retail workers who are unable to shop prior
to Christmas Day;
elderly customers live within walking distance and it's convenient for them to
shop local;
Applicant is a small family business;
Applicant has a COVID-19 plan;
has been an exceptional year due to the COVID-19 pandemic; and
Applicant has held a liquor licence for 22 years and has had no compliance
11 November 2021, the Delegate determined to refuse the Application, citing that
the points provided in the Applicant's response
did not represent exceptional
circumstances as envisaged by the Guidelines
(the Original Decision).
Specifically, the Delegate stated:
history of compliance with the LCR Act is an expectation, not an exception;
has impacted the entire liquor industry and cannot be said to be an
change to renewal fees for packaged liquor licences indicates that packaged
liquor has not been affected as much as other types
wish to make up for potential lost revenue is not an exception;
a convenient location for residents to purchase liquor is not an exception;
packaged liquor being available before Christmas Day, there are opportunities
for essential and retail workers to pre-plan and
pre-purchase the liquor that
they wish to consume on Christmas Day; and
demand for services/supply is not an exceptional circumstance, particularly
given that the Guidelines serve to minimise harm.
Application for Internal Review
18 November 2021, the Applicant lodged an application for internal review (the
Review Application) .
Applicant made the following submissions in support of the Review
Application:
have held a liquorlicence for 22 years and have had no compliance
the Commission granted us a temporary limited licence last year to enable us
to supply liquor on Christmas Day 2020, and there has
been no change to our
circumstances since that licence was granted; and
to having previously been granted a liquor licence to trade on Christmas Day
2020, we kept our submissions the same in 2021 as
had been previously
15 December 2021, the Applicant via email consented to the Review Application
being determined 'on the papers', and stated that
the Premises are part of
Maroondah Village Shopping Centre, which is open on Christmas Day 2021 and
caters to a large population
of all age groups.
Legislation and the Commission's task
The Commission's internal review power
2 of Part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under section
152, the Delegate's decision in respect of
the Original Application is a
reviewable decision, and the Applicant is eligible to apply for review of that
decision. The Review
Application was made under section 153.
section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to a review
application is to make a fresh decision that:
or varies the Original Decision; or
aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the Commission
on review considers appropriate.
the LCR Act, an application to grant a licence may be contested or uncontested.
Pursuant to section 3(1) of the LCR Act, an
uncontested application relevantly
" an application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation of
licence or BYO permit in respect of which no objection is received
under Division
of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division for
that objection (or that period as extended under section 174)".
It is noted
that the Original Application was uncontested, and the Review Application
similarly remains uncontested.
effect, the Commission, on internal review, stands in the shoes of the Delegate
and makes a fresh decision with respect to the
Original Application. In doing
so, it must consider all the information, material and evidence before the
Delegate. It may also consider
further information, material or evidence as part
of making its decision.
Exercising the internal review power
9 of the VCGLR Act requires the Commission, in exercising its internal review
function, to have regard to the objects of the
LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines issued by the Minister under section 5 of the VCGLR Act.s
considering the Review Application, the Commission must determine whether
exceptional circumstances have been demonstrated by the
Applicant to be granted
a temporary limited licence for the provision of packaged liquor from licensed
premises during hours that
are outside 'ordinary trading hours', as defined by
section 3 of the LCR Act.
objects of the LCR Act are set out in section 4(1), which provides:
3 Sections 4(2) and 157(2) to (5) of the LCR Act and section 25(3) of the VCGLR
Act further prescribe the manner in which the Commission
is to undertake
internal reviews.
4 See section 157(3).
5 VCGLR Act, section 9(3) and (4).
"(1) The objects of this Act are-
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by-
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products;
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption
of alcohol and
reducing risky drinking of a/Coho/ and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality
and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment."
4(2) provides further that:
"ft is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion,
must be exercised and
performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the
misuse and abuse of alcohol."
Court of Appeal of the Victorian Supreme Court has made it clear in
Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
(Kordister)
that harm minimisation is a fundamental principle of the LCR Act, and
can properly be regarded as
"the primary regulatory object of the Act and
therefore the primary consideration in liquor licensing decisions".s
However, as was also noted by the Court of Appeal,
"this is not to say
... that it [harm minimisation] is to be taken into account, or given such
weight, to the exclusion of the other
Commission considers that while the grounds of refusal outlined in section 44(2)
are relevant considerations, the ultimate determination
of an uncontested
application is tobe made pursuant to sections 44(1) and 157(1) at the discretion
of the Commission with reference
to the objects of the LCR Act, including the
development of a diversity of licensed facilities reflecting community
expectations.
Conduct of an inquiry
34 of the VCGLR Act provides that subject to the VCGLR Act, gambling legislation
or liquor legislation, the Commission may
conduct any inquiry in any manner it
considers appropriate.
the conduct of an inquiry, section 25(3) of the VCGLR Act provides that the
Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence,
however must comply with the
rules of natural justice.
[2012] VSCA 325
, at [19] per Warren CJ and Osborn JA;
[188] per Tate JA.
[2012] VSCA 325
, at [188] per Tate JA.
As noted in paragraph 6 above, 'ordinary trading hours' in relation to a
packaged liquor licence or a late night (packaged liquor)
licence are defined
under section 3 of the LCR Act as:
(i) the hours between 9
and 11 p.m. on each day, other than
Sunday, Good Friday, Anzac Day or Christmas Day;
(ii) the hours between 10
and 11 p.m. on Sunday; and
(iii) the hours between 12 noon and 11 p.m. on ANZAC Day.
Material before the Commission
Commission had before it and considered all the materials received by the
Delegate which included:
Original Application; and
submissions
from the Applicant in support of the Original Application, listed at paragraph
Commission also had before it and considered additional information and evidence
the Original Decision;
Review Application, which included submissions in support as listed at paragraph
15 above; and
an email from the Applicant dated 15 December 2021, in which it confirmed
agreement for the matter to be determined 'on the papers'
as stated above at
paragraph 16.
Reasons for decision on review
Issues for determination on review
making its decision on review as to whether to grant the temporary limited
licence the subject of the Review Application, the issues
for the Commission to
consider are as follows:
application of the Guidelines, which the Comm ission is required to have regard
to under section 9(4) of the VCGLR Act given the
Proposed Temporary Licence
Trading Hours; and
the Commission should exercise its discretion to grant the temporary limited
licence the subject of the Review Application,
having regard to the objects of
the LCR Act and, in particular, harm minimisation, which is the primary
of these issues are discussed in turn.
Application of the Guidelines - Exceptional
Circumstances?
section 9(4) of the VCGLR Act, the Commission must have regard to the Guidelines
in exercising its internal review function
in this matter. The Guidelines are
mentioned at paragraph 7 above, and their relevance to this Review Application
is discussed below.
3 of the Guidelines requires applicants for licences, excepting those specified
in paragraph 2 of the Guidelines, that allow
for the provision of packaged
liquor from licensed premises during hours that are outside 'ordinary trading
hours' to demonstrate
exceptional circumstances. The Proposed Temporary Licence
Trading Hours are not those specified in paragraph 2 of the Guidelines,
that paragraph 3 of the Guidelines applies. By reason of the Guidelines, the
Commission should only grant the temporary limited
licence the subject of the
Review Application if exceptional circumstances can be demonstrated by the
Overall, the Applicant's submissions seem to indicate a desire to trade on
Christmas Day to meet the needs of residents of the local
community given the
convenience from shopping locally.
Commission has considered the submissions from the Applicant and has determined
the following:
Applicant's submission that trading on Christmas Day will allow locals in the
area to shop on Christmas Day indicates a desire
for greater convenience. The
decision of the Liquor Control Commission on 7 July 1998 in the matter of
Rosstown Hotel (Rosstown)8
establishes the basic principles underpinning
Victoria's approach to applications for extended hours for the selling of
liquor. In Rosstown, the Liquor Control Commission took the view that a
slight inconvenience of a customer not being able to purchase
packaged when it
is suitable to them cannot be converted into a substantial
In the Commission's view, the Applicant's submission that by granting the
temporary limited licence the subject of the Review Application,
trading will
allow for greater convenience for the local community, is not an exceptional
circumstance. The main benefit to customers
would be the convenience of not
needing to purchase liquor (and other groceries) prior to Christmas Day,
something that can be
arranged with a small amount of planning and without the
increased risk of persons who, having run out of liquor on Christmas Day,
seeking to purchase additional alcohol, from which consequential risks of harm,
misuse or abuse of alcohol woul.d potentially arise,
adverse to community
the Commission acknowledges the Applicant's submissions that there have been no
negative issues with the Licence, a history
of compliance does not demonstrate
exceptional circumstances. Licensees are expected to comply with the conditions
set out in a licence
or will be otherwise committing an offence against the LCR
Applicant also submits that the Commission should grant the Review Application
as the Applicant was granted a temporary limited
licence to trade on Christmas
Day 2020, and because of the impact of COVID-19 pandemic during
The Commission notes that the Applicant was granted a temporary limited licence
to trade on Christmas Day 2020 and further that the
Commission aims for
consistency in its decision making. However, the Commission is not bound by its
earlier decisions, as each decision
is made on a case-by-case basis having
regard to the individual circumstances and merits of each application. The
Commission notes
that 2020 was a year in which the impacts of COVID-19 were far
reaching with many lockdowns and other restrictions imposed on businesses,
the approach taken by the Commission to temporary limited licence applications
during this year was unique to the circumstances
of 2020, consistent with the
objects of the LCR Act, and the governmental directions. The Commission finds
that the circumstances
related to COVID-19 in 2020 are not replicated in 2021
(or, in any event, not to the same extent). The Commission finds that the
previous granting of a temporary limited licence for Christmas Day 2020 does not
constitute an exceptional circumstance.
Further, having regard to the Guidelines, and the circumstances of 2021, the
Commission finds that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
during 2021, could
not be considered as an exceptional circumstance.
Commission has carefully considered all the Applicant's submissions and finds
that collectively these do not meet the test of
exceptional circumstances.in
accordance with paragraph 3 of the Guidelines.
Rosstown Holdings Pty Ltd v Liquor Licensing Commission
\__ _ _ _ _ _ _.L----. --. - . -- - - - - - - - - - -.-
--. --. ---. --. -- . - -
. --(. -... . - .- -.- --. -- -
.---.- --. - _J_-.---.--.--.---.--.---.--路路.-路路 i
Whether to grant the Review Application having regard to the
objects of the LCR Act
Commission must exercise its discretion under section 44(1) when determining
whether or not to grant the temporary limited licence
the subject of the Review
Application, having regard to the objects of the LCR Act, particularly harm
minimisation, which is the
primary object.9
the reasons set out above, the Commission is not satisfied that the Licensee has
demonstrated exceptional circumstances. Furthermore,
taking into account the
objects of the LCR Act, especially harm minimisation, the Commission finds no
other reason why the Premises
should be granted a temporary limited licence
which contains trading hours exceeding the 'ordinary trading hours' for a
liquor licence.
Commission notes that an object of the LCR Act (as outlined in section 4(1)(b))
is to facilitate the development of a diversity
of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations. The LCR Act defines 'ordinary trading hours'
(as outlined at paragraph
6 above) to specifically exclude trading on Christmas
Day. Accordingly, the Commission is of the view that community expectations
in this regard would be for packaged liquor outlets to be closed on Christmas
Day and that granting the temporary limited licence
the subject of the Review
Application would not further this object.
considering all the material before it and having regard to the Guidelines and
the objects of the LCR Act, the Commission has
determined that, in this
instance, it is not appropriate to exercise its discretion to grant the Review
Application.
Decision on review
the reasons set out above, the Commission has determined to affirm the decision
of the Delegate and has refused to grant the temporary
limited licence the
subject of the Review Application.
The preceding 43 paragraphs are
the Reasons
for Decision
Mr Ross Kennedy PSM, Chair, Ms Danielle Huntersmith,
Commissioner, and Mr Des Powell AM, Commissioner.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.7 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter