URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/37.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Golden Plains C104gpla (PSA) [2025] PPV 37 (31 July 2025)
Golden Plains Planning Scheme Amendment C104gpla
Teesdale Flood Risk Identification Study
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
31 July 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
Golden Plains Planning Scheme Amendment C104gpla
Teesdale Flood Risk Identification Study
31 July 2025
Sarah Raso, Chair Peter Edwards, Member
List of Figures
Glossary and abbreviations
1 per cent Annual Exceedance Probability
Australian Rainfall and Runoff Guidelines version 4.x
Corangamite Catchment Management Authority
Golden Plains Shire Council
Digital Elevation Model
Effective Impervious Area
Floodway Overlay Schedule 2
Flood Study
Teesdale Flood Risk Identification Study (Water Technology,
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Light Detection and Ranging
Land Subject to Inundation Overlay
Land Subject to Inundation Overlay Schedule 2
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning Practice Note 12: Applying the flood provisions in planning
Representative Concentration Pathways
Regional Flood Frequency Estimation
Shared Socio-economic Pathways
Amendment summary
The Amendment
Golden Plains Planning Scheme Amendment C104gpla
Common name
Teesdale Flood Risk Identification Study
Brief description
Implements the findings of the
Teesdale Flood Risk Identification
(Water Technology Pty Ltd, 2023)
Subject land
Land within Teesdale, Victoria (refer to Figure 1)
Planning Authority
Golden Plains Shire Council
Authorisation
14 November 2024, with conditions
6 February to 10 March 2025
Submissions
Number of submissions: 18; Opposed: 15
Panel process
Sarah Raso (Chair) and Peter Edwards
Supported by
Gabrielle Trouse, Project Officer
Directions Hearing
2 June 2025, online via video conference
Panel Hearing
30 June and 1 July 2025 at Planning Panels Victoria and online via video
Parties to the Hearing
Golden Plains Shire Council
represented by Daniel Murrihy, calling
the following expert evidence:
- Lachlan Inglis
of Water Technology in flooding
Corangamite Catchment
Management Authority
represented by Geoff Taylor
Christine Dewhurst
Cameron Anker
Rock Lengyel
calling the following expert evidence:
- Mark Colgate
of Arcadis in flooding
Will Cockram
Golden Plains PSA C104gpla [2025] PPV
Date of this report
31 July 2025
Executive summary
Golden Plains Planning
Scheme Amendment C104gpla (the Amendment) updates and introduces new flood
controls within the Golden Plains
Planning Scheme (Planning Scheme) to implement
the findings of the
Flood Risk Identification Study
Technology, 2023) (Flood Study). It introduces a new Schedule 2 to both the
Floodway Overlay (FO2) and the Land Subject to
Inundation Overlay (LSIO2) to
identify land at risk of flooding.
The Golden Plains Shire Council is the planning authority for the
Key issues raised in submissions included:
threshold issues
the effect of
the overlays on property values, insurance and future
development.
The Panel concludes:
There is clear
policy support for the Amendment.
The criteria
used to apply the Floodway Overlay and Land Subject to Inundation Overlay is
appropriate and consistent with
Planning Practice Note 12: Applying the Flood
Provisions in Planning Schemes
The methodology
of the Flood Study, including the modelling, is appropriate and provides a
suitable basis for the flood control mapping.
property values or insurance premiums or the ability to develop land in a
particular way are not reasons to remove the
proposed overlays from a
Recommendations
Based on the reasons set out in this Report, the
Panel recommends that Council:
Golden Plains Planning Scheme Amendment C104gpla as
1 Introduction
1.1 The Amendment
(i) Amendment description
Amendment proposes to implement the
Flood Risk Identification
(Water Technology, 2023) (Flood Study) by applying new flood
mapping to land identified as flood prone in the township of Teesdale.
to insert a new Schedule 2 to the Floodway Overlay (FO2) and Schedule 2 to the
Land Subject to Inundation Overlay (LSIO2).
The Amendment also corrects a past error by applying Schedule 2 to existing
Floodway Overlay and Land Subject to Inundation Overlay
(LSIO) land across the
municipality, except for land in Inverleigh where a schedule 1 already applies
to both the Floodway Overlay
and LSIO. The schedules for these areas were
inadvertently removed from the Planning Scheme when Amendment C80gpla was
on 5 September 2019.
Specifically, the Amendment proposes to:
- amend maps 24
and 26 for the LSIO and Floodway Overlay to apply new flood mapping
- amend existing
maps 01 to 13, 15 to 26, 28 to 29 to the LSIO and Floodway Overlay to update the
reference number in the maps from
FO to FO2 and LSIO to LSIO2.
Planning scheme
- insert a new
Schedule 2 to Clause 44.03 – Flood Overlay
- insert a new
Schedule 2 to Clause 44.04 – Land Subject to Inundation Overlay
- replace the
Schedule to Clause 72.08 (Background Documents) with a new Schedule to include
Teesdale Flood Risk Identification Study
(Water Technology,
(ii) The subject land
The Amendment applies to land in Teesdale along
Native Hut Creek (
Flood Study predicts will flood during a 1 per cent Annual Exceedance
Probability (1% AEP) event. It also applies to other
land in the municipality
that is currently affected by the Floodway Overlay and LSIO maps but does not
have an associated schedule
in the Planning Scheme. The new FO2 and LSIO2 will
be applied to these areas, but the Floodway Overlays’ extent is not
Map of Teesdale Flood Risk Identification Study area and
proposed FO2 and LSIO2
Source: Explanatory Report
1.2 Background
(i) Flood Study
is designated as a Priority Flood Risk Area in the Corangamite Regional
Floodplain Management Strategy (2018)
which identifies flood risks to the
town including from Native Hut Creek. Investigations by the Corangamite
Catchment Management
Authority (CCMA) also found that its current flood mapping
underestimate the flood risk in Teesdale.
Council received funding through the Risk and Resilience Grants Program to
complete the Teesdale Flood Risk Identification Study (Water
Technology,
2023) (Flood Study).
The Flood Study was completed by Water Technology in May 2023 and examined
flood risks from Native Hut Creek and its tributaries (see
Native Hut Creek Catchment
(ii) Authorisation
The Minister for Planning authorised the preparation
and exhibition of the Amendment with changes on 14 November 2024 subject to the
following conditions:
Schedule 2 to Clause 44.03 (Floodway Overlay) to be consistent with the final
tracked version sent by Regional Projects (Flooding).
the Schedule to Clause 72.08 (Background Documents) to insert the Teesdale Flood
Risk Identification Study (Water Technology
the Instruction Sheet to correct the description of the map sheets and to
include Clause 72.08.
the Explanatory Report in accordance with the tracked changes and comments and
to include reference to Clause 72.08
(iii) Exhibition and submissions
On 24 October 2023, Council authorised the
preparation and exhibition of an amendment to implement the Flood Study.
Council received
18 submissions including late submissions.
1.3 The Panel’s approach
issues raised in submissions were:
extent of the
proposed overlays
accuracy of the
considered flood prone due to topography or lived experience (no history of
overlays on property prices and insurance premiums.
The Panel has
assessed the Amendment against the principles of net community benefit and
sustainable development, as set out in Clause
71.02-3 (Integrated decision
making) of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment, submissions, evidence and other
material presented
to it during the Hearing. It has reviewed all material and has had to be
selective in referring to the more relevant
or determinative material in this
Report. This Panel considered all submissions and materials in reaching its
conclusions, regardless
of whether they are specifically mentioned in this
This Report deals with the issues under the following headings:
1.4 Procedural issues
Mr Lengyel was overseas
when the Panel notified submitters of the Hearing process and subsequently
lodged a late request to be heard
Mr Cockram filed a late submission which was referred to the Panel on 24 June
2025. Mr Cockram subsequently sought to be joined as
a party to the proceedings
along with Mr Lengyl.
The Panel gave all parties an opportunity to comment on whether they had an
objection to the late joinder of Mr Lengyel and Mr Cockram
and no party
2 Strategic issues
2.1 Planning context
chapter identifies planning context relevant to the Amendment.
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
- section 4 of
Municipal Planning Strategy
- Clause 02.02
- Clause 02.03-3
(Environmental risks and amenity)
Planning Policy Framework
- Clauses 11
(Settlement) and 11.01-1S (Settlement),
12.03-1S (River and riparian corridors, waterways, lakes, wetlands and
billabongs)
- Clauses 13
(Environmental risks and amenity), 13.01-1S (Natural hazards and climate
change), 13.03-1S (Floodplain Management) and
13.03-1L (Floodplain Management
– Golden Plains Shire)
19.03-3S (Integrated water management)
Other planning strategies and policies
- Corangamite
Regional Floodplain Management Strategy (2018)
Planning scheme provisions
- Land Subject
to Inundation Overlay
Planning scheme amendments
- Amendment
Golden Plains C80gpla
Ministerial directions
- Ministerial
Direction 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments)
Planning practice notes and other guidance
Practice Note 12: Applying the flood provisions in planning schemes (PPN12)
Practice Note 46: Strategic Assessment Guidelines
for Development in Flood-Affected Areas,
DELWP, 2019
Practitioner’s Guide to Victorian Planning Schemes Version 1.5,
2022 (Practitioner’s Guide)
The purposes of the Flood Overlay are:
To identify waterways, major flood paths, drainage depressions and high
hazard areas which have the greatest risk and frequency of
being affected by
To ensure that any development maintains the free passage and temporary
storage of floodwater, minimises flood damage and is compatible
hazard, local drainage conditions and the minimisation of soil erosion,
sedimentation and silting.
To reflect any declarations under Division 4 of
if a declaration has been made.
To protect water quality and waterways as natural resources by managing urban
stormwater, protecting water supply catchment areas,
and managing saline
discharges to minimise the risks to the environmental quality of water and
groundwater.
To ensure that development maintains or improves river and wetland health,
waterway protection and flood plain health.
The Floodway Overlay allows a schedule to contain:
management objectives to be achieved
a statement of
The Floodway Overlay requires a permit to construct a building
or to construct or carry out works (unless a schedule states that a
not required).
Where a local floodplain development plan has not been prepared, a permit
application must be accompanied by a flood risk report.
Permit applications must be referred to the relevant floodplain management
authority – the CCMA in this instance.
Subject to Inundation
The purposes of the LSIO are:
To identify flood prone land in a riverine or coastal area affected by
the 1 in 100 year (1 per cent Annual Exceedance Probability)
flood or any other
area determined by the floodplain management authority.
To ensure that development maintains the free passage and temporary storage
of floodwaters, minimises flood damage, responds to the
flood hazard and
local drainage conditions and will not cause any significant rise in flood level
or flow velocity.
To minimise the potential flood risk to life, health and safety associated
with development.
To reflect a declaration under Division 4 of
To protect water quality and waterways as natural resources by managing urban
stormwater, protecting water supply catchment areas,
and managing saline
discharges to minimise the risks to the environmental quality of water and
groundwater.
To ensure that development maintains or improves river, marine,
coastal and wetland health, waterway protection and floodplain health.
The LSIO allows a schedule to contain:
management objectives to be achieved
a statement of
The LSIO requires a permit to construct a building or to
construct or carry out works (unless a schedule states that a permit is not
Permit applications must be referred to the relevant floodplain management
2.2 Strategic justification
(i) Relevant Policy and guidance
13.03-1S (Floodplain management) sets out the objective:
To assist the protection of:
Life, property
and community infrastructure from flood hazard, including coastal inundation,
riverine and overland flows.
The natural
flood carrying capacity of rivers, streams and floodways.
storage function of floodplains and waterways.
Floodplain areas
of environmental significance or of importance to river, wetland or coastal
It includes the strategies:
Identify land affected by flooding, including land inundated by the 1 in 100
year flood event (1 per cent Annual Exceedance Probability)
or as determined by
the floodplain management authority in planning schemes.
Avoid intensifying the impact of flooding through inappropriately located use
and development.
The relevant policy document is:
Victorian Floodplain Management Strategy
(Department of
Environment, Land, Water and Planning, 2016)
Victorian Floodplain Management Strategy
2016 is a State
Government strategy that clarifies the roles and responsibilities of government
agencies and authorities involved
in flood management. In relation to planning,
the strategy explains:
Enhanced effort in municipal planning, supported by increased knowledge of
flood hazards, will go a long way towards securing resilience
to floods. Flood
overlays need to be introduced or updated as soon as possible after new flood
maps are produced to maximise the
returns on investment in flood information and
PPN12 provides practical advice and guidance for local councils, planners,
and other stakeholders on how to apply flood-related provisions
within local
planning schemes effectively. PPN12 requires the flood controls to:
be based on best
available data
be proportionate
to the level of risk
implemented with
appropriate engagement with affected stakeholders
evidence-based and context specific
The Guidelines for Development
in Flood-Affected Areas, DELWP, 2019 provide a comprehensive framework for
assessing and managing development
proposals in flood-prone regions of Victoria.
These guidelines aim to ensure that development is compatible with flood risks,
protecting human life, property, and the environment.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
There was no dispute amongst the parties that the
Amendment is strategically justified.
Council’s Part A submission set out the strategic basis of the
Amendment. It submitted that in addition to clauses 13.03-1S
and 71.02-3 and
the Victorian Floodplain Management Strategy actions, the Amendment is
strategically justified and supported or implemented:
sections 4 and 6
of the PE Act by providing a safe environment, regulating development in
hazardous areas and protecting assets, and
balancing the present and future
interests of the wider community
clauses 02.02
and 02.03-3 that seek to:
- respond to
identified flood risks
- implement the
strategic direction to minimise flood risk and maintain the capacity of the
floodplain.
(iii) Discussion and conclusion
There is explicit policy in the Planning Policy
Framework to manage riverine flooding. It is uncontroversial that amendments of
support for flood management across State and local strategies
in the Planning
Scheme, particularly at Clause 13. The Amendment is responsive to this policy
context and has been prepared in accordance
with relevant Ministerial Directions
and Practice Notes. It is consistent with the directions from the Victorian
Floodplain Management
The Amendment provides clear policy direction to ensure that development
within areas identified as flood prone from catchment and
riverine sources are
regulated in order to avoid hazard to human life and property and impacts on
floodplain behaviour.
The Panel considers the criteria used to apply the overlays in the areas
subject to flooding accords with current practice and guidance
including PPN12,
Ministerial Directions, the Practitioner’s Guide and the Planning Policy
Framework. PPN12 supports the use
of the LSIO and Floodway Overlay schedules.
The selection of the overlays is considered suited to the local flooding
experienced in the Teesdale area.
As identified in Chapter 3 the Panel considers the Flood Study is
appropriately robust and forms a sound basis for applying flood
Consistent with Clause 71.02-1, the Amendment provides clear policy direction
to ensure that development within the areas identified
as flood prone from
catchment and riverine sources are regulated to avoid hazard to human life and
property and impacts on floodplain
behaviour. An important feature of the LSIO
and Flood Overlay schedules in the Amendment is that they do not prohibit
development.
Any new development will require a permit under the overlay
schedules and would be assessed to determine if such development would
or be impacted by flooding.
The Panel is satisfied the Amendment should proceed subject to addressing the
more specific issues raised in submissions as discussed
in the following
(iv) Conclusions
For the reasons set out in this Report, the Panel
controls are required to assist in the protection of life, property, community
infrastructure and the environment from the
hazards associated with floods.
The use and
application of the Floodway Overlay and Land Subject to Inundation Overlay is
appropriate.
The Amendment
implements the Planning Policy Framework and is consistent with the relevant
Ministerial Directions and Planning Practice
3 Threshold issues
3.1 Evidence
Committee had regard to the evidence noted in
as well as relevant
submissions.
Area of expertise
Lachlan Inglis
Water Technology
Floodplain and Catchment Management
Rick Lengyel
Mark Colgate
Floodplain and Catchment Management
As directed by the Panel, an expert meeting on flooding issues was held on 26
June 2025 and a report was tabled identifying the agreed
opinions and
Key areas of agreement:
streamflow and other data from nearby (similar) catchments (Regional Flood
Frequency Estimation (RFFE))
can assist in identifying historical
flood events in Teesdale where no streamflow data exists for Native Hut
the magnitude of
a flood event cannot be directly attributed to magnitude of total rainfall (a
particular rainfall event may result
in a flood of the same, lower or greater
magnitude AEP event)
controls should be updated if/when effective mitigation measures are
implemented
2020-2021 LiDAR
Digital Elevation
Model (DEM) is the latest and best available topographical dataset and was
appropriately verified through field
Teesdale design flood flows with nearby and/or similar catchments is appropriate
to validate the flood modelling
1% AEP flood
peak flow estimate aligns with RFFE
Climate change
controls should consider climate change
climate change scenario RCP8.5 (high greenhouse gas emissions) Australian
Rainfall and Runoff (ARRv4.1) closely matches
peak flows in the current ARRv4.2
SSP3-7.0 scenario (high greenhouse gas emissions).
Key areas of
disagreement:
the stormwater
and overland flow of township (urban environment) was not appropriately
effort was not made to gather information on the 2022 flood event
climate change
scenario (RCP8.5 ARR v4.1) is overly conservative in comparison to the latest
(2021) for validating historical flood is not appropriate
values of key
inputs and parameters used for model validation for current and historical
events is not appropriate
the Amendment
does not appropriately apply the principles of PPN12.
3.2 Validity and accuracy of the modelling
(i) The issues
issues are whether the:
flood mapping
reflects the lived flood experience, including observations from flood
flood model
parameters and calibration are inaccurate and therefore result in significant
overestimated flood flow and extents.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Mr Inglis considered the Flood Study methods, results and outputs:
appropriate to
inform the development of the Flood Overlay and LSIO
consistent with
good practice and the application of water engineering to manage flood risk.
He explained that he had undertaken a number of flood studies in
and around Teesdale which provided him with a good appreciation of
conditions and flood behaviour, model calibration, and how local catchments
react to rainfall and flood events. He added that
flood modelling was an
inexact science and engineering judgement is required in developing and
calibrating the flood model. He said
that determining key parameters utilised
in the model was principally based on nearby catchments and other flood studies;
in conjunction
with the ARR data hub which provides pertinent details on
regional catchments.
Mr Inglis clarified that historical flood events, such as those in 2001,
2011, and 2022, were significantly less severe than the 1%
AEP benchmark.
Although some submitters believed the 2022 flood was a 1% AEP event, Mr Inglis
identified that while a nearby rainfall
station recorded extremely high rainfall
(up to a 1 in 1000-year event), this did not occur uniformly across the
catchment. As a
result, Teesdale experienced moderate riverine flooding
alongside more extensive overland flow, rather than a high-magnitude flood
In response to Mr Colgate’s concerns regarding the modelling, Mr Inglis
the adopted
parameters used in the validation of the historical events are consistent with
regional and nearby local flood studies
the hydrologic
model parameters were able to very closely replicate the flood frequency
estimates produced by the ARR Regional Flood
Frequency Estimator (RFFE)
hydrological
modelling of the creek’s passage through the township utilised a suitable
model resolution and structure definition
to model flows to define the flood
hazard at the township scale; consistent with similar studies for other
Victorian townships
modelling and sensitivity testing was undertaken to address impervious areas in
accordance with ARR v4.2 for the urban catchments
(noting it is not relevant to
the majority of the Native Hut Creek catchment which is predominately farmland).
This additional work
identified a 4 per cent reduction in peak flow and volume
compared to the original modelling
the Teesdale
township has a relatively small impact on the overall flood characteristics of
Native Hut Creek as:
- the township
contributes less than 4 per cent of peak flow rate compared to the upstream
- peak flow from
Native Hut Creek occurs much later than the township which discharges relatively
quickly to the creek
acknowledged
that minor changes to topography will have occurred over time but fundamentally
the creek alignment and flood plain have
remained unchanged and are not expected
to have a significant impact on the validation of modelling
Mr Colgate challenged the Flood Study’s conclusions
and said it likely overestimated both runoff and flood extents and should
used to inform the overlays. He said the validation process lacked adequate
calibration, relied on subjective and sparse
data, and failed to utilise the
most recent and relevant 2022 flood event. Mr Colgate also criticised the use
of 2021 elevation
data to model the topography used to simulate past floods,
which he said failed to account for changes in infrastructure and landform.
Colgate considered the model did not accurately reflect the on- ground
conditions such as stormwater storage or the true extent
of impervious surfaces.
He recommended incorporating more observed data and local knowledge into the
modelling process.
Council supported Mr Inglis’ findings that the flood modelling was
accurate and based on the best available guidelines at the
time it was prepared,
being ARR v4.1 (2019). It had been reviewed by both Council’s engineers
and the CCMA and was appropriate
to support the Amendment. Council also noted
that community consultation had been undertaken through mailouts, online
and public sessions, providing several opportunities for local
The CCMA reinforced that Teesdale had been identified as a priority area for
flood risk in 2018. It submitted that the current LSIO
and FO, introduced in
2009, were outdated and underestimated the extent of flood hazard. The updated
schedules it said, would ensure
flooding issues are easily identified thereby
providing certainty and greater clarity to ensure new development responds
appropriately
to flooding issues
The CCMA supported methodology, confirming it followed industry standards and
noting that no submitters, including Mr Colgate, had
provided quantitative
evidence to contradict the model’s validity.
Submitters raised concerns that the modelled flood extents did not align with
their lived experience, particularly during the 2022
flood. Many submitted that
their properties, often on higher ground, should not be considered flood prone,
and criticised the lack
of ground-truthing of floor levels. Some felt that
consultation was inadequate and shared Mr Colgate’s concerns about the
model’s assumptions, lack of calibration, and overall accuracy.
(iii) Discussion
The Panel is satisfied that the methodology and
validity of the flood modelling is appropriate to support the application of
and FO2. The Panel acknowledges that there will always be uncertainty
around flood modelling. There are numerous factors that ultimately
and impact the level of flooding which may occur, such as how wet the catchment
is (which will influence the level of run
off) and the spatial and temporal
distribution of rainfall. Engineering judgement, as well as experience are
essential to developing
a robust and defendable model which the Panel is
comfortable Mr Inglis has delivered.
The Panel appreciates Mr Colgate’s detailed, thorough and robust
desktop analysis of the Flood Study methodology, variables,
parameters and
outputs with the overarching emphasis that the model overestimates the true
flood extents. While not to the same
level as a third-party independent review
(understandably, Mr Colgate did not have the time, resource or funding), his
work was valuable
in testing many of the key assumptions in the modelling.
On balance, the Panel supports Mr Inglis’ findings as:
experience with local catchments within the area
outputs were similar to those produced by the RFFE – essentially a
comparison with a standard model with similar characteristics
as the Native Hut
Creek catchment
he undertook
additional sensitivity testing and model review in response to some of Mr
Colgate’s concerns and the model continued
to produce similar results
additional and
more refined modelling of Teesdale township is unlikely to realise meaningful
changes in model outputs for peak flows
in Native Hut Creek as the township
contributes less than 4 per cent to peak flow compared with the total upstream
catchment (approximately
110 square kilometres) draining to Teesdale
supported by CCMA and Council who agreed with the methodology and
Many submitters believed the modelling was inaccurate as
the flooding they experienced in 2022 did not match the 1% AEP flood event
extents. This is readily explained as the recent floods were in the order of 5
to 20% AEP, well short of the 1% AEP event used as
the basis of applying LSIO2
and FO2. Similarly, the previous more recent flood events were of a similar
magnitude to the 2022 event.
The Panel agrees with Mr Inglis that little
material benefit would have been realised by undertaking detail modelling and
calibration
of this event.
The Panel is satisfied that the community had adequate opportunity to
participate in the development of the Flood Study. Some newer
residents may
have been unaware that dwelling floor levels in affected areas were previously
surveyed as part of the Flood Study,
this does not mean that the engagement
process was inadequate.
(iv) Conclusion
The Panel concludes:
The methodology
of the Flood Study, including the modelling, is appropriate and provides a
suitable basis for the Flood Overlay mapping.
3.3 Climate change
(i) The issue
issue is whether the climate change scenario used in the model is too
conservative.
(ii) Background
Estimating the impacts of climate change on flooding
is an evolving science but it is broadly accepted that in the future there will
be more intense rain events potentially leading to greater flooding. Therefore,
climate change is a relevant consideration of this
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is the international
body tasked with assessing the science of climate change.
The IPCC released its fifth Assessment Report in 2014 which explored five
different Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP).
RCPs describe different
possible future scenarios for greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. They range
from RCP2.6, representing a
scenario with significant reduction in greenhouse
gas emissions, up to RCP8.5 representing a high-emission scenario where
gas emissions continue to rise through the 21st Century.
In 2021, the IPCC released its sixth Assessment Report where it explored five
different Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs) combined
with further refined
RCPs. The SSPs include assumptions about future socio-economic development,
geopolitical conditions and general
economic and technologic trends. Similarly,
SSPs range from level 1 (‘taking the green road’) to level 5
global warming and greater challenges to adaptation). IPCC did not
estimate the likelihood of the scenarios but described SSP5 as
highly unlikely,
SSP3 as unlikely and SSP2 as likely.
In late 2022, the ARR guidelines were updated to incorporate the most recent
and relevant climate science and projections (now ARR
v4.2, released in August
These guidelines are relevant to understanding how climate change will impact
the Native Hut Creek environs and floodplain by trying
to predict the future.
In terms, of flood modelling, greater greenhouse gas emissions will lead to
greater rainfall intensity, and
potentially greater and more extensive
(iii) Evidence and submissions
Mr Inglis advised that the climate change analysis in the Flood Study was
based on ARR v4.1 (2019), which was the current standard
at the time the study
was undertaken. He noted that updated climate change guidelines (ARR v4.2) were
only released in draft form
in late 2023 and finalised in mid-2024.
He said the study considered RCP4.5 (7.8 per cent increase in rainfall) and
RCP8.5 (18.4 per cent increase in rainfall) scenarios,
but adopted the RCP8.5
scenario which was consistent with industry practice at the time, and agreed on
in consultation with the CCMA
and Council. Mr Inglis explained that the
resulting increase in flood extent was minimal (as shown in
). Further sensitivity analysis
using ARR v4.2 climate scenarios showed that peak flows would fall between SSP3
and SSP5 pathways.
These he said are not considered overly conservative and
remain within a reasonable range (see
Comparison of the 1% AEP flood extents under present day
and 2100, RCP8.5 conditions
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 3 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Source: Flood Damages and Mitigation Assessment Report Water Technology May
Flow at Bannockburn-Shelford Road Bridge under various
climate scenarios to
Mr Colgate expressed concern that the climate change assumptions used in the
Flood Study were too conservative. He said that the
use of RCP8.5 (which
correlates with SSP5-8.5), widely recognised as a ‘worst-case
scenario’ assuming no meaningful mitigation
of greenhouse gas emissions,
was not technically justified and did not serve the best interests of the
community. Instead, he recommended
RCP4.5 (which correlates with SSP2-4.5),
which reflected moderate emission reductions, policy action, and increased
renewable energy
uptake. This scenario, he said, aligned more closely with
global climate policy goals such as the Paris Agreement and would provide
balanced basis for proposed overlays.
Mr Colgate also noted that the RCPs have been superseded by SSPs, which offer
a more nuanced framework that incorporates policy and
economic trends. He
suggested that SSP2-4.5 be used as the central planning scenario as it reflects
current emission trajectories
and policy directions more accurately than
Council supported Mr Inglis’ approach to climate change modelling and
confirmed that the use of RCPs was standard practice at
the time of the Flood
Study. It acknowledged that RCP8.5 represents a ‘business as usual’
scenario, assuming continued
reliance on fossil fuels, while RCP4.5 reflects a
future in which carbon emissions peak around 2040 and then decline.
Council noted that ARR v4.1, which guided the Flood Study, only provided
parameters for RCPs - not for the newer SSP). In this context,
the application
of RCP8.5 was both appropriate and consistent with the guidelines. Council also
observed that other recently completed
flood studies across Victoria have
similarly adopted RCP8.5.
Importantly, Council highlighted that the use of RCP8.5 in the modelling had
a relatively minor impact on outcomes with only three
additional properties
affected by flooding under this scenario, and five additional properties had the
FO2 applied to part of those
properties.
The CCMA supported the use of a projected increase in rainfall intensity to
2100 under RCP8.5. It confirmed that this approach aligned
with key planning
policies, particularly Clause 11 (Settlement) and Clause 13.01 (Climate Change
Impacts) of the Planning Policy
Framework. These clauses require planning to
incorporate climate adaptation and mitigation, identify areas at risk using the
available science, and ensure that planning controls enable risk mitigation
and adaptation strategies. They also emphasise directing
population growth to
low-risk areas.
The CCMA advised that RCP8.5 was adopted instead of RCP4.5 due to the ongoing
uncertainty surrounding climate change projections for
flood modelling, as well
as the current absence of detailed State policy guidance on this issue. In the
context of floodplain management,
Victorian Catchment Management Authorities and
Melbourne Water have adopted a risk-based approach, considering both high (SSP3)
very high (SSP5) climate scenarios when assessing future flood hazards and
associated planning risks. This further supported the
application of a
precautionary approach, such as the use of RCP8.5, in informing flood controls
and hazard mapping.
Some submitters raised doubts about the validity of rainfall data and climate
science, and the inclusion of climate change as part
of the Amendment process.
(iv) Discussion
The Panel is satisfied that climate change impacts
have been appropriately considered and incorporated into the flood modelling.
The Flood Study was undertaken and considered using ARR v4.1, which was
appropriate at that time. The use of RCP8.5 is common practice
and endorsed by
CCMA, the agency principally responsible for flood plain management in Golden
Water Technology, the authors of the Flood Study, undertook additional
investigations using ARR v4.2, and identified that the peak
flood flow using
RCP8.5 was between the SSP3-7.0 and SSP5-8.5 scenarios (closer to the mid-range
scenarios). This addresses in part,
Mr Colgate’s concern that the
selected climate change scenario was not extremely conservative (in terms of the
2100 projected
peak flow along Native Hut Creek). Further, the Panel recognises
that the additional area of land inundated under the worst-case
climate change
scenario (RCP8.5) compared to the no climate change scenario is minimal (see
). This indicates that the extent
of flooding is not highly sensitive to the specific climate change scenario
applied. Therefore,
the use of the RCP8.5 scenario, in accordance with the
precautionary principle, is considered reasonable given the uncertainty
surrounding
future climate conditions and the absence of formal policy or
guidance. That said, CCMA has indicated that in the future, it intends
SSP3 and SSP5 scenarios when assessing flood hazards.
Climate science will continue to evolve, and due to the timing of this study,
the contemporary and new climate change methodologies
were compared. Water
Technology and the Project Reference Group should be commended for undertaking
the additional investigations
around climate scenarios to align with best
practice and utilising the most up to date guidance.
The Panel acknowledges that there will continue to be a range of views around
climate science but is satisfied that work undertaken
in regard to this matter
aligns with State guidelines and policy.
(v) Conclusion
The Panel concludes:
climate change modelling is appropriate for introducing LSIO2 and FO2
3.4 Property value and financial implications
(i) The issue
issue is whether property value and financial implications are relevant when
deciding to apply a LSIO or FO.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Several submissions raised concerns that the
Amendment would reduce property values and impact on the ability to sell
property or
obtain financing. Others raised concerns about the potential
increase in insurance premiums or difficulty in obtaining insurance
because the properties would be identified as subject to potential inundation
and flooding risk. They were also concerned
the redevelopment of properties due to the requirements of the overlays.
Council’s response to these issues was that the mapping and Amendment
seeks to identify land that is liable to flooding to facilitate
orderly planning
and appropriate assessment of proposed development. Flooding constraints should
not be ignored just because they
may affect land values, insurance premiums, or
create additional development costs.
(iii) Discussion
The Panel has previously concluded that the overlays
are justified and that the flood controls provide an appropriate basis for
risk in flood-prone areas. The fact that designating a property as
flood prone in a planning scheme may negatively impact insurance
property value is not a reason to avoid the application of planning controls to
manage flood impact.
The issue of economic impacts on individual land owners has been discussed in
many Planning Panels reports. These Panels have consistently
found that the
application of an LSIO or Flood Overlay does not impede development, and that
land values, insurance premiums and
rates are not relevant planning
considerations. No evidence was provided to this Panel that persuaded it that
this long-held position
should be re-examined.
Having said that, planning controls should be updated if or when effective
mitigation measures are constructed. Similarly, if climate
change modelling
continues to evolve and its impacts are likely to be less, then the Flood
Overlay and LSIO should be updated accordingly.
(iv) Conclusion
The Panel concludes:
property values or insurance premiums or the ability to develop land in a
particular way are not reasons to remove the
proposed overlays from a property
and are not relevant when considering the
A Document list
Description
Provided by
Directions Hearing notice letter
Planning Panels Victoria (PPV)
Submitter maps (provided to the Panel only)
Panel Directions and Version 1 Timetable
Version 2 Timetable
Part A submission
Further directions regarding flooding expert witness meeting
Expert witness report of Mark Colegate (4 March 2025)
Rick Lengyel
Supplementary expert witness statement of Mark Colegate (22 June
Rick Lengyel
Mark Colegate Curriculum Vitae
Rick Lengyel
Expert witness report of Lachlan Inglis
Lachlan Inglis Curriculum Vitae
Letter of instruction to Lachlan Inglis
Late submission from William Cockram (Submission 19)
Version 3 Timetable
Addendum to expert witness report of Lachlan Inglis –
Corrections
Addendum to expert witness report of Lachlan Inglis – Response to
late Submission 19
Part B submission
Slideshow presentation
Flooding conclave statement
Light Detection and Ranging – uses laser light to collect 3D data on
topography surface by sensors mounted on an aircraft.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (6.64 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter