URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/vic/VicSAC/2023/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:23:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in Victoria: Final Report [2023] VicSAC 2; (27 June 2023)
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in Victoria: Final Report
Sentencing Advisory Council, June 2023
Contributors
Dr Paul McGorrery, Felicity Stewart
Sentencing Advisory Council
Professor Marilyn McMahon
Deputy-Chair:
Council Directors:
Fiona Dowsley, Anoushka Jeronimus, Brendan Kissane
KC, Dan Nicholson, Anne O’Brien, Paul Smallwood, Wendy Steendam
Acting Chief Executive Officer:
Dr Paul McGorrery
Acknowledgments
The Council would like to
thank the many individuals and organisations that contributed to this project
over the last two years. Their
insights have been invaluable in identifying the
key issues, shaping our thinking and framing our final recommendations.
We especially thank the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria for meeting with
us multiple times during this project and providing
us with the data on
conditions attached to adjourned undertakings. That data has formed the basis
for many of the recommendations
in this report.
We would also like to thank legal research assistant Melanie Hull for her
work on legal-checking this report.
Chair’s foreword
There are certain common
assumptions about the criminal justice system. That most crimes are crimes of
violence. That most offenders
go to prison. That those who don’t go to
prison get to ‘walk free’. And that the people who cycle through the
system have actively chosen a life of crime. These are the
misconceptions upon which much crime fiction is based and that are promoted
the popular media. But they do not accurately represent the processing of crime
and offenders in our criminal justice system.
The majority of criminal offences dealt with in that system are non-violent,
and the most common sentencing outcome is a fine. The
people who most frequently
interact with the justice system are our most vulnerable: people experiencing
mental impairment, those
facing a past trauma and/or dealing with substance
abuse. Many people’s offending is relatively minor, or they will only have
one interaction with the justice system in their lives. And far more often than
not, the most effective way of protecting the Victorian
community is not to
imprison these people but to impose another type of sentence.
The Sentencing Advisory Council focused on cases involving low-level
offenders when it began examining adjourned undertakings in 2021.
undertakings are the second most common sentencing outcome in Victoria, with
over 17,000 imposed in 2019 (pre-COVID-19).
Adjourned undertakings are very
flexible in both their duration (up to five years) and the conditions that can
be attached (any condition
the court deems appropriate), thereby allowing them
to be tailored to the circumstances of each case. In their current form, they
were first introduced in Victoria in 1985. Yet they have never been the subject
of detailed examination. Consequently, there is relatively
little community
awareness about these orders and how they operate.
Over the past two years the Council met with dozens of stakeholders,
conducted a statistical examination of how adjourned undertakings
analysed the conditions attached to these types of orders, released a
consultation paper with questions about potential
reforms, received written
submissions in response to that consultation paper, developed draft options for
reform, tested those options
with individual stakeholders and at a consultation
forum, and developed 26 final recommendations.
I thank the organisations and individuals that generously gave their time to
this project over the last two years. Their contributions
have very much shaped
our thinking and the final recommendations in this report.
I also want to thank the project team for their efforts. At a time when the
Council has been experiencing significant resourcing issues,
the secretariat
undertook a sizeable law reform exercise – involving extensive data
analysis, legal research, consultation
and policy development – in a
relatively brief time period, and developed recommendations that address key
issues in relation
to adjourned undertakings and that have the potential to make
the justice system a little fairer, and Victoria a little safer. By
clear information about this under-examined but frequently employed sentencing
option, this report also counters many of
the misconceptions that exist about
offenders and the operation of our criminal courts.
Professor Marilyn McMahon, Chair, Sentencing Advisory Council
Executive summary and recommendations
Adjourned undertakings
perform a critical role in the Victorian criminal justice system. They are a
low-end community order that requires
the offender to be of good behaviour for a
certain period of time, and they may also require the offender to comply with
additional conditions, such as making a charitable donation or
participating in a rehabilitation program. They are primarily designed
provide a response to less serious offending, to first-time offenders, to
vulnerable offenders or even to serious offending if
there are extraordinary
circumstances. Because of this broad scope, adjourned undertakings are highly
prevalent. In 2019 alone, there
were over 17,000 adjourned undertakings imposed,
mostly in the Magistrates’ Court, making up 18% of all sentencing outcomes
in adult courts that year. Yet despite the importance and prevalence of
adjourned undertakings, this project has been the first detailed
examination of
their use since their introduction in 1985.
In that context, this report follows the consultation paper we published in
August 2022 and presents 26 recommendations for reforms
to adjourned
undertakings and related orders. Those recommendations are a product of
extensive data analysis, legal research and
consultation over the last two
years. Our overarching aim in making those recommendations is to refine a
sentencing order that is
already held in high regard by those who work in
Victoria’s criminal justice system. Adjourned undertakings are a highly
and useful order, and we do not want to fix what isn’t broken or
cause unintended consequences. With that in mind, we have
grouped our
recommendations according to certain themes.
Renaming adjourned undertakings
The terminology of ‘adjourned
undertaking’, while technically accurate, is not particularly accessible.
Stakeholders unanimously
told us that these sentencing orders should be renamed.
While many in the legal profession already refer to them as ‘bonds’,
non-legal stakeholders were concerned that the term ‘bond’ could
easily be misinterpreted as referring to financial conditions
(for example,
rental bonds and government bonds). We agree and recommend that adjourned
undertakings be renamed as good behaviour
Renaming adjourned undertakings
Recommendation 1:
That the Victorian
Government amend the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) to rename adjourned
undertakings as good behaviour orders.
Purposes of adjourned undertakings
The purposes of sentencing in Victoria are enshrined
Sentencing Act
: just punishment, denunciation,
deterrence, community protection and rehabilitation. These are, according to
, the ‘only’ purposes of sentencing. There is thus a
tension between
, the latter of which endeavours to
outline the specific purposes of adjourned undertakings (and
dismissals/discharges). We have made
a number of recommendations related to
; these collectively are designed to (a) make it clearer that this is
an enabling provision, not a limiting one, (b) remove outdated
references to
‘trivial’ or ‘technical’ offences and (c) improve
awareness of these considerations.
Purposes of adjourned undertakings
Recommendation 2:
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be amended to clarify that a court may impose
an adjourned undertaking for any one or more of the listed purposes, and to
a catch-all provision enabling courts to impose an adjourned undertaking
for any other purpose it considers appropriate in the circumstances.
Recommendation 3:
section 70(1)(b)
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be amended to remove the words ‘trivial’ and
‘technical’.
Recommendation 4:
That the current content of
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be moved to be co-located with the general
purposes of sentencing in
Conditions of adjourned undertakings
There are two mandatory conditions of all adjourned
undertakings, and courts may also impose any other condition that they think
appropriate
in the circumstances. The flexibility of these optional conditions
was one of the major reasons that most stakeholders in the criminal
system see so much utility in adjourned undertakings – they can be
tailored to the particular circumstances of each
case and person. We conducted
an Australian-first analysis of the types of conditions attached to adjourned
undertakings and found
that the most common were making charitable donations,
continuing with medical (especially mental health) treatment, and participating
in a behaviour change program, a driver education course or substance abuse
There were, though, a number of areas that we identified for improvement in
relation to the conditions attached to adjourned undertakings.
Defining good behaviour. There is currently no definition of what it means to
be of ‘good behaviour’ for the period of
the adjourned undertaking.
Stakeholders agreed that this makes it difficult to explain to people what is
required. We recommend that
‘good behaviour’ be defined as not
committing a further offence. While it may have been ideal to limit this to not
further offences punishable by a term of imprisonment, this approach
would exclude many driving offences from being a breach of the
condition, and
driving offences account for a quarter of all adjourned undertakings.
Critically, this recommendation is interdependent
with our recommendation to
repeal the offence of breaching an adjourned undertaking. That recommendation
limits the consequences
of breaching the good behaviour condition to varying the
adjourned undertaking, or cancelling it and resentencing the original offending
while also taking into account compliance with the order prior to
cancellation.
Defining ‘good behaviour’
Recommendation 5:
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be amended to specify that for the purpose of the condition to be
of good behaviour during the period of an adjourned undertaking,
good behaviour
means ‘not committing a further offence’.
Justice plans. Justice plans are programs of services for people with an
intellectual disability. They can be imposed as conditions
of either community
correction orders (CCOs) or adjourned undertakings. It currently takes
approximately 12 weeks for many people
to be assessed as eligible for a justice
plan and to have the plan of services prepared for the court. We recommend that
the Department
of Families, Fairness and Housing explore opportunities to speed
up those processes in appropriate cases.
Justice plans
Recommendation 6:
That the Department of
Families, Fairness and Housing, in appropriate cases, support more efficient
processing of target group assessments
and the preparation of justice plans.
Payment conditions. There are two main ways that courts can currently order
an offender to make a charitable donation as a condition
of their adjourned
undertaking. The first is to make the donation directly to a charitable
organisation nominated by the court. The
second is to give the money to the
court, with those funds later distributed via the Court Fund.
There are two issues with ordering an offender to make a charitable donation
directly. First, we found that magistrates’ choices
are playing a
significant role in which charities are receiving funds. Second, the offender
can claim their charitable donation as
a tax deduction, which unfairly benefits
those in higher income tax brackets.
There are also presently issues with the Court Fund, in that there is limited
publicly available information about how it functions,
how decisions are made
and how that money is ultimately
distributed.
We believe that the issues with the Court Fund can be resolved through
greater transparency in the receipt and distribution of funds,
whereas the
issues with direct charitable donations cannot be remedied. We therefore
recommend that courts should not be permitted
to order donations be paid
directly to charities, and that there should be more transparency in the Court
Fund. We also recommend
that courts should be required to consider the financial
circumstances of the offender in deciding which conditions (if any) to attach
an adjourned undertaking, including whether to order a charitable donation
condition and, if so, how much. Courts must currently
consider a person’s
financial circumstances in the context of fines but not adjourned undertakings.
Payment conditions
Recommendation 7:
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be amended to limit payment conditions (if any) of adjourned
undertakings to contributions to the Court Fund.
Recommendation 8:
That the Magistrates’ Court review how to
improve the operation, governance and transparency of the Court Fund.
Recommendation 9:
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be amended
to require courts to consider the financial circumstances of the offender in
deciding which optional conditions (if
any) to attach to an adjourned
undertaking (for example, whether to order a payment to the Court Fund and, if
so, the amount of such
Guidance about conditions. In our consultation paper, we were able to analyse
the types of conditions attached to almost 25,000 adjourned
undertakings in 2019
and 2020. Following consultation with stakeholders about the nature and wording
of some of those conditions,
we recommend that the
Sentencing Act
amended to include a list of factors that courts should consider in deciding
which conditions to attach to an adjourned undertaking.
These factors are
designed to ensure that the conditions are as few as necessary, pragmatically
achievable, consistent with the objectives
of adjourned undertakings, culturally
safe and appropriate, and the least restrictive required to achieve the purposes
of sentencing.
Guidance about conditions: legislative principles
Recommendation 10:
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be amended to include a list of matters that courts must consider
when attaching conditions to adjourned undertakings, including:
the principle of
proportionality;
the principle of
parsimony, in particular that the default position should be an adjourned
undertaking with no conditions;
the purposes for
which a sentence may be imposed as set out in
the purposes of
an adjourned undertaking as presently set out in
whether the
condition is reasonably achievable during the period of the adjourned
undertaking; and
the availability
of culturally appropriate programs and services.
We also recommend
that some model wording be developed in the
Victorian Sentencing Manual
for some of the more common conditions attached to adjourned undertakings.
For instance, we found numerous conditions that simply
read ‘Continue to
see Dr [Name]’ with no reference to what the offender should do if that
doctor were to become unavailable
for some reason. The aim of the model wording
would not be to prescribe how conditions should be worded, but rather to assist
practitioners
and courts by providing initial wording capable of being easily
adapted to suit the unique circumstances of each case. There should
training for legal practitioners and judicial officers about conditions of
adjourned undertakings.
Guidance about conditions: wording
Recommendation 11:
That the Judicial College
of Victoria expand the
Victorian Sentencing Manual
to include guidance
Recommendation 12:
That the Judicial College of Victoria and the Law
Institute of Victoria provide training for judicial officers and legal
practitioners,
respectively, about conditions of adjourned undertakings.
Paying for programs. One of the more consistent observations we heard from
stakeholders is that requiring people who receive adjourned
undertakings to pay
for programs and services in which they are ordered to participate
disproportionately and unfairly affects people
with lower incomes. It is also
inconsistent with the current practice of many programs and services being paid
for as conditions
of CCOs. We therefore recommend that the Department of Justice
and Community Safety develop a resourcing model to ensure that when
programs or
services are ordered as conditions of adjourned undertakings, they can be paid
for in appropriate cases. We acknowledge
that it is not feasible or pragmatic
for all conditions to be paid for, especially when paid for via other routes
(for example, Medicare).
We anticipate that courts would have discretion whether
to order that a particular program be paid for, in light of the offender’s
financial circumstances.
Paying for programs
Recommendation 13:
That the Department of
Justice and Community Safety develop a resourcing model to ensure that when
programs or services are ordered
as conditions of adjourned undertakings, they
can be paid for by the state in appropriate cases.
Adjourned undertakings in the sentencing hierarchy
The way the
Sentencing Act
currently operates
means that courts cannot impose a fine if the purposes of sentencing could be
achieved by imposing an adjourned
undertaking. However, we heard from numerous
stakeholders that the way fines and adjourned undertakings operate means that,
in practice,
an adjourned undertaking is often a more severe sentencing outcome
than a fine. Fines have no ongoing behavioural obligations, whereas
undertakings do. While a fine will always have a financial component, adjourned
undertakings often have one as well (a
charitable donation condition). The
median fine amount imposed in Victoria ($500) is the same as the median value of
charitable donation
conditions of adjourned undertakings ($500). There is no
offence of non-payment of a fine, but there is presently a distinct offence
breaching an adjourned undertaking. Further, there is a discretion with both
orders whether to record a conviction. We therefore
recommend that the
Sentencing Act
be amended so that there is no hierarchy between fines and
adjourned undertakings, such that the focus is instead on the most appropriate
sentencing outcome in each case.
Revising the hierarchy
Recommendation 14:
section 5(7)
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be amended so that there is no hierarchy
between fines and adjourned undertakings.
Most sentencing orders in the
Sentencing Act
have a single provision
authorising courts to make the order (for example, fines, CCOs, and drug and
alcohol treatment orders). For
adjourned undertakings,
courts to impose one with conviction, and
empowers courts to impose
one without conviction. The same is true for discharges and dismissals, with
sections 73
differentiated only by whether a conviction is recorded. We
heard that having two provisions do the same thing based on whether a
is recorded can cause confusion, and that sometimes the intended order is
mis-recorded as the other. To promote consistency
and reduce the risk of
mis-recorded convictions, we recommend merging these provisions.
Merging the provisions
Recommendation 15:
sections 72
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be merged into a single provision.
Recommendation 16:
sections 73
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be merged into a single provision, named ‘proven and
dismissed’.
Recommendation 17:
subsections 7(g)
–(j) be amended
accordingly.
In 2021, Victoria introduced the
Spent Convictions Act
, which limits
the period during which certain findings of guilt need to be disclosed. However,
an inconsistency seems to have arisen.
While fines are currently more severe in
the sentencing hierarchy than adjourned undertakings, a fine imposed without
is spent immediately at the date of sentencing. But because adjourned
undertakings have conditions (such as being of good behaviour)
that last for the
life of the order, those findings of guilt must be disclosed until the end of
the order. Stakeholders were unanimous
that adjourned undertakings imposed
without conviction should be spent immediately, not at the end of the order. We
Revising the Spent Convictions Act
Recommendation 18:
Convictions Act 2021
(Vic) be amended so that adjourned undertakings without
conviction are ‘spent’ at the date of sentencing.
Courts have been imposing imprisonment with an adjourned undertaking in an
increasing number of cases in recent years, especially
in cases involving time
served prison sentences. This combination of sentences is, however, currently
only possible in cases with
two or more charges because the same offence cannot
presently receive both imprisonment and an adjourned undertaking. We therefore
recommend that the Victorian Government consider introducing a new provision to
Sentencing Act
– one that would be similar to how
operates with combined orders of imprisonment with a CCO – enabling courts
to impose imprisonment with an adjourned undertaking.
A new combined order
Recommendation 19:
That the Victorian
Government consider inserting a new provision into the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) to expressly allow courts to impose a combined order of imprisonment
with an adjourned undertaking.
Decriminalising breaches of adjourned undertakings
A person who breaches an adjourned undertaking,
particularly if they do so by committing further offences, can (a) be sentenced
the new offences and/or (b) be resentenced for the original offending. In
that context, prosecuting someone for the additional and
specific offence of
breaching a sentencing order will often constitute double, if not triple,
punishment. Moreover, prosecution for
breach offences seems to be highly
inconsistent, with just 1 in 10 offenders who reoffend during their adjourned
undertaking prosecuted
for a distinct breach offence. With very strong
stakeholder support, we recommend repealing the offence of breaching an
undertaking. This would not, we note, limit the court’s power to
vary a sentence, or resentence the offender entirely, if they
have breached the
Decriminalising breaches
Recommendation 20:
That the offence of
contravening an adjourned undertaking be repealed.
Restitution and compensation orders
When sentencing someone, courts can also make
restitution and compensation orders. Restitution orders involve returning stolen
or money. Compensation orders involve paying a victim money for injury
or for the loss of property or damage to it. When imposing
an adjourned
undertaking, it seems that courts can make a restitution or compensation order
by three potential avenues. One is as
a condition of the adjourned undertaking
itself, making failure to pay a breach of the order. One is as an ancillary
sections 84
Sentencing Act
, the latter of which
requires an application by the victim or prosecution (the court cannot make the
order without an application).
And one is via
sections 74
Sentencing Act
, which we heard are sometimes used to enable ancillary
compensation orders to be made without application. On closer examination,
isn’t clear that this is what
sections 74
were meant to do. Those
provisions also create an unusual situation where victims can more easily
receive compensation for injury
in less serious cases (where adjourned
undertakings are imposed) than in more serious cases (where CCOs are imposed).
We therefore
recommend that the Victorian Government review whether courts
should be able to make own-motion ancillary compensation orders when
imposing an
adjourned undertaking.
Restitution and compensation
Recommendation 21:
That the Victorian
Government review whether courts should be able to make own-motion ancillary
compensation orders for injury when
imposing adjourned undertakings, discharges
or dismissals.
Communicating about adjourned undertakings
Early in the project, the Magistrates’ Court
kindly provided the Council with a copy of its current adjourned undertaking
which we reproduced in our consultation paper. Stakeholders raised several
concerns with the current form, including that it is outdated
and jargonistic,
uses a small font, and includes references to conditions that are often not
applicable. We agree with these concerns,
and recommend that the
Magistrates’ Court redesign the form in consultation with experts in form
design as well as people with
lived experience of the criminal justice
Redesigning the form
Recommendation 22:
Magistrates’ Court, in consultation with experts in form design, as well
as people with lived experience of the criminal
justice system, review and
revise the current adjourned undertaking form to improve accessibility and
comprehensibility.
Currently, both the
Sentencing Act
and the adjourned undertaking form
require offenders to physically or electronically sign the form to indicate that
they have agreed
to comply with the conditions of the order. We recommend moving
away from the need for a signature, especially with the rise of Webex
hearings since the COVID-19 pandemic, instead revising both the legislation and
the form so that courts can simply record that
the offender has agreed to
Requiring a signature
Recommendation 23:
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be amended
to remove the requirement that offenders have
to give a ‘written’ undertaking to comply with the conditions of an
undertaking.
Recommendation 24:
That the Magistrates’ Court amend the
adjourned undertaking form to enable courts to record an offender’s verbal
to the conditions of an adjourned undertaking, rather than requiring a
written or electronic signature.
We were told in consultations that the Magistrates’ Court currently
emails an electronic copy of the finalised adjourned undertaking
(a) as a matter
of course when the sentencing hearing is online or (b) upon request when the
hearing is in person. We recommend that
courts (including the higher courts in
relevant cases) always send an electronic copy of the adjourned undertaking form
to offenders
(and, if relevant, their lawyers), so that they can easily access
it throughout the duration of the order.
Sending an electronic copy
Recommendation 25:
That courts send an
electronic copy of finalised adjourned undertaking forms to offenders (and, if
relevant, their legal representatives).
At the end of the period of the adjourned undertaking, there is a hearing in
open court where a magistrate will confirm, as best as
possible, whether the
offender has complied with the conditions of the order. After that hearing,
there is currently no correspondence
sent to the offender confirming that the
order has been finalised. To promote positive reinforcement of the
offender’s good
behaviour and to provide a sense of closure, we recommend
that the court send an electronic notification (via either SMS or email)
the offender has successfully completed their adjourned undertaking.
Notification of completion
Recommendation 26:
At the end of the period
of the adjourned undertaking, if the court is satisfied that the offender has
observed the conditions of
their adjourned undertaking, the court should send
the offender electronic notification to this effect.
Introduction
key function of the Sentencing Advisory Council is to provide advice to the
Attorney-General on sentencing matters.
aim of this project is to review the use of adjourned undertakings in Victoria
and to advise the Attorney-General about any opportunities
to improve their
operation in law and practice.
Adjourned undertakings perform a critical role in sentencing in Victoria.
They involve a person serving their sentence in the community
while subject to
two mandatory conditions – to be of ‘good behaviour’ and to
attend court if called upon. Courts
may also attach a wide range of additional
conditions, such as making a charitable donation or participating in a
rehabilitation
According to the current sentencing hierarchy in Victoria, adjourned
undertakings are the least severe community order available.
They are, though,
also sufficiently broad in scope that they can be used for even relatively
serious offending in some cases. They
are primarily directed at first-time
offenders, marginalised and vulnerable offenders, and people who have committed
less objectively
serious offending. For these people, the most appropriate way
to achieve the various purposes of sentencing – such as rehabilitation
protection of the community – is often to limit their ongoing contact with
the criminal justice system by imposing an adjourned
undertaking, acknowledging
that sometimes ‘the process is sufficient
punishment’,
and ensuring that they are
receiving appropriate support to reduce their risk of reoffending. As Vacro told
us in their submission:
Non-custodial sentences like adjourned undertakings have great potential to act
as a hook for change if they connect people who are
early in their contact with
the justice system with the domains we know will help them move away from
Adjourned undertakings are also highly prevalent. As we observed in our
consultation paper,
they are the second most
common sentencing outcome in Victoria, with over 17,000 imposed in 2019. Only
fines are more common.
Our approach
This is the first review of adjourned undertakings
since they were introduced in 1985. We have examined court data, reviewed
literature on low-end orders, undertaken extensive consultation with
Victorian stakeholders about potential areas for reform, published
consultation paper, received written submissions, developed draft options for
reform, and tested them with stakeholders at a series
of roundtables and
meetings. This report and the recommendations contained herein are the result of
that work and reflect the many
valuable contributions of stakeholders along the
Overwhelmingly, we heard that adjourned undertakings are already perceived
positively by stakeholders in the criminal justice system.
For instance:
[A]djourned undertakings provide a flexible, problem-solving approach to
sentencing. They are an essential tool to help address the
underlying causes and
risk factors for offending in a proportionate way, as the conditions of an order
can be tailored to the needs
of each person. Significantly, they allow the court
to impose a sentence which links First Nations people with culturally safe and
appropriate services which connect them with culture and community.
Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid)
In [our] experience, the inherent flexibility of adjourned undertakings seems to
allow customisation to better achieve appropriate
sentencing outcomes for people
belonging to marginalised groups.
Submission 10 (Victoria Police)
[A]djourned undertakings are a practical and cost-effective justice response for
someone who has committed low level offences, or
who has no prior convictions
... [they] can act as a deterrent for poor choices and provide an opportunity
for the person to demonstrate
more appropriate and acceptable behaviour.
Ultimately, an adjourned undertaking may divert someone away from the justice
an earlier junction ... [preventing escalation] to a custodial
sentence that may cause more harm.
Submission 6 (Women and Mentoring)
[T]he primary goal of any effective and humane criminal justice system is to
ensure policy, legislation and budgetary decisions are
all centred on prevention
and early intervention. In that sense ... adjourned undertakings can be an
important part of sentencing
to prevent further contact with the criminal
justice system.
Submission 7 (Jesuit Social Services)
The LIV considers Adjourned Undertakings to be an important but often overlooked
component of Victoria’s sentencing system
... they are a cost effective,
flexible sentencing disposition that facilitates offender rehabilitation by
minimising contact with
the criminal justice system.
Submission 8 (Law Institute of Victoria)
[A]djourned undertakings are one of the most critical sentencing options
available to our client base. This is because of the flexibility
permitted under
this disposition for the court ... in tailoring a sanction that can be
supportive whilst reflecting the admonishment
of the court. Adjourned
undertakings are important because ... 1. They reduce stigmatisation ... 2. They
promote rehabilitation ...
3. They minimise disruption to accused people’s
responsibilities (and protective factors)[.]
Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw)
Adjourned undertakings should be utilised more widely.
Stakeholder Survey, Respondent 1 (February 2022)
I would encourage greater use of adjourned undertakings as a sentencing
Stakeholder Survey, Respondent 6 (February 2022)
The major theme emerging from stakeholders was that the inherent flexibility
of adjourned undertakings is what makes them a highly
effective tool in the
courts’ arsenal of sentencing orders. Adjourned undertakings can be
tailored to the unique circumstances
of each case, offering the full gamut of
punitive, supervisory and rehabilitative conditions. Stakeholders saw this
flexibility as
so critical that we were warned by multiple stakeholders not to
‘fix what isn’t broken’ in our efforts to reform
undertakings.
Our recommendations must be viewed through that lens, because that is how we
have approached them. We have sought to improve a disposition
that is already
largely revered by those in the criminal justice system but that could also
benefit from some modifications. We do
not want to cause unintended consequences
and undo any of the many positive features of adjourned undertakings or restrict
use in appropriate cases.
Structure of this report
Some key themes about areas of potential reform
emerged from our consultations with stakeholders, and they have guided how we
structured this report:
– renaming adjourned undertakings
– purposes of adjourned undertakings
– conditions of adjourned undertakings
– adjourned undertakings in the sentencing hierarchy
– decriminalising breaches of adjourned undertakings
– restitution and compensation orders
– communicating about adjourned undertakings.
The importance of consultation
Consultation is a cornerstone of the Council’s
and provides an essential source of
evidence when we consider potential reforms. This project involved several
overlapping consultation
From November
2021 to September 2022, we met with 20 organisations, some on multiple
occasions, including courts, police, prosecutors,
defence lawyers, organisations
that work with victims of crime, academics and community organisations. The aim
of these consultations
was to identify issues and seek stakeholder views on
potential areas for reform.
In February
2022, we circulated a survey to nine organisations in the legal profession that
had agreed to distribute the survey to
their staff. Although there were just 25
respondents, the quality of responses was high.
In August 2022,
we released a consultation paper that included novel data on the use of
adjourned undertakings and asked 23 questions
adjourned undertakings and related orders. We then received 11 written
submissions and met with a number
of other organisations.
From February to
April 2023, after having developed draft options for reform, we hosted a
roundtable to seek stakeholder feedback
and met individually with a number of
organisations.
This iterative consultation process has been
instrumental in the development of our recommendations. We hope all those who
time to share their views along the way can see how useful their
contributions have been in shaping our thinking throughout this
adjourned undertakings
The term ‘adjourned
undertaking’ has been used to describe this sentencing order since it was
introduced in 1985.
Both words describe the
order’s nature: it is an ‘undertaking’ because it is an
agreement or promise by the offender,
and it is ‘adjourned’ because
at some later stage a magistrate will review the offender’s behaviour
order. Despite the technical accuracy of the terminology, we asked
stakeholders whether these orders should be renamed using more
language, particularly given the various names for similar orders around
Stakeholder views
The feedback we received was unanimous that there
should be a change in terminology.
Legal Aid described the term
adjourned undertaking
as ‘confusing
and unfamiliar’.
The Australian
Community Support Organisation (ACSO) described it as ‘confusing,
particularly to those ... with English as
And Vacro said that the
terminology is not well understood by the general
However, while stakeholders were unanimous in advocating change to the
terminology, there was less consensus about what the new terminology
behaviour order:
this was the terminology preferred by ACSO, saying it was
more ‘straightforward’. Vacro also commended this
terminology.
behaviour bond:
Victoria Legal Aid, the Office of Public Prosecutions, the
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service, Victoria Police and the Law Institute
Victoria all supported the term ‘good behaviour
largely because it
is how most people working in the criminal justice system already describe
adjourned undertakings (‘bonds’).
Victoria Police argued that this
term ‘appropriately ... signifies the idea that it is a partnership,
alliance or bond between
specifically opposed the term ‘good behaviour bond’ because the term
‘bond’ is sometimes used to
reference monetary bond
requirements.
behaviour agreement:
Jesuit Social Services suggested that ‘good
behaviour agreement’ might be an accessible
Fitzroy Legal Service,
WEstjustice and Youthlaw also jointly submitted that this term ‘is more
empowering ... than something
that just happens’ to the offender, such as
Conditional
release order:
Women and Mentoring argued that the terminology of
‘good behaviour’ has paternalistic undertones, and that Victoria
follow the language of ‘conditional release orders’ used in
New South Wales and Western
The Council’s view
In our consultation paper, we expressed the
preliminary view that ‘good behaviour order’ might be the most
appropriate
term to describe this sentencing
In part, this terminology was
designed to distinguish these orders from the good behaviour bonds already
available in the Children’s
All but one stakeholder suggested that the order should include the term
‘good behaviour’. There were, though, different
views about whether
the term should be good behaviour ‘bond’, ‘order’ or
‘agreement’. The majority
of stakeholders – especially those
working in the legal system – advocated the term ‘good behaviour
, telling us that it is already common parlance, with the term
‘bond’ used as a shorthand. There were good reasons for
suggestion. First, this change would synchronise terminology with what is
apparently already common practice. And second, it
would convey that the
offender has agreed to abide by the conditions of the order.
Ultimately, however, the Council was persuaded by the submissions of ACSO and
Vacro that the term ‘good behaviour order’
is more appropriate for
two reasons:
even if the language is commonly used by those in the legal profession, the term
‘bond’ can easily be misconstrued
as requiring payment of money that
is forfeited upon breach, as is the case with rental bonds and bail bonds. Even
Sentencing Act
itself, the term ‘bond’ refers to
‘a condition requiring an offender to pay an amount of money ... which is
to forfeiture’.
While some adjourned undertakings have financial conditions, most do not. In
comparison, the term ‘good behaviour order’
is much less likely to
be misinterpreted as requiring the payment of a sum of money.
there is already precedent in the
Sentencing Act
for describing a
sentence as an ‘order’ despite requiring the offender to consent to
it. In particular, a community correction
order (CCO) cannot be imposed unless
the offender agrees to it.
far as the Council is aware, the use of the term ‘order’ in this
context has not caused any confusion or issues. The
term ‘order’
also more genuinely reflects that, while the offender is consenting to the
order, it is not a true power
balance between equal parties negotiating
Renaming adjourned undertakings
Recommendation 1:
That the Victorian
Government amend the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) to rename adjourned
undertakings as good behaviour orders.
of adjourned undertakings
Sentencing Act
courts with a framework of objectives to consider in deciding the most
appropriate sentence in a given case. These are known
as the purposes of
sentencing, and they are outlined in
Sentencing Act
There are also, though, additional (or supplementary) purposes, in
that courts must specifically consider in deciding whether to impose an
adjourned undertaking, discharge or dismissal.
Section 5(1)
provides that the only purposes of sentencing in Victoria
punish the offender to an extent and in a manner which is just in all of the
circumstances; or
deter the offender or other persons from committing offences of the same or a
similar character; or
establish conditions within which it is considered by the court that the
rehabilitation of the offender may be facilitated; or
manifest the denunciation by the court of the type of conduct in which the
offender engaged; or
protect the community from the offender; or
combination of two or more of those purposes.
In the specific
context of low-end orders (adjourned undertakings, dismissals and discharges),
section 70(1)
then specifies that:
70. Purposes of orders under this Division
An order may be made under this Division—
(a) to provide for the rehabilitation of an offender by allowing the sentence to
be served in the community unsupervised;
(b) to take account of the trivial, technical or minor nature of the offence
(ba) to allow for the offender to demonstrate his or her remorse in a manner
agreed to by the court;
(c) to allow for circumstances in which it is inappropriate to record a
conviction;
(d) to allow for circumstances in which it is inappropriate to inflict any
punishment other than a nominal punishment;
(e) to allow for the existence of other extenuating or exceptional circumstances
that justify the court showing mercy to an offender.
The precise relationship between these two provisions is not immediately
apparent. For instance, what should a court do if the general
purposes of
sentencing suggest that an adjourned undertaking is the most appropriate
outcome, but (for whatever reason) none of the
supplementary purposes in
is unique in the
Sentencing Act
Sections 18X
specify the purpose(s) of a drug and alcohol treatment order and a community
correction order (CCO), but those are the purposes for
which those orders are
generally available, not the purposes for which a court may impose those orders
in any particular case. For
states that ‘[t]he
purpose of a community correction order is to provide a community based sentence
that may be used for a
wide range of offending behaviours while having regard to
and addressing the circumstances of the
This guides courts in
understanding the intent behind this sentencing order but does not specify the
objectives that the court should
be trying to achieve when sentencing in any
particular case.
Revising the supplementary purposes
In our consultation paper, we asked whether there
was a need to amend the supplementary purposes in
and, if so,
Stakeholder views
Each of the stakeholders whose written submission
addressed this question believed that there were some useful amendments that
be made to the supplementary
They did, though, differ in what
they believed the amendments might be.
The Office of Public Prosecutions suggested that it would be useful to
clarify that the supplementary purposes are alternatives (by
‘or’ between each of them) because, while this is largely understood
in practice, it is not immediately apparent
on the face of the
legislation.
We heard that the provision
was generally operating as intended. But we also heard that there is a view by
some that adjourned undertakings
are just for trivial offences, and therefore
could benefit from the addition of ‘or’ between each of
the supplementary purposes. Similarly, there was a suggestion
introductory language of
to further specify that an order can be made
under this division ‘for any one or more of the following
The Law Institute of Victoria suggested that
would benefit from a
catch-all purpose, such as ‘where the court is of the view that it would
otherwise be in the interests
of justice to do
The Law Institute argued that
this would ‘enable courts to impose Adjourned Undertakings in a broader
range of matters than
the law currently
Victoria Police similarly
observed that there is a catch-all provision in New South Wales that could be
useful in Victoria, allowing
courts to impose an adjourned undertaking after
taking into account ‘any other matter that the court thinks proper to
The Law Institute of Victoria further suggested removing the word
‘trivial’ from the wording of
in order to ‘enhance
clarity and certainty in the operation of the law, and promote the use of
Adjourned Undertakings in a
broader range of
So too did Fitzroy Legal
Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw jointly suggest replacing ‘trivial,
technical or minor nature’
section 70(1)(b)
with ‘the objective
seriousness of the offending ... in order to remove the association of adjourned
undertakings with only
very low-level
offending’.
Victoria Legal Aid further suggested that the supplementary purposes could be
removed in their entirety from the
Sentencing Act
[i]n our practice experience, it is rare for reference to be made to the
purposes of sentencing in the legislation as a result of
the extensive list of
purposes for sentencing listed in section [5] of the
Sentencing Act 1991
We consider the purposes are already largely addressed in this section and it
would be beneficial to remove [section 70] to avoid
the potential for
unnecessary complexity in the sentencing
One of the observations we also heard from stakeholders was that, among the
legal profession, there is not universal awareness about
the existence of
section 70.
The Law Institute of Victoria
agreed that it would be useful to co-locate the supplementary purposes specific
to adjourned undertakings
with the general purposes of sentencing in
Sentencing Act
The Council’s view
The Council broadly agrees with the various
submissions from stakeholders that there are some amendments that could be
usefully made
Sentencing Act
to better facilitate
the use of adjourned undertakings in appropriate cases.
First, while we were told that
is largely interpreted as only
requiring one of the purposes to be achieved in order to unlock the availability
of an adjourned undertaking,
this should be clarified in the legislation by (a)
adding the word ‘or’ between the various supplementary purposes and
(b) amending the introductory text to specify that an order can be made
‘for any one or more of the following purposes’
(or similar
language). There was no opposition to these reforms at our stakeholder
roundtable.
Second, given the principle of parsimony – both at common law and in
section 5(7)
Sentencing Act
– it seems reasonable to read
the supplementary purposes in
as enabling provisions, not restrictive
ones. It would seem incongruous that a court would consider an adjourned
undertaking the
most appropriate sentencing outcome after considering the
purposes of sentencing in
section 5(1)
but then feel hamstrung from imposing an
adjourned undertaking because (for whatever reason) none of the supplementary
purposes in
seemed to apply. Further, while acknowledging that this
is most likely how the provision operates in practice, it would be useful
expressly include a catch-all provision at the end of the supplementary purposes
(such as ‘any other purpose the court considers
appropriate in the
circumstances’). While these supplementary purposes may, as Victoria Legal
Aid observed, add some ‘complexity
[to] the sentencing exercise’,
they serve a useful function in encouraging the use of adjourned
undertakings.
Third, we agree with the Law Institute of Victoria and Fitzroy Legal Service,
WEstjustice and Youthlaw that the language of ‘trivial’
‘technical’ in
section 70(1)(b)
is not ideal. There has been a
growing trend away from describing certain crimes as ‘technical’
And if the offending was indeed
‘trivial’, then this raises questions about the exercise of
prosecutorial discretion
to lay criminal charges in the first place. The term
‘minor offending’ seems sufficient on its own to capture the intent
of that supplementary purpose. Attendees at our roundtable were broadly
supportive of removing the words ‘trivial’ and
‘technical’ from the
Finally, we see merit in relocating the supplementary purposes of adjourned
undertakings (and dismissals/discharges) to co-locate
them with the general
purposes of sentencing in
It is a key tenet of legislative drafting
that ‘[p]oor organisation may obscure underlying principles’ and
that, as such,
‘[t]he text should be structured according to the interests
and priorities of the readers’.
would be unsurprising to hear that busy or junior practitioners, and especially
non-lawyers, would not expect additional purposes
of sentencing to appear
elsewhere in the
Sentencing Act
section 5(1)
begins ‘[t]he
purposes for which sentences may be
imposed...’.
To overcome the apparent
tension and overlap between the two provisions, they could be co-located, which
may be a useful way of clarifying
how they are designed to interact. One
possible strategy in relocating the provisions (or even in not relocating them)
could be to
reframe them as a non-exhaustive list of factors (rather than as
‘purposes’) that courts should consider in deciding
impose an adjourned undertaking (or discharge/dismissal). This would equally
resolve the current tension between
, insofar as
section 5(1)
states that these are the ‘
purposes of
sentencing, whereas
seems to offer additional purposes in a specific
Purposes of adjourned undertakings
Recommendation 2:
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be amended to clarify that a court may impose
an adjourned undertaking for any one or more of the listed purposes, and to
a catch-all provision enabling courts to impose an adjourned undertaking
for any other purpose it considers appropriate in the circumstances.
Recommendation 3:
section 70(1)(b)
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be amended to remove the words ‘trivial’ and
‘technical’.
Recommendation 4:
That the current content of
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be co-located with the general purposes of
sentencing in
of adjourned undertakings
There are two mandatory conditions
that must be attached to all adjourned undertakings in Victoria: the offender
must (1) attend court
if required and (2) be of good behaviour during the period
of the adjourned undertaking.
In addition,
the court may include any other conditions it deems
appropriate.
This chapter considers
potential reforms to the mandatory and optional conditions that can be attached
to adjourned undertakings.
The requirement to be of good behaviour
All adjourned undertakings require the offender to
be of good behaviour during the period of the
The term ‘good
behaviour’ is not currently defined in the
Sentencing Act
elsewhere. During preliminary consultation, several stakeholders raised concerns
with the lack of definition, particularly given
that offenders can be prosecuted
for failing to comply with this condition and/or resentenced for their original
offending. We therefore
asked in our consultation paper whether there is a need
to clarify the definition of ‘good behaviour’ in
sections 72
Sentencing Act
Stakeholder views
Submissions from stakeholders were unanimous in
advocating a definition for ‘good
behaviour’.
Jesuit Social Services
observed that the lack of definition ‘can contribute to a subjective
interpretation of what constitutes
a breach of this
condition’.
And the Office of Public
Prosecutions provided examples of behaviours that had been considered potential
breaches of adjourned undertakings
but had not been prosecuted, such as:
attendance for a disturbance at the offender’s residence, with no offence
detected and no further action taken; and
granting of an intervention order against the
Law Institute of Victoria cautioned that ‘any definition [of good
behaviour] should not attempt to comprehensively define
what the term means ...
it should set the minimum
The Australian Community Support Organisation (ACSO) and the Office of Public
Prosecutions favoured defining ‘good behaviour’
as not committing an
offence punishable by a term of
imprisonment.
This would mirror the
approach to community correction orders
In a similar vein, the Law
Institute of Victoria submitted that good behaviour should mean ‘not
commit[ting] any further, non-trivial
offences .... includ[ing] traffic
infringements’.
And Fitzroy Legal
Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw submitted a number of ways to potentially
narrow the current definition, such
as ‘only includ[ing] indictable and
family violence-related offences’, or ‘exclud[ing] any offence that
has a lesser
penalty than the offence in relation to which an adjourned
undertaking was originally imposed’.
Most stakeholders therefore favoured a relatively high threshold for the
‘good behaviour’ condition.
Some stakeholders, however, observed that a quarter of adjourned undertakings
are imposed in cases where the most serious offence
is a traffic-related
and that when courts impose an
adjourned undertaking, they expect that any similar behaviour by the offender
would constitute a breach
of the condition to be of good behaviour. Many
offences in the
Road Safety Act
and related regulations have a maximum
penalty of a fine
and would not be captured
by a definition limiting ‘good behaviour’ to offences punishable by
a term of imprisonment.
At our stakeholder roundtable, there was general support for defining good
behaviour as ‘not committing a further offence’,
participant noting that this was ‘better than not having a
definition’ and another participant noting that this
communication with offenders easier because ‘half the challenge is
communicating to the client what good behaviour
The Council’s view
We have reached the view that good behaviour should
be defined simply as to not commit another offence, rather than limiting it to
offences punishable by a term of imprisonment.
We share the concern raised by some stakeholders that this definition does
not preclude the possibility of minor regulatory offences
(such as parking
infringements) constituting a breach of the condition to be of good behaviour.
We do, though, believe that the combination
of prosecutorial and judicial
discretion would mean that minor regulatory offences would be unlikely to be
operationalised in that
way. And, importantly, there are thousands of offenders
subject to adjourned undertakings for driving-related behaviours each year,
it is critical that they understand that engaging in similar behaviour could
result in them being resentenced for the original
offending. While many
drink-driving, drug-driving or speeding offences can result in imprisonment for
second or subsequent offences,
some do not and would not constitute a breach if
‘good behaviour’ was defined as not committing offences punishable
imprisonment.
Moreover, while some
second or subsequent offences do carry a potential prison term, if the second
driving offence is different from
the first offence (for example, speeding and
then drink-driving), the maximum penalty could still be a fine and therefore not
the condition to be of good behaviour.
We do, however, want to reiterate that this recommendation for a relatively
broad definition of ‘good behaviour’ is conditional
implementation of our later recommendation that the specific offence of
breaching an adjourned undertaking be repealed (see
Chapter 6). That way the
only potential consequences of committing a further offence would be to be
resentenced for the original
offending or to have the adjourned undertaking
varied. The offender could not be prosecuted for a distinct breach offence.
Defining ‘good behaviour’
Recommendation 5:
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be amended to specify that for the purpose of the condition to be
of good behaviour during the period of an adjourned undertaking,
good behaviour
means ‘not committing a further offence’.
Justice plan conditions
A justice plan condition can be attached to both
adjourned undertakings
It is one of the few express
conditions that the
Sentencing Act
specifies can be attached to an
adjourned undertaking. It requires someone with an intellectual disability (as
defined in the
Disability Act 2006
(Vic)) to participate in services for
a period of up to two years. In our consultation paper, we found that 0.4% of
adjourned undertakings
imposed in 2019 and 2020 included a justice plan
condition (92 adjourned undertakings).
Justice plans were perceived favourably by most of the stakeholders we
consulted. For instance, Victoria Legal Aid wrote that:
[a]djourned undertakings with justice plan conditions attached are an important
and effective sentencing option for people with intellectual
disabilities. In
our experience, because ordering an assessment for a justice plan triggers
engagement with disability services it
can ensure people receive targeted
specialist treatment that they may not have otherwise been able to access. It
also supports people
to navigate the National Disability Insurance Scheme, which
many of our clients find extremely difficult. In addition, the use of
plans as a condition of an adjourned undertaking can reduce a person’s
engagement with multiple agencies and unnecessary
justice system.
Stakeholder concerns about justice plans
While justice plans are generally perceived
favourably, stakeholders raised several issues as well. One persistent issue is
definition of ‘intellectual disability’ – a
precondition to the imposition of a justice plan – is very narrow.
stakeholder explained early in our consultations:
justice plans are limited because there has to be that declaration of
intellectual disability ... if your client hasn’t been
identified as
having an intellectual disability from an early age, such as no involvement, no
historical information, often the person
who does have the intellectual
disability goes under the radar.
Stakeholders also raised concerns about the current timeframes for the
preparation of justice plans. As we identified in our consultation
preparation of a justice plan requires an initial target group assessment (an
assessment of whether the offender meets
the diagnostic criteria for an
intellectual disability) and then the preparation of a justice plan; both
processes have an estimated
Victoria Legal Aid observed that
these timeframes can lead to a ‘standard waiting time for justice
plans’ of about ‘12
This delay can lead to people experiencing anxiety due to court proceedings
being prolonged and result in delays in receiving services.
resourcing to reduce the period for preparation would promote quicker connection
to supports that address a person’s
needs and reduce the risk [of] a delay
leading to disengagement from
In correspondence with the Council, the Department of Families, Fairness and
Housing (DFFH) noted that there is currently just one
psychologist in Victoria
who completes target group assessments, and then a few dozen disability justice
coordinators who prepare
the plan of available services (among the various other
aspects of their role).
While DFFH advised
that there is currently a ‘very productive individual in the role’
of conducting target group assessments,
they agreed that not having contingency
measures ‘poses potential critical risks for
timelines’.
They also explained that
the six-week timeframe is often important to the preparation of a justice plan,
including that:
it provides an opportunity to meet with the client at least once, but ideally a
couple of times, to build rapport, gauge their likelihood
of complying, assess
their attitude towards the offending behaviour, gather information, and involve
them in developing their plan
Disability Act
that people with a disability have a right to participate actively in the
decisions that affect their
DFFH was therefore keen not to create unrealistic expectations by reducing
the anticipated six-week timeframe for the development
of a justice
particularly when it can sometimes be
difficult to coordinate meetings with the offender, or if the offender does not
appointments.
DFFH did, however,
suggest that the process could be sped up by improved information-sharing
systems and ‘the addition of forensic
disability staff at courts who can
act as liaison’.
Victoria Police also
raised the possibility that ‘program suitability assessments’ could
be conducted ‘prior to
hearing dates’, which ‘may provide
additional support to accused
We were also told that another barrier to the use of justice plans is that
there is a ‘lack of awareness among the legal profession
and courts around
the availability of justice plans as part of adjourned undertakings, not just
The Council’s view
The restrictive eligibility criteria for justice
plans are beyond the scope of the present review of adjourned
undertakings.
We did, though, consider the current timeframes for target group assessments
and the preparation of justice plans to be within scope,
as these timelines
directly affect the ability of offenders to access relevant services as part of
their adjourned undertaking. In
particular, 12 weeks seems like a significant
amount of time for some offenders to potentially wait to begin accessing
services if
a court believes a justice plan could be appropriate. There can be
good reasons for those timeframes in many cases, such as DFFH
staff building a
rapport with the client or experiencing difficulties in coordinating a meeting
with them. However, DFFH also agreed
that there may be potential opportunities
to speed up those processes in appropriate cases. We therefore recommend that
DFFH explore
opportunities to promote more efficient processing of target group
assessments and preparation of justice plans in appropriate cases.
recommendation received unanimous support when presented at our
roundtable.
Justice plans
Recommendation 6:
That the Department of
Families, Fairness and Housing, in appropriate cases, support more efficient
processing of target group assessments
and the preparation of justice plans.
We were also concerned to hear that there might not be full awareness of the
availability of justice plans as a condition of adjourned
undertakings. Later in
this report, we recommend that judicial officers receive training on the
conditions of adjourned undertakings
– that training should include
reference to the availability of justice plans as conditions of adjourned
undertakings.
Payment conditions
In our consultation paper, we discussed the two
primary ways that a condition to make a payment is usually attached to an
undertaking.
requiring the
offender to make a donation
to ‘an organisation that
provides a charitable or community service’; or
requiring the
offender to make a donation
‘to the court for payment to
such an organisation’ (this is known as the Court Fund).
payment conditions are distinct from ancillary orders – such as costs
restitution orders and compensation
orders – that are not part of the adjourned undertaking
Instead, these are conditions of
the adjourned undertaking, and failure to pay can constitute a breach (making it
possible that the
offender could be prosecuted for a breach offence and/or
resentenced for the original offence).
Following feedback from stakeholders during preliminary consultation, we
posed three questions relating to the payment conditions
attached to adjourned
undertakings:
Should courts
continue to be permitted to attach payment conditions to adjourned undertakings
If so, should
courts continue to be permitted to order donations to specific charities (or
there be more transparency in how the Court Fund
of the reasons we asked whether payment conditions should continue to be
available for adjourned undertakings is that these conditions
are functionally
very similar to a fine, except that the money is directed to a different place.
Indeed, the Supreme Court in 2013
found that payment conditions for an adjourned
undertaking were so similar to a fine that they were rendered
impermissible,
because it conflicted with
the principle of parsimony to permit a pecuniary penalty for a sentence less
severe than a fine. Parliament
quickly enacted legislation to clarify that
payment conditions were nevertheless
We also heard from many
stakeholders during early consultations that payment conditions
disproportionately affect people with lower
There are then two reasons we asked whether courts should continue to be able
to order donations to specific charities (or types of
charities). First,
individual magistrates’ choices were affecting which charities receive the
And second, while the offender
must provide the court with a copy of the receipt as proof of payment, they
nevertheless retain proof
of the donation and can claim it as a tax deduction,
which disproportionately benefits people with higher incomes.
Finally, the reason we asked whether there should be more transparency in the
Court Fund is that there is very limited publicly available
information about
how much money is ordered to be paid into the Court Fund each year, how much is
actually paid and how decisions
organisations funds are paid.
Stakeholder views
One of the overwhelming themes to emerge from the
submissions we received was that monetary conditions disproportionately affect
with lower incomes and can risk further entrenching them in a cycle of
poverty and engagement with the criminal justice system. For
[M]onetary conditions are regressive and discriminate against those who are
financially disadvantaged.
Submission 4 (Vacro)
The imposition of monetary penalties or mandated donations can be particularly
costly for marginalised communities and people already
experiencing
disadvantage.
Submission 10 (Victoria Police)
Having to pay a fine or donation to a charitable organisation may add an
additional burden to some of our most vulnerable community
members, and further
entrench them in cycles of offending or poverty.
Submission 6 (Women and Mentoring)
The imposition of a monetary penalty can add to the burden of people already
experiencing financial pressure and disproportionately
impact those of lower
socioeconomic groups.
Submission 7 (Jesuit Social Services)
Failure to pay will be seen as being non-compliant and this places many people
who are already experiencing financial distress in
even further distress[.]
Submission 2 (Australian Community Support Organisation)
[W]e consider it important for judicial officers to be equipped with the tools
to appropriately identify the potential impacts of
requiring financial
contributions ... This will ensure those experiencing financial stress are not
being disproportionately impacted[.]
Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid)
The Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service further observed that an inability to
comply with a payment condition can sometimes result
in a person receiving a
more severe sentence:
In many cases our clients cannot afford the financial burden of paying a
financial penalty. As such, there have been circumstances
where despite an
adjourned undertaking being the most appropriate sentence for a client, the
client may instruct their lawyer to
accept a more severe penalty, like a
Community Correction Order (CCO), because they do not have the financial ability
to accept a
financial condition, whereas they may have the ability or time to
engage with the conditions of a CCO. Clients may also instruct
their lawyer to
accept a fine rather than an undertaking with a charitable donation condition,
because a person who receives a fine
can apply to the court to have the fine
converted into unpaid community work hours. This option is not available for an
undertaking ... A person should not receive a more serious sentence
because they have a lower
Despite these concerns, many stakeholders nevertheless remained of the view
that payment conditions of adjourned undertakings remained
appropriate in some
In part, a payment condition can be
a punitive element of the sentence and therefore reduce the need for the court
to record a conviction
or impose a more severe sentence. And in part, a donation
can demonstrate remorse, especially if the charity is somehow linked to
offending (for example, a donation to a women’s shelter in a family
violence case or to a road trauma charity for driving
offences). The importance
of a nexus between the offending and the selected charity was highlighted by
multiple stakeholders. The
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service, for instance,
wrote that:
Sentencing Act
does not specifically require charitable
donation conditions to be relevant in some way to the offending, it is well
accepted in practice
the conditions attached to the offending should be both
rehabilitative in nature and address themes of the
Stakeholders had mixed views about whether courts should be able to order
direct donations to charities. The Office of Public Prosecutions
and the Law
Institute of Victoria considered it important to maintain a nexus between the
offending behaviour and the charity receiving
ACSO, on the other hand, observed
that donations made directly to charities have a larger impact on people with
lower incomes, due
to the donations being tax
deductible.
Similarly, the Victorian
Aboriginal Legal Service described it as ‘unconscionable that people who
have the financial means
... are able to ultimately benefit from the
ACSO and the Law Institute of Victoria further agreed with the observation in
our consultation paper that there seemed to be an issue
with which organisations
receive charitable donations.
that ‘less than 200 groups [were] nominated’ to receive charitable
donations in 2019 and 2020, but there are
‘more than 20,000 charitable
org[anisation]s in Victoria’.
If charitable donation conditions remain a feature of adjourned undertakings,
stakeholders largely preferred that donations were exclusively
made to the Court
Fund so long as there was improved transparency in the Court Fund’s
ACSO suggested that there should
be ‘an undertaking by the courts to audit the funds
The Law Institute of
Victoria considered it ‘imperative’ that ‘the Court Fund
properly account for payments from
the Court Fund to demonstrate their legal
regularity’ and ‘to better perform a reparative effect by allowing
the offender
to understand where the donation is
The Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service recommended that the Magistrates’ Court publish annual
reports on the management and
disbursement of donations made to the Court
Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice
and Youthlaw cited examples where a failure to explain how the Court Fund
operates led to ‘a
mistaken assumption that the money [would] be used to
fund the court itself’.
And Victoria
Police wrote that ‘transparency would provide offenders insight into how
their donation is helping ... [g]reater
transparency in Court Fund operations
may also be appropriate due to the significant volume of money moving through
Some stakeholders further observed that courts are not currently required to
consider the financial circumstances of an offender in
deciding whether to
impose a payment condition of an adjourned undertaking and, if so, the value of
that payment. In almost every
scenario where the
Sentencing Act
anticipates that an offender will be required to pay a sum of money, there is an
obligation on the court to consider ‘the
financial circumstances of the
offender’. This is the case for bond conditions of CCOs
(section 48J)
(section 52)
, superannuation orders
(section 83F)
, compensation orders
(sections 85H
), recovery of victims of crime compensation
(section 87A)
and cost recovery orders
(section 87J).
But the same is not true for adjourned
undertakings.
In that context, many stakeholders were supportive of amending the
Sentencing Act
to specify that courts should take an offender’s
financial circumstances into account when deciding whether to impose a
donation condition and the value of that
ACSO ‘strongly
suggest[ed]’ this reform,
Law Institute of Victoria described it as
‘imperative’,
Legal Aid said in their experience ‘insufficient consideration’ is
currently given to the effect of financial
penalties with adjourned
undertakings,
and the Victorian
Aboriginal Legal Service said that in their experience ‘financial
conditions ... are rarely, if ever, considered
in light of the person’s
financial situation’.
The Council’s view
There are four interrelated issues concerning
payment conditions. The first is whether courts should continue to be able to
charitable donation conditions at all when imposing adjourned
undertakings. We were persuaded that these conditions can constitute
component of the sentence and potentially avoid the need for a more severe
sentence type or the recording of a conviction.
It is clearly also very common
practice (about 30% of adjourned undertakings in 2019 and 2020 had a payment
condition attached),
and as we said at the outset of this report, we do not want
to fix what isn’t broken. A major reform such as prohibiting payment
conditions would require both a good reason and significant stakeholder support.
Moving to the second issue, we do not believe that conditions requiring
offenders to make direct donations to specific charities (or
should continue to be permissible. While many stakeholders raised the perceived
value of a nexus between offending
and the type of charity receiving the money,
this did not outweigh the countervailing considerations. Direct donations
disproportionately
affect people with lower incomes who would not receive the
same level of deduction (if any). We found that the charities receiving
donations are often not related to the offending. We found that certain
charities are more prominent at particular Magistrates’
Court locations,
even if the charity is not linked geographically to the court location. And in
some cases, the chosen charity can
even be antithetical to the purposes of
sentencing. For example, we were told in consultation that ordering an offender
donation to a police-related charity, when one or more of the offences
were committed against a police officer, can further fracture
offender’s perception of, and relationship with, police, rather than
serving a reparative function.
As such, we have reached the view that financial conditions should be limited
to payments to the Court Fund. This leads to our third
issue in relation to
payment conditions. There is very little publicly available information about
the Court Fund, such as how much
money it receives each year, how decisions
Court Fund received over $2 million in
that is a significant amount of
money received by a public entity that is not currently accounted for. Further,
while the Magistrates’
Court provided us with a copy of the form to
request funding from the Court Fund, that form was not – until very
– publicly available
online, which made it difficult for charitable organisations to be aware of the
Court Fund as a potential
source of funding. We therefore recommend that the
Magistrates’ Court review how to improve the operation, governance and
transparency
of the Court Fund. As a related benefit, increased transparency in
the Court Fund would also allow courts to explain to offenders
how charitable
donation conditions are typically used. Courts could then, using a family
violence case as an example, explain that
a certain percentage of the Court Fund
each year funds domestic violence charities.
The fourth and final issue is that the
Sentencing Act
currently require courts to consider a person’s financial circumstances in
deciding whether to order a payment condition,
the value of a payment and how
payment is to be made. We heard mixed views from stakeholders about whether
courts are nevertheless
generally making these enquiries despite the absence of
this legislative requirement. It is, though, concerning to hear both Victoria
Legal Aid and the Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service raise concerns that there
are cases where such enquiries are not taking place.
It would therefore be both
practically and symbolically useful – and consistent with other sentencing
dispositions –
to amend the
Sentencing Act
to require courts
to consider a person’s financial circumstances before attaching a payment
condition to an adjourned undertaking.
This recommendation, we note, extends
beyond conditions requiring donations to the Court Fund and would equally apply
to courts deciding,
for example, whether to order participation in a certain
rehabilitation program and/or whether the offender should bear the cost
participating in a program (see [4.73]).
Payment conditions
Recommendation 7:
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be amended to limit payment conditions (if any) of adjourned
undertakings to contributions to the Court Fund.
Recommendation 8:
That the Magistrates’ Court review how to
improve the operation, governance and transparency of the Court Fund.
Recommendation 9:
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be amended
to require courts to consider the financial circumstances of the offender in
deciding which optional conditions (if
any) to attach to an adjourned
undertaking (for example, whether to order a payment to the Court Fund and, if
so, the amount of such
Guidance about conditions
In addition to the two mandatory conditions that are
attached to all adjourned undertakings,
courts can include any other conditions they deem
appropriate.
There is little guidance in
Sentencing Act
to adjourned undertakings, except that they can include charitable donation
and/or justice plan
conditions.
This broad flexibility
allows courts to tailor conditions to the circumstances of the offending and the
Using a machine learning model, we examined the optional conditions attached
to almost 25,000 adjourned undertakings in 2019 and 2020
and presented the
results of that analysis in our consultation
Almost half of all adjourned
undertakings (47%) had no optional conditions. The most common optional
conditions were charitable donations,
either paid to the Court Fund (24% of
adjourned undertakings) or paid directly to a charity (7%); commencing or
continuing with medical
or mental health treatment of some sort (15%);
participating in a driver education course (5%); participating in an anger
course or a men’s behaviour change program (6%); and
participating in substance abuse treatment (4%).
Even among these more common conditions, we identified some issues with their
nature and wording in some cases. For instance, many
adjourned undertakings
required the offender to ‘continue to see Dr [name]’, without
specifying what the offender should
do if that treating doctor became
unavailable for some reason (for example, if the doctor retired or moved
interstate). It may be
implied that the offender can see an alternative
practitioner if circumstances require, but this is not immediately apparent, and
the uncertainty could cause undue anxiety to the offender subject to the
condition. It was also common for an adjourned undertaking
to require the
offender to comply with other court orders in place, such as bail or family
violence orders. But adherence to those
orders is already required by law, and
these cross-referencing conditions can create an unnecessarily complex web of
consequences
for individual breach behaviours.
There were also many bespoke conditions that seemed to be tailored to the
specific circumstances of the case, and some of these raised
concerns about
either their nature or their wording. As just some examples:
One condition
required the offender to
successfully
obtain their driver licence. What
if, despite their best efforts, they repeatedly fail the test?
One condition
required a young offender to ‘read up on the cost to the community of
graffiti’. What amount of reading
would satisfy this condition?
One condition
required the offender to ‘consider’ volunteering at a men’s
shed. Is a passing thought sufficient?
We therefore asked in our
consultation paper whether there was a need for guidance about the optional
conditions that can be attached
to adjourned undertakings.
Stakeholder views
First and foremost, stakeholders identified the
flexibility in the conditions of adjourned undertakings as the primary strength
this sentencing order and opposed any reform that would interfere with that
flexibility:
[A]djourned undertakings provide a flexible, problem-solving approach to
sentencing. They are an essential tool to help address the
underlying causes and
risk factors for offending in a proportionate way, as the conditions of an order
can be tailored to the needs
of each person.
Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid)
[A]djourned undertakings ... connect people with programs and allow the
conditions placed on the order to be tailored to each person.
Submission 7 (Jesuit Social Services)
[A]djourned undertakings are one of the most critical sentencing options
available to our client base. This is because of the flexibility
permitted under
this disposition for the court to consider a broad range of circumstances and
underlying causes in tailoring a sanction
that can be supportive whilst
reflecting the admonishment of the court.
Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw)
Stakeholders also told us, however, that the nature and wording of conditions
are sometimes less than ideal, especially if conditions
are unrealistic or
unclear (which can negatively affect the offender’s ability to understand
and comply with conditions).
The Office of Public Prosecutions noted that there is sometimes a ‘lack
of clarity’ in conditions and that ‘[d]ifficulties
often arise in
relation to the scope of the condition and what constitutes compliance or a
Victoria Police also raised concerns about conditions that are not
sufficiently clear, citing the example of a condition requiring
There is no definition of ‘regular’ in context, nor an understanding
of what the purpose of the contact is. This ambiguity
is particularly difficult
for culturally and linguistically diverse people to navigate as assumed meanings
of certain terms or phrases
do not or may not translate
accordingly.
Several stakeholders further raised concerns that there is often insufficient
detail about what offenders should do if circumstances
change and compliance
with the condition is no longer possible or
reasonable.
Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw also raised concerns about
conditions requiring abstinence from substance use, because
recovery from
substance abuse is a process that typically involves two steps forward and one
They argued that it is not
reasonable to expect perfect compliance, and punishing predictable relapses
along the way will only impede
the offender’s rehabilitation. It is for
this reason, for example, that the specialist Drug Court in Dandenong tolerates
urinalysis tests during the life of a drug and alcohol treatment
It is more realistic to
in substance use, rather than complete
abstinence.
Collectively, stakeholders considered three potential forms of guidance that
could be provided to courts in relation to the setting
of optional conditions:
of conditions: most stakeholders opposed the inclusion of a list of optional
conditions in the
Sentencing Act
because it could result in an
‘overloading’ of unnecessary
conditions.
considerations: there was support for some form of guidance – especially
legislative guidance – about the relevant
considerations (for example,
parsimony and proportionality) that courts should take into account in deciding
which conditions to
attach to an adjourned
undertaking.
there was also considerable support for some model wording (capable of being
modified as needed) of some of the most common
optional conditions, particularly
Victorian Sentencing
Victoria Legal Aid offered some potential legislated principles that courts
could consider in deciding which conditions to impose;
many of these principles
were mentioned and supported by other stakeholders as well:
should be proportionate to the offending;
should be no more restrictive than is required to meet the sentencing purposes
set out in the
Sentencing Act
should only be imposed if they are capable of being fulfilled within the
duration of the order; and
should reasonably relate to the purposes of imposing the
potential principles or factors suggested by stakeholders included that:
should be ‘reasonably
achievable’;
should consider which services are both local and
should consider the availability of culturally appropriate services wherever
The Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service also recommended that the
Sentencing Act
should be amended to (a) ‘emphasise the importance
of culturally safe conditions’ and (b) ‘make clear that an adjourned
undertaking without attached conditions is an available sentence, which is not
clear in the existing
legislation’.
This view was shared
by Victoria Police, who suggested that ‘courts may benefit from being
prompted to consider the utility
of an adjourned undertaking with no optional
conditions at all’.
Finally, stakeholders told us that the availability of services in programs
in regional areas is a consistent issue of concern. For
[T]here are certainly reduced services and supports in rural and regional areas
that make the requirements of an adjourned undertaking
often more costly than
for clients in an accessible metro region. Any funding for supports within these
orders much apply a loading
to service costs in rural and regional areas.
Submission 2 (Australian Community Support Organisation)
[A]ccess to the support services and programs which may be a condition of an
adjourned undertaking, are very limited in rural and
regional Victoria.
Specialist health, family violence, and other therapeutic programs have
waitlists and gaps in many rural and remote
areas. Poverty and a lack of access
to transport options can also reduce accessibility. This can compound the
disadvantage experienced
by rural and regional people who are subject to
adjourned undertakings ... As such, adjourned undertakings requiring access to
programs in regional and rural Victoria can set offenders up to fail
and decrease public safety.
Submission 10 (Victoria Police)
Our practice experience has shown that people from regional and remote
communities do not have the same access to services as those
in metropolitan
areas. This experience is reinforced by other increasing reports of shortages in
allied health workers and a strong
unmet need for allied health services in
rural and regional areas ... in our experience, in rural Victoria there are
instances where
adjourned undertakings contain conditions that people cannot
comply with during the period of the order because of delays in accessing
services. This is particularly common when conditions relate to in demand
services such as Men’s Behaviour Change Programs.
In such cases people are
being brought back to court for breaching the order through no fault of their
In addition, a lack of access to public transport can be a significant barrier
to accessing support and services. Many people living
in remote areas are only
able to attend regional centres to access services if they have a licence and
access to a car. In our experience,
many people coming before the court do not
have this access and this can frequently lead to non-compliance with orders.
These experiences demonstrate the need for greater access to supports, services
and programs in rural and regional Victoria. In our
experience, the most acute
and urgent needs relate to services for psychological and psychiatric issues,
drug and alcohol addiction,
anger management programs and greater access to
public or low-cost transportation for those unable to access a vehicle.
Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid)
The Council’s view
There was very limited stakeholder support for the
specification of optional conditions for adjourned undertakings in the
Sentencing Act
, despite this currently being the case for
This was largely because of the
perceived risk that a specified list could lead to an overloading of conditions.
We agree and do
not recommend a specified list of optional conditions for
adjourned undertakings in the
Sentencing Act
. It also better facilitates
the flexible nature of the order to not have a specified list.
There are, however, two reforms relating to guidance about conditions that we
recommend: first, introducing legislative principles
that courts must consider
in deciding which conditions (if any) to attach to adjourned undertakings; and
second, amending the
Victorian Sentencing Manual
to include guidance
considerations and model wording
of common conditions.
As to the first reform, we note that there is currently guidance about the
‘matters to be considered when attaching conditions’
to a CCO in
section 48A
Sentencing Act
48A. Matters to be considered when attaching conditions
The court must attach conditions to a community correction order in accordance
principle of proportionality; and
purposes for which a sentence may be imposed as set out in
purpose of a community correction order set out in
section 36.
believe, for a number of reasons, that the inclusion of similar factors for
consideration would be useful in the context of adjourned
undertakings. There
was, as discussed above, strong stakeholder support for this reform. It would be
consistent with the approach
taken in numerous other jurisdictions, where there
is common law guidance about certain principles that apply in setting the
of orders equivalent to adjourned
undertakings.
And it would provide
courts with guidance about determining the most appropriate conditions (if any)
in each particular case.
We therefore see merit in amending the
Sentencing Act
to specify the
principles or factors relevant to setting conditions of adjourned undertakings.
At the very least, the provision should
mirror the current matters that courts
must consider when attaching conditions to a CCO. It also, however, seems
reasonable for courts
to take some additional considerations into account:
The first is the
principle of parsimony, the requirement to impose the least severe sentence
necessary to achieve the purposes of
sentencing. Half of all adjourned
undertakings have no optional conditions imposed, and multiple stakeholders
(such as the Victorian
Aboriginal Legal Service and Victoria Police) advocated
this as the default position for adjourned undertakings.
The second is
whether the condition is reasonably achievable – which we take to refer
not only to the ability of the offender
to comply with the condition but also to
the availability of relevant services and programs (in terms of both wait times
availability). Although there are challenges to providing a full suite
of programs and services in regional areas, their more limited
availability in
those areas contributes to ‘postcode justice’. Courts should be
required to consider the local availability
and accessibility of any programs
The third is
whether there are any culturally appropriate programs and services
Guidance about conditions: legislative principles
Recommendation 10:
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be amended to include a list of matters that courts must consider
when attaching conditions to adjourned undertakings, including:
the principle of
proportionality;
the principle of
parsimony, in particular, that the default position should be an adjourned
undertaking with no conditions;
the purposes for
which a sentence may be imposed as set out in
the purposes of
an adjourned undertaking as presently set out in
whether the
condition is reasonably achievable during the period of the adjourned
undertaking; and
the availability
of culturally appropriate programs and services.
As to the second
reform, we see significant value in the development of guidance in the
Victorian Sentencing Manual
, including both general guidance about how to
word conditions (for example, using full sentences, rather than shorthand, to
that everyone understands what is intended) and model wording for some of
the more common conditions attached to adjourned undertakings.
The proposed
guidance would not be prescriptive. Instead, it would offer judicial officers,
particularly in the high-volume, time-pressured
summary jurisdiction, some
initial wording of conditions that could easily be modified to suit the
circumstances of each case. That
model wording should be flexible, easily
adapted and non-binding. As such, we believe that the most appropriate source
for this guidance
would be the
Victorian Sentencing Manual
, produced by
the Judicial College of Victoria.
raised this possibility with the Judicial College, and they have already
identified a possible location in the
Sentencing Manual
for that proposed
Once that guidance is developed, it would be useful to then inform the
judiciary and profession about the new guidance. We therefore
also recommend
that, once the guidance has been published, training be provided (as Victoria
Legal Aid has suggested
) to judicial
officers about framing conditions of adjourned undertakings and (as the Law
Institute of Victoria has
) to practitioners about
assisting courts by proposing the substance and wording of possible optional
conditions.
Guidance about conditions: wording
Recommendation 11:
College of Victoria expand the
Victorian Sentencing Manual
guidance about the wording of conditions (if any) attached to adjourned
undertakings.
Recommendation 12:
Judicial College of Victoria and
the Law Institute of Victoria provide training for judicial officers and legal
practitioners, respectively,
Funding programs and services
The effectiveness of adjourned undertakings often
hinges on the availability and accessibility of appropriate, effective and
safe programs and services.
In our consultation paper, we found that, of the 24,787 adjourned
undertakings imposed in the Magistrates’ Court in 2019 and
2020, about 15%
required the offender to participate in a rehabilitation program of some sort.
This included behaviour change programs
such as men’s behaviour change
programs and anger management courses (6%), driver education courses such as
Amber Community’s
Road Trauma Awareness Seminar (5%), and drug and alcohol
treatment programs (4%).
However, there is currently no direct funding available to pay for programs
that are ordered as conditions of adjourned undertakings,
leaving offenders to
pay for the programs themselves, unless programs are otherwise subsidised (such
as through Medicare). As just
one example, one drink-driving education program
is at least $384 for two 3.5-hour
While these programs are often
designed to reduce the offender’s risk of reoffending and promote their
rehabilitation, they
can also have a negative financial impact on the offenders
ordered to participate in them, disproportionately affecting people with
We therefore asked in our consultation paper whether there should be a way
for programs ordered as a condition of an adjourned undertaking
to be paid for
by the state in appropriate cases.
Stakeholder views
It has been an ongoing stakeholder concern
throughout this project that rehabilitation programs ordered as conditions of
undertakings are not funded; in particular, there is a risk that when
offenders cannot afford those programs, they are set up to
There was overwhelming support for
introducing some form of government funding for programs ordered as conditions
of adjourned undertakings.
For instance:
[T]here is currently no funding or support for people to comply with a condition
of this nature (such as participation in a drug
rehabilitation program). In our
practice experience, this disproportionately impacts those who are unable to pay
to access such services
and programs. This limits an important opportunity to
promote rehabilitation and reduce the risks of a person committing further
offences and intervene at an early opportunity to prevent entrenchment in the
criminal justice system.
Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid)
To increase compliance with and effectiveness of Adjourned Undertakings, it
would be appropriate to provide funding for those programs
directed as
conditions of the order, especially for offenders from marginalised groups who
would not otherwise be able to fund rehabilitative
conditions of their order.
Submission 3 (Office of Public Prosecutions)
Programs that are mandated by an adjourned undertaking should be provided free
of charge, or at a subsidised rate for people who
are low- and middle-income
earners. Judicial decision makers should consider a sentenced person’s
financial circumstances –
including not only their income, but also the
size of their household and whether they have other caring responsibilities to
out of that income – when considering whether and how to impose a
requirement to complete a program.
Submission 9 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service)
Where ordered for by the State, the State should be responsible for payment of
these services. For those living on Centrelink payments,
which place most people
as living below the poverty line, placing conditions requiring payment to access
and complete the requirement
will most likely place them in a higher category
for potential to reoffend in the future or for failure to comply.
Submission 2 (Australian Community Support Organisation)
In their submission, the Office of Public Prosecutions added that there is
‘a stark difference’ between adjourned undertakings
because when a person receives a CCO, ‘the State funds the conditions and
programs’, but this is not the case
for offenders on adjourned
undertakings.
The Council’s view
The Council is persuaded by the strong support for
program funding demonstrated by stakeholders who made submissions and attended
our roundtable. They illustrated that there are several ways in which the
current user-pays system creates inequity between offenders
in different income
First, the requirement that offenders pay for their court-ordered programs
‘means that a nominally equivalent sentence imposes
a far greater burden
on low-income earners than those on higher
Second, courts are not presently required to consider the financial
circumstances of the offender and the impact that paying for the
program would
have on them in ordering a program as a condition of their adjourned
undertaking.
Third, if the program is not realistically affordable for the offender, they
may feel obligated to request, or the court may feel
obligated to impose, a more
severe sentencing outcome, not because it is the most appropriate sentence but
because the adjourned
undertaking is not viable with that rehabilitation program
as a condition.
That being said, we acknowledge that it may not be financially feasible to
expect the state to pay for all rehabilitation programs
attached to adjourned
undertakings, especially for offenders who can more realistically afford to pay
for those programs.
If there is a need to prioritise payment for only
programs, this discretion should rest with the court after
considering the financial circumstances of the offender. In that context,
note our earlier recommendation at [4.39] that courts should be required to
consider the financial circumstances of the offender
in deciding which optional
conditions (if any) to attach to adjourned undertakings.
complexity of this matter, we recommend that the Department of Justice
Community Safety develop a resourcing model to ensure that conditions of
adjourned undertakings can be paid for by the state in
appropriate
Paying for programs
Recommendation 13:
That the Department of
Justice and Community Safety develop a resourcing model to ensure that when
programs or services are ordered
as conditions of an adjourned undertaking, they
can be paid for by the state in appropriate cases.
undertakings in the sentencing hierarchy
This chapter explores
the legislative framework within which adjourned undertakings currently operate
in Victoria and recommends reforms
to improve how adjourned undertakings and
related orders are used.
Revising the hierarchy: adjourned undertakings and
The sentencing orders available for adults in
Victoria – aside from those applicable to federal
– are outlined in the
Sentencing Act
. Imprisonment is the most severe sentence in what the
Court of Appeal has described as a ‘loose hierarchy of sentencing
Adjourned undertakings,
discharges and dismissals sit together at the bottom of this hierarchy, which
gives legislative effect to
the principle of parsimony: courts must not impose
sentences that are more severe than necessary to achieve the purposes of
sentencing.
Most relevantly for present
section 5(7)
Sentencing Act
provides that:
A court must not impose a fine unless it considers that the purpose or purposes
for which the sentence is imposed cannot be achieved
by a dismissal, discharge
or adjournment.
That is, if an adjourned undertaking could be crafted to sufficiently achieve
the purposes of sentencing in a particular case, then
the court must not impose
a fine (or other more severe order). It was against this backdrop that one of
the most consistent observations
made during consultation was that, although
section 5(7)
creates a rigid hierarchy between fines and adjourned undertakings,
in practice none exists. This is because:
sentencing orders can include significant pecuniary conditions (a third of
adjourned undertakings require a charitable donation
of some sort), and in
practice the median values of those fines and charitable donations are both
sentencing orders, courts have discretion whether to record a conviction –
albeit in practice convictions are recorded
four times more frequently with
fines (64%) than with adjourned undertakings (17%);
stakeholders told us that offenders often prefer a fine as a ‘once and
done’ sentencing order, because an adjourned
undertaking includes a
mandatory condition to be of good behaviour for a period of time, and can also
come with other optional conditions
such as substance abuse treatment (4%) or
driver education (5%),
programs that offenders must often pay for themselves; and
non-compliance
with the conditions of an adjourned undertaking – including non-payment to
the Court Fund or a charitable organisation
– is currently a distinct
offence that can be
prosecuted,
non-payment of a fine is not.
Collectively, these points make it difficult to envisage many scenarios where
the purposes of sentencing could not be achieved by
an adjourned undertaking,
rather than a fine. Yet in practice, fines are the most common sentence in
Victoria, accounting for about
half of all outcomes each
This is likely to be due to the
pragmatic application of the spirit of parsimony, rather than strict adherence
to the rigid hierarchy
prescribed.
In that context, and mindful of the focused scope of this project, we asked
in our consultation paper whether the placement of adjourned
undertakings in
Victoria’s sentencing hierarchy should be amended and, if so, how and
Stakeholder views
There was a range of responses. As Victoria Legal
Aid observed in their submission, ‘[t]he question of where adjourned
undertakings
should sit in the sentencing hierarchy is
Victoria Police were broadly supportive of amending the hierarchy:
[D]epending on an offender’s financial situation, a fine may be more or
less onerous than an adjourned undertaking ... Consideration
could ... be given
to making fines and adjourned undertakings of an equal standing in the hierarchy
of sentencing. Judicial discretion
could then be exercised to determine which
sentence would be more appropriate in the individual’s
circumstances.
The Australian Community Support Organisation (ACSO) supported the suggested
change in the sentencing hierarchy if it would ‘reduce
the impact ... of
non-compliance with order
conditions’.
And participants at
our stakeholder roundtable also agreed that fines and adjourned undertakings
should be at the same level in the
sentencing hierarchy, with one participant
noting that the current hierarchy is a ‘big area of appeals’ from
the Magistrates’
Court to the County
Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw opposed the notion of having
a sentencing hierarchy at all, because ‘sentences
imposed should meet the
purposes of sentencing while addressing the particular circumstances of an
accused person ... rather than
simply moving up a
In contrast, Victoria Legal Aid contended that the current use of adjourned
undertakings for more serious offending reflects a ‘gap’
current hierarchy and that, rather than revise the current hierarchy, the more
appropriate solution would be to introduce
a new sentencing
The Council’s view
In considering the placement of sentencing orders in
Victoria’s sentencing hierarchy, one of the challenges is that recording
conviction is discretionary and
quasi-ancillary
for almost all of those
orders. In our consultation paper, we found that 83% of adjourned undertakings
are imposed without conviction.
we found that 36% of fines are imposed without
conviction.
Even community correction
orders (CCOs) are sometimes imposed without conviction, particularly for people
with no prior convictions
and good prospects of
rehabilitation.
For some people, recording a conviction may be the most severe aspect of
their sentence, especially for first-time offenders with
no criminal record.
Among other things, a conviction can affect visa status, employability, access
to housing, ability to travel,
access to adoption and admission into certain
professions. Being discharged with
(a finding of guilt with no
conditions other than the recording of a conviction) can be worse for some
offenders than receiving a
CCO without conviction. This, in our view, makes it
difficult to definitively place any sentencing order (perhaps other than prison)
into a definitive ranking of severity.
Nevertheless, we remain of the view that a revision of the hierarchy is
required (see Figure 1, page 45).
that adjourned undertakings can be, and often are, more onerous than fines, we
believe that
Sentencing Act
should be amended to remove
the implication that fines cannot be imposed unless an adjourned undertaking can
achieve the purposes
of sentencing. The circumstances of the case should govern
whether the court should impose one or the other.
Figure 1: Existing and proposed sentencing hierarchies
Existing hierarchy
Proposed hierarchy
Imprisonment
Imprisonment
Drug and alcohol treatment order
Drug and alcohol treatment order
Community correction order
Community correction order
Fine – Good behaviour order
Adjourned undertaking – Discharge – Dismissal
Proven and dismissed
Revising the hierarchy
Recommendation 14:
section 5(7)
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be amended so that there is no hierarchy
between fines and adjourned undertakings.
Merging the provisions
Prior to the introduction of the
Sentencing Act
in 1991, the process for determining whether to record a conviction was,
according to the Attorney-General at the time, ‘hopelessly
When the new Act came
into force, it was intended to ‘rationalise and simplify’ the law
A result of this reform
is that, for some sentencing orders (fines and CCOs), there is a single
authorising provision
(sections 37
), and the discretion to record a
conviction is governed separately and exclusively via
Whereas for
other sentencing orders (adjourned undertakings and discharges/dismissals),
there are distinct provisions based on whether
or not a conviction will be
(sections 72
sections 73
), bearing in mind the
considerations outlined in
In our consultation paper, we asked whether
sections 72
Sentencing Act
should be merged and similarly whether
sections 73
Sentencing Act
This would unify the approach to
all sentencing orders, by creating just one enabling provision for the
imposition of an adjourned
undertaking and another for discharge/dismissal, with
the recording of a conviction still being governed by
Sentencing Act
As they stand,
sections 72
are almost identical, with some
idiosyncratic differences of no practical significance:
section 72(1)
specifies a 5-year limit for adjourned undertakings, whereas
section 75(1)
describes it as a 60-month limit;
section 75(2)(c)
enables courts to attach ‘any conditions’ to an adjourned
undertaking, whereas
section 72(2)(c)
allows courts to attach ‘any
conditions’; and
, courts ‘discharge the offender’, but under
‘dismiss the charge[s]’.
Sections 73
quite similar, except that when a conviction is recorded, the person is
discharged, and when no conviction is recorded,
the charges are dismissed:
A court may discharge a person whom it has convicted of an offence.
A court, on being satisfied that a person is guilty of an offence, may (without
recording a conviction) dismiss the charge.
Stakeholder views
Relatively few written submissions expressed a view
provisions.
Those that did, however,
supported merging the provisions. ACSO agreed with our observations in the
consultation paper.
Victoria Police said
that ‘a merger would be a suitable approach to consolidate the
And Fitzroy Legal
Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw said that while these were not ‘critical
issues with respect to [their]
clients’, they supported ‘combining
[the] provisions into [a] single clause [to] reduce convolution within the
legislation’.
One participant at
the roundtable also added that (a) the orders can sometimes be mis-recorded as
one another (for example, a discharge
is recorded as a
and (b) it can often be
difficult to explain to victims that a dismissal or discharge does not equate to
a finding of not guilty,
particularly
given that both ‘discharge’ and ‘dismiss’ are elsewhere
used in criminal legislation to mean
that the case has ended without a finding
The Council’s view
Sentencing Act
has become increasingly
complex over the years.
Even excluding
endnotes, as some researchers recently did when exploring the increasing
complexity of federal legislation,
Sentencing Act
has grown from its original 120 pages to now 541, more
than four times its original size. In that context, merging a handful of
will not make much difference. It is, though, a step, however small,
towards consistency and simplification. Moreover, doing so reduces
raised at our roundtable that the orders may be confused for one another.
We are therefore of the view that
sections 72
should be merged, and
sections 73
should be merged, to reflect that adjourned undertakings and
discharge/dismissal are in fact individual sentencing orders. Importantly,
recommendation is predicated on such mergers not affecting courts’
discretion to record a conviction, which should continue
to be governed by the
circumstances specified in
Nor should merging the
provisions affect the recording of a conviction being a relevant consideration,
in appropriate cases, in deciding
the most appropriate sentence to impose.
We have also reached the view that the terms ‘dismissal’ and
‘discharge’ could easily be misinterpreted as
suggesting that the
offending was not found proven. Indeed, both terms are used elsewhere in
Victoria’s criminal justice legislation
to say as much. We therefore
recommend that these orders be renamed as ‘proven and dismissed’ to
more clearly convey
that the offences were found proven.
Merging the provisions
Recommendation 15:
sections 72
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) be merged into a single provision.
Recommendation 16:
sections 73
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be merged into a single provision, named ‘proven and
dismissed’.
Recommendation 17:
subsections 7(g)
–(j) be amended
accordingly.
Reforming the
Spent Convictions Act
In our consultation paper, we raised a potential
inconsistency in how Victoria’s new spent convictions legislation affected
offenders who receive adjourned undertakings without
conviction.
In particular, the
legislation currently provides that offenders who receive adjourned undertakings
without conviction do not have
their finding of guilt spent until they are no
longer subject to conditions.
there are mandatory conditions (to attend court as required and to be of good
behaviour) that apply for the entire period of
all adjourned undertakings, this
means that offenders who receive adjourned undertakings without conviction must
disclose their findings
of guilt until the end of their adjourned undertaking.
As we found in our consultation paper, the vast majority of adjourned
undertakings
last for 12 months, and 83% of adjourned undertakings are imposed
without conviction, so every year this issue would affect thousands
Victorians who must disclose findings of guilt for a considerable period of
The reason that this creates a potential inconsistency is that people who
receive a fine without conviction, which is more severe
than an adjourned
undertaking without conviction according to the current sentencing hierarchy,
have their conviction spent immediately
at the date of sentencing. This is
because there are no ongoing conditions associated with fines.
We therefore asked whether offenders who receive adjourned undertakings
without conviction should have their findings of guilt spent
at the date of
, instead of at the end of their order.
Stakeholder views
Stakeholders were unanimously in support of the
proposed reform, both in the written submissions we
roundtable.
Vacro and ACSO made especial mention of the effect that the current
legislation has on people’s employability. Vacro were
‘unequivocal’
in advocating this reform, saying that it would allow
people to access resources via employment
And ACSO said that the current
approach ‘unduly disadvantages thousands of people and has the potential
to hold them within
the justice cycle rather than moving forward with their
Further, Victoria Police, the Law Institute of Victoria, and Fitzroy Legal
Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw all noted the awkward
incentivisation for
offenders to acquiesce to, or actively seek, a more severe sentence (a fine) in
order to have their finding of
guilt spent
immediately.
The Council’s view
In light of the unanimous stakeholder feedback on
this proposed reform, we remain of the view expressed in the consultation paper
Spent Convictions Act
should be amended so that adjourned
undertakings imposed without conviction are spent at the date of sentencing,
rather than when
the offender completes all conditions of the adjourned
undertaking. This recommendation may be fruitfully considered during the
review of the
Spent Convictions
Revising the
Spent Convictions Act
Recommendation 18:
Convictions Act 2021
(Vic) be amended so that adjourned undertakings without
conviction are ‘spent’ at the date of sentencing.
A new mid-tier community order?
In our consultation paper, we asked whether there
was scope to increase the use of judicial monitoring as a condition of adjourned
undertakings.
Judicial monitoring has
been shown to have significant therapeutic benefits when used appropriately. We
also found that it is occasionally,
albeit very rarely, already used as a
condition of some adjourned undertakings (20 of about 25,000 adjourned
undertakings in 2019
Numerous stakeholders raised concerns about promoting increased use of
judicial monitoring with adjourned
undertakings.
The main concerns raised
workload. As noted in our consultation paper, over 17,000 adjourned undertakings
were imposed in 2019 alone.
Increasing the use of judicial supervision as a condition of adjourned
undertakings has the potential to significantly increase the
workloads of
courts, prosecutors and defence lawyers.
disproportionate
or unsuitable response.
One of the purposes of adjourned undertakings is to
allow offenders to serve their sentence unsupervised in the community (noting
that there are other
disproportionate and inconsistent to encourage more offenders who receive these
orders to have increased engagement with
the criminal justice
We were persuaded by the submissions we received that it
would not be appropriate to actively encourage greater use of judicial
as an optional condition of adjourned undertakings. And in any event,
it is already possible either through the mandatory condition
to attend court if
required or via the broad discretion for a court to attach any condition it
thinks appropriate in the circumstances
There were some stakeholders, however, who instead advocated a new mid-tier
community order for which judicial monitoring would be
appropriate, sitting
somewhere between an adjourned undertaking and a CCO in the current sentencing
Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw said that this might
‘fill... a perceived gap in community-based sentencing
options between
adjourned undertakings and CCOs’.
Jesuit Social Services advocated a new ‘therapeutic order’ to
‘fill the gap between fines and community correction
The Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service, in another context, recently recommended that the Victorian
Government ‘increase community-based
sentencing options’ between
adjourned undertakings and CCOs.
Victoria Legal Aid suggested that adjourned undertakings are sometimes used in
more serious cases ‘to fill a gap in the
sentencing hierarchy between
fines and the more onerous and resource intensive
At our stakeholder roundtable, participants had mixed views about the merits
of a new mid-tier community order. Some participants
supported the proposal,
commenting that a ‘gap’ in the orders currently available could be
filled by such an order, enabling
more onerous conditions such as judicial
monitoring without requiring the person to engage with Corrections Victoria, and
would be useful to have ‘more rungs’ on the sentencing
ladder to convey to offenders that they will receive more severe
penalties when
they reoffend.
Other participants, though, raised various concerns, including:
the resource
implications for courts and practitioners if some adjourned undertakings become
mid-tier community orders with more onerous
conditions;
the current
availability (as conditions of adjourned undertakings) of various conditions
suggested for the mid-tier community order;
a functional
orders prior to the introduction of
risk of the introduction of a new mid-tier community order enhancing the overall
severity of sentencing outcomes in
The Council’s view
There is a genuine question about the potential
utility of a new mid-tier community order sitting somewhere between an adjourned
undertaking
and a CCO. However, at our roundtable there were mixed views about
such a reform that warrant further discussion. Moreover, recommending
introduction of such an order is beyond the scope of the present review.
A new combined order: imprisonment with an adjourned
undertaking
Sentencing Act
first came into
section 36(2)
(now repealed) allowed courts to ‘make a
community-based order in respect of an offender in addition to ... a term of
imprisonment
of not more than 3 months’. This option was available
regardless of whether the offender was being sentenced for one or multiple
offences. When major sentencing reforms came into force 20 years later, a
similar provision was enacted, allowing courts to ‘make
a community
correction order in addition to imposing a sentence of imprisonment only if ...
the sum of all the terms of imprisonment
to be served ... is 3 months or
In effect, the combined
option of imprisonment with a community order remained available. A similar
version of that provision continues
to exist today, except the maximum term of
imprisonment that can be combined with a CCO is currently one
Imprisonment with a CCO is
colloquially known as a ‘combined
And combined orders are
highly prevalent, with thousands of them imposed every
There has, however, never been an equivalent provision expressly empowering
courts to impose a combined order of imprisonment with
an adjourned undertaking.
To some extent, this makes sense – if the offending in the case as a whole
is serious enough to justify
a term of imprisonment, it could seem unusual to
then also impose a less serious community order, rather than a
But there could also be good reason
for this combination of sentencing orders in appropriate cases, especially if
the offender does
not need the more intense level of supervision or assistance
associated with a CCO. We found that this combination of sentences is
occurring, at an increasing rate (about 250 a year), despite the absence of an
express authorising provision. So we asked
stakeholders for their views on
whether the
Sentencing Act
should be amended to expressly empower the
courts to impose this combined sentence, in the same way that
currently does for combined orders of imprisonment with a CCO.
Stakeholder views
There was a variety of views from stakeholders about
this potential reform.
Vacro, Victoria Legal Aid, Victoria Police, and Fitzroy Legal Service,
WEstjustice and Youthlaw all supported a new combined order.
Uniformly, they
hoped that it could replace some of the current combined orders of imprisonment
with a CCO. The aim of this would
be to reduce unnecessary criminal justice
system involvement for those offenders. For instance:
This would, in our view, be a better response to the increasing rate of time
served prison sentences than imprisonment plus a community
correction order,
because it would reduce contact with the punitive end of the justice system and,
if paired with resources and access
to services, improve the reintegration
experience.
Submission 4 (Vacro)
We support reforms that would enable a sentencing court to make an order for an
adjourned undertaking in combination with a term
of imprisonment. In our
practice experience, this combination of orders can be effective where a
judicial officer wants to emphasise
the importance of the person remaining
engaged in treatment upon release from custody but ongoing ... contact with
Corrections is
not necessary or beneficial ... [It] would ensure that this type
of combination sentence could be made where there is a single charge
Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid)
In circumstances where a short custodial sentence is considered necessary, VP
considers it may be advantageous for a combined sentence
inclusive of an
adjourned undertaking ... [which] can facilitate access to rehabilitative
programs and services. This can often be
in a less criminogenic manner than
[CCOs] due to the reduced contact with the criminal justice system. Adjourned
undertakings can
also assist in transitioning out of a custodial setting[.]
Submission 10 (Victoria Police)
This option would be useful where a sentencing court has imposed a term of
imprisonment and wants there to be structure or some oversight
for an accused
person upon their release, but where a CCO is not appropriate. This is
particularly relevant where a person has existing
supports in place ... requires
engagement with services that are tailored to their needs, are unable to comply
with the onerous requirements
of a CCO, or have already served a substantial
period of imprisonment. This amendment would effectively simplify the process of
sentencing option already being exercised. It is our experience that courts
adopt this approach in practice by imposing imprisonment
on one or a number of
charges, and an adjourned undertaking on one or more of the other charges.
Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw)
We would certainly see value in it. We particularly see instances, particularly
for time served, where the term of imprisonment is
inevitable, but there is a
desire ... an importance of keeping someone engaged in treatment, and the
adjourned undertaking providing
that flexibility is really important, but the
person may not require ongoing engagement with Corrections.
Stakeholder Roundtable (16 February 2023)
Victoria Police, however, also cautioned that there is often a greater level
of responsibility placed on offenders who receive adjourned
undertakings,
compared to CCOs, because they are typically responsible for organising and
funding their own programs and services:
[A]n adjourned undertaking requires offenders to access and engage in
rehabilitative programs at their own expense and through their
own initiative.
This contrasts with CCOs which include program funding, supervision and
monitoring. For prison leavers without access
to funds, housing and other
resources, the obligations imposed by an adjourned undertaking may be
inaccessible.
This was a concern shared by ACSO, which did not support the new combined
order because of the onus it would place on offenders:
It is ACSO’s concern that the creation of such an order would be likely to
create additional barriers to success by a person
subject to such an order. With
adjourned undertakings as currently in place, there is no support provided and
all provisions are
at the cost of the person receiving the order ... ACSO is of
the firm opinion that persons subject to such orders would be likely
to fail due
to financial restriction rather than poor behaviour ... If significant
improvements in the provision of funding for support
for persons to access the
services noted in the adjourned undertaking was provided ACSO may reassess this
Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw were also concerned that
courts would begin imposing adjourned undertakings in cases
previously they would not have imposed an additional community-based order upon
ACSO also observed the risk that a failure to successfully complete the
adjourned undertaking component of this combined order could
sentencing discretion anew for the case as a whole, even though the offender has
already successfully completed their
imprisonment.
We raised this risk with
participants at our roundtable, and they agreed that this does present a risk,
with one participant observing:
‘[y]ou’ve already served time in
prison when you’ve then been contravened for the condition that was after
imprisonment. You can’t separate them once you’ve joined
The Council’s view
We are of the view that there is utility in
introducing a provision to the
Sentencing Act
that would specifically
empower courts to impose a combined order of imprisonment with an adjourned
undertaking. In no small part,
our recommendation is a product of
Victoria’s current bail laws, which have quadrupled the rate of time
served prison sentences
to 20% of all prison
such that it would be useful
to have a sentencing order that can reflect time spent on remand but also enable
some measure of ongoing
accountability and/or rehabilitation without resorting
This combination of sentencing orders – imprisonment with an adjourned
undertaking – is already occurring at an increasing
rate (up from 43 cases
in 2011 to 247 in 2020). And the majority of those cases involved time served
prison sentences (68%). Given
it is already possible to impose imprisonment with
an adjourned undertaking in cases where an offender is being sentenced for two
or more offences, it seems illogical to preclude offenders who are being
sentenced for a single offence from this combination if
it is the most
appropriate outcome.
We agree with Victoria Police and ACSO that there is a risk that imposing a
combined order of imprisonment with an adjourned undertaking,
rather than a CCO,
could leave offenders in a more difficult position of having to organise and pay
for relevant programs and services
themselves, without the assistance of
Corrections Victoria. However, there are some countervailing points that seem to
mitigate that
risk: (a) we found that less than 10% of adjourned undertakings
seem to include a condition requiring participation in a program
(b) when we reviewed the
conditions imposed in past cases involving imprisonment with an adjourned
undertaking, the programs in those
cases were typically already funded and
specifically targeted at offenders leaving
and (c) we recommend elsewhere
in this report that courts have discretion to order that programs be funded by
the state in appropriate
cases (again highlighting that there is an interplay
between a number of our recommendations).
We also acknowledge the concern of Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and
Youthlaw that the new order could result in ‘more’
community-based
components for people who previously would not have received them. However, the
principle of parsimony
suggests that
this increase in community-based components should not occur. This is because
people who previously would have received
straight imprisonment (without a
community component) should continue to receive such an order, whereas the new
option – imposing
an adjourned undertaking instead of a CCO as the
community component of a combined sentence – provides courts with an
to impose a less severe sentence than they otherwise would impose under
the present system, especially if the court does not see
the involvement of
Corrections as necessary.
Finally, we acknowledge ACSO’s concern about the risk of reopening the
sentencing discretion as a whole for offenders who are
not fully compliant with
the adjourned undertaking component. There are, though, several factors that
mitigate this risk:
finding that an offender has breached an adjourned undertaking, courts already
have the power to resentence the offender to a
imprisonment
(so long as the
maximum penalty for the original offence allows for such a sentence);
considering resentencing an offender following a breach of the adjourned
undertaking, courts would be required to consider the
extent to which the
offender has complied with the
(including the fact
that they have already served a term of imprisonment); and to a lesser extent
the aim of this
new combined order is to, in appropriate cases, reduce the number of combined
orders of imprisonment with a CCO, and
CCO breaches can already lead to
resentencing.
In summary, this combination of sentences is already occurring in cases
involving more than one charge, is inconsistently unavailable
for offenders
being sentenced for just one charge, and is capable of reducing unnecessary
(particularly due to the principle of
parsimony). There are also various reasons to believe that the potential risks
either are unlikely
to occur or are outweighed by the likely advantages of a new
A new combined order
Recommendation 19:
That the Victorian
Government consider inserting a new provision into the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) to expressly allow courts to impose a combined order of imprisonment
with an adjourned undertaking.
Decriminalising
breaches of adjourned undertakings
Sentencing Act
came into effect, section 79 rendered it an offence for an offender to
breach a condition of their adjourned undertaking. The maximum
penalty for that
offence has almost always been a level 12 fine (10 penalty
The only real changes since 1991
are that the value of a penalty unit has increased
considerably,
and the breach offence is
section 83AC.
In our consultation paper, we asked, for a variety of reasons, whether the
offence of breaching an adjourned undertaking should be
This chapter outlines the
relevant data relating to breaches of adjourned undertakings, the reasons we
asked whether breaches should
be decriminalised and stakeholders’ views on
The prevalence of breach offences
There has, in recent years, been an increase in the
number of breaches of adjourned undertakings recorded by police each year, from
This does not necessarily mean
that those offenders were charged with (or found guilty of) a breach offence. A
recorded offence simply
means that a police officer reasonably believes that an
offence has occurred.
Those breaches may
have been constituted by reoffending (as a breach of the requirement to be of
good behaviour), but they also may
have been breaches of an optional condition,
such as failure to make a donation.
In the same timeframe, there was also an increase in the number of breaches
of adjourned undertakings that were sentenced by courts
(that is, the breach
offences were charged and proven), from about 500 to 1,100 a
The most common outcome for breach
offences tends to be for the court to find the charge proven and dismiss it,
either with or without
conviction (84% of
We also, however, found that breach offences are prosecuted very
inconsistently. In 2015 and 2016, of the 15,000 people who received
adjourned undertakings, about 3,000 of them were later sentenced for further
offending that occurred during that 12-month
period, meaning they breached the
requirement to be of good behaviour. Yet of those 3,000 offenders, only about
300 (1 in 10) were
charged with the offence of breaching their adjourned
undertaking contrary to
section 83AC
Sentencing Act
Possible responses to breaches
If breach behaviour is brought to the court’s
attention, courts have a number of options available, even if no charge of
has been laid.
First, the court
can do nothing, which is the equivalent of confirming the order. Second, the
court can ‘vary the order’,
especially if the breach occurs because
one of the conditions has become unfeasible for the offender for some reason.
court can resentence the offender for the original offending. In
deciding what course to adopt, the court must take into account
the extent to
which the offender has complied with the order thus
These are the same powers that a court can exercise if the offender is found
guilty of the offence of breaching an adjourned undertaking:
confirm the order,
do nothing, vary the order or resentence the
As such, repealing the distinct offence of breaching an adjourned undertaking
would not affect the ability of the court to take whatever
course it deems most
appropriate in response to breach behaviour. It would simply mean that those
powers could only be exercised
, not under
section 83AT
Stakeholder views
All of the written submissions and all of the
stakeholders at our roundtable were unanimous in their view that the breach
should be repealed.
Vacro described its response as ‘an unequivocal yes’ to
decriminalisation.
The Law Institute of
Victoria was equally emphatic, saying that it ‘supports entirely
decriminalising the breaching of an adjourned
undertaking’.
The Law Institute
also observed that the financial penalties for breaches of adjourned
undertakings may be wholly inappropriate if
non-compliance was due to financial
reasons (for example, not being able to afford payment for a particular
rehabilitation or treatment
program), making it ‘counterproductive to
impose further financial burdens’.
The Law Institute instead advocated an approach geared towards helping offenders
comply with their conditions.
Jesuit Social Services said that criminalising breaches of adjourned
undertakings ‘serves to only further [people’s] entrenchment
criminal justice system’.
Women and Mentoring said that breach offences can ‘further entrench
someone in the criminal justice system and contribute
to their feelings of
worthlessness and failure’.
Victoria Legal Aid described the breach offence as ‘an unnecessarily
punitive option for matters which are less serious’
and also observed the
inconsistency in there being no equivalent breach offence for non-payment of
fines, despite fines being more
serious than adjourned undertakings in the
current hierarchy.
Victoria Legal Aid
suggested that the more appropriate response to breach behaviours is to consider
whether the offender needs to
be brought back before the court for resentencing.
So too did the Law Institute.
Victoria Police wrote that it ‘supports ... repeal of the offence in
section 83AC
the court retains the ability to vary or
cancel and resentence the adjourned undertaking ... there is no need to retain a
breach specific
The Council’s view
We are of the view, especially in light of the
remarkable stakeholder support, that the distinct offence of breaching an
undertaking should be repealed. There are a number of reasons for
this, many of which reflect observations we have made on previous
offences of breaching court orders):
Victoria is one
of only two jurisdictions in Australia (the other being Western Australia) that
makes breaching these sorts of orders
a distinct offence.
offences make up about 10% of criminal charges sentenced in Victoria each year,
a significant workload for those involved
in criminal proceedings.
The primary
responses to breach offences are to find them proven and dismissed, with or
without resentencing the original offending
(and resentencing can occur
regardless of there being a distinct breach offence).
There are very
inconsistent practices in prosecuting breach offences.
acknowledge the pragmatic utility of breach offences appearing on a
person’s criminal history, this alone does not
justify retaining a
criminal offence. There are other avenues through which that information could
be recorded.
Decriminalising breaches
Recommendation 20:
That the offence of
contravening an adjourned undertaking be repealed.
Restitution
and compensation orders
This chapter considers a peculiar
anomaly that has arisen in the
Sentencing Act
, which appears to have been
interpreted as enabling courts to make own-motion ancillary compensation orders
for victims of crime
who are injured, but only in the context of low-end orders
(adjourned undertakings, discharges and dismissals), not more severe sentencing
orders such as community correction orders (CCOs) and imprisonment.
When sentencing someone, courts can make orders for restitution and/or
compensation. Restitution orders involve returning stolen property
Compensation orders involve paying a victim money for injury or for the loss of
property or damage to it. There seem to
be three possible avenues by which
courts can potentially make either a restitution or a compensation order when
imposing an adjourned
undertaking.
First, we found in our consultation paper that some courts have made
restitution or compensation a condition of the adjourned undertaking
Compensation was, for example, a condition attached to 1.1% of adjourned
undertakings (totalling $231,000 over a two-year
This approach makes failure to
make restitution or compensation a breach of the adjourned undertaking.
Second, there are specific provisions of the
Sentencing Act
enable courts to make ancillary restitution and compensation orders (separate to
the sentencing order itself). There is no specified
application process for a
restitution order for stolen goods (via
section 84)
or a compensation order for
property damage (via
section 86)
, but there is a specified application process
for a compensation order for personal injury (via
sections 85B
result, it seems that courts can make ancillary restitution orders for stolen
goods and compensation orders for property damage
in the absence of an
application (own-motion orders), but they can’t do the same when the
compensation order relates to an
injury (because an application is required).
Sentencing Act
includes two restitution and compensation
provisions that are specific to dismissals, discharges and adjourned
undertakings:
sections 74
. Before the introduction of those provisions,
there had been some uncertainty about the availability of restitution and
compensation
orders in cases where a conviction was not recorded. The Victoria
Sentencing Committee in their 1988
found that there was ‘a
need to simplify and rationalise restitution provisions and to ensure that this
may be used whether
or not the sanction imposed on the offender involves a
conviction’.
Sections 74
were therefore introduced to provide that courts ‘may make an order for
compensation or restitution in addition to’ adjourned
undertakings,
discharges and dismissals regardless of whether a conviction is
The question that these
provisions raise is: do they confer an additional power on courts that
does not – to make an own-motion ancillary compensation order relating
to personal injury?
During our early consultations, some stakeholders told us that
sections 74
have been interpreted this way, but inconsistently. In particular, we
were told that some judicial officers are interpreting the
provisions as a
simple reminder that ancillary restitution and compensation orders are
permissible when imposing low-end orders.
But others are interpreting the
provisions as conferring an additional power to make restitution and
compensation orders above and
beyond the powers in
sections 84
Sentencing Act
Stakeholder views
In our consultation paper, we asked whether
should be repealed.
stakeholders responded to this question. The Office of Public Prosecutions
contended that the provisions are redundant and
could be repealed, though they
did not actively advocate as such.
were also told that an own-motion process can often be more flexible and less
formal. For instance, a victim support team advocated
retaining the provisions
because (a) they are already in use and (b) they can remove the need in some
cases for victims to have to
compensation.
The Council’s view
The current wording of the
Sentencing Act
allowed a procedural anomaly to develop.
Sections 74
do not appear to
confer any additional power on courts, but they have been interpreted as doing
so. In that way, they have allowed
courts the ability to impose own-motion
ancillary compensation orders for personal injury that are otherwise only
available if an
application is made via
section 85C.
On the one hand, this seems
fairly uncontroversial. Own-motion orders are already possible for restitution
orders for stolen goods
and compensation orders for property damage. It
therefore seems highly unusual that only victims of personal injury should be
to make an application to be compensated, when those whose goods have
been stolen or property has been damaged do not.
sections 74
only apply to adjourned undertakings, dismissals
and discharges. If these provisions are to operate as conferring some additional
power on courts to make own-motion ancillary compensation orders for personal
injury, they would only do so for less serious offending,
whereas victims in
cases where imprisonment or a CCO has been imposed would still need to make
their own applications for compensation.
Given the stakeholder feedback we received, we do not recommend repealing
sections 74
as yet. Instead, we suggest that the Victorian Government
review the extent to which compensation orders for personal injury should
available as own-motion ancillary compensation orders when courts impose low-end
sentencing orders, as the same order would require
an application from the
victim or the prosecution when courts impose more severe sentences such as
imprisonment or a CCO.
Restitution and compensation
Recommendation 21:
That the Victorian
Government review whether courts should be able to make own-motion ancillary
compensation orders for injury when
imposing adjourned undertakings, discharges
or dismissals.
Communicating
A criminal justice system can only
function properly if it communicates effectively with all who come into contact
with it, whether
they be victims,
the legal profession, the
media or the general community.
instance, offenders can only reasonably be expected to comply with the
conditions of a sentencing order if they understand what
those conditions mean
and the consequences of non-compliance. This is difficult to achieve if the
language used in the sentencing
order is arcane or jargonistic, particularly for
people who speak English as a second language or who have a cognitive impairment
or learning difficulties. This chapter considers potential improvements in how
courts communicate with offenders about adjourned
undertakings, in
particular:
whether the
adjourned undertaking form should be reviewed and revised to improve
accessibility;
how offenders
can access a copy of the finalised order; and
whether and how
courts communicate with offenders who successfully complete their adjourned
undertaking.
Redesigning the adjourned undertaking form
When an offender receives an adjourned undertaking,
the court (through Courtlink
) produces a
template form (CP230-9) that is amended with case-specific details, printed and
then signed by both the magistrate and
the offender. The offender is provided
with a copy to take with them when they leave court at in-person hearings.
The Magistrates’ Court provided us with a copy of the current adjourned
undertaking form, which we reproduced in our consultation
paper with their
permission.
Our preliminary view was
that the current form had multiple issues relating to accessibility, such
using a very
small font and relatively jargonistic language;
always including
references to certain optional conditions even if they are not applicable to
each offender;
explain what the offender should do if they are experiencing difficulties in
complying (for example, if their treating
doctor is no longer available);
inadequately
explaining the circumstances in which the offender would need to return to court
(or not) at the end of the adjourned
undertaking;
explain that a breach can result in resentencing; and
specifying an
incorrect maximum fine for a breach offence.
Stakeholder views
Stakeholders who commented on the form shared our
In its current form, CP230-9 lacks clarity and causes confusion ... The form
needs to have a simple layout and plain language to
ensure it is accessible,
particularly by culturally and linguistically diverse people or those with a low
level of literacy.
Submission 10 (Victoria Police)
In our practice experience, the court order for adjourned undertakings causes
confusion for court users. Our lawyers frequently receive
questions from our
clients querying whether they need to attend court at the end of an adjourned
undertaking because they are uncertain
current form.
Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid)
The current adjourned undertaking form is convoluted and difficult to understand
... [and] causes unnecessary confusion and stress
for many people ... VALS
receives many enquiries from people who do not understand their obligations set
out in the form ... who
are unsure if they are required to attend court for
their bond return ... The form should be amended to ensure that it can be
by the sentenced person.
Submission 9 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service)
[The form] is currently cluttered, contains information that is not relevant to
the accused person, uses jargonistic legal language,
and fails to provide
important information about what to do if there is an issue or the person is
unable to comply with the condition/s
of an order.
Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw)
Some of the specific changes suggested by stakeholders included:
using a minimum
12-point font size and ensuring the form is available in larger font on
ensuring the
form is written in plain English;
ensuring the
form is available in languages other than English;
specifying what
the offender should do if they become unable to comply with a condition (for
example, if there is a significant waiting
list for a specified program or their
treating medical practitioner becomes unavailable);
making it clear
that the offender does not need to attend court at the end of the specified
period unless they are specifically advised
accepting verbal
consent, rather than requiring a written signature; and
making it clear
that one of the potential consequences of breach is being resentenced for the
original offending.
Many of the organisations that represent
offenders who receive adjourned undertakings – Victoria Legal Aid, the
Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service, and Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and
Youthlaw – shared examples of offenders who had attended court on
return date because they had not understood that they were not required to
They noted that having to attend
court unnecessarily can cause significant disruptions to prosocial factors in an
life – to work, childcare, travel, etc. It is important
that offenders understand that they do not need to attend court unless
If the adjourned undertaking form is reviewed, the Australian Community
Support Organisation (ACSO) and Victoria Legal Aid further
advocated that any
redesign involve people with lived experience of the criminal justice
Victoria Legal Aid, for instance, wrote that:
[t]here are better outcomes and experiences when services are developed and
operated by the people who use them. Lived experience
leadership and
coproduction, using human-centred design techniques, is needed to ensure our
justice system is designed by those with
lived experience to ensure it is
tailored, effective and responsive. Accordingly, we recommend that adjourned
undertaking forms be
redesigned in consultation with people with lived
experience of the justice
And ACSO ‘strongly’ suggested that there be ‘detailed
consultation on any redesign of the form with those subject
to adjourned
undertakings or other lived experience of justice involvement’.
The Council’s view
Once an offender leaves court, the adjourned
undertaking form becomes their sole reference point of what is required of them
the period of the order. While they will have had the information on
the form conveyed to them by the court,
it is crucial that the form be easily understood.
Given the numerous issues with the current form identified by stakeholders,
the Council recommends that the Magistrates’ Court
review and revise the
content, structure and layout of the
This should occur in consultation
with experts in form design, especially those with experience of developing
forms and other materials
for marginalised populations, as well as people with
lived experience of the criminal justice system.
One participant at our roundtable also observed that it could be helpful for
the revised form to be shared with the higher courts
to ensure consistency
across jurisdictions.
Redesigning the form
Recommendation 22:
Magistrates’ Court, in consultation with experts in form design and people
with lived experience of the criminal justice
system, review and revise the
current adjourned undertaking form to improve accessibility and
comprehensibility.
The need for a signature
The current adjourned undertaking form requires a
physical signature from the offender to consent to the order. The need for this
physical signature most likely derives from the underpinning legislation.
Sections 72
Sentencing Act
specify that the order involves
an ‘offender giving an undertaking’, and
undertaking
to mean ‘a written undertaking by the
offender in the prescribed form’.
There is no ‘prescribed form’ in the
Sentencing Regulations 2021
(Vic). Instead, the current form was developed, and continues to be managed
by, the courts themselves.
Given the rise of Webex court hearings in response to COVID-19, there may be
a level of practical utility in moving away from the
need for a physical (or
electronic) signature as evidence that the offender has consented to the
adjourned undertaking. Instead,
the court could simply ask the offender if they
consent to the order and reflect that consent in the order through, for example,
a check-box.
This pragmatic shift away from requiring physical signatures may, however,
need legislative reform, given that the
Sentencing Act
currently requires
the offender to give a ‘written
undertaking’.
The precise nature
of what textual amendments would be required to enable courts to record an
offender’s verbal consent to
the order is ultimately a matter for
parliamentary counsel. We would, though, simply note that the term
‘undertaking’,
as it appears in
, is currently used in multiple unique contexts throughout the
Sentencing Act
: an undertaking to assist
authorities,
undertakings,
an undertaking following
release on adjournment,
an undertaking
to attend court if sentencing is
or otherwise
or an undertaking to comply
with certain conditions upon the governor exercising the royal prerogative of
As such, any change to the
definition of ‘undertaking’ could have broader implications than
just its application to adjourned
undertakings. However, we note that there is
an interplay between many of our recommendations, and a shift in the terminology
‘good behaviour order’ (see above at [2.6].) would reduce the
overlapping terminology of ‘undertaking’.
Therefore, two separate reforms would most likely be necessary to remove the
need for the offender to sign the undertaking: (1) legislative
overcome the current requirement that the offender give a written undertaking,
and (2) amendment of the form itself to
remove the need for a signature.
Requiring a signature
Recommendation 23:
Sentencing Act
(Vic) be amended
to remove the requirement that offenders have
to give a ‘written’ undertaking to comply with the conditions of an
undertaking.
Recommendation 24:
That the Magistrates’ Court amend the
adjourned undertaking form to enable courts to record an offender’s verbal
to the conditions of an adjourned undertaking, rather than requiring a
written or electronic signature.
Electronic copy of the adjourned undertaking form
Upon sentencing an offender to an adjourned
undertaking, the court gives the person a hard copy of the finalised adjourned
undertaking
form to take with them when they leave court. During consultations,
we were told that it is not reasonable to rely on offenders retaining
copy as the only reminder of the conditions of their order for the period of the
order. Paper copies are easily damaged
or lost, especially for offenders in less
secure housing situations who might move frequently or whose lives are otherwise
As Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw told us:
It is our experience that many accused people do not [retain] or have difficulty
retaining the hard copy adjourned undertaking form
provided at court,
particularly where the person is marginalised, vulnerable or young, and are
thereafter unaware of their
obligations.
The Council understands that when an adjourned undertaking is imposed during
online hearings (as have become more common since COVID-19),
the courts will
usually ask for the offender’s (or their legal representative’s)
email address so that an electronic
copy of the form can be emailed to them
after the hearing. But we were also advised that this is not done automatically
when matters
are heard in person.
One solution would be for courts to always email a copy of the finalised
adjourned undertaking form to the offender (and, if relevant,
their legal
representatives) and/or text them a hyperlink from which they can access the
form, to ensure that they have an electronic
copy for reference. When we raised
this possibility with participants at our roundtable, there was general support
from everyone
Courts should be
flexible, though, about the preferred medium by which offenders will receive an
electronic copy of the form. There
will be some offenders for whom an email
address will be their preferred medium, and there will be others for whom an SMS
more appropriate.
Sending an electronic copy
Recommendation 25:
That courts send an
electronic copy of finalised adjourned undertaking forms to offenders (and, if
relevant, their legal representatives).
Notifying offenders of expiry of their adjourned
undertaking
At the end of an adjourned undertaking, a magistrate
(or judge) will, in open court, review relevant materials in Courtlink to assess
the offender’s compliance with the conditions of the adjourned undertaking
(for example, whether they have provided a letter
from a treating practitioner
or confirmation of payment to the Court Fund). If the court is satisfied that
the offender has observed
the conditions of their adjourned undertaking, the
court must discharge the offender or dismiss the charges without any further
of the matter.
A police prosecutor is present for this review process, but the offender is
not typically required to attend. At present, the court
does not then
communicate to the offender that the matter has been finalised. Stakeholders
were concerned that the lack of communication
with the offender that the matter
has been finalised misses an opportunity for positive reinforcement of compliant
There is ample evidence to suggest that even small gestures of positive
reinforcement of desirable behaviour can have significant
Advising offenders that their
adjourned undertaking has been successfully completed, and showing that the
court was invested in their
compliance, can reinforce the ‘good
behaviour’ shown by the person during the period of their order.
There is a question whether the language used in such a notification should
be slightly guarded. On the one hand, there may have been
breaches or
reoffending during the period of the adjourned undertaking, and the court is not
aware of this at the finalisation hearing.
In such instances, sending notice of
‘successful’ completion could pose a reputational risk for the
court, because the
offender has not actually successfully completed their
adjourned undertaking. On the other hand, the vast majority of people on
undertakings do successfully comply with the conditions and
don’t reoffend during the period of the adjourned undertaking.
are already making a finding at the end of the adjourned undertaking that they
are ‘satisfied that the offender
has observed their conditions’,
because that is a prerequisite of discharge/dismissal at the further
Using positive language in the
notification could potentially play a role in reinforcing the offender’s
positive behaviour,
and that could be lost if the wording was watered down.
Either way, we are of the view that it would be useful for courts to send a
notification to offenders that their adjourned undertaking
Notification of completion
Recommendation 26:
At the end of the period
of the adjourned undertaking, if the court is satisfied that the offender has
observed the conditions of
their adjourned undertaking, the court should send
the offender electronic notification to this effect.
Appendix 1: consultation and submissions
3 December 2021
Meeting with County Court
9 December 2021
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
10 December 2021
Meeting with Law Institute of Victoria
14 December 2021
Meeting with County Court
15 December 2021
Meeting with Law Institute of Victoria
16 December 2021
Meeting with Victoria Police
21 December 2021
Meeting with Federation of Community Legal Centres
22 December 2021
Meeting with Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service
17 January 2022
Meeting with Department of Justice and Community Safety
17 January 2022
Meeting with Department of Families, Fairness and Housing
18 January 2022
Meeting with County Court
19 January 2022
Meeting with Victoria Police
19 January 2022
Meeting with Victoria Legal Aid
21 January 2022
Meeting with Office of Public Prosecutions
21 January 2022
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
25 January 2022
Meeting with Criminal Bar Association
15 February 2022
Meeting with Centre for Forensic Behavioural Science
30 March 2022
Meeting with Judicial College of Victoria
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
31 August 2022
Meeting with Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service
2 September 2022
Meeting with No to Violence
2 September 2022
Meeting with Safe + Equal
5 September 2022
Meeting with Jesuit Social Services
5 September 2022
Meeting with Australian Multicultural Foundation
9 September 2022
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
13 September 2022
Meeting with Australian Community Support Organisation
13 September 2022
Meeting with Victim Services, Support and Reform
13 September 2022
Meeting with Vacro
26 September 2022
Meeting with Fitzroy Legal Service
7 October 2022
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
16 February 2023
Stakeholder Roundtable: Australian Community Support Organisation,
Department of Justice and Community Safety, Fitzroy Legal Service,
Public Prosecutions, Victoria Police, Victoria Legal Aid, Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service
21 February 2023
Meeting with Department of Families, Fairness and Housing
28 February 2023
Meeting with Law Institute of Victoria
17 April 2023
Meeting with Magistrates’ Court
19 April 2023
Meeting with County Court
Submissions
Confidential
Australian Community Support Organisation
Office of Public Prosecutions
Victoria Legal Aid
Women and Mentoring
Jesuit Social Services
Law Institute of Victoria
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service
Victoria Police
Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw
Bibliography
Government, Office of Parliamentary Counsel,
Plain English Manual
(Australian Government, 2013).
Crawford, Lisa B., Elma Akand, Steefan Contractor and Scott Sisson,
‘Legislative Complexity: What iIs It, How Do We Measure
It, and Why Does
It Matter?’ (auspublaw.org, 2022)
<auspublaw.org/blog/2022/11/legislative-complexity-what-is-it-how-do-we-measure-it-and-why-does-it-matter>.
Crime Statistics Agency, ‘Spotlight: Offence Types – Differences
Between Recorded Offences and Criminal Incidents
(crimestatistics.vic.gov.au, 2018)
<https://www.crimestatistics.vic.gov.au/crime-statistics/download-crime-data/year-ending-31-March-2018/spotlight-offence-types-differences>.
Currie, Beth A., Jane Hoy, Lynda Legge, Valerie K. Temple and Munazza Tahir,
‘Adults with Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder: Factors
Associated with
Positive Outcomes and Contact with the Criminal Justice System’ (2016)
Journal of Population Therapeutics and Clinical Pharmacology
Davies, Rhiannon and Lorana Bartels, ‘Challenges of Effective
Communication in the Criminal Justice Process: Findings from Interviews
Victims of Sexual Offences in Australia’ (2020) 9(4)
Department of Families, Fairness and Housing,
Review of the
Disability Act
: Consultation Paper
(Department of Families, Fairness and Housing,
Dvoskin, Joel A., Jennifer L. Skeem, Raymond W. Novaco and Kevin S. Douglas,
‘What If Psychology Redesigned the Criminal Justice
System?’, in
Joel A. Dvoskin, Jennifer L. Skeem, Raymond W. Novaco and Kevin S. Douglas
Using Social Science to Reduce Violent Offending
University Press, 2011).
Freiberg, Arie,
Change and Stability in Sentencing: A Victorian Study
(The University of Melbourne, 1996).
Freiberg, Arie,
Fox and Freiberg’s Sentencing: State and Federal Law
a (3rd ed., Thomson Reuters, 2014).
Higgins, Stephen T. and Nancy M. Petry, ‘Contingency Management:
Incentives for Sobriety’ (1999) 23(2)
Alcohol Research & Health
Evaluation of the Drug Court of Victoria: Final Report
Law Reform Commission of Victoria,
Plain English and the Law,
(Law Reform Commission of Victoria, 1987).
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, ‘Court Fund’
(mcv.vig.gov.au, 2023) < https://www.mcv.vic.gov.au/find-support/court-fund
Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Inquiry into Access to and
Interaction with the Justice System by People with an Intellectual Disability
and Their Families and Carers
(Parliament of Victoria, 2013).
Parliament of Victoria, Legal and Social Issues Committee,
Inquiry into
Victoria’s Criminal Justice System
(Parliament of Victoria, 2022).
Paulin, Alison, Alayne McKee, Tracey Karanui-Golf and Sally Kedge,
Language of Protection Orders
(Talking Trouble, Aotearoa NZ, 2020).
Powell, Anastasia and Nicola Henry, ‘Policing Technology-Facilitated
Sexual Violence Against Adult Victims: Police and Service
Perspectives’ (2018) 28(3)
Policing and Society
Rudes, Danielle S., Faye S. Taxman, Shannon Portillo, Amy Murphy, Anne
Rhodes, Maxine Stitzer, Peter F. Luongo and Peter D. Friedmann,
Positive Reinforcement in Justice Settings: Acceptability and Feasibility’
(2012) 42(3)
Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Fine’
(sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/about-sentencing/fine>.
Sentencing Advisory Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the
Magistrates’ Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2022)
<https://www.sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au/sentencing-statistics/sentencing-outcomes-magistrates-court>.
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Combined Orders of Imprisonment and CCOs in
(Sentencing Advisory Council, forthcoming).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction Orders: Third Monitoring
Report (Post-Guideline Judgment)
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2016).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in Victoria:
Consultation Paper
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2022).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Secondary Offences in Victoria
(Sentencing Advisory Council, 2017).
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Suspended Sentences and Intermediate
Sentencing Orders: Suspended Sentences Final Report –
Sentencing Advisory Council,
The Imposition and Enforcement of Court Fines
and Infringement Penalties in Victoria: Report
(Sentencing Advisory Council,
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Time Served Prison Sentences
(Sentencing
Advisory Council , 2020).
Singer, Lawrence and Suzanne Cooper, ‘Improving Public Confidence in
the Criminal Justice System: An Evaluation of a Communication
(2009) 48(5)
Howard Journal of Criminal Justice
State of Victoria,
Whole of Victorian Government Response to the Law
Reform Committee Inquiry into Access to and Interaction with the Justice System
by People with an Intellectual Disability and Their Families and Carers
(State of Victoria, 2013).
TaskForce, ‘Behaviour Change Program’ (taskforce.org.au, 2022)
<https://taskforce.org.au/education/driver-behaviour-change-program/>.
Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
, Final Report no. 11
(Tasmania Law Reform Institute, 2008).
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Nuther-mooyoop to the Yoorrook Justice
Commission: Criminal Legal System
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service,
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
People with Intellectual Disabilities at
Risk: A Legal Framework for Compulsory Care: Report
(Victorian Law Reform
Commission, 2003).
Victoria Legal Aid,
Submission to the Parliament of Victoria Law Reform
Committee: Inquiry into Access to and Interaction with the Justice System by
with an Intellectual Disability and Their Families and Carers
(Victoria Legal Aid, 2011).
Victorian Sentencing Committee,
Sentencing: Report of the Victorian
Sentencing Committee
, vol. 1 (Victorian Sentencing Committee, 1988).
Legislation and regulations
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Disability Act 2006
Justice Legislation Amendment Act 2013
Magistrates Court Act 1989
Magistrates Court (Amendment) Act 1999
Penalties and Sentences Act 1985
Road Safety Act 1986
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing (Amendment) Act 1997
Sentencing Regulations 2021
Spent Convictions Act 2021
Interstate and overseas
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Bell v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 203
Brittain v Mansour
[2013] VSC 50
[2021] VCC 1174
DPP v Eskander
[2022] VCC 653
DPP v Harrington
[2017] VCC 288
DPP v Vella & Ors
[2020] VCC 659
DPP v Whelan & Anor
[2017] VCC 1746
[2021] VCC 1554
Nguyen v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 211
Re Chatters
[2017] VSC 2
[2020] VSC 708
R v Piacentino & Anor
[2007] VSCA 49
R v O’Connor
[1987] VicRp 45
[1987] VR 496
R v Piacentino
[2007] VSCA 49
Younger v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 199
Interstate and overseas
Byrne v Mingay
[2014] ACTSC 126
Garling v Firth
[2016] NTSC 41
Maynard v Lane
[2011] TASSC 33
Perkins v Heath
[2017] NTSC 74
[2004] NSWCCA 258
Quasi-legislative materials
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative
Assembly, 13 October 2016 (Martin Pakula, Attorney-General)
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 19 March 1991
(Mr Kennan, Attorney-General)
Published by the Sentencing Advisory Council, Melbourne, Victoria,
© Copyright State of Victoria, Sentencing Advisory Council, 2023
This publication is protected by the laws of copyright. No part may be
reproduced by any process except in accordance with the provisions
ISBN 978-1-925071-73-3 (Online)
Authorised by the Sentencing Advisory Council,
Level 3, 333 Queen Street,
Melbourne VIC 3000
Copyedited and typeset by Catherine Jeffreys AE
Freiberg et al.,
Change and Stability in Sentencing: A Victorian Study
(1996) 233.
Advisory Council,
Reforming Adjourned Undertakings in Victoria: Consultation
(2021) 1 (henceforth
Consultation Paper
it is one of our statutory functions:
Sentencing Act 1991
108C(1)(e).
and Sentences Act 1985
(Vic) s 83 (repealed). The legislation does not use
the exact term ‘adjourned undertaking’, instead calling it a
on adjournment’ (following the giving of an undertaking).
However, that language was the foundation for the present standard
nomenclature
of ‘adjourned undertaking’.
Consultation
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 3 (Office of Public
Prosecutions); Submission 4 (Vacro); Submission
5 (Victoria Legal Aid);
Submission 6 (Women and Mentoring); Submission 7 (Jesuit Social Services);
Submission 8 (Law Institute of
Victoria); Submission 9 (Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service); Submission 10 (Victoria Police); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal
WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid).
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation).
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid); Submission
8 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission
9 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal
Service); Submission 10 (Victoria Police).
10 (Victoria Police).
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation).
7 (Jesuit Social Services).
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
6 (Women and Mentoring).
Consultation
10. Note that the definition of ‘good behaviour’ is
discussed below at [4.2]–[4.10].
Youth and Families Act 2005
Consultation
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 3 (Office of Public
Prosecutions); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal
Aid); Submission 8 (Law Institute of
Victoria); Submission 10 (Victoria Police); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal
Service, WEstjustice
and Youthlaw).
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions).
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions).
8 (Law Institute of Victoria).
8 (Law Institute of Victoria).
10 (Victoria Police), citing
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
8 (Law Institute of Victoria).
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid).
of these comments were made by stakeholders in a confidential context; however,
this was supported in our meeting with the Law
Institute of Victoria: Meeting
with Law Institute of Victoria (28 February 2023).
with Law Institute of Victoria (28 February 2023).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (16 February 2023).
for example, Anastasia Powell and Nicola Henry, ‘Policing
Technology-Facilitated Sexual Violence Against Adult Victims:
Police and Service
Sector Perspectives’ (2018) 28(3)
Policing and Society
301 (criticising the use of the term ‘technical’ in the context of
breaches of family violence intervention orders).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (16 February 2023).
Reform Commission of Victoria,
Plain English and the Law,
Report 9 (1987)
[52]. See also Australian Government, Office of Parliamentary Counsel,
English Manual
(2013) 25: ‘Even when the words and sentences in a Bill
are clear, it’s more difficult to understand if the provisions
aren’t properly arranged’.
(emphasis added).
ss 72(2)(a)
(2)(a)–(b).
ss 72(2)(c)
ss 72(2)(b)
Consultation
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 3 (Office of Public
Prosecutions); Submission 7 (Jesuit Social
Services); Submission 8 (Law
Institute of Victoria); Submission 9 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service);
Submission 10 (Victoria Police);
Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service,
WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
7 (Jesuit Social Services).
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions).
8 (Law Institute of Victoria).
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 3 (Office of Public
Prosecutions). ACSO also suggested that good
behaviour could include compliance
with the other conditions of the adjourned undertaking.
s 45(1)(a):
‘the offender must not commit ... an
offence punishable by imprisonment’.
8 (Law Institute of Victoria).
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
Consultation
is, offences for which the maximum penalty is a specified number of penalty
units, meaning a term of imprisonment cannot be imposed:
Sentencing Act
Stakeholder
Roundtable (16 February 2023).
for example,
Road Safety Act 1986
ss 49(3AAA)(b)
referring to the applicable penalties for second and subsequent offences
contrary to
sections 49(1)(bb)
, (eb), (h) and (i).
(definition of justice plan condition), 72(3),
75(3), 80(1)(b).
(definition of justice plan condition),
Consultation
5 (Victoria Legal Aid).
with Law Institute of Victoria (15 December 2021). See also Submission 5
(Victoria Legal Aid) (‘We are also of the view
that the court should be
able to order a justice plan for all people with a disability’);
Submission 10 (Victoria Police) (‘VP
supports broadening the eligibility
criteria for justice plans. Limiting justice plans only to persons with
intellectual disabilities
may not support community safety as robustly as
possible’).
Consultation
5 (Victoria Legal Aid).
from Department of Families, Fairness and Housing to Sentencing Advisory Council
(15 March 2023).
from Department of Families, Fairness and Housing to Sentencing Advisory Council
(15 March 2023).
from Department of Families, Fairness and Housing to Sentencing Advisory Council
(15 March 2023).
with Department of Families, Fairness and Housing (21 February 2023).
for example,
Re Chatters
[2017] VSC 2
from Department of Families, Fairness and Housing to Sentencing Advisory Council
(15 March 2023).
10 (Victoria Police).
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
is partly beyond scope because any changes to justice plans would have a broader
impact on people subject to CCOs than they would
on people subject to adjourned
undertakings. In our previous research, we found that there are about 200
justice plans attached to
CCOs each year, compared to 59 justice plans attached
to adjourned undertakings: Sentencing Advisory Council,
Community Correction
Orders: Third Monitoring Report (Post-Guideline Judgment)
(2016) 13, 17;
Consultation Paper
44. But also there have been multiple reviews over the
last 20 years recommending an expansion of the restrictive eligibility criteria
for justice plans, and our voice would add little to those efforts: Victorian
Law Reform Commission,
People with Intellectual Disabilities at Risk: A Legal
Framework for Compulsory Care: Report
(2003) 126–127; Victoria Legal
Submission to the Parliament of Victoria Law Reform Committee: Inquiry
into Access to and Interaction with the Justice System by People
Intellectual Disability and Their Families and Carers
(2011) 10; Parliament
of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Inquiry into Access to and Interaction
with the Justice System by People with an Intellectual Disability and Their
Families and Carers
(2013) 309–312; State of Victoria,
Victorian Government Response to the Law Reform Committee Inquiry into Access to
and Interaction with the Justice System
by People with an Intellectual
Disability and Their Families and Carers
(2013) 4; Department of Families,
Fairness and Housing,
Review of the
Disability Act 2006
: Consultation
(2021) 36–37, 62; Parliament of Victoria,
Legal and Social
Issues Committee, Inquiry into Victoria’s Criminal Justice System
(2022) 559–560.
Stakeholder
Roundtable (16 February 2023).
is most likely no substantive difference, but
section 72(2)(c)
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) allows courts to attach any
‘condition’ to the undertaking, whereas
section 75(2)(c)
courts to attach any ‘special condition’.
section 85K
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) creates a default
presumption that each party to a criminal proceeding ‘must bear their own
costs’, this is also
‘unless the court otherwise determines’,
giving the court full discretion. Similarly,
section 131(1)
Magistrates Court Act 1989
(Vic) provides that ‘the Court has full
power to determine by whom, to whom and to what extent ... costs are
section 401(1)
Criminal Procedure Act
(Vic) specifies that ‘the costs of, and incidental to, all
criminal proceedings in the Magistrates’ Court are in the
discretion of
the court and the court has full power to determine by whom, to whom and to what
extent the costs are to be paid’.
As an indicator of the prevalence of
costs in these cases, there was $120,000 in costs awarded ancillary to adjourned
undertakings
Consultation Paper
Restitution
and compensation orders are discussed in more detail in Chapter 7.
Consultation
[2013] VSC 50
, [50]–[51].
Legislation Amendment Act 2013
–(3), amending
Sentencing Act 1991
ss 72(2)(c)
Consultation
9 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid); Submission
8 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission
10 (Victoria Police); Submission 11
(Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
9 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions); Submission 8 (Law Institute of Victoria). The
Office of Public Prosecutions and Law
Institute of Victoria did, though, suggest
restricting payments to registered charities. Other organisations also supported
the importance
of a nexus between donations and the offending, without
necessarily advocating the retention of donations to specific charities:
Submission 9 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service); Submission 10 (Victoria
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation).
9 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
for example, Submission 2 (Australian Community Support Organisation);
Submission 8 (Law Institute of Victoria).
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation);
Consultation Paper
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 3 (Office of Public
Prosecutions); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal
Service, WEstjustice and
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation).
8 (Law Institute of Victoria).
9 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
10 (Victoria Police).
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal
Aid); Submission 8 (Law Institute of Victoria);
Submission 9 (Victorian
Aboriginal Legal Service); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and
Youthlaw); Stakeholder Roundtable
(16 February 2023).
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation).
8 (Law Institute of Victoria).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid).
9 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
with Fitzroy Legal Service (26 September 2022). These observations are borne out
by our finding that the Victoria Police Blue
Ribbon Foundation was the fourth
most common charity or organisation that offenders who received adjourned
undertakings were ordered
to make a donation to in 2019 and 2020 (88 donations
totalling $60,000):
Consultation Paper
Consultation
Magistrates’
Court of Victoria, ‘Court Fund’ (mcv.vig.gov.au, 2023).
ss 72(2)(a)
(2)(a)–(b).
ss 72(2)(c)
ss 72(2)(c)
Consultation
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 3 (Office of Public
Prosecutions); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal
Aid); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal
Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions).
10 (Victoria Police).
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 9 (Victorian
Aboriginal Legal Service).
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
for example, KPMG,
Evaluation of the Drug Court of Victoria: Final Report
(2014) 59–60.
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid); Submission
7 (Jesuit Social Services); Submission
8 (Law Institute of Victoria). The one
exception here was Victoria Police, who observed that NSW legislation includes
and inclusive condition categories’ that could be useful:
Submission 10 (Victoria Police), citing
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal
Aid); Submission 7 (Jesuit Social Services);
Submission 9 (Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service); Submission 10 (Victoria Police); Stakeholder Roundtable (16
February 2023); Meeting
with Law Institute of Victoria (28 February 2023).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid); Submission 7 (Jesuit Social Services); Submission 9
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service); Submission
10 (Victoria Police);
Stakeholder Roundtable (16 February 2023); Meeting with Law Institute of
Victoria (28 February 2023).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid). On the importance of proportionality and ensuring the
conditions were no more restrictive than
necessary: Submission 2 (Australian
Community Support Organisation); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid); Submission 7
(Jesuit Social
Services); Submission 8 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission 9
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal
Aid); Submission 7 (Jesuit Social Services);
Submission 8 (Law Institute of
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal
Aid); Submission 9 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal
Service); Submission 10 (Victoria
Police); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw);
Stakeholder Roundtable
(16 February 2023). On the need to consider the local
services that are available, ACSO noted that such guidance ‘would support
people in regional and remote areas as the ability to achieve a requirement
would be based on access to the service’: Submission
2 (Australian
Community Support Organisation).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid); Submission 9 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service). On
the need for culturally appropriate services,
the Victorian Aboriginal Legal
Service noted that ‘Aboriginal specific rehabilitative programs, including
drug and alcohol
or behaviour change programs, regularly have limited capacity
and long wait times for admission’: Submission 9 (Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service).
9 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
10 (Victoria Police).
div 4. The only stakeholder that raised support for
this was Victoria Police.
[2004] NSWCCA 258
, [61], cited with approval in the Northern
Territory, the Australian Capital Territory and Tasmania:
Perkins v Heath
[2017] NTSC 74
Garling v Firth
[2016] NTSC 41
, [33]–[36];
Byrne v Mingay
[2014] ACTSC 126
, [109]–[110]; to a lesser extent
(only the second principle)
Maynard v Lane
[2011] TASSC 33
Bugmy, the court held that conditions must reasonably relate to the purposes of
sentencing in each particular case, be defined
with a reasonable level of
precision and not be unduly harsh, unreasonable or onerous.
a source of information and guidance about sentencing, the
Sentencing Manual
has been described by the Court of Appeal as
‘invaluable’:
Nguyen v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 211
from Judicial College of Victoria (28 March 2023).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid). In particular, Victoria Legal Aid wrote that there
should be ‘practical education and materials
to guide judicial officers
... about the types of optional conditions that may be appropriate to attach to
adjourned undertakings’.
with Law Institute of Victoria (28 February 2023).
Consultation
‘Behaviour Change Program’ (taskforce.org.au, 2022). Even then, $384
is the concession rate; the full price
Consultation
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal
Aid); Submission 10 (Victoria Police).
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 3 (Office of Public
Prosecutions); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal
Aid); Submission 6 (Women and
Mentoring); Submission 7 (Jesuit Social Services); Submission 9 (Victorian
Aboriginal Legal Service);
Stakeholder Roundtable (16 February 2023).
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions).
9 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
are governed by the
Crimes Act 1914
v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 203
Sentencing Act 1991
v Piacentino
[2007] VSCA 49
, [47]. This principle has, though, traditionally
been applied exclusively in the context of prison sentences, prohibiting courts
from imposing a prison sentence if any other disposition would adequately
achieve the purposes of sentencing:
R v O’Connor
[1987] VicRp 45
[1987] VR 496
median value of a charitable donation condition attached to an adjourned
undertaking in 2019 and 2020 was $500: see further,
Consultation Paper
50. Similarly, the median fine in Victoria has consistently been $500,
regardless of inflation rates or changes in the value of penalty
Sentencing Advisory Council,
The Imposition and Enforcement of Court Fines
and Infringement Penalties in Victoria: Report
a full list of optional conditions attached to adjourned undertakings, see
Consultation Paper
Advisory Council, ‘Sentencing Outcomes in the Magistrates’
Court’ (sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2022).
Consultation
5 (Victoria Legal Aid).
10 (Victoria Police).
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (16 February 2023).
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid).
quasi-ancillary, we mean that the recording of a conviction is ancillary to
imposition of a sentence, but a conviction can also
be a relevant factor in
deciding which sentence type to impose.
Consultation
Advisory Council (2014), above n 140, 32.
for example,
DPP v Eskander
[2022] VCC 653
[2021] VCC 1174
, [40]–[41];
DPP v Vella
[2020] VCC 659
hierarchy depicted in Figure 1 accounts for other recommendations in this
report, including renaming adjourned undertakings as
good behaviour orders,
merging discharges and dismissals into a single order, and renaming that single
order as ‘proven and
dismissed’.
Parliamentary Debates, Legislative Assembly, 19 March 1991, 339 (Mr Kennan,
Attorney-General).
Parliamentary Debates, Legislative Assembly, 19 March 1991, 339 (Mr Kennan,
Attorney-General).
Consultation
Law Institute of Victoria, for example, indicated that it ‘does not
currently hold a view on this matter’: Submission
8 (Law Institute of
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation).
10 (Victoria Police).
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
stakeholders confirmed this: for example, Meeting with Law Institute of Victoria
(28 February 2023).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (16 February 2023).
for example,
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
ss 59(4)(b)
was observed, for example, in Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice
and Youthlaw).
B. Crawford et al., ‘Legislative Complexity: What Is It, How Do We Measure
It, and Why Does It Matter?’ (auspublaw.org,
is, ‘the nature of the offence ... the character and past history of the
offender; and ... the impact of the recording
of a conviction on the
offender’s economic or social well-being or on his or her employment
prospects’:
Sentencing Act 1991
Consultation
Convictions Act 2021
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 3 (Office of Public
Prosecutions); Submission 4 (Vacro); Submission
5 (Victoria Legal Aid);
Submission 7 (Jesuit Social Services); Submission 8 (Law Institute of Victoria);
Submission 9 (Victorian
Aboriginal Legal Service); Submission 10 (Victoria
Police); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (16 February 2023).
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation).
8 (Law Institute of Victoria); Submission 10 (Victoria Police); Submission 11
(Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
For example, Victoria Police
observed that this anomaly could ‘be seen ... [as] an incentive to seek a
more serious sentencing
outcome (a fine) to have the conviction spent
earlier’: Submission 10 (Victoria Police).
Convictions Act 2021
Consultation
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid); Submission
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice
and Youthlaw).
Consultation
s 70(1)(a).
See further, Submission 5 (Victoria Legal Aid):
Adjourned undertakings are primarily imposed for more minor
offending and for people who have had minimal prior contact with the
justice system. As a result, an intensive judicial supervision condition can
result in a sentence which is disproportionate
to the offending. Judicial
supervision conditions can also prolong a person’s contact with the
criminal justice system, which
as the consultation paper outlines, can be
inconsistent with the purpose of adjourned undertaking orders, which is to
encourage as
little contact with the justice system as possible in appropriate
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
7 (Jesuit Social Services) (‘This order would include a treatment
component which can better respond to the needs
of those with complex mental
health, substance misuse or disabilities and ensure that these groups are not
further entrenched in
the justice system’.)
Aboriginal Legal Service,
Nuther-mooyoop to the Yoorrook Justice Commission:
Criminal Legal System
(2022) 58 (recommendation 62).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid). In particular, Victoria Legal Aid suggested that:
a new sentencing order should be created to fill the gap between
fines and CCOs. A new ‘therapeutic order’ would give
courts the authority to impose tailored sentences in a similar way adjourned
undertakings are currently being used in
more serious cases but with additional
resourcing. We envisage such orders could have a treatment component supported
by dedicated
resourcing and a legislated option of judicial monitoring.
Stakeholder
Roundtable (16 February 2023).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (16 February 2023).
(in effect to 15 January 2012).
for example,
[2020] VSC 708
Younger v The Queen
[2017] VSCA 199
DPP v Whelan & Anor
[2017] VCC 1746
DPP v Harrington
[2017] VCC 288
, [74]; Victoria, Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative Assembly, 13 October 2016, 3860 (Martin Pakula, Attorney-General).
Advisory Council,
Combined Orders of Imprisonment and CCOs in Victoria
(forthcoming).
one stakeholder commented at our roundtable: ‘How do you reconcile it
being the top and bottom end of the sentencing hierarchy?’:
Stakeholder
Roundtable (16 February 2023).
10 (Victoria Police).
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation).
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (16 February 2023).
for example, Sentencing Advisory Council,
Time Served Prison Sentences
(2020) 18 (finding that ‘[t]ime spent on remand seems to increase the
likelihood that a court will ultimately impose a sentence
of imprisonment ...
Sentencing courts are more frequently being put in the position of having to
impose sentences on people who have,
for all intents and purposes, already been
Consultation
44 (finding that 47% of adjourned undertakings have no optional
conditions at all, the most common conditions are donations and mental
medical treatment, and the most prevalent program condition is participation in
a behaviour change program, in 6.3% of
adjourned undertakings, followed by
driver education programs, in 4.6% of adjourned undertakings).
Consultation
14 (for example, a post-prison employment program managed by Vacro, a
post-prison transition program managed by Vacro, a justice
plan managed by the
Department of Families, Fairness and Housing, and treatment plans with the
Victorian Aboriginal Health Service
and the NorthWestern Mental Health
for example,
R v Piacentino & Anor [
2007] VSCA 49
s 83AT(1)(c).
Analogously,
Sentencing Act 1991
was a brief period from November 1997 to May 1999 when the offence was only
punishable by a single penalty unit, but that seems
to have resulted from a
legislative oversight, rather than an intentional policy decision. In
particular, section 12 of the
Sentencing (Amendment) Act 1997
replaced the existing penalty scale for fines in the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic), making a level 12 fine equal to 1 penalty unit, whereas previously it was
10 penalty units. 18 months later, section 30 of
Magistrates Court
(Amendment) Act 1999
(Vic) replaced the reference to ‘level 12
section 83AC
Sentencing Act 1991
‘level 10 fine’, making the maximum 10 penalty units again.
1991 to 2002, the value of a penalty unit was precisely $100. But since then it
has increased almost every year: Sentencing Advisory
Council, ‘Fine’
(sentencingcouncil.vic.gov.au, 2022).
Consultation
Consultation
72. This was well in excess of the proportional increase in adjourned
undertakings in the same period.
Statistics Agency, ‘Spotlight: Offence Types – Differences Between
Recorded Offences and Criminal Incidents’
(crimestatistics.vic.gov.au,
Consultation
Advisory Council,
Secondary Offences in Victoria
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 3 (Office of Public
Prosecutions); Submission 4 (Vacro); Submission
5 (Victoria Legal Aid);
Submission 6 (Women and Mentoring); Submission 7 (Jesuit Social Services);
Submission 8 (Law Institute of
Victoria); Submission 9 (Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service); Submission 10 (Victoria Police); Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal
WEstjustice and Youthlaw); Stakeholder Roundtable (16 February
8 (Law Institute of Victoria).
8 (Law Institute of Victoria).
7 (Jesuit Social Services).
6 (Women and Mentoring).
5 (Victoria Legal Aid).
8 (Law Institute of Victoria).
from Victoria Police (6 April 2023).
Advisory Council,
Suspended Sentences and Intermediate Sentencing Orders:
Suspended Sentences Final Report –
Sentencing Advisory Council (2017), above n 211, 25–26. So too have other
organisations: see, for example, Tasmania Law Reform
, Final Report no. 11 (2008) 153.
Consultation
report was heavily influential in the drafting of the
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic), described by the then Attorney-General as a ‘fundamental building
block’: Victoria, Parliamentary Debates, Legislative
Assembly, 19 March
1991, 336 (Mr Kennan, Attorney-General).
Sentencing Committee,
Sentencing: Report of the Victorian Sentencing
vol. 1 (1988) 358.
describes these provisions as confirmation that the low-end nature of
discharges, dismissals and adjourned undertakings does
not preclude ancillary
orders such as restitution and compensation orders: Arie Freiberg,
Freiberg’s Sentencing: State and Federal Law in Victoria
2014) 670–671.
Consultation
3 (Office of Public Prosecutions).
from Victim Services, Support and Reform (7 November 2022).
for example, Rhiannon Davies and Lorana Bartels, ‘Challenges of Effective
Communication in the Criminal Justice Process:
Findings from Interviews with
Victims of Sexual Offences in Australia’ (2020) 9(4)
for example, Beth A. Currie et al., ‘Adults with Fetal Alcohol Spectrum
Disorder: Factors Associated with Positive Outcomes
and Contact with the
Criminal Justice System’ (2016) 23(1)
Journal of Population
Therapeutics and Clinical Pharmacology
for example, Lawrence Singer and Suzanne Cooper, ‘Improving Public
Confidence in the Criminal Justice System: An Evaluation
of a Communication
Activity’ (2009) 48(5)
Howard Journal of Criminal Justice
is the official database of the Magistrates’ Court and Children’s
Consultation
5 (Victoria Legal Aid); Submission 9 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service);
Submission 11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice
and Youthlaw).
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation); Submission 5 (Victoria Legal
5 (Victoria Legal Aid).
2 (Australian Community Support Organisation).
a good example of the application of plain English principles to court form
design, see Alison Paulin et al.,
The Language of Protection Orders
Stakeholder
Roundtable (16 February 2023).
–(2AC), (2H)(a).
s 83A(2)(b).
s 101(3)(a).
11 (Fitzroy Legal Service, WEstjustice and Youthlaw).
Stakeholder
Roundtable (16 February 2023).
example, in response to being asked in our stakeholder survey to name one thing
they would change about adjourned undertakings,
one respondent advocated
‘[f]or the court to confirm in writing the accused has complied. This
would then put the accused at
ease and also fulfill a broader issue of
confidence in the court system’.
for example, Joel A. Dvoskin et al., ‘What If Psychology Redesigned the
Criminal Justice System?’, in Joel A. Dvoskin
et al. (eds),
Social Science to Reduce Violent Offending
(2011) 298; Stephen T. Higgins
and Nancy M. Petry, ‘Contingency Management: Incentives for
Sobriety’ (1999) 23(2)
Alcohol Research & Health
Danielle S. Rudes et al., ‘Adding Positive Reinforcement in Justice
Settings: Acceptability and Feasibility’
(2012) 42(3)
Substance Abuse Treatment
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (875 KB)
PDF format (870 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter