URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/988.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stone World Australia Pty Ltd v 1240 Nepean Hwy Pty Ltd (Building and Property) [2025] VCAT 988 (6 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
CIVIL DIVISION
BUILDING AND PROPERTY LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. BP107/2025
Deed of surrender of lease – tenant sues the landlord for the balance
of the payment of the agreed sum under the Deed –
claims by the landlord
to set off certain amounts to extinguish its liability to the tenant.
Stone World Australia Pty Ltd [ ACN: 150 472 183 ]
1240 Nepean Hwy Pty Ltd [ ACN: 648 606 124 ]
I Lulham, Deputy President
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
30 October 2025
DATE OF ORDER
6 November 2025
Stone World Australia Pty Ltd v 1240 Nepean Hwy Pty Ltd (Building and
Property) [2025] VCAT 988
respondent shall pay the applicant $202,400.00 plus interest of $38,816.44.
1 of this Order is enforceable immediately.
are reserved. Any application for costs shall be made in writing by 14 November
2025. This written application need only say
that costs are sought. An applicant
for costs need not set out the grounds of the application, nor an itemisation of
the costs sought.
If an application for costs is made by 14 November 2025, the
Tribunal will list a costs hearing before me at which the parties can
Deputy President
APPEARANCES:
For Applicant
Mr A Campbell of Counsel
For Respondent
Mr Z Yang, General Manager
applicant, which conducted the retail business of selling landscaping materials
including decorative tiles, was the tenant of
premises in Cheltenham pursuant to
a Lease dated 14 October 2020. The landlord under that lease sold the property
to the respondent,
which by operation of law then became the landlord of the
2021-2022 the respondent decided to redevelop the property and so negotiated
with the applicant to vacate the leased premises.
It is apparent that the
respondent intended to demolish the premises, as a result of which it was not
concerned to enforce or impose
any ‘make good’ obligations on the
parties entered a Deed of Surrender of Lease on 5 October 2022 to record their
agreement. The Deed was prepared by a law firm
on behalf of the respondent, but
the version of the document which was executed by the applicant and the
respondent was amended in
handwriting in several
Whilst the Deed looks
untidy as a result, the provisions remain clear.
Schedule to the Deed records:
(a) the names and addresses of the parties;
(b) the date of the Deed being 5 October 2022;
(c) the date on which the applicant was to surrender the premises, being
‘15 September 2023 or earlier by mutual agreement’;
(d) the amount to be paid by the respondent to the applicant in consideration of
it surrendering the premises, being $368,000.00
(e) the date on which the payment was to be made, being ‘50% at the end of
January 2023 and the balance at the surrender date’;
(f) the absence of make good obligations – in this respect I set out
clause 4 of the Deed, which was wholly typewritten and
not amended by any
handwriting:
4 Tenant’s obligations
4.1 On or before the Surrender Date, the Tenant must vacate the premises as
though the term of the Lease has expired or come to an
4.2 The Premises will be returned in the condition as is and the Tenant will
be released from its obligation under the Lease and this
Deed to make good of
the premises. The Tenant will not be required to remove the fixtures or fitting
in the Premises.
4.3 The Landlord must not make any deductions from the security bond with
respect to the condition of the Premise
4.4 Nothing in this Deed affects or limits the Tenant’s obligations
under the Lease for the period up to and including the date
that the Tenant
surrenders the Lease, including but not limited to the payment of rent,
outgoings and any other monies under the
6 and 7 contained releases by the tenant of the landlord and vice versa, but
they are irrelevant to this dispute.
7.1.2 provided that within 14 days of the surrender of the lease, the respondent
was to return to the applicant the unused
part of the security deposit.
applicant claims that the respondent has paid half of the sum due to it under
the deed, but has refused to pay the balance on
the basis of specious purported
set offs. The applicant relies on the deed, but pleads that on 25 October 2023
the parties orally
negotiated a variation of the surrender date to 30 November
2023, and that the applicant physically surrendered the premises on 28
its Points of Claim dated 30 January 2025 the applicant claims $202,400.00
(which equates to $184,000 plus GST), plus interest
respondent did not comply with the Tribunal’s Orders that they file and
serve Points of Defence and give discovery of relevant
documents, but shortly
before the hearing it filed and served an affidavit of Mr Zhenhua Yang sworn 25
September 2025, which articulated
its defence. Relevantly, by means of this
affidavit the respondent alleged that:
(a) the applicant was
‘required to return the premises in original condition, free of damage,
fair wear and tear excepted, and
to remove all stock and rubbish’;
(b) the applicant failed to vacate the premises on the surrender date, and
instead returned the keys on 28 November 2023 but stored
goods at the premises
and directed its clients to access stock at the premises thereafter;
‘Harassment
and disruption: On 25 May 2024, a representative of the applicant namely Mr Xiao
Lu attended the respondent’s
office without appointment, entered
restricted areas, refused to leave, and harassed Aultun’s staff. This
caused significant
distress and additional costs for security and staff
(d) The respondent sold the property and settlement of the sale took place on 8
August 2025. ‘Due to the applicant’s
breaches and continued
occupation well beyond the agreed surrender date, the respondent incurred
additional holding costs, suffered
a reduction in sale price, and was forced to
absorb extra expenses to clean and remediate the property before
settlement’.
(e) The respondent sought to set off its claims against its liability to pay the
balance under the deed, thus extinguishing that
25 September 2025 Mr Xiao Lu swore an affidavit on behalf of the applicant. In
substance he swore up to the allegations in the
Points of Claim.
two affidavits effectively ‘crossed in the mail’. It was not as if
one affidavit was drafted as a reply to the other.
the hearing Mr Xiao Lu and Mr Zhenhua Yang used their respective affidavits as
their evidence in chief, and each answered questions
of the other party in cross
examination.
is unnecessary to labour this point. Suffice to say that the respondent did not
dent the credibility of Mr Xiao Lu, and I am satisfied
that his evidence was
true and correct. Mr Zhenhua Yang, however, was forced to make a number of
concessions in cross examination
which result in me being unable to accept his
evidence as being reliable. Without referring to unnecessary matters:
(a) Mr Zhenhua Yang’s statement, on oath, that the applicant was
‘required to return the premises in original condition,
free of damage,
fair wear and tear excepted, and to remove all stock and rubbish’ is
plainly wrong and inconsistent with the
clear words of the deed. As the
respondent was proposing to demolish the premises and redevelop the property
when the surrender was
negotiated with the applicant, it is perfectly
understandable why the respondent would release the applicant from its
good’ obligations under the lease. To then swear in his
affidavit that the applicant had those obligations does great harm
to Mr Zhenhua
Yang’s credit.
(b) Mr Zhenhua Yang’s argument that the words in clause 4.2 of the deed
that the ‘Premises will be returned in the condition
as is’ meant
that when the applicant surrendered the premises, they had to be in precisely
the condition they were in on 5
October 2022 is an artificial argument which is
illogical and unsustainable. The commercial and appropriate construction of
4.2 is that the premises word to be surrendered but not made good.
(c) Mr Zhenhua Yang’s assertion that the applicant had stored goods on the
premises after surrendering them is, in simple terms,
most artificial. I am
satisfied on the evidence given by the witnesses in cross examination, that Mr
Zhenhua Yang is actually referring
to some ‘display’ tiles which the
applicant had been exhibiting in the premises when it was running its business
them, which the applicant stacked neatly but left in an area of the
property on the basis that they would be thrown away with the
materials when the respondent demolished the premises. There was not a large
collection of such tiles, and referring to
this as the ‘storage’ of
goods is an exaggeration. Additionally, whilst the old display tiles had no
benefit to the applicant,
Mr Xiao Lu was somewhat reluctant to waste them by
throwing them away. A customer of the applicant contacted him and asked if they
could have them. Mr Xiao Lu asked Mr Zhenhua Yang if he could have the keys for
a little while so that he could let the customer
into the property to collect
the tiles. Mr Zhenhua Yang agreed. Mr Xiao Lu frankly conceded that he could no
longer precisely remember
whether he obtained the keys from Mr Zhenhua Yang, or
whether the customer obtained them directly. In any event, this was an informal
arrangement for which the applicant is not to be criticised. It certainly does
not amount to the applicant having remained in possession
of the property after
the surrender date.
(d) The respondent’s attempt to seek compensation for the alleged
harassment of another company, Aultun, is legally unsound
– there being no
legal basis for a claim for damages for harassment of the kind alleged, let
alone harassment of a corporation,
and further let alone harassment of a
corporation which is not the respondent – and the making of that claim
also greatly diminishes
Mr Zhenhua Yang’s credit. I note in this respect
that Mr Zhenhua Yang gave evidence that he was formerly a real estate agent.
am satisfied that as such he would have sufficient understanding of the law to
know that this claim was nonsensical.
applicant submitted that the purported set offs of the respondent were basically
recent inventions which were cynically raised
in a misguided attempt to avoid a
genuine legal liability. I think this submission is quite open on the
conclude that the applicant is entitled to $202,400.00 including GST under the
deed, without any set off in favour of the respondent
which would reduce the
applicant expressly sought interest in its Points of Claim. The Tribunal is
empowered to award damages in the nature of interest,
section 184
Australian Consumer Law and Fair Trading Act 2012
Particularly as the parties are commercial entities, there is no
justification for the applicant being kept out of its money since
29 November
2023. In his affidavit sworn 25 September 2025, Mr Xiao Lu set out a calculation
of interest at the rate prescribed under
Penalty Interest Rates Act 1983
(Vic) from 29 November 2023 until 29 September 2025 at $37,152.88. The
of September 2025 was the intended date of the hearing of this
matter, but the Tribunal rescheduled the hearing to 30 October 2025
own resource issues. I have calculated interest for the period of 31 days from
30 September 2025 to 30 October 2025 [$1,553.56]
and added that to Mr Xiao
Lu’s calculation. Total interest is $38,816.44. I award that sum to the
applicant expressly sought costs, but the parties could not sensibly be heard on
the question of costs until the Tribunal had
made its decision in relation to
the applicant’s claim. I therefore reserve the question of costs. As the
respondent is self-represented,
I draw its attention to
Division 8 of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic), which can be
accessed through the Tribunal’s website.
Deputy President
The Deed was prepared by a
well-known law firm. The presence of spelling errors in the document suggests
that it is an early draft,
which the parties then altered in hand and executed
rather than instructing the law firm to re-engross the document with the agreed
amendments.
note here that, on the evidence given on behalf of the respondent,
‘Aultun’ refers to a company other than the respondent,
and that the
respondent did not give discovery of any documents relating to ‘additional
costs for security and staff support’.
Exhibited to the affidavit, in
effect, were some photographs of some people in the premises, but the
photographs were not proof of
‘harassment’.
The respondent did
not give discovery of any documents relating to reduction in sale price, or
extra expenses to clean and remediate
the property.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (158 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter