URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2025/266.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:40:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DPP v Dillon (a pseudonym) [2025] VSCA 266 (7 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF
COURT OF APPEAL
S EAPCR 2024 0146
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
CLAYTON DILLON (a pseudonym)
WALKER, ORR and KIDD JJA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
8 September 2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
7 November 2025
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2025] VSCA 266
JUDGMENT APPEALED
[2024] VCC 1070 (Judge
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal – Sentence
– Crown appeal – Respondent pleaded guilty to nine charges of sexual
against his two child nieces – Charges of sexual penetration of
child under 12, sexual penetration of child under 16, sexual
assault of child
under 16, and encouraging child under 16 to engage in sexual activity –
Total effective sentence of 5 years’
imprisonment with
non‑parole period of 3 years – Whether total effective sentence
and non‑parole period manifestly
inadequate – Whether orders for
cumulation reflected the separate criminality of respondent’s offending
against two victims
– Whether orders for cumulation were contrary to the
presumption of total cumulation for serious sexual offenders – Whether
judge misapplied principle of totality – Orders for cumulation manifestly
inadequate – Appeal allowed – Respondent
resentenced to total
effective sentence of 8 years’ imprisonment with non‑parole
period of 5 years.
Sentencing Act 1991
DPP v Karazisis
[2010] VSCA 350
(2010) 31 VR 634
Nguyen v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 184
[2008] VSCA 222
Barnard v The
[2022] VSCA 42
[2013] NSWCCA 195
(2013) 234 A Crim R 324
(2006) 167 A Crim R 159;
RH McL v The Queen
(2000) 203 CLR 452
DPP v Hopson
(a pseudonym)
[2016] VSCA 303
Gordon (a pseudonym) v The
[2013] VSCA 343
Zhao v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 267
(a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2020] VSCA 173
Nguyen v The Queen
[2016] HCA 17
(2016) 256 CLR 656.
Ms D Piekusis KC with Mr J O’Connor
Respondent:
Ms E Clark with Ms L Bull
A Hogan, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
Respondent:
K Temperley, Teak Legal & Consulting
TABLE OF CONTENTS
2 November 2023, the respondent was arraigned and pleaded guilty to nine charges
of sexual offending against two child victims
in the County Court.
16 July 2024, the respondent was sentenced on the nine charges, as well as on an
unrelated summary offence to which he had also
pleaded guilty, as
on Indictment
penetration of a child under the age of
penetration of a child under the age of 16
penetration of a child under the age of 16
penetration of a child under the age of
Sexual assault
of a child under the age of 16
(course of conduct charge)
Sexual assault
of a child under the age of 16
Sexual assault
of a child under the age of 16 (rolled up charge)
penetration of a child under the age of 16
Encouraging a
child under the age of 16 to engage in or be involved in sexual
Possession of
imitation firearm
years or 240 penalty units
Effective Sentence:
Pre-sentence
Detention Declared:
Section 6AAA
Total Effective
Sentence 6 years 6 months
Period 4 years 10 months
Relevant Orders:
Sentencing Act 1991
, the offender is sentenced as a
serious sexual offender in respect of charges 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9.
Sex Offenders Registration Act 2004
, the length of the
reporting period is life.
of property in the schedule.
Director of Public Prosecutions (‘the appellant’) appealed pursuant
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
on the following
two grounds:
The total effective sentence and non‑parole period
imposed are manifestly inadequate in that in fixing sentence the learned
sentencing judge —
(a) made orders for cumulation in respect of the individual sentences imposed
that, in combination with the fact that the individual
sentences are objectively
low, resulted in a total effective sentence and non‑parole period that are
manifestly inadequate
in all the circumstances;
(b) failed to have sufficient regard to the seriousness of the offences, the
context within which the offences were committed, and
the impact the offences
had on the victims;
(c) failed to have sufficient regard to the separate criminality involved in
offending against two victims;
(d) made orders for cumulation that fail to reflect that the respondent was to
be sentenced as a serious offender on Charges 3‑9.
(e) failed to give sufficient weight to the sentencing principles of protection
of the community, general deterrence, just punishment,
denunciation and specific
deterrence in setting the total effective sentence and non‑parole period;
(f) misapplied the principle of totality.
: The learned sentencing judge erred by applying the sentencing
principle of totality in relation to Charges 3‑9 in a manner
undermined the legislative policy inherent in
Sentencing Act 1991
by applying the sentencing principle of totality
as if that section was not on the statute book.
of offending
respondent was between 21 and 23 years of age at the time of the offending and
had no prior criminal history.
respondent offended against his second cousins who were two sisters,
‘AW’ and ‘MS’. The victims referred
respondent’s mother as ‘aunty’.
offending occurred when the respondent visited the victims’ family at
their home, or when the victims visited the respondent’s
included times where the respondent was asked to care for the victims.
first victim — AW
November 2020 and November 2022, the respondent offended against AW when she was
aged 11 to 13.
1 and 2 — sexual penetration(s) of a child under 16
a date between 14 November 2020 and 26 November 2021, the respondent and his
mother visited the victims’ home.
and MS were playing in their bedroom and had made a fort out of sheets. The room
was covered in blankets and was dark. AW was lying
on her bed with her back
against the wall watching a program on her tablet. The respondent entered the
bedroom and lay beside AW.
The respondent put his hand down AW’s pants,
under her underwear, and penetrated her vagina with his finger. The respondent
asked AW, ‘does it feel good?’. The offence stopped so that the
respondent and AW could join the family for dinner. This
constituted
dinner, AW returned to her bedroom to continue to watch her program. The
respondent followed AW into her bedroom and lay down
next to her. The respondent
put his hand down AW’s underpants and penetrated her vagina. When the
respondent penetrated AW’s
vagina he said, ‘wow, two fingers’.
This constituted charge 2.
3 — sexual penetration of a child under 16
a date between 16 July 2021 and 13 November 2022, AW stayed overnight at the
house of the respondent and his mother.
one point during the overnight stay, AW was sitting on a beanbag in the
loungeroom. The respondent sat next to AW on a separate
beanbag and shared a
large blanket over their legs. The respondent’s mother and a friend of
hers sat on couches behind the
respondent and AW, while everyone watched a
movie. The respondent took this opportunity to slide his hand down AW’s
under her underwear and then penetrated her vagina with his fingers.
6 — sexual assault of a child under 16
a date between 1 November 2022 and 12 November 2022, the respondent touched
AW’s right breast under her clothing while she
was laying on a hammock at
the house of the respondent and his mother.
7 — sexual assault of a child under 16 (rolled up
— sexual penetration of a child under 16
encouraging a child under 16 to engage in sexual activity
7, 8 and 9 all occurred on the one day, on 13 November 2022. On that day, AW was
initially left in charge of her two younger
siblings when the rest of the family
travelled to Bendigo for a medical appointment. The respondent’s mother
asked the respondent
to go to the victims’ house to assist AW.
respondent arrived at the house and greeted all three children in the house.
Upon the respondent’s arrival, AW went into
her bedroom and sat at her
desk, watching a movie on her laptop and sorting her beads. The respondent sent
AW a Snapchat message
asking her if she was alright. The respondent then went
into AW’s bedroom and kneeled beside her.
respondent lifted up AW’s tank top and bra and then squeezed her right
breast and nipple repeatedly. AW continued to watch
her movie, despite her
breast being exposed. The respondent also unbuttoned AW’s denim shorts and
touched the outside of her
vagina. Later that day, AW was sitting at the dining
table in the kitchen with her siblings. The three children were sitting at the
table playing games on their electronic devices. The respondent stood behind AW
and placed his right hand under her tank top and
bra and touched her on the
breast in the presence of her two younger siblings. These breast and vaginal
touchings constituted charge
the respondent sat with AW on the couch in her living room. The respondent
covered himself and AW in a blanket. AW’s
younger siblings were also
seated on the couch. The respondent rubbed AW’s thigh in a circular motion
under the blanket. The
respondent then unbuttoned AW’s denim shorts and
then slid his hand inside AW’s shorts, under her underwear, to insert
finger into AW’s vagina. The respondent moved his finger in and out of
AW’s vagina slowly, doing so in close proximity
to her younger siblings.
AW remained on her mobile phone. This conduct constituted charge 8.
the respondent was penetrating AW’s vagina (ie, the offence the subject of
charge 8), the respondent wrote a message in
the notes app on his mobile
phone, saying ‘We can go into your bedroom, and I’ll lick it’.
The respondent then
tapped AW’s thigh for her to read the note. AW turned
away from the respondent, attempting to ignore him. The respondent then
second note saying, ‘Up to you’. The respondent tried to attract
AW’s attention again by elbowing her to
read the note. AW understood the
respondent’s intention was to lick her vagina in the privacy of her
bedroom. This conduct
constituted charge 9.
remained seated with her legs crossed, trying to prevent the respondent from
continuing to penetrate her vagina with his finger.
A short time later, she told
the respondent she needed a drink of water, at which point the respondent ceased
penetrating her vagina.
AW’s mother and stepfather arrived home, she told them about the
respondent’s offending conduct. Her stepfather immediately
removed the
respondent from the house.
linking the respondent to the offending against AW was obtained following
analysis of vaginal swabs taken from her.
second victim — MS
January 2022 and November 2022, the respondent offended against MS when she was
aged 8 to 9.
5 — sexual assault of a child under 16 (course of conduct
5 is a course of conduct charge, where the respondent was charged with
intentionally sexually touching MS, a child under the
age of 16, by rubbing her
respondent touched MS on the vagina approximately three to four times
— on separate occasions — while she was seated
on the couch in her
loungeroom, with the first occasion occurring when she was 8 years old,
before her ninth birthday.
one occasion, the respondent visited MS and her family at their home. The
respondent had a shower when he arrived and sat on the
couch with MS where she
was watching a children’s cartoon, Peppa Pig, on her tablet. The
respondent placed a blanket over both
of their legs saying, ‘Please, can
I?’. MS understood that the respondent was asking to touch her vagina. She
said, ‘No’,
several times while the respondent persisted in asking
her until she said ‘Yes’. The respondent then slid his hand under
her pants and underwear and touched her on the vagina while she continued to
watch Peppa Pig.
respondent also offended against MS on other occasions where the respondent and
MS were both covered with a blanket, or when only
MS was covered by the blanket.
4 — sexual penetration of a child under 12
interviewed by police (see paragraph
below), the respondent was asked
whether he had ever penetrated MS’s vagina. He admitted that he had done
so on one occasion.
That admission forms the basis of charge 4.
penetration was not disclosed by MS in her video recorded statement to police.
respondent also admitted to touching MS on her vagina on three separate
occasions. This admission relates to charge 5.
complaint to her mother
complained to her mother about the respondent’s conduct at the same time
as her sister (AW) on 13 November 2022.
of interview
respondent was arrested and interviewed by police on 14 November 2022, the
day following the complaints to AW and MS’s parents.
During the interview,
the respondent made full and frank admissions to the police about his sexual
offending against both victims.
sentencing judge concluded that the offending was ‘plainly serious
offending with significant victim
In that regard, the
sentencing judge identified the following
(a) The respondent had a high degree of moral culpability for the offending
(b) The offending was opportunistic, protracted, and sustained over a
two year period.
(c) The significant differences in age between the respondent and the
(d) The respondent was a trusted member of the victims’ extended family
— that trust was
(e) The respondent’s offending occurred in brazen circumstances on a
number of occasions with others in close proximity, including
(f) The respondent persisted with the offending the subject of charge 5
notwithstanding the victim, MS, repeatedly saying
(g) The offending occurred in the victims’ home where they were entitled
to be safe.
sentencing judge took into account the following matters personal to the
respondent.
plea and remorse:
The sentencing judge said that it was significant that the
respondent had pleaded guilty to the offences, accepted responsibility
offending and saved the victims the ordeal of living through the events again in
court, particularly given their
Admissions,
discount on charge 4:
The respondent was allowed a significant
discount given his guilty plea and his cooperation with the police once he was
In particular, a
discount was
attached to charge 4 as this offence would not have been known by the
police save for the admission made by the
respondent.
moderation of moral culpability and general deterrence:
The sentencing judge
accepted that there was a causal link between the respondent’s autism
spectrum disorder and the offending
behaviour, which enlivened limb 1 of
judge summarised the evidence of the clinical psychologist, Ms Alison
Mynard, who had diagnosed the respondent with autism spectrum
disorder and
assessed him as having a ‘very poor level of empathy’. These matters
impacted on [the respondent’s] capacity to understand the impact of [his]
offending on the victims. Ms Mynard concludes that
[the respondent’s]
moral development is immature, reflecting a ‘childlike understanding that
behaviour is wrong if there
are negative consequences, rather than an
integration of internal values and standards of empathy ... and compassion for
examined the evidence of Ms Mynard, her Honour concluded:
I am satisfied that the characteristics of [the respondent’s] autism
spectrum disorder, including impaired emotional regulation
and reasoning skills,
combined with poor inhabitation, would have contributed to [his] offending
behaviours. I conclude that these
mental health impairments meant that [he] did
not fully understand the gravity of [his] conduct or its moral implications,
contributing
to a continuation of [his] offending. The principles of
operate to reduce, to some degree, [the respondent’s] moral
culpability for [his] offending and the role played by general
deterrence.
the sentencing judge went on to find:
[T]here is evidence that [the respondent was] aware of the wrongfulness of
[his] conduct, including by taking steps to conceal [his]
offending. I am not
satisfied that [the respondent’s] impairment was such that [he was] not
aware that [his] conduct over the
two year period was very wrong. While I
am satisfied that [the respondent’s] cognitive and mental health
impairments contributed
to [his] offending by impairing [his] ability to reason
and to consider the consequences of [his] actions, I am not satisfied that
impairments caused [his] offending conduct or are of such severity to eliminate
the need for general deterrence.
a similar effect, the judge emphasised elsewhere that, although general
deterrence was moderated, the sentence still had a role
to play in deterring
others from the sexual abuse of vulnerable
likely burden of imprisonment:
The respondent’s diagnosis of major
depressive disorder and his ‘multiple complex needs’, which
Ms Mynard opined
were likely to deteriorate in custody, enlivened
, for which the sentencing judge gave a further
That is, his
disorders and needs would make imprisonment more burdensome for him than for
someone without such conditions.
good prospects of rehabilitation
The sentencing judge
noted that the respondent had no prior or subsequent criminal history and had
complied with his strict bail conditions
She said the
following about his prospects of rehabilitation:
[The respondent has] been assessed by Ms Mynard as posing a moderate risk
of reoffending and I accept that [the respondent’s]
experience of custody
will be a salutary one. [The respondent’s] future prospects of
rehabilitation will depend, in large part,
upon [his] engagement in treatment
and counselling to improve [his] insight into the motivations for [his]
offending and its impact
on the victims. At present, I assess [the respondent
has] reasonably good prospects of rehabilitation. However, participation in
sex offender treatment program is clearly warranted. The sentence I impose must
operate to deter [the respondent] from future offending
of this nature while
accepting that specific deterrence is also moderated to a degree by reason of
[the respondent’s] diagnosed
autism spectrum
sentencing judge took into account that the respondent was a youthful offender
at the time of the offending, noting:
The rehabilitation of youthful offenders is an important sentencing objective,
however, the weight that attaches to youth diminishes
the more serious the
offending. This was clearly serious offending, however, I have had regard to
[the respondent’s] youth
in sentencing [him], particularly in fixing an
appropriate non‑parole period to facilitate [his] prospects of
rehabilitation.
sentencing considerations:
, and cumulation, the sentencing judge said:
I have had regard to the serious sexual offender provisions when determining
the amount of cumulation to order in respect of each
charge, particularly to
reflect the fact [the respondent] offended against two separate victims.
However, where [the respondent’s]
offending occurred on the one occasion,
such as the offending on 13 November 2022, being Charges 7, 8
and 9, I have ordered a greater
degree of concurrency to give effect
to the sentencing principle of
her Honour said that she had imposed sentences below
the standard
having regard to the sentencing benefit that attaches to the
guilty plea, the respondent’s cooperation and admissions, the
application
principles, and his
submissions on appeal
parties’ submissions were directed holistically at both grounds, so it is
convenient to summarise them together.
appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that the individual sentences imposed fell at the lower end of
the range of available sentences having regard
to the following
(a) The respondent fell to be sentenced for both penetrative and
non‑penetrative sexual offending.
(b) The respondent’s offending was against two child victims over a period
of approximately two years.
(c) The respondent was a trusted family member who was significantly older than
both victims.
(d) Charges 1 to 8 are standard sentence offences and the respondent was
sentenced as a serious sexual offender for charges 3 to
(e) There were aggravating features of the offending identified by the
sentencing judge, as set out in paragraph
(f) The victims and their families suffered profound harm as a result of the
respondent’s actions.
(g) Charge 5 was a course of conduct charge and
charge 7 was a rolled‑up charge. This made them more serious.
appellant submits that given the low individual sentences, the sentencing judge
was required to make appropriate orders for cumulation
or concurrency, applying
the accepted rules as to totality and proportionality, including
Sentencing Act
. The appellant accepts that the low individual
sentence imposed on charge 4 is not in the same category as the other
charges due
appellant submits that the orders for cumulation:
(a) fail to reflect the separate criminality of the offending, which warranted
real expression in the circumstances;
(b) are too low in circumstances where the offending comprised at least
nine separate incidents against the two victims (with aggravating
over a period of two years;
(c) did not reflect the separate criminality for charges 1 and 6
(where no orders for cumulation were made);
(d) did not properly recognise that the offending under charges 4
and 5 was against a different victim (MS); and
(e) did not give proper (or any) effect to the operation of
relation to charges 3 to 8), where a presumption of total cumulation
appellant observes that the orders for cumulation ranged between 0 and
25 percent of the individual sentences imposed. The appellant
referred to
the levels of cumulation ordered in a number of sentences considered by this
Court between 2020 and 2024, which involved
sexual offending against children
where the offender fell to be sentenced as a serious sexual offender. While the
appellant acknowledges
that such arithmetic comparisons may have its
limitations, it submits that these figures demonstrate that orders for
cumulation in
this case were very low and are statistical outliers.
appellant submits that where the respondent was sentenced as a serious sexual
offender, the sentencing judge was bound to regard
the protection of the
community as the principal sentencing purpose. Relevant to the sentencing of the
respondent in this regard
was the fact that the respondent posed a moderate risk
of reoffending and demonstrated a low degree of insight into his offending.
appellant submits that the matters personal to the respondent — including
the application of limb 1 of
— did not explain the
inadequate orders for cumulation. To that end, the appellant highlights the
judge’s findings —
and the evidence — that the respondent
appreciated the wrongfulness of what he was doing. We will pick these matters up
our analysis below.
Ultimately,
the appellant submits that, by reason of the manifestly inadequate or
non‑existent orders for cumulation, the resultant
total effective sentence
and non‑parole period were clearly outside the sentencing range reasonably
respondent’s submissions
respondent accepts that the individual sentences imposed were low (although he
submits they were appropriate). He also accepts
that the orders for cumulation
appear, when considered in isolation, modest. He contends, however, that those
orders were necessary
to produce a total effective sentence and non‑parole
period that was just in all the circumstances, having regard to the matters
personal to him. Those matters include his guilty plea, his expressions of
remorse and acceptance of responsibility, the
, his age, and the need to facilitate his prospects of
rehabilitation. Totality must be viewed through this prism, the respondent
respondent contends that the orders for cumulation allowed the judge to give
proper effect to the principle of totality having
regard to the overlap in the
complainants and in the time over which the offending occurred, and the powerful
mitigation in support
of the respondent. The respondent submits that the orders
for cumulation can be explained as follows:
(a) For charge 1, it was logical to order no cumulation because the offending
was the first in time but did not give rise to the
base sentence (with a larger
sentence imposed for charge 8). Further, the respondent did not fall to be
sentenced as a serious offender
on this charge. The seriousness of the
offending, and its separate and distinct criminality, were acknowledged by way
of the individual
sentence of 3 years’ imprisonment.
(b) The events giving rise to charge 2 occurred on the same day as the events
giving rise to charge 1. They appeared to be of a short
duration and were
without aggravating features that would elevate the seriousness of the
offending. Again, the respondent did not
fall to be sentenced as a serious
offender on this charge.
(c) For charge 3, a very significant individual sentenced was imposed, but
otherwise the offending was of relatively short duration
and there was no other
conduct that accompanied the event.
(d) For charge 4, the individual sentence and order for cumulation were
appropriate given that the respondent was entitled to a very
substantial
discount for his full and frank admissions, without which he would
not have faced a charge with a maximum penalty of 25 years’
imprisonment, being the most serious charge on his indictment.
(e) For charges 5 and 6, the individual sentences and orders for cumulation
(or lack thereof) reflect the lower maximum penalty for
the offence and the
nature of the touching the subject of the charges, which, in comparison to the
other charges, was not the most
serious or significant offending.
(f) Charges 7, 8 and 9 were all part of one episode of conduct on the same day,
which explains why there is modest cumulation in
relation to that event.
respondent submits that the sentencing judge applied the serious offender
provisions correctly, having referred to their operation
explicitly. The
respondent observes that although the prosecutor drew the judge’s
attention to the serious offender provisions
during the plea, there was no
submission that a disproportionate sentence ought be imposed or that there
should be substantial or
significant orders for cumulation. Further, the
prosecutor did not make submissions in reply to the respondent’s
that the presumption of cumulation should be disposed with because of
his autism spectrum disorder diagnosis and other matters in
mitigation. Overall,
the respondent submits, there is nothing to suggest that the judge misapplied
the serious offender provisions.
respondent points to the fact that the judge went to great lengths to recognise
the objective seriousness of this offending and
the moral culpability of the
respondent, but contends that the judge had to weigh these considerations
against the powerful matters
in mitigation. Contrary to the appellant’s
submissions, the protracted nature of the offending did not have a compounding
on the respondent’s moral culpability; rather, the judge accepted
Ms Mynard’s opinions about the respondent’s mental
including his capacity to understand the impact of his offending. The respondent
relies upon this passage from her Honour’s
The instinctive synthesis involved in sentencing still requires a balancing of
many factors, including the nature and objective
seriousness of [the
respondent’s] offending, [his] moral culpability, as well as [his]
personal circumstances and the matters
to which I have referred in mitigation of
respondent submits that having weighed all of those considerations, the
sentencing judge arrived at a total effective sentence
and non‑parole
period which was, while at the lower end, within the range of sentences open to
her Honour and not wholly outside
on cumulation, totality and
this appeal is focussed upon the adequacy of the orders for cumulation, it is
convenient to briefly set out some of the key principles.
discretion to make orders for cumulation is
a very broad one and should not be unduly circumscribed by appellate
intervention. The authorities recognise that judges should
be allowed great
latitude in tailoring an appropriate total effective
said, the discretion must be exercised in accordance with principle. Some of the
general principles are as follows:
(a) Cumulation orders must reflect differences in the seriousness of each
offence and the different episodes of offending, and recognise
each separate
(b) Whether or not cumulation is ordered in relation to such offences will
depend on whether each additional incident may be seen
as having added to the
total criminality of the offender’s
A failure to order
adequate cumulation can ‘undervalue the gravity of the [offender’s]
conduct and the impact of that
conduct upon [the]
(c) Orders for cumulation ensure that each charge carries weight in the overall
sentencing outcome. They ensure that offenders do
not, and are seen not to,
receive a ‘discount’ by reason of being sentenced for multiple
charges on the one occasion.
Ormiston JA said in
[O]rdinary principles as to cumulation require that the sentencing judge should
as far as practicable identify separate events,
‘episodes’ or
‘transactions’ giving rise to specific counts or groups of counts
and to recognise them by
ordering at least a
degree of cumulation
is to avoid the appearance that an offender may commit a series of crimes after
the first such crime with effective impunity,
if all sentences for a series of
unconnected offences were to be served
concurrently.
Sentencing Act
have modified the role of totality with
respect to the sentencing of ‘serious offenders’, including
‘serious sexual
offenders’.
pursuant to
, the sentencing judge is bound to regard the protection of
the community as the principal purpose of imposing the sentence. Second,
pursuant to
, a presumption of total cumulation applies.
High Court has emphasised the following about
(the predecessor of
, which was in substantially the same
The evident object of the section is to make sentences to which it applies
operate cumulatively rather than concurrently. The section
gives the judge a
discretion to direct otherwise. But the object of the section would be
compromised and probably defeated in most
cases if the ordinary application of
the totality principle was a sufficient ground to liven the discretion. Since
the relationship
and the totality principle does not arise
in this appeal, it is enough to say that sentencing judges need to be astute not
to undermine
the legislative policy inherent in
by applying the
totality principle to the sentences as if that section (or
replaced it) was not on the statute
is undoubtedly a tension between the policy underlying
principle of totality. As Redlich JA said in
Gordon (a pseudonym) v The
[The] tension between the policy underlying
and the principle of
totality is difficult to reconcile. Authority has thus far provided no clear
guidance as to the circumstances
in which the statutory presumption of full
cumulation under
should override the principle of totality. However,
it may at least be said that as the objective gravity of the total offending
increases, so will the degree of cumulation which is ordered, thereby producing
a total effective sentence which will more closely
correspond with both the
legislative policy underlying
and the principle of
is clear is that, in fixing orders for cumulation for serious sexual offenders,
totality must give way, to some degree, to
After reviewing earlier
authority, including the statements reproduced above, this Court said in
v The Queen
It follows from these statements of principle that
and totality both
apply, but that the full effect of totality is to
be somewhat reduced
order to give proper effect to the legislative intent manifested in the
has become equally plain that
[o]n any view, in cases of multiple sexual offending, even those which involve
the same victim, and where the offences are closely
associated in time, some
level of cumulation is, today,
very much to be expected
Sentencing Act 1991
, and its treatment of serious sexual offenders,
supports that approach.
the question of the need to accumulate, when individual sentences are moderated,
it is helpful to recall the following observation
of the High Court in
v The Queen
Generally speaking, however, the imposition of
less severe individual
may call for
a greater degree of accumulation
in order to
reflect total criminality whereas more severe individual sentences may
necessitate a greater degree of
concurrency.
turn now to consider the impugned sentences in the light of these
principles.
of ground 1 (manifest inadequacy)
principles applicable to a Director’s appeal on the ground of manifest
inadequacy are well accepted. In
Director of Public Prosecutions v
, this Court said:
In Victoria, the contention that a sentence was manifestly inadequate is
invariably expressed as a submission that the sentence
was outside the range
reasonably open to the sentencing judge in the circumstances. As with the ground
of manifest excess, the ground
of manifest inadequacy is a stringent one,
difficult to make good. Error of this kind will not be established unless the
court is persuaded that the sentence was ‘wholly outside the
range of sentencing options available’ to the sentencing
another way, it must be shown that it was not reasonably open to the sentencing
judge to come to the sentencing conclusion
which he/she did if proper weight had
been given to all the relevant circumstances of the offending and of the
the reasons which follow, we have concluded that the orders for cumulation were
manifestly inadequate, resulting in a manifestly
inadequate total effective
sentence and non‑parole period.
degree of concurrency not explained by structure of sentences
it is striking that no cumulation was affixed to two individual sentences
(charges 1 and 6).
where orders for cumulation were made (charges 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8
and 9), they were mostly — as a proportion of the
relevant individual
sentences — exceptionally and disproportionately low. This resulted in a
very high degree of overall concurrency
across all sentences. There is no
apparent explanation for this in the structure of the sentences.
the high degree of overall concurrency cannot be explained by reference to the
levels of the individual sentences imposed.
This was not a case where the
severity of the individual sentences demanded restraint in the orders for
cumulation. It is quite the
sentencing judge evidently adopted the ‘moderate and cumulate’
approach to sentencing. Her Honour significantly moderated
the individual
sentences, largely, it would seem, to reflect the ameliorating influence of
. The individual sentences imposed were, on any
view, low, if not lenient.
markedly moderated the individual sentences, this would ordinarily call for a
‘greater degree of
accumulation’
in order to
reflect the totality of the respondent’s serious sexual criminality
against two child victims, over two years,
while he was mostly a
‘serious sexual offender’.
our opinion, the degree of cumulation ordered did not adequately reflect these
examination of each individual sentence also reveals that the sentencing
discretion miscarried with respect to cumulation. We now
turn to each
of cumulation on charge 1 and adequacy of cumulation on charge 2
1 and 2 were both charges of digital sexual penetration of a child under 16. No
order for cumulation was made on the sentence
of 3 years’
imprisonment imposed on charge 1. Two months’ cumulation was
imposed for charge 2.
respondent submitted that, because charges 1 and 2 were perpetrated on
the one day against the one victim, this justified complete
concurrency for charge 1.
do not accept that submission. It is one thing to allow for some concurrency. It
is quite another to allow for full concurrency.
There are two reasons why the
failure to designate any cumulation to the sentence for charge 1 bespoke
while the two penetrations took place on the one day, they were separated in
time and by a family dinner. This was not offending
which temporally formed part
of a single uninterrupted event justifying complete concurrency. It was distinct
charge 1 was very serious criminal conduct, involving, as it did, penetrative
offending. The separate criminality in charge
1 had to be separately
denounced, and punished. Without any cumulation, this was not recognised or
given any weight in the total
effective sentence. In short, some of the
punishment for charge 1 had to carry through to the total outcome.
absence of any order for cumulation on charge 1 is also not explained by
the degree of cumulation ordered on charge 2. The level
of cumulation
assigned to charge 2 — of just 2 months’ cumulation in
respect of an individual sentence of 3 years —
was itself so low as
to bespeak error. Certainly, 2 months’ cumulation was not of an order
which sufficiently reflected the
combined criminality for both of these
of cumulation on charge 3 (AW)
3 was again a charge of digital sexual penetration of a child under 16. The
individual sentence of 42 months’ imprisonment
charge 3 was higher than the individual sentences imposed on charges 1
and 2 (which were 3 years each). This must be explained
by the fact
that the respondent fell to be sentenced as a serious sexual offender on
charge 3. The judge ordered 3 months’
cumulation in respect of
the sentence imposed on charge 3.
should also have expected to see a demonstrable increase in the level of
cumulation ordered to reflect the fact that the respondent
was by now a serious
sexual offender, and that the presumption of concurrency was replaced by a
presumption of cumulation. Yet, the
increase in the amount of cumulation ordered
— by comparison with the 2 months attached to charge 2 —
was nominal.
our opinion, the cumulation of just 3 months assigned to this 42 month
sentence was manifestly inadequate and did not give effect
Sentencing Act
of cumulation on charge 6 (AW)
6 involved the respondent touching AW’s breast under her clothing on a
single occasion. No order for cumulation was made
in respect of the individual
sentence of 6 months imposed for charge 6 (sexual assault of a child
to the respondent, an explanation for the failure to assign any cumulation to
charge 6 lies in the fact that the offending
was objectively less serious
by comparison with the other offending. This appears to be the likely
explanation. Even so, there remain
some difficulties with the fact that no
cumulation was ordered.
the absence of cumulation fails to adequately denounce this assault — it
may have been comparatively less grave, but
sight should not be lost of the fact
that it remained a sexual assault of a child.
it fails to recognise that this offending was isolated in time from the other
charges. It took place on a separate occasion
the failure to make any order of cumulation was inconsistent with the
legislative policy inherent in
Sentencing Act
weight — even a modest amount — had to be given to this separate
wrongdoing in the total sentence.
of cumulation on charges 7 and 9 (AW)
turn to the orders for cumulation made in relation to the episode covered by
charges 7, 8 and 9:
(a) Charge 8 (sexual penetration of a child under 16) gave rise to the base
sentence (42 months’ imprisonment).
(b) Cumulation of 1 month was attached to the individual sentence of
18 months for charge 7 (sexual assault of a child under 16).
(c) Cumulation of 1 month was attached to the individual sentence of
20 months for charge 9 (encouraging a child under 16 to engage
sexual activity).
Self-evidently,
the amounts of cumulation ordered (1 month for each of charges 7
and 9) could not, practically, have been lower.
respondent argues that these small amounts for cumulation can be explained by
the temporal and contextual relationship between
the charges. He fastens upon
the fact that all occurred on a single day when the respondent was engaged in
babysitting duties of
AW and her siblings.
our opinion, the respondent’s argument downplays the breadth and gravity
of the sexual offending encompassed by these three
7 was a rolled up charge encompassing multiple sexual touchings of AW’s
breast and the outside of her vagina over a protracted
period of time in
different locations within the house. The sentence had to properly reflect the
totality of the multiple acts encapsulated
This needed to be
reflected in the level of cumulation assigned to that sentence.
charge 9 was committed while the respondent was sexually penetrating AW
(charge 8). Notwithstanding this overlap, it carried
a high degree of
separate individual criminality. Charge 9 involved sexual offending of a
different quality — a proposal to
engage in additional and different
serious criminal sexual activity. It represented a calculated attempt to isolate
the victim from
her siblings. The offence thus involved a degree of planning, as
well as persistence.
overlapping circumstances of charges 7, 8 and 9 tempered the degree of
cumulation required in respect of the sentences imposed
on charges 7
and 9. Nevertheless, this had to be balanced against the need to reflect
the accumulating gravity of the respondent’s
sexual misconduct this day,
all committed as a serious sexual offender. A meaningful measure of cumulation
was warranted.
month’s cumulation on each of charges 7 and 9 was disproportionately low
and failed to adequately punish the separate criminality
inherent in each of
these charges.
of cumulation on charges 4 and 5 (MS)
individual sentence of 3 years’ imprisonment imposed on charge 4
(sexual penetration of a child under 12) was an especially
lenient sentence. The
sentencing judge explained the leniency of the sentence by reference to the
discount (in combination with
cannot be gainsaid that the respondent was entitled to receive a significant
discount for having admitted to the penetration in
question. It was the
respondent’s admission — volunteered by him whilst being interviewed
at the police station —
which exposed him to this charge, it being the
most serious charge on the indictment (carrying a maximum penalty of
imprisonment). As the respondent pointed out in the oral
hearing, MS had never alleged in her Video Audio Recorded Evidence (VARE)
penetration had occurred.
having imposed such a modest sentence, it was still important that a
proportionate degree of cumulation be ordered so as to reflect
that MS was a
separate child victim to AW, and a very young one at that.
order for 9 months’ cumulation was the highest amount of cumulation
ordered on any charge. It was appropriate to order a
higher degree of cumulation
in order to recognise that MS was a separate victim. However, in our opinion,
9 months’ cumulation
— in respect of a sentence of
3 years’ imprisonment for penetrative offending against a different
victim while the respondent
was a serious sexual offender — did not carry
nearly sufficient weight in the overall sentencing outcome.
5 was a course of conduct charge involving three or four touchings on the
victim’s vagina. This was repeated and direct
touching on the vaginal area
over a period of time when MS was 8 to 9 years of age.
was able to particularise one occasion — when she was watching Peppa Pig.
The offending on this occasion was persistent and
committed in the face of the
victim repeatedly saying ‘No’.
was, it would seem, some overlap between the course of conduct charged under
charge 5 and the penetration encompassed by charge
4. Both occurred
within the same period. Charge 4 appears to be an occasion where the
touchings covered by charge 5 progressed to
penetration.
accepting that overlap, an order for only 2 months’ cumulation in
respect of the sentence imposed on charge 5 was inadequate
to reflect the
criminality involved in multiple sexual assaults of an 8 or 9 year old
youth and rehabilitation
our opinion, the
considerations, together with the
respondent’s youth and prospects of rehabilitation, do not explain the
disproportionately
and extremely low levels of cumulation ascribed to the
sentences imposed on charges 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 9, or the complete
of any cumulation in respect of the sentences imposed on charges 1
may be accepted that limb 1 of
was meaningfully engaged and was
properly treated as having more than a marginal moderating influence in the
sentencing synthesis.
The appellant did not cavil with the proposition that
considerations may moderate orders for cumulation. That must be
correct, given that they may moderate both the minimum term and the
said, the moderating influence of limb 1 of
in this case
must be kept in perspective. This was not a case where the severity of the
respondent’s autism spectrum disorder,
and its connection to the
offending, was at a level which warranted an extreme reduction in the
respondent’s moral culpability
and in the resultant sentences.
fact is, the respondent was not deprived of the essential capacity to comprehend
the wrongfulness of his conduct. As the sentencing
judge concluded:
(a) the respondent’s impairment was not such that he was not aware that
conduct over the two year period was very
(b) the principles of
operated to reduce the respondent’s
moral culpability for the offending — and to moderate general deterrence,
just punishment
and denunciation — ‘to
(c) the respondent still bore ‘a high degree of moral culpability’
for the offending conduct, despite the application
offending was protracted, over a two year period, and against two victims. This
allowed for time to reflect on wrongfulness. The
respondent also took calculated
steps to conceal his offending.
course, the judge was also required to give weight to the considerations of the
respondent’s youth and promotion of his rehabilitation.
But, as the
sentencing judge correctly observed:
The rehabilitation of youthful offenders is an important sentencing objective,
however, the weight that attaches to youth diminishes
the more serious the
the sentencing judge assessed the respondent to have reasonably good prospects
of rehabilitation.
However, this
too must be considered in context. As her Honour noted, the respondent’s
reform will be very much dependent upon
his engagement in treatment and
counselling to improve his insight into the motivations for his offending and
its impact on the victims.
respondent was assessed by the psychologist, Ms Mynard, as posing a
moderate risk
of reoffending. His prospects were not wholly favourable.
consideration of community protection counterbalanced, to some degree, some of
the mitigating influence of limb 1 of
Furthermore, for
charges 3 to 9, the sentencing judge was required by
Sentencing Act
to regard the protection of the community as the principal
purpose of imposing the sentence.
with the moderating influence of his mitigating factors — including
and the respondent’s youth — the sentencing
principles of general deterrence, just punishment, and denunciation remained
considerations of real weight, given that the offending involved the sexual
abuse of children.
our opinion,
, the respondent’s youth and his prospects of
rehabilitation did not justify the disproportionately low accumulation in this
her thorough sentencing reasons, the sentencing judge properly identified all
the factors which were relevant to this sentencing
exercise. The judge quite
correctly characterised the gravity of this offending as ‘plainly
serious’, and the ongoing
role which the punitive considerations continued
to play, despite the respondent’s personal circumstances.
Nevertheless,
the reasons did not ultimately translate into the fixing of appropriate orders
for cumulation.
the extent that the sentencing judge ordered cumulation, the orders
(a) to denounce and punish the respondent’s individual criminality
involved in each offence;
(b) to reflect the cumulative trauma caused by his continuous offending;
(c) to account for the totality of the respondent’s offending, against two
separate child victims, over nine separate episodes;
(d) to sufficiently moderate considerations of totality in accordance with
Sentencing Act
, given that the respondent
fell to be sentenced for most of the charges as a ‘serious sexual
manifestly inadequate orders for cumulation had a compounding effect, producing
a manifestly inadequate total effective sentence
and a manifestly inadequate
non‑parole period.
our opinion, ground 1 is made out.
that we have upheld ground 1, it is unnecessary to determine ground 2.
Notwithstanding
our conclusion that the sentence imposed on the respondent was manifestly
inadequate, this Court retains a residual
discretion to dismiss the
appellant’s appeal. The respondent submits that we should invoke the
residual discretion.
appellant contends that, in the circumstances of this case, the residual
discretion should not be exercised. We note that on this
issue the burden lies
upon the appellant.
authorities have identified a non-exhaustive list of factors which inform the
exercise of the residual discretion. In addition
to the conduct of the
prosecutor at first instance, these factors include whether:
(a) the offender given a non‑custodial sentence has complied with its
terms for a significant period;
(b) the offender given a ‘lenient disposition’ has made productive
use of that disposition, including by finding ‘employment
and stability in
their personal life’;
(c) the offending falls short of ‘criminality of the highest
(d) there has been a delay between the imposition of sentence and the Crown
appeal; and
(e) the sentence first imposed is of a type which enhances the prospects of the
offender’s rehabilitation, particularly where
the offender is
are three factors that the respondent says justifies the exercise of the
discretion.
first is that the respondent’s personal circumstances reflect both youth
and a high degree of need for rehabilitation (on
account of his autism spectrum
disorder). At the oral hearing, the respondent emphasised that it had been more
than a year now since
the imposition of the sentence on the respondent and, for
such a young person in custody with his difficulties, this was a lengthy
of time to labour under the uncertainty of whether or not his sentence would be
increased, and if so, to what extent.
should say that we were not provided with any information as to how the
respondent’s rehabilitation has progressed since
he has been in
second is that, while the respondent’s offending was serious when compared
against other types of offending involving children,
the offending could not be
said to involve ‘criminality of the highest order’.
third point relied upon by the respondent is that the primary purpose of Crown
appeals — to lay down principles for the
governance and guidance of courts
having the duty of sentencing convicted persons — can be achieved in this
a very significant extent’ by a statement from this Court
that the sentences imposed at first instance ‘were wrong and
why they were
our opinion, the appellant has established that this is not a matter where the
residual discretion ought to be invoked.
youth, and the respondent’s reform are all relevant considerations. Those
considerations were, however, already reflected
in the modest individual
sentences imposed in this case. They will also be reflected in the new orders
for cumulation, as well as
in the new total effective sentence and
non‑parole period. The criminality in this case — especially in
respect of charge
4 — was either of ‘the highest order’
or at least approached this description. It is in the interests of justice
the appeal be allowed, that the respondent be re‑sentenced and that he be
required to undergo his just and appropriate
punishment.
Re-sentence
would therefore allow the appellant’s appeal, set aside the orders imposed
in the County Court in respect of the charges
on the indictment, and
re‑sentence the respondent on those charges as follows:
on Indictment
penetration of a child under the age of 16
penetration of a child under the age of 16
penetration of a child under the age of 16
penetration of a child under the age of 12
Sexual assault
of a child under the age of 16 (course of conduct charge)
Sexual assault
of a child under the age of 16
Sexual assault
of a child under the age of 16 (rolled up charge)
penetration of a child under the age of 16
Encouraging a
child under the age of 16 to engage in or be involved in sexual
Effective Sentence:
Pre-sentence
Detention Declared:
Section 6AAA
Total Effective
Sentence 11 years
Parole-Period 8 years
Relevant Orders:
Sentencing Act 1991
, the offender is sentenced as a
serious sexual offender in respect of charges 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9.
Sex Offenders Registration Act 2004
, the length of the
reporting period is life.
Contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
Contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
Contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
Contrary to
Crimes Act 1958
Contrary to
Control of Weapons Act 1990
DPP v Dillon (a pseudonym)
[2024] VCC 1070
, [90] (‘Reasons’).
Reasons, [28]–[44].
Reasons, [44].
Reasons, [30], [36].
Reasons, [31].
Reasons, [32].
Reasons, [33].
Reasons, [34].
Reasons, [36].
[2005] VSCA
271 (Buchanan
JA with Eames and Nettle JJA agreeing).
Reasons, [62].
Reasons, [68];
(2007) 16 VR 269
[2007] VSCA 102 (Maxwell
P, Buchanan and
Vincent JJA). Limb 1 relates to moral culpability.
Reasons, [54].
Reasons, [68].
Reasons, [69].
Reasons, [90].
Reasons, [70].
Reasons, [71], [90].
Reasons, [72].
Reasons, [73].
Reasons, [92].
Reasons, [103]. The
applicable standard sentences were as follows: 10 years’ imprisonment
for sexual penetration of a child
under the age of 12 (charge 4);
6 years’ imprisonment for sexual penetration of a child under the age
of 16 (charges 1, 2,
3 and 8); and 4 years’ imprisonment
for sexual assault of a child under the age of 16 (charges 5, 6
Nguyen v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 184
, [40] (Priest JA and Kidd AJA) (citations omitted).
Jenkins v The
[2021] VSCA 65
, [32]–[33] (Priest and Niall JJA).
[2008] VSCA
, [77] (Nettle and Weinberg JJA and Hargrave AJA);
Barnard v The
[2022] VSCA 42
, [10] (Priest and T Forrest JJA).
R v O’Rourke
[1997] 1 VR 246
, 252 (Winneke P, Brooking and Callaway JJA). See also Arie
Fox & Frieberg’s Sentencing: State and Federal Law in
(Lawbook Co, 3
ed, 2014) [13.60].
[2013] NSWCCA 195
A Crim R 324
, 339, [80] (Beazley P, Johnson and RA Hulme JJ);
[2013] NSWCCA 195
(2006) 167 A Crim R 159, 164–5, [18]
(Spigelman CJ, Whealy and Howie JJ);
[2006] NSWCCA 381.
[1998] 1 VR 664
, 676 (Ormiston JA, Winneke P agreeing at 665,
Hedigan AJA agreeing at 690) (emphasis added).
Sentencing Act
(definition of ‘serious sexual offender’), (3) (definition of
‘serious offender’). A ‘serious sexual
means an offender ‘who has been convicted of 2 or more sexual offences for
each of which he or she has been
sentenced to a term of imprisonment or
detention in a youth justice centre’.
RH McL v The Queen
(2000) 203 CLR 452
, 477, [76] (McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ);
[2002] HCA 46
DPP v Hopson (a pseudonym)
[2016] VSCA 303
, [59] (Redlich
and Whelan JJA and Beale AJA).
Gordon (a pseudonym) v
[2013] VSCA 343
, [74] (Redlich JA).
Zhao v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 267
, [94] (McLeish, Niall and Weinberg JJA) (emphasis added),
referring at [93] to
(a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2013] VSCA
, [74] (Redlich JA) and
DPP v Hopson (a pseudonym)
[2016] VSCA
, [50] (Redlich and Whelan JJA and Beale AJA).
Flynn (a pseudonym) v
[2020] VSCA 173
, [115] (Niall, T Forrest and
Weinberg JJA) (emphasis added), citing
Sentencing Act 1991
Nguyen v The Queen
[2016] HCA 17
(2016) 256 CLR 656
, 677, [64] (Gageler, Nettle and Gordon JJ) (emphasis
added) (citations omitted);
[2016] HCA 17.
DPP v Karazisis
[2010] VSCA 350
(2010) 31 VR 634
, 662–3, [127] (Ashley, Redlich and Weinberg JJA,
Warren CJ and Maxwell P agreeing at 637 [1]) (citations omitted);
[2010] VSCA 350.
Nguyen v The Queen
[2016] HCA 17
(2016) 256 CLR 656
, 677, [64] (Gageler, Nettle and Gordon JJ);
DPP v Sutcliffe (a
[2024] VSCA 63
, [56] (Boyce, Whelan and T Forrest JJA).
R v Vuadreu
, [36] (Ashley and Weinberg JJA).
Reasons, [69] (emphasis
Reasons, [68] (emphasis
Reasons, [44].
Reasons, [73].
Reasons, [72].
Reasons, [72].
Veen v The Queen [No
(1988) 164 CLR 465, 476–7 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson and
Toohey JJ);
[1988] HCA 14.
DPP v Browne
[2023] VSCA 13
103 MVR 226
, 241, [66] (Kyrou, T Forrest and Kennedy JJA);
[2023] VSCA
DPP v Ristic
, [71] (Beach, Kennedy and Boyce JJA) (citations omitted).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (817 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter