URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCC/2025/1601.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Halley v Pinelis [2025] VCC 1601 (7 November 2025)
IN THE COUNTY COURT
OF VICTORIA
LAW DIVISION
Not Restricted
Suitable for Publication
Case No. CI-24-05929
JOEL HALLEY
TALI PINELIS
JUDICIAL REGISTRAR LYNCH
DATE OF HEARING
20 and 21 October 2025
DATE OF RULING
7 November 2025
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
Halley v Pinelis
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] VCC 1601
APPEARANCES
For the Plaintiff
The Plaintiff appeared in person
For the Defendant
Mr M Reardon
Moray & Agnew
Moray & Agnew
HIS HONOUR:
Background:
2 August 2023, the plaintiff was the driver of a motor vehicle which was
involved in a transport accident with the at-fault defendant.
defendant’s insurer admitted liability and after deeming that the
plaintiff’s vehicle was uneconomical to repair,
paid the plaintiff an
amount of $9,990, being the purported pre-accident market value of the
plaintiff contends that the amount so assessed by the defendant’s insurer
understated the value of his vehicle and that
a greater amount should have been
paid to him.
plaintiff initially commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court of Victoria and
following orders from that Court on 13 September
2024, the matter was
transferred to the County Court.
orders of her Honour Judge Tran of this Court on 23 April 2025, a redacted
amended statement of claim was deemed filed in the proceeding
and formed the
basis of the plaintiff’s claim before the Court. The plaintiff seeks
damages, interest, and costs.
The motor vehicle
plaintiff’s motor vehicle was a base variant Audi TT Mk1 2000, registered
number ULB 289. The 2-wheel drive, 5-speed manual
vehicle featured a 1.8 litre
engine and was purchased by the plaintiff in June 2012 for $12,990. Following
his purchase of the vehicle,
in addition to regular servicing, the plaintiff had
the vehicle resprayed, the engine reworked, the perforated leather interior and
boot trim updated, and an iPad-style Pioneer stereo system with Bluetooth and a
high-definition reverse camera fitted. At the time
of the accident, the vehicle
had travelled 345,540 kilometres.
The evidence:
the plaintiff nor the defendant gave evidence. The only witnesses called to
give evidence during the trial were the experts
engaged by the parties. For the
plaintiff, Mr Brian Cowan, and for the defendant, Mr Graeme Cuthbert and Mr
Brett Keating. Reports
from each of these experts were tendered into evidence.
The plaintiff also tendered an exhibit bundle. As the vehicle was not available
for inspection, desktop assessments of the pre-accident market value of the
vehicle were performed by all three experts.
Cowan is based in New South Wales and gave his evidence via audiovisual link.
Mr Cowan informed the Court he is a panel beater
by trade and he ran panel
beating businesses from 2003 until 2021. Mr Cowan informed the Court he
previously held a wholesale motor
trader’s licence, but that this licence
had not been renewed since 2007. Mr Cowan informed the Court he had held
Board-level
positions with the Motor Traders’ Association of NSW.
Cowan prepared a report dated 6 March 2025, which was tendered into evidence by
the plaintiff.
Cowan informed the Court he was engaged by the plaintiff to address three
questions, namely:
(a) What was the pre-accident value of the plaintiff's vehicle at the time of
the collision?
(b) What was the likely salvage value of the plaintiff's vehicle at the time of
the collision?
(c) Was it economical to repair the plaintiff's vehicle following the collision?
Cowan’s expert opinion in relation to each of the matters put to him by
the plaintiff was as follows:
(a) $22,500 to $24,500;
(b) $750; and
(c) repairs “would” exceed $25,000 (in evidence, Mr Cowan replaced
the word “would”, with “could”).
Cowan informed the Court that, in reaching his conclusion as to the pre-accident
market value of the plaintiff’s vehicle,
he relied upon a quotation the
plaintiff had provided to him from Shannons Insurance dated 30 January 2025, in
which an agreed value
of $17,500 had been applied to the plaintiff’s
vehicle. This quotation was tendered into evidence by the plaintiff as part
a larger exhibit bundle.
Cowan informed the Court that, as Shannons Insurance holds a financial and
insurance licence, he was satisfied the Agreed Value
Quotation of $17,500 was an
acceptable valuation of the plaintiff’s vehicle. Further, Mr Cowan
informed the Court that, while
he did undertake a search on the online
“Car Sales” website, he was unable to find a comparative vehicle.
Considering
the upgrades made to the vehicle by the plaintiff following purchase
by him, Mr Cowan gave a range of the pre-accident market value
plaintiff’s vehicle to be between $22,500 and $24,500.
paragraph 18 of his report under the heading “Conclusion”, Mr Cowan
“Joel Halley has invested approximately $30,000
purchasing and improving Audi TT. He was not at fault in accident that occurred
on 02/08/2023 and he is being penalised with an unfair settlement of $9900. Joel
should be able to negotiate a fair and reasonable
settlement with Auto and
General Insurance that reflects his investment.”
cross-examination by counsel for the defendant, Mr Cowan conceded that:
(a) he had no recent experience in vehicle sales, having not held a wholesale
motor car trader’s licence since 2007;
(b) time constraints in completing the report within a three-day period meant
that he was only able to undertake a limited amount
of research, and that he
would usually require twenty-one days to complete a report;
(c) the odometer reading of a vehicle can influence its market value, but he had
overlooked that the odometer reading of the plaintiff’s
vehicle was
345,540 kilometres at the time of the collision;
(d) the only comparable vehicle found on his search of the Car Sales website was
an Audi TT Quattro (all-wheel drive) variant, which
was not the base variant
owned by the plaintiff, and the base variant was less sought after than the
Quattro variant;
(e) he relied on the Shannons Insurance Agreed Value Quotation from 30 January
2025, notwithstanding he was engaged to provide a
market value of the vehicle as
of 2 August 2023;
(f) he relied on the Shannons Insurance Agreed Value Quotation from 30 January
2025, notwithstanding the quotation was founded on
an assumption that the
plaintiff had not made any claim or accident within five years;
(g) he relied on the Shannons Insurance Agreed Value Quotation from 30 January
2025, notwithstanding the quotation was founded on
the vehicle being undamaged
and in good condition;
(h) he accepted the opinion that what he placed weight on, being the Agreed
Value Quotation from Shannons Insurance dated 30 January
2025, was based on
inaccurate information;
(i) the salvage value price of $1,000.00 obtained by Mr Keating, the expert
engaged by the defendant, was fair and reasonable;
(j) he agreed with the opinion expressed by Mr Cuthbert, the expert engaged by
the defendant, that the plaintiff’s vehicle
has not reached the threshold
for collectability and the model does not achieve very high resale prices;
(k) he agreed with the opinion expressed by Mr Cuthbert that, even if the
plaintiff’s model vehicle was to become collectible,
the plaintiff’s
own vehicle, due to its very high kilometres, is never going to attain the same
value as comparison vehicles
with fewer kilometres travelled;
(l) he agreed with the opinion expressed by Mr Cuthbert that the cost of the
respray and re-trim undertaken by the plaintiff would
not return value spent,
even on a low-kilometre vehicle, and that such upgrades do not have the same
value-add on a vehicle which
has travelled more than 345,000 kilometres;
(m) his reference in paragraph 18 of his report to amounts invested into the
vehicle by the plaintiff is not a relevant consideration
to determining the
pre-accident market value of a vehicle;
(n) his reference in paragraph 18 of his report to the plaintiff not being at
fault for the accident is not a relevant consideration
to determine the
pre-accident market value of a vehicle;
(o) his reference in paragraph 18 of his report to the plaintiff being penalised
with an unfair settlement is not a relevant consideration
to determine the
pre-accident market value of a vehicle;
(p) his reference in paragraph 18 of his report that, the plaintiff should be
able to negotiate a fair and reasonable settlement
with Auto and General
Insurance which reflects his investment, is not a relevant consideration to
determine the pre-accident market
value of a vehicle;
(q) after being challenged by counsel for the defendant that his comments in
paragraph 18 could be perceived as being advocacy and
were contrary to the
expert witness Code of Conduct, he now wished to reverse his comments identified
in that paragraph.
I found Mr Cowan to be a witness of truth, I find that the foundations of his
expressed opinions to be flawed, such that I do
not give his opinions any weight
in reaching my decision.
Mr Graeme Cuthbert
Cuthbert is an automotive consultant who completed a motor mechanic
apprenticeship and technicians certificate in the 1960s and
then owned a
mechanical and panel workshop until about 2001. He has continuously held a
motor car trader’s licence since the
late 1960s. Since 2001, Mr Cuthbert
has owned and operated an automotive consultant business, which includes
providing motor vehicle
valuations, motor vehicle memorabilia valuations and
motor vehicle insurance investigations.
Cuthbert prepared two expert reports dated 13 March 2025 and 19 August 2025
respectively. Both reports were tendered by the defendant.
Cuthbert gave evidence that, in his expert opinion:
(a) after conducting extensive online searches for comparable vehicles, the
pre-accident market value of the plaintiff’s vehicle
was $11,068.90, made
up of $10,580.00 for the vehicle, plus stamp duty and transfer fees of $488.90.
From this amount of $11,068.90
is to be deducted the salvage fee of the
(b) his assessment considered the body respray, the reworking of the engine, the
upgrading of the interior trim, and the stereo system
upgrade with Bluetooth and
the reversing camera, but that none of these improvements have led to any real
gain in market value;
(c) his market appraisals revealed that comparative vehicles had travelled
considerably lower kilometres than the plaintiff’s
(d) the live market research data revealed that the Quattro variant attracts
higher sales prices than the base variant owned by the
(e) he has personally assisted a client with trying to sell a 2005 Audi TT base
variant and the best price offered was $7,500.00.
This vehicle had travelled
67,500 kilometres;
(f) the plaintiff’s base model variant is not considered an emerging
(g) the Shannons Insurance Agreed Value Quotation dated 30 January 2025 had no
impact on his assessment of the pre-accident value
of the plaintiff’s
(h) the base model variant owned by the plaintiff was not an appreciating
(i) rarely do you see an increase in the value of a vehicle when the work is
undertaken in a vehicle that is not highly sought after;
(j) the Cowan report did not cause him to change his opinion or assessment of
the pre-accident market value of the vehicle.
Mr Brett Keating
Keating is a qualified panel beater by trade and has a Certificate IV in motor
vehicle assessing. He has been a motor vehicle
assessor for the last six years.
He is now based in Queensland, having previously resided in Victoria. His
evidence was given by
audiovisual link.
becoming a vehicle assessor, Mr Keating was the area manager and part owner in
several panel beating businesses. His role
was to oversee the running of the
business across five sites and involved all facets of the business.
Keating has provided two expert reports dated 13 March 2025 and 22 August 2025
respectively. Both reports were tendered by the
Keating gave evidence that, in his expert opinion:
(a) the plaintiff’s vehicle was in average condition based on the photos
that he was provided;
(b) he sourced three salvage values for the vehicle, namely, $755.00; $603.00
and $1,100.00;
(c) he conducted a live-market search of comparable vehicles to the
plaintiff’s vehicle, and it revealed seven vehicles for
comparison;
(d) when comparing the advertised prices of the seven vehicles to that of the
plaintiff’s vehicle, he applied the industry
standard of allowing for an
adjustment of $100.00 (up or down) for every 10,000-kilometre differential;
(e) the plaintiff’s vehicle had an estimated pre-accident market value of
$7,146.00, being the average of the adjusted prices
(considering the variations
in the kilometres) of the seven vehicles from the live-market search;
(f) when comparing odometer readings of vehicles, the vehicle with the lower
odometer reading will generally be worth more money
than the vehicle with a
higher odometer reading;
(g) that the Shannons Insurance Quote for Agreed Value obtained by the plaintiff
on 30 January 2025 does not constitute the pre-accident
market value of the
plaintiff’s vehicle;
(h) the additions made to the vehicle by the plaintiff since purchase have not
added to the pre-accident market value of the vehicle;
(i) his opinions and conclusions are not changed by the report of Mr Cowan.
resolution of the dispute in this proceeding involved an assessment of the
expert evidence.
mentioned, the plaintiff contended that the defendant under-assessed the
pre-accident market value of his vehicle. In support
of that contention, he
relied on the evidence from Mr Cowan.
have considered the totality of the evidence before me, together with the
submissions made by both parties.
the reasons expressed, I prefer the expert evidence of Mr Cuthbert and Mr
Keating to that of Mr Cowan.
Cowan made several concessions during his oral evidence. He accepted there were
flaws in the assumptions and methods he set out
in his written report. The
effect of the cross-examination of Mr Cowan was to raise a very real doubt as to
the method and accuracy
of his assessment of the pre-accident value of the
plaintiff’s vehicle.
the other hand, Mr Cuthbert and Mr Keating presented as credible witnesses.
They each provided a more thorough analysis of the
issues in dispute between the
parties and considered a broader range of comparable vehicles to that undertaken
by Mr Cowan.
Accordingly,
I am satisfied that the combined experience and expertise of Mr Cuthbert and Mr
Keating outweighs that of Mr Cowan.
I consider they gave cogent evidence for a
conclusion that the insurer’s pre-accident market value of the
plaintiff’s
$9,900 was fair and reasonable.
result in this case turns on which body of expert evidence is accepted. As
should be clear, I do not accept Mr Cowan’s
written opinion and I do not
attach much weight to his oral evidence. I prefer the expert evidence relied on
by the defendant.
therefore find, on the balance of probabilities, that the defendant’s
assessment of the pre-accident market value of the plaintiff’s
$9,990.00 to be a fair and reasonable evaluation.
made that finding, I will now hear from the parties with respect to the
appropriate form of orders, including for costs, to
finalise the
proceeding.
direct that the defendant is to provide the plaintiff with a memorandum of the
proposed orders sought by it considering the conclusions
I have expressed. If
the parties cannot agree on orders, then, at the request of either party, I will
list the proceeding for a
directions hearing to resolve any outstanding
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (216 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter