URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2025/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:43:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ryan's Family Hotel Pty Ltd at Ryans Hotel [2025] VicLiqComm 4; (13 June 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision
In the matter of an inquiry into
whether there are grounds to take disciplinary action against Ryans Family Hotel
Pty Ltd (under administration),
as the then licensee of premises trading as
Ryan’s Hotel located at 171 Franklin Street, Traralgon under late night
licence no. 31914888, and if those grounds exist, whether to take
disciplinary action under
Liquor Control Reform
Commission:
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair
Mr Steven Brnovic, Commissioner
Ms Susan Timbs, Commissioner
Date of Hearing:
17 December 2024
Date of Decision:
13 June 2025
Date of Reasons:
13 June 2025
Appearances:
Mr Brayden McGregor of Ampt & Partners, lawyer for Mackay Goodwin, the
appointed administrators on behalf of Ryans Family Hotel
Pty Ltd (under
administration) and for Mr George Zurcas, director of Ryans Family Hotel Pty Ltd
(under administration)
Mr Robert Bottazzi, manager and consultant for Ryans Family Hotel Pty Ltd
(under administration)
Acting Inspector Liam Maher on behalf of Liquor Inspector Andrew Miles
(together, Victoria Police)
Mr Sam Stafford of Counsel, Counsel Assisting the Commission (instructed by
Mr Michael Majewski, Senior Solicitor)
The Commission has determined that there are grounds for disciplinary
action in accordance with
section 93(1)
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
and has decided to:
impose a fine of
$15,000 against Ryans Family Hotel Pty Ltd (under administration), to be paid
within one month of the date of this
related person, Mr Robert Bottazzi under
section 93D
Liquor Control
Reform Act 1998
for a period of 3 months from the date of this decision from
(a) holding a licence or BYO permit;
(b) being a director in any body corporate that holds a licence or BYO
(c) being a partner in any partnership that holds a licence or BYO permit;
(d) having a beneficial interest (whether directly or indirectly) in the shares
of any body corporate that holds a licence or BYO
permit; and
(e) in any way (whether directly or indirectly) taking part in, or being
concerned in, the management of any licensed premises or
any body corporate that
holds a licence or BYO permit or any licensed club; and
related person, Mr George Zurcas under
section 93D
Liquor Control
from the date of this decision until 30 June 2026 from
(a) holding a licence or BYO permit;
(b) being a director in any body corporate that holds a licence or BYO
(c) being a partner in any partnership that holds a licence or BYO permit;
(d) having a beneficial interest (whether directly or indirectly) in the shares
of any body corporate that holds a licence or BYO
(e) in any way (whether directly or indirectly) taking part in, or being
concerned in, the management of any licensed premises or
any body corporate that
holds a licence or BYO permit or any licensed club; and
(f) being employed by any licensed club or any person that holds a licence or
BYO permit.
James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair
Introduction
Family Hotel Pty Ltd (under administration) (
Ryans or Licensee
liquor licence to operate premises known as Ryan’s Hotel in Traralgon,
Victoria. Victoria Police submitted to the Commission
35 separate incidents that
they had identified over a period of approximately 1.5 years concerning the
operation of Ryan’s
Hotel and requested the Commission to conduct an
inquiry into it.
Inquiry has been protracted. Since its commencement it has been necessary for
the Commission to hold five directions hearings
and give further directions
outside those hearings to progress the matter. This has arisen from various
matters including the numerous
allegations, changes in the status and identity
of licensees, variations in the relevant license, changes of legal
representation
and requests for adjournments due to the unavailability of
a directions hearing on 24 June 2024, and prior to the final hearing, the
Licensee, two related persons and Victoria Police presented
to the Commission an
undated document titled ‘Settlement Agreement’ comprising two
relevant parts being the ‘Statement
of Agreed Facts’ and
‘Terms of Settlement Subject to the Commission’ [sic]
Approval’. For convenience, this
latter part will be referred to as the
Proposed Outcome
attempts to facilitate the efficient resolution of the subject matter of an
inquiry are generally in the public interest and
are to be encouraged and
commended. When considering such proposals, the Commission must also consider
its statutory duty and the
public interest in a process that best achieves its
statutory objectives. While not bound by it, the Commission has had careful
to the fact and the substance of the Proposed Outcome.
this case it is appropriate in all the circumstances for the Commission to
depart from the Proposed Outcome. In summary the Commission:
(a) is satisfied there are grounds to take disciplinary action and exercises its
discretion to do so; and
(b) has departed from the Proposed Outcome in a number of respects, including by
finding it appropriate to disqualify both related
persons of the Licensee for
the periods stated.
Background to the Inquiry
The Inquiry into Ryans
December 2023, the Commission commenced an inquiry into whether there were
grounds to take disciplinary action against Ryans (as
a licensee under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
following a request made
by a licensing inspector (
Victoria Police
) pursuant to section
91(1)(b)(ii).
Police submitted that between November 2021 and February 2023 (
), Ryans operated the Premises in a manner that consistently breached
the conditions of its licence. The alleged breaches involved
operational failures, including issues with CCTV equipment, noise pollution, and
overall inadequate management with respect
to patrons, detrimentally impacting
the amenity of the surrounding area, and otherwise contributing to
alcohol-related harm.
also referred to as the Licensee, is a corporate entity established in January
2021 before being placed into voluntary administration
in September 2024. During
the relevant period, it was the holder of late night (general) licence no.
) with respect to premises located at 171 Franklin
Street, Traralgon (
the relevant period, the sole director of Ryans was Mr George Zurcas. Mr Robert
Bottazzi was a manager and/or a consultant
for Ryans during the relevant period.
Both Mr Zurcas and Mr Bottazzi have had a long history in the hospitality
industry, over several
Relevant Related Persons
Commission’s task under section 91 is to first determine whether there are
any grounds for disciplinary action against Ryans
as defined under section
90(1). If so, the Commission must decide whether to take disciplinary action
and, if so, what disciplinary
action is to be taken against the Licensee and/or
related person(s).
Police submitted that Mr Zurcas and Mr Bottazzi were related persons of Ryans as
defined under section 93D(5) but submitted
that a Ms Tina Doyle was not a
related person. It was further submitted that it was under Mr Zurcas’s and
Mr Bottazzi’s
direction and control that the Premises operated in a manner
which repeatedly breached the conditions of the Licence.
detailed reasons that will follow, the Commission is satisfied that both Mr
Zurcas and Mr Bottazzi are related persons of Ryans
under section 93D(5) of the
Commission is not satisfied that Ms Doyle is a related person. It is convenient
to deal with those reasons briefly here.
Doyle was described as a “general manager” of the
For this reason, the
Commission informed Ms Doyle of the disciplinary action inquiry and requested
that she make submissions as to
her involvement with the Premises.
Police submitted that, unlike Mr Zurcas or Mr Bottazzi, Ms Doyle did not have
the same level of responsibility in relation
to the described liquor licence
On that basis,
notwithstanding Ms Doyle’s title as a “manager” at the
Premises, Victoria Police did not submit
that there were grounds for
disciplinary action against her.
Doyle submitted that she was involved as a part-time bar manager and otherwise
not involved in the day-to-day running of the
Commission considered that there was very limited evidence before it as to what
role, if any, Ms Doyle played in any of the described
breaches or as to her
involvement with the Premises in general. Accordingly, the Commission did not
consider that it could be satisfied
that Ms Doyle was a related person for the
purpose section 93D(5).
The Licensed Premises
Up to and including relevant period
Licensee was granted the Licence for the Premises on 28 May 2021.
Premises is located within the CBD of Traralgon. During the relevant period
(between November 2021 and February 2023) the Premises
contained a dancefloor,
sports bar, bistro and outdoor beer garden.
Police described the Premises as “a multi-level occupancy over two floors
that operates as a nightclub in the heart
of Traralgon’s CBD entertainment
district providing recorded amplified musical entertainment other than
background music and
liquor to patrons under the Licence relevantly until either
3am or 4am”.
the relevant period, the Licence permitted the supply of liquor in accordance
with the following conditions:
This licence is a late night (general) licence and authorises the licensee
to supply liquor on the licensed premises for consumption
on and off the
licensed premises during the trading hours specified below.
The licensee shall not cause or permit undue detriment to the amenity of
the area to arise out of or in connection with the use of
the premises to which
the licence relates during or immediately after the trading hours authorised
under this licence.
When live or recorded amplified music other than background music is
The licensee shall install and maintain a surveillance recording system
able to clearly identify individuals, which shows time and
date and provides
continuous images of all entrances and exits, bars and entertainment/dance floor
areas. The surveillance recording
system must operate from 30 minutes before the
start of the entertainment being provided, until 30 minutes after closure. A
of the recorded images must be available upon request for immediate viewing
or removal by the Victoria Police, or a person authorised
in writing by the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation, or otherwise retained
for at least one month.
Crowd controllers, licensed under the
Private Security Act 2004
, are to be
employed at a ratio of 2 crowd controllers for the first 100 patrons and 1 crowd
controller for each additional 100 patrons
or part thereof. One crowd controller
is to be present outside the premises to monitor patrons arriving at and
departing from the
premises until 3 a.m. After 3 a.m., one crowd controller is
to be present outside the premises whenever a patron departs from the
and to remain outside the premises for a period of 15 minutes after the patron
has left the vicinity of the premises. Crowd
controllers are to be present from
30 minutes before the start of the entertainment being provided, until 30
minutes after closure.
MAXIMUM CAPACITIES
First Floor (160 patrons), Ground Floor (330 patrons) Overall Maximum (490
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
An RSA monitor (being a person in a senior management role at the hotel)
is to be present on the premises when live or recorded music
above background is
provided after 10pm on Friday and Saturday.
No patron is to enter or re-enter the premises after 1.30am on any given
TRADING HOURS
FOR CONSUMPTION OFF THE LICENSED PREMISES –
Sunday Between 10am and 11pm
Good Friday & ANZAC Day Between 12 noon and 11pm
On any other day Between 7am and 11pm
FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE LICENSED PREMISES –
Sunday Between 10am and 4am the following morning except for the period
between 3am and 12 noon on ANZAC Day
Good Friday & ANZAC Day Between 12 noon and 4am the following
On any other day Between 7am and 4am the following
morning except for the period between 3am and 12 noon on
Current status
around July 2023, the Premises ceased operating as a nightclub. In addition,
physical alterations were made to the Premises and
it commenced trading as a
greek restaurant with an upstairs function
around September 2024, Richard Lawrence and Mitchell Ball (both of Mackay
Goodwin) were appointed voluntary administrators to the
Licensee company
(collectively,
the Administrators
). The Administrators applied to the
Commission to reduce the maximum number of patrons from 490 to 250, and to
reduce the end time
trading hours for consumption on the licensed premises from
3am or 4am to 1am. As a result of the change of the trading hours to
than 1am, the category of the Licence changed from a ‘late night (general)
licence’ to a ‘general licence’.
changes were granted by a delegate of the Commission on 18 December 2024.
Licensee company sold the business of the Premises to 4 Pints Hospitality Group
(ACN: 681 976 358) (
The business of the
Premises was purchased in March 2025 and the Licence was transferred on an
uncontested basis.
transfer of Licence application was approved by a delegate of the Commission on
6 March 2025 and included licence conditions (without
objection),
(a) restricted the playing of live or recorded music to not above background
music level;
(b) reduced the end time trading hours for consumption on the licensed premises
to 1am (as opposed to 3am or 4am under the previous
conditions of the Licence);
(c) reduced the maximum patron capacity from 490 to 250.
effect of such conditions precluded the offering of late-night entertainment or
functioning as a nightlife venue and overall changed
the scale and nature of the
Grounds for disciplinary action
Legal framework and principles
objects of the LCR Act are set out in section 4(1). The objects that are
relevant to this inquiry are:
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by–
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor; and
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community.
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries [...]
4(2) requires that the Commission, in the conduct of an inquiry, exercise its
powers “with due regard to harm minimisation
and the risks associated with
the misuse and abuse of alcohol”.
and their related persons have obligations under the LCR Act with respect to the
supply and consumption of liquor, particularly
with respect to not unreasonably
impacting on the amenity of the local area, through their licensed activities.
The Commission can
take disciplinary action against a licensee and its related
persons in accordance with the framework set out Division 1 of Part 6
Act and having regard to the objects of that Act, particularly harm
minimisation.
90(1) defines “grounds for disciplinary action” in relation to a
licensee or permittee including:
(a) that the licensee or permittee has contravened a provision of this Act, the
regulations, the licence or BYO permit or a condition
of the licence or BYO
permit (as the case may be);
(o) that the licensee or permittee has conducted the business under the licence
or BYO permit, or allowed it to be conducted, in
a manner that detracts from or
is detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the licensed premises are
(q) that the licensee or permittee is otherwise not a suitable person to
hold a licence or BYO permit.
are some circumstances under the LCR Act where a person is considered as not
suitable to hold a licence,
these circumstances are not exhaustive. Therefore, it is necessary to consider
the concept of suitability in the context of the
legislation.
was recognised in
Buzzo Holdings Pty Ltd
Anor v Loison
that the purpose of Division 1 of Part 6 of the LCR Act is “the
protection of the public, the upholding of industry standards,
maintenance of public confidence in the liquor
“for the punishment of particular individuals or
corporations”.
the Commission considers that the protection of the public and the object of
harm minimisation are paramount. Therefore,
in assessing the issue of
suitability, the Commission “must look at what is in accordance with the
public interest which embrace
matters, amongst others, of standards of human
conduct acknowledged to be necessary for the good order and well-being of the
and “take into account that the Act [...] was designed to
protect the interest of the community [...] and the issue of protection
public remains an important
consideration”.
The relevant allegations, particulars and facts
of the proposal to conduct an inquiry was given to the Licensee and other
interested parties in accordance with sections 92
and 92A of the LCR
24 June 2024, the Commission received the Terms of Settlement comprising a
Statement of Agreed Facts and the Proposed Outcome,
jointly signed by Mr Zurcas
(on behalf of himself and Ryans), Mr Bottazzi, and Acting Senior Sergeant Alison
Morris on behalf of
Victoria Police.
Statement of Agreed Facts confirmed the signatories’ agreement that
Ryans’ conduct between November 2021 and February
2023 – being the
relevant period – gave rise to the following grounds for disciplinary
action for the purpose of section
(a) the licensee has contravened a provision of the LCR Act, its regulations,
the licence or a condition of the Licence (as the case
(b) the licensee has conducted the business under the licence, or allowed it to
be conducted, in a manner that detracts from or is
detrimental to the amenity of
the area in which the premises is
(c) the licensee is otherwise not a suitable person to hold a
Specifically,
Victoria Police, Ryans, Mr Zurcas, and Mr Bottazzi agreed that the scope of such
conduct was as described in the particulars
below (and numbered 1, 4, 7, 8, 9,
10, 13, 15, 18, 19, 20, 23, 32, and 33 in the Victoria Police materials)
Agreed Particulars
Summary of Allegation
21 November 2021
At approximately 2:04am, Victoria Police members attended the Premises.
During the inspection, Victoria Police members spoke with
Mr Zurcas “and
managers Tina Doyle and Robert Bottazzi”, and observed that:
the operation of
the CCTV equipment was not in accordance with the conditions of the Licence
while liquor was being supplied, in that
the timestamp on the CCTV footage was
out of sync with the current time by approximately 2 hours; and
rubbish was
strewn around the immediate exterior of the Premises impacting on the amenity of
the area, in breach of the conditions
of the Licence.
5 December 2021
At approximately 12:44am, Victoria Police members attended the Premises.
During the inspection, Victoria Police members spoke with
Mr Zurcas, and
“managers Tina Doyle and Robert Bottazzi were also present”.
Victoria Police members observed that:
the operation of
the CCTV equipment was not in accordance with the conditions of the Licence
while liquor was being supplied, in that
two CCTV cameras were obstructed,
affecting the coverage and the quality of the CCTV footage; and
rubbish was
strewn around the immediate exterior of the Premises impacting on the amenity of
the area, in breach of the conditions
of the Licence. This included broken glass
that injured a patron.
Following subsequent investigations,
Victoria Police members also observed that:
controller working at the Premises was unlicensed, in breach of the conditions
of the Licence; and
CCTV footage
provided by Mr Zurcas following the inspections was not in accordance with the
conditions of the Licence, in that it
only went back 14 days.
5 January 2022
At approximately 3:00pm, a liquor inspector observed that the Responsible
Service of Alcohol (RSA) Register did not contain the RSA
certificate for Mr
Zurcas, contrary to the requirements of the LCR
15 January 2022
At approximately 1:00am, Victoria Police received a noise complaint from a
resident who was impacted by loud music emanating from
the Premises.
30 January 2022
Liquor Inspectors investigated a complaint regarding several intoxicated
patrons at the Premises. Based on their investigation, the
Liquor Inspectors
observed that:
controllers failed to respond to patrons who were in various states of
intoxication; and
the CCTV footage
obtained showed that the footage from the external beer-garden area was of poor
quality, not able to clearly identify
individuals, in breach of the conditions
of the Licence.
5 February 2022
An intoxicated female patron was struck on the head with a glass bottle by
another female patron. The attack occurred at the beer
garden of the Premises.
Staff noticed the victim's bloodied face as she left the premises on her own
without any offer of assistance.
A short time later, the victim was located by
Victoria Police members at a road intersection, still in an intoxicated state
and bleeding
from her head wound. The victim was conveyed to Latrobe Regional
Hospital for medical treatment. Following multiple requests by Victoria
Ryans failed to provide CCTV footage in breach of the conditions of the
26 February 2022
On 26 February 2022, at approximately 1:05am Victoria Police members
attended the Premises and “spoke with manager in charge
Bottazzi”. Victoria Police members observed that:
a female patron
was passed out in the middle cubicle in the female toilets; and
at approximately
1:16am, a fight broke out outside the Premises involving several intoxicated
patrons, and crowd controllers were
slow in responding to the incident and
managing patrons.
Victoria Police subsequently requested CCTV
footage by email request to Mr Bottazzi. However, the requested CCTV footage was
not provided.
As a result, Ryans contravened the conditions of the
13 March 2022
Victoria Police received a noise complaint from a resident who was impacted
by loud music emanating from the Premises. The resident
was unable to sleep due
to very loud noise pollution and attempted to contact Ryans to no avail. At the
time the Premises was operating
as a nightclub with a DJ platform set up in an
external marquee area and Ryans allowed musical entertainment to be provided to
detriment of the area and without any regard for residents.
16 April 2022
Residents living nearby the Premises were disturbed and kept awake unable
to sleep by loud musical entertainment emanating from the
Premises. At the time,
the Premises was operating as a nightclub with a DJ platform set up in an
external marquee area and Ryans
allowed musical entertainment to be provided to
the detriment of the area and without any regard for residents or their quality
17 April 2022
Residents living nearby the Premises were disturbed and kept awake unable
to sleep by loud musical entertainment emanating from the
Premises. A resident
experienced music so intense and loud that the windows of her home were
vibrating. At the time the Premises
was operating as a nightclub with a DJ
platform set up in an external marquee area and Ryans allowed musical
entertainment to be
provided to the detriment of the area and without any regard
for residents or their quality of life.
November 2021 –
Residents living nearby the Premises have been constantly disturbed and
kept awake unable to sleep due to loud musical entertainment
emanating from the
Premises. Throughout this time, and in the knowledge of multiple ongoing noise
pollution complaints, Ryans has
continued to allow musical entertainment to be
provided to the detriment of the area and without any regard for the impact the
of the Premises has continued to have on residents, residents' peace
and quiet and their overall quality of life.
At approximately 12:05am a female patron was “pestered” by an
older male patron attempting to get her attention. The female
patron refused to
engage with him. Another male patron from the older male patron’s social
circle pulled the female patron’s
hair and threw her on the ground. An
intoxicated female patron, who was also from the older male patron’s
social circle, repeatedly
assaulted the female patron. Crowd controllers
escorted the female patron outside the Premises. Moments later, the intoxicated
patron was ejected from the Premises and began to repeatedly punch and
kick the victim causing a broken finger, lacerations and bleeding,
bruising to
her head and face. Crowd controllers positioned at the front entrance of the
Premises failed to intervene or assist the
female patron. Victoria Police
members attended the premises to investigate the incident and were unable to
view CCTV footage after
“[m]anager Robert Bottazzi” told them that
he could not operate the CCTV system. Because Victoria Police members were
unable to immediately view the footage, Ryans was in breach of the conditions of
the Licence.
At 2:30am, Victoria Police members re-attended the Premises
in response to intoxicated patrons causing a disturbance. Victoria Police
observed that:
an intoxicated
male patron left the Premises with a swollen left eye. The patron told the
Victoria Police members that he was assaulted
when he was using the urinal, and
fell unconscious on the toilet floor. The patron was conveyed to Latrobe
Regional Hospital where
he received medical treatment for a broken left eye
socket, split lip and swelling to his face, receiving four stitches and
radiography
an intoxicated
male patron threw a can of alcohol at the Victoria Police members. Victoria
Police members escorted the patron outside,
and the patron spat at the Victoria
Police members during the arrest; and
in response to
another request by Victoria Police members for CCTV footage, “manager
Robert Bottazzi” claimed that the
CCTV system was new and did not know how
to operate it. Because Victoria Police members were unable to immediately view
the footage,
Ryans was in breach of the conditions of the
11 February 2023 and 10 March 2023
On 11 February 2023, at approximately 2:00am an intoxicated male patron
complained to Victoria Police that he was ejected from the
Premises and
assaulted by crowd controllers. Victoria Police enquiries on the night revealed
that the patron had been ejected from
the Premises after crowd controllers found
him in the female toilets. Victoria Police spoke with “manager Robert
to request CCTV footage. However, the requested CCTV footage was
not provided. As a result, Ryans contravened the conditions of the
On 10 March 2023, a Victoria Police member attended the Premises
to obtain the CCTV footage. The member spoke with “[m]anager
Bottazzi”, who said that there was an issue with downloading the CCTV
footage, and that everyone was locked out of the
system. Victoria Police then
left a USB storage device at the Premises for the purposes of downloading the
CCTV footage. However,
the requested CCTV footage was not provided. As a result,
Victoria Police issued an infringement notice against Ryans for contravening
conditions of the Licence.
25 February 2023
Between approximately 2:00am and 2:30am, Victoria Police received two noise
complaints from residents who were unable to sleep from
loud and ongoing musical
entertainment emanating from the Premises. Victoria Police were able to clearly
identify the noise pollution
to be coming from the Premises.
Findings of fact on the allegations and particulars
the directions hearing on 24 June 2024 the Commission considered the Statement
of Agreed Facts and Agreed Particulars and determined
that they were an
appropriate basis upon which the Inquiry could proceed.
Commission is accordingly satisfied that each of the allegations and Agreed
Particulars in the Statement of Agreed Facts is proven.
balance of the allegations and particulars were not pursued and it was not in
the public interest to proceed to an inquiry on
them. They do not form part of
the Commission’s Inquiry.
those facts, allegations and particulars established, the Commission must
determine whether they constitute grounds for disciplinary
action. While giving
significant weight to the parties’ agreement that such grounds exist, it
is, however, ultimately a matter
for the Commission.
regard to the Statement of Agreed Facts the Commission makes the findings set
There have been repeated breaches of the LCR Act and the
Agreed Particulars, reveal repeated breaches of both the LCR Act and the
conditions of the Licence.
CCTV system was persistently non-compliant: CCTV footage was unavailable;
incomplete; or not retained for the required duration;
and staff were repeatedly
unable to operate the system (Particulars 1, 4, 9, 10, 13, 23, 32). Accordingly,
the Licence condition
requiring continuous and identifiable surveillance footage
to be made available upon request was contravened.
employment of an unlicensed crowd controller (Particular 4) breached both the
Licence conditions and the
Private Security Act 2004
absence of a valid RSA certificate for Mr Zurcas (Particular 7) was in direct
breach of section 108AD of the LCR Act.
There has been a failure to minimise harm
consistent theme across the Agreed Particulars was Ryans’ failure to
implement measures aimed at minimising alcohol related
violent incidents occurred on the Premises, often involving clearly intoxicated
patrons. These include the assault of a female
patron with a glass bottle
(Particular 10), the serious facial injuries sustained by a male patron in the
toilets (Particular 23),
and the unaddressed presence of intoxicated individuals
both inside and outside the Premises (Particulars 9, 13, 23). In these
not only were crowd controllers slow or entirely absent in their
response, but the victims were also left without assistance from
Commission considers that Ryans’ inaction in addressing the deteriorating
conduct of patrons, combined with its failure
to take reasonable steps to ensure
crowd controller compliance and RSA standards was inconsistent with the primary
object of the
LCR Act: minimisation of harm.
There has been an adverse impact on amenity
amenity of the surrounding area was persistently impacted by Ryans’
operations.
the relevant period, residents were subjected to excessive noise from musical
entertainment, often into the early hours of
the morning (Particulars 8, 15, 18,
19, 20, 33). Despite repeated complaints and noise reports, Ryans continued to
allow loud music
from external DJ platforms, disregarding the amenity of nearby
disturbances were not isolated incidents but formed part of a sustained pattern
of amenity impact, with one resident reporting
their windows were vibrating due
to the intensity of the music (Particular 19).
amenity issues arose from waste management failures, including broken glass that
caused injury (Particulars 1, 4), exemplifying
Ryans’ indifference to
maintaining a safe and clean environment in accordance with the
There have been breaches of public safety
safety was repeatedly compromised by Ryans’ management failures.
addition to the recorded violent incidents, patrons were placed in dangerous
situations without proper intervention. One female
patron was left to leave the
venue alone while bleeding from a head wound (Particular 10), and another was
found unconscious in the
toilets (Particular 13).
Additionally,
intoxicated patrons caused disturbances requiring police intervention, including
one who spat at police officers during
arrest (Particular 23).
consistent pattern of unmanaged intoxication, assault, and inadequate incident
response demonstrated a systemic failure to uphold
basic safety standards
expected of a licensed venue.
There have been breaches of security
failed to provide a secure environment for patrons, staff, and the broader
multiple occasions, crowd controllers did not respond effectively to violence or
intoxication (Particulars 9, 13, 23), and in one
case, an unlicensed crowd
controller was employed (Particular 4), directly breaching the requirements of
Private Security Act 2004
and the conditions of the Licence.
Employing an unlicensed crowd controller means that the person’s ability
to perform the
functions of a crowd controller safely and in accordance with
law, has not been checked. This posed safety risks to patrons of Ryans.
persistent failure to provide CCTV footage to Victoria Police further undermined
venue security and hindered investigations into
serious incidents (Particulars
10, 13, 23, 32). The claim by managers that they could not operate the CCTV
system (Particular 23)
is clearly incompatible with proper security
There has been an impact on the integrity of the regulatory
breaches extended over a period of approximately 1.5 years with little evidence
that Ryans took meaningful steps to address the
concerns raised by Victoria
Police, the liquor regulator, or local residents.
some early incidents involved administrative non-compliance (e.g., CCTV
timestamp errors – Particular 1), these quickly
escalated into physical
violence, intoxicated patrons requiring hospitalisation, and consistent failure
to provide legally required
CCTV footage or security responses.
seriousness of the breaches is heightened by their frequency, the physical harm
caused, and Ryans’ repeated failure to meaningfully
cooperate with
enforcement authorities.
failure to retain a valid RSA certificate on the RSA Register is not a trivial
breach, as such a failure may undermine compliance
monitoring and the
effectiveness of the regulatory regime.
Commission considers the persistent disregard for compliance obligations to be
indicative of deliberate neglect rather than inadvertent
Are there grounds for taking disciplinary action against Ryans?
the Commission is satisfied that there are grounds for disciplinary action under
sections 90(1)(a)
(Particulars
the Commission is satisfied that grounds exist under
sections 90(1)(a)
the Commission does not consider it necessary to decide if grounds exist under
section 90(1)(q).
Accordingly,
as the Commission is satisfied that there are grounds for disciplinary action,
it must proceed to make a determination
in accordance with section 93 of the LCR
Disciplinary action and relevant considerations
90 defines “disciplinary action” against a licensee to mean any one,
or a combination, of the following:
(a) the cancellation, or
suspension for a specified period, of the licensee's licence;
(b) the variation of the licensee's licence;
(c) the endorsement of the licensee's licence;
(d) the issuing of a letter of censure to the licensee;
(e) the imposition of a fine not exceeding 250 penalty
“Variation”
of the licensee’s licence is defined at section 90(1) as:
(a) a variation of the times outside ordinary trading hours at which the licence
authorises the supply of liquor;
(b) a variation of the size or perimeter of the licensed premises;
(c) a variation of a condition of the licence (other than a condition imposed by
the LCR Act);
(d) the imposition of a new condition on the licence;
(e) the removal of a condition of the licence (other than a condition imposed by
the LCR Act); or
(f) a variation of the category of the licence —
(i) from a late night (general) licence to a general licence; or
(ii) from a late night (on premises) licence to an on-premises licence; or
(iii) from a late night (packaged liquor) licence to a packaged liquor licence.
the Commission finds that a ground for taking disciplinary action under section
90 is made out, the Commission may also determine,
pursuant to section 93D, that
the licensee or a related person be disqualified –
(a) from holding a licence or BYO permit;
(b) from being a director in any body corporate that holds a licence or BYO
(c) from being a partner in any partnership that holds a licence or BYO
(d) from having a beneficial interest (whether directly or indirectly) in the
shares of any body corporate that holds a licence or
BYO permit;
(e) from in any way (whether directly or indirectly) taking part in, or being
concerned in, the management of any licensed premises
or any body corporate that
holds a licence or BYO permit or any licensed club; or
(f) from being employed by any licensed club or any person that holds a licence
or BYO permit.
93D(2) and (3) state that the Commission may disqualify a person in all or any
of the ways listed above even if it determines
not to take disciplinary action
under section 93, and that it must specify a period for which the
disqualification is to apply.
93D(5) further states that a “related person” in relation to a
licensee or permittee relevantly means –
(a) any director or nominee of the licensee or permittee (if it is a body
corporate); or
(c) any person who, whether directly or indirectly, is concerned in or takes
part in the management of licensed premises or club
of the licensee or
Factors in determining appropriate disciplinary action
indicated in paragraph 28 above, the primary object of the LCR Act is the need
to minimise harm and the protection of the public
through encouraging a culture
of responsible consumption of alcohol, rather than imposing a sanction as a form
of punishment. The
Commission must also weigh this objective against the other
objects in the LCR Act.
Commission may take into account a variety of factors in determining the
appropriate disciplinary action, including (but not limited
the paramount
need to minimise harm
need to protect the public;
the nature,
extent, and seriousness of identified grounds, including the period over which
they extended;
compliance history of the licensee and/or similar previous
as well as whether
evidence suggests that the licensee fosters and encourages a culture of
compliance with the LCR Act;
the level of
cooperation with the Commission or other authorities responsible for enforcement
under the LCR Act;
the financial
position of the licensee;
the need to
generally deter and discourage similar behaviour from other licensees and
specifically deter the licensee in
contrition and/or corrective actions taken by the licensee to improve management
of the premises;
consistency with
other like cases; and
any mitigating
circumstances relevant to the matter.
Joint Proposed Outcome
this case, there are ‘Terms of Settlement’ detailing the following
jointly Proposed Outcome that:
(a) the Licence is to be varied to include a special condition prohibiting Ryans
from supplying liquor for consumption on the Premises
after 1am on any day. The
special condition is to be in effect for the duration that Ryans holds the
(b) Ryans is to pay a fine of $15,000; and
(c) Mr Bottazzi is to be disqualified from involvement in licensed premises
under sections 93D(1)(a)-(e) for a period of 12 months.
Proposed Outcome correctly acknowledges that its terms would be subject to the
Commission’s approval. Ultimately, whether
or not the Commission takes
disciplinary action, and the form of any resulting disciplinary action, is a
matter for the Commission.
Commission held a hearing on 17 December 2024 (
) primarily
concerned with the appropriateness of the matters contained in the Proposed
Outcome. Evidence was given by Mr Bottazzi
and Mr Zurcas. They were
cross-examined and parties made submissions prior to the Hearing, at the Hearing
and subsequently.
Consideration of the Proposed Outcome
Variation of the Licence
first agreed proposed disciplinary action was variation of the Licence such that
Ryans could only operate to 1am.
is not appropriate to accept a proposed variation of the hours of operation on
the Licence where Ryans no longer holds the Licence
and where the Licence is
currently so restricted.
Imposition of a fine
assessing the appropriateness of the second agreed proposed disciplinary action,
namely, the proposed payment of a fine by Ryans,
the Commission considers that
any financial penalty must be substantial enough to reflect the gravity of
Ryans’ repeated breaches
and effect some general deterrence.
support of a $15,000 fine against Ryans, Victoria Police submitted that there
were 10 instances of Ryans supplying liquor contrary
to the conditions of the
Licence. It calculated the fine based on the values of penalty units between
November 2021 – February
2023, and submitted that the “average
potential fine” could range from “$14,000 to
addition, Victoria Police submitted that a $15,000 fine represented
“approximately 35% of the total quantum the Commission
could impose in any
case” (i.e., a fine not exceeding an amount that is 250 times the value of
a penalty unit),
and that this
was “a fine reflective of Ryans accepting most of the particulars without
requiring formal proof and appropriate
to impose as a discounted penalty in the
spirit of co-operative
agreement”.
Commission also acknowledges from the Statement of Agreed Facts that Ryans had
taken some corrective actions, including altering
the Premises’ trading
model and cooperating more fully with Victoria Police.
the Commission is satisfied that a $15,000 fine is appropriate.
Other Matters
circumstances where Ryans no longer holds the Licence; a disqualification period
has been imposed on its sole
and it has been
separately fined, the Commission is of the view that the objects of the LCR Act
are satisfied without the need for
a further disqualification period against it
under section 93D.
it is the view of the Commission that, even without a specific finding under
section 90(1)(q), the disciplinary actions taken
in this matter would be
justified on the findings under sections 90(1)(a) and (o) alone.
Assessment of related persons
Commission now turns to its assessment of the appropriateness of the third
agreed proposed disciplinary action in the Settlement
Agreement, namely, the
proposed disqualification of Mr Bottazzi for a period of 12 months.
first threshold issue is whether the Commission can be satisfied that
Mr Bottazzi is a “related person” of Ryans
for the purpose of
section 93D(5).
Commission notes that Mr Bottazzi admitted to being a related person in the
Statement of Agreed Facts. In that document, he is
described as a “General
Manager” who, along with Mr Zurcas, “had the benefit of receiving
police verbal warnings,
and a Written Warning to address the cultural issues
specific to local patronage and affect change and compliance with the liquor
licence and licensee
obligations.”
in giving evidence at the Hearing, Mr Bottazzi informed the Commission that he
was not involved in managerial functions of
the Premises and that, while he
signed the Statement of Agreed Facts which identified him as a “related
person” and the
“general manager”, this was due to his
inability to contest the allegations due to financial constraints and the cost
of legal proceedings.
asserted that his agreement to the Statement of Agreed Facts was motivated by a
desire to avoid prolonged litigation rather than
an acknowledgment of managerial
responsibility at the
Zurcas in his evidence informed the Commission that Mr Bottazzi was a
“consultant” and not a manager of the
Commission observed that both Mr Zurcas and Mr Bottazzi sought to diminish their
respective involvement in operational matters,
despite having signed an agreed
position that attributed a higher level of responsibility to each of them. As
Victoria Police observed
in their further submissions, the Commission had the
opportunity to assess the demeanour and credibility of the witnesses first-hand,
and in doing so may legitimately place less weight on certain aspects of their
oral evidence where it conflicted with prior admissions
or appeared
self-serving.
light of the signed Statement of Agreed Facts, the Commission is unable to give
significant weight to the evidence of Mr Bottazzi
as to the level of his
involvement at the Premises.
Commission notes that there is also the following evidence in the materials
filed by Victoria Police, of an association between
Ryans and Mr Bottazzi:
(a) Sergeant Susan Mapleson stated that she understood that Mr Bottazzi was a
manager/assistant manager and one of three persons
who had assisted her with
compliance checks relevant to Particulars 1 and
(b) Senior Constable Natasha Dunn stated that, on 11 February 2023 (Particular
32), Leading Senior Constable Tom Monaghan was directed
by security staff to
speak with Mr Bottazzi in relation to Victoria Police requests to obtain CCTV
footage of an assault that occurred
earlier that
(c) Acting Sergeant Michael Calagaz’s identifies Mr Bottazzi providing
information on the evening of 26 February 2022 (Particular
13) and being the
Commission considers that, while Mr Bottazzi submits that his management role
was “minor”,
does not necessarily contradict the Statement of Agreed Facts that he was a
related person. Although Mr Zurcas was the
primary decision‑maker,
Mr Bottazzi’s involvement in operations at the Premises connected
him to several compliance
lapses, such as failing to promptly provide CCTV after
liquor-related incidents. As such, Mr Bottazzi bears some responsibility for
those incidents which identify him as present in the Agreed Particulars (for
example, Particulars 1, 4 and 13).
the Commission is satisfied that Mr Bottazzi is a related person for the purpose
of section 93D(5)(c), and that he was directly
or indirectly concerned in the
management and control of the Premises.
Agreed Particulars, together with the overall evidence before the Commission
indicate that Mr Bottazzi was present at the Premises
during several instances
of non-compliance, was a person of authority at the Premises, and failed to take
adequate steps to prevent
or respond to Victoria Police requests.
Departing from the Proposed Outcome
Commission is concerned to emphasise that the departure from the Proposed
Outcome should not be viewed as a rejection of the efforts
made by the parties
to seek a resolution and should not discourage parties from reaching resolutions
of matters before the Commission
in the future.
is true enough that a lengthy hearing was avoided by the resolution of this
matter based on the Statement of Agreed Facts. That
is not only in the interests
of the parties but also in the public interest.
agreement between the parties is a highly relevant matter and while it is not
binding on the Commission, the Commission should
give it significant weight.
Nevertheless, the Commission must be satisfied itself that the Proposed Outcome
is appropriate, and no
agreement between Victoria Police, the related persons
and the Licensee can supplant the Commission’s duty to impose disciplinary
action when it has determined that it should take action.
means the Commission can and should depart from an agreed position where it is
appropriate to do so to achieve the purposes of
the LCR Act, which have been
described above.
Commission notes that tribunals, including VCAT, do depart from proposed
outcomes. For example:
Chiropractic Board of Australia v Petridis
[2023] VCAT 841
rejected an agreement as to suspension, and imposed a cancellation and
disqualification, because it did not consider a suspension
was appropriate due
to the need for specific deterrence. It considered it was appropriate for there
to be a further assessment of
Petridis’s fitness to practice at a later
date (see [111]). VCAT otherwise considered the agreed disqualification period
be too long, in that insight may be gained sooner.
Pharmacy Board of Australia v Rest
[2023] VCAT 1397
, by way of
determination of disciplinary action, the parties jointly proposed a reprimand,
a three-month suspension, and conditions
be imposed on Mr Rest’s
registration for education, mentoring and limitation on practice. While VCAT
agreed that a reprimand
and suspension were appropriate determinations, and that
conditions be imposed on Mr Rest’s registration, in taking into account
all relevant matters – and particularly the need for the specific and
general deterrence and the nature and circumstances of
the conduct – VCAT
considered that a period of suspension of two months was appropriate in this
case, and that it is not appropriate
for Mr Rest to be able to choose between
formal education and one on one education as a condition of his registration.
VCAT required
that the condition be amended to require one on one education.
Considerations in deciding to depart from the Proposed Outcome
considering whether to depart from the Proposed Outcome, the Commission has
applied a number of principles followed by courts and
tribunals in similar
circumstances.
Commonwealth v Director Fair Work Building Industry Inspectorate
[2015] HCA 46
(2015) 258 CLR 482
- [58] the High Court considered the operation of
agreed outcomes on judicial consideration in civil penalty proceedings as
to criminal proceedings. That distinction is not relevant here, nor is
the Commission a court, however the Court’s observations
regarding the
matters to be assessed are apt:
Subject to the court being
sufficiently persuaded of the accuracy of the parties' agreement as to facts and
consequences, and that
the penalty which the parties propose is an appropriate
remedy in the circumstances thus revealed, it is consistent with principle
for the reasons identified in Allied Mills, highly desirable in practice for the
court to accept the parties' proposal and therefore
impose the proposed
Tribunal in Victorian Legal Services Commissioner v Hyatt
[2014] VCAT 198
identifies the position of the Commission succinctly when it states that the
while it may be “a highly desirable practice for
the Court to accept the
parties’ proposal” [24(c)] no agreement can supplant the duty of the
adjudicator to “determine
the level of conduct alleged and to impose
sanctions” [25].
Hauer v Lord
[2006] VCAT 739
, the Tribunal expressed the view that a departure
from the parties’ proposal be limited to what “will be an unusual
In my opinion, the applicable law is the same
as that articulated and explained by the Planning Appeals Board in Dowling v
Malvern. The tribunal must consider the matters raised by the inquiry;
it is not to be a mere rubber stamp. However, the fact that
the parties have
reached agreement as to the appropriate orders that should be made will be a
relevant and weighty consideration,
such that it will be an unusual case where
the tribunal rejects a proposed consent order.
Dowling v City of Malvern
, the Planning Appeals Board referred
to the importance of the public interest:
The Board cannot be a
mere "rubber stamp" in determining appeals which are brought pursuant to the TCP
Act. Whilst the Planning Appeals
Board is constituted to hear and determine
appeals between parties in its determinations have a wide effect, upon the
public. Moreover,
the Board is required to make its determinations based upon
considerations of public interest and public policy. This distinguishes
Board from a court exercising civil jurisdiction. Unlike a court, the Board,
has, and must exercise, an independent responsibility
and judgement as to the
appropriateness of any determination it makes.
The fact that parties appear to have reached agreement as to the
appropriate determination that should be made is a relevant and weighty
that should be taken into account by the Board in making its
determination.
these principles to the Commission’s task, it is highly relevant that the
parties have submitted the Proposed Outcome
and the Commission has considered it
carefully. The Commission is, however, not a mere rubber stamp and must satisfy
itself that
the Proposed Outcome is an appropriate outcome having regard to all
relevant matters.
may constitute an “unusual case” as identified in Hauer v Lord is
undefined. It should also be noted that the decision
in that case was made by
VCAT under a previous iteration of the LCR Act and one which predates the
current role of the Commission.
would therefore be reasonable to assume that such “unusual” cases
would be ones where the proposed outcome does not
reasonably reflect the
Commission’s assessment of the nature and gravity of conduct alleged as
established by the Agreed Particulars
and the other matters, such as the public
interest. The Commission must take into account the public interest in resolving
the disciplinary
proceeding and avoiding the cost, uncertainty and inconvenience
of a full hearing. But the Commission is also compelled, as stated
, to consider the wider aspects of public interest and public
policy as reflected in its governing legislation.
Post-Hearing submissions
7 March 2025, the Commission raised with the parties the possibility that it may
depart from the Proposed Outcome and invited post-Hearing
submissions.
response to the request for the post-Hearing submissions, the parties did not
submit that the evidence led at the Hearing on disciplinary
action after the
Proposed Outcome, as well as intervening events (including the current use of
the Premises, the Licensee’s
administration and the transfer of the
Licence) would affect the terms of the Proposed Outcome.
Submissions
filed on behalf of Mr Zurcas emphasised that he was experiencing financial
hardship, detailing substantial debts and liabilities,
including debts totalling
more than $1 million. These submissions requested the Commission to avoid
imposing additional monetary
penalties due to the impact on his financial
viability and potential
bankruptcy.
to submissions filed by Mr Bottazzi, he reiterated that he had voluntarily
ceased involvement in licensed premises in all
capacities since December 2023.
He added that both he and Mr Zurcas were no longer in contact with one another,
and that he has no
plans or intentions relating to the liquor industry. Mr
Bottazzi requested that the Commission recognise this voluntary cessation
involvement as "time served" and refrain from imposing additional
its own submissions, Victoria Police placed reliance on the Proposed Outcome as
reflective of a negotiated resolution to assist
the Commission in avoiding a
lengthy hearing.
Victoria Police also
placed reliance on its previous written
submissions,
wherein it argued the
appropriateness of imposing a fine (see paragraph 83 above), and said that the
12-month disqualification period
for Mr Bottazzi is commensurate with the time
of his active involvement in the Premises in a “managerial
this case, the Commission accepts that the resolution achieved through the
Statement of Agreed Facts spared the need for a protracted
and costly hearing.
That is an outcome squarely in the public interest. Nevertheless, the Commission
must ensure that the disciplinary
actions imposed are consistent with the
seriousness of the conduct and reflect the broader public policy objectives of
the LCR Act
and particularly the aims of the disciplinary framework in that LCR
Act. Any proposed adjustments made by the Commission to the Proposed
reflect these imperatives.
carefully considered the Proposed Outcome in light of the applicable legal
principles and the Commission’s obligations
under the LCR Act, as well as
the parties’ submissions on the matter, the Commission is satisfied that
the disciplinary actions
requested by the parties are broadly appropriate forms
of disciplinary action.
the Commission considers it necessary and appropriate to depart from certain
aspects of the Proposed Outcome for the reasons
set out below.
Departures from the Proposed Outcome
George Zurcas
the reasons that follow, the Commission considers that disqualifying Mr Zurcas
until 30 June 2026 is appropriate, necessary and
proportionate, in order to
reinforce the LCR Act harm minimisation and public safety objectives. It is
appropriate to depart from
the Proposed Outcome so as to impose disciplinary
action against Mr Zurcas, in order to give effect to protecting the public by
him, and others in Mr Zurcas’s position, from engaging in
conduct that led to the grounds for disciplinary action.
respect to Mr Zurcas, the Commission is satisfied that disciplinary action is
necessary based on his role as the sole director
of Ryans. Mr Zurcas was
ultimately responsible for the operation and management of the Premises when
multiple and repeated breaches
occurred. This includes inadequate supervision of
security personnel, repeated non-compliance with CCTV obligations, and causing
detriment to the amenity of the area. He, therefore, had primary responsibility
of the operation of the Premises during the incidents
referred to in the Agreed
Particulars.
determining the scope and duration of the disqualification, the Commission has
given weight to the nature and gravity of the grounds
of disciplinary action, as
considered at paragraphs 44 to 66 above.
Commission has further considered that:
(a) In giving evidence at the Hearing, Mr Zurcas took full responsibility for
the events. It is also noted that:
(i) while he asserts that he has successfully managed venues with strong
compliance records (for example, The Deck Geelong), the
Commission has been
presented with evidence,
disclosed to Mr Zurcas, that he has been the subject of regulatory action on
numerous previous occasions, including licence
disqualifications, suitability
determinations, and a recent EPA prosecution resulting in a
conviction.
The repeated nature
of the breaches at the Premises, when viewed against the backdrop of this
regulatory history, gives rise to legitimate
concerns about whether lessons from
previous compliance failures have been learnt; and
(ii) while the Commission acknowledges the evidence and submissions of Mr Zurcas
regarding his financial position (i.e., he is experiencing
significant financial
hardship, including personal liabilities exceeding the value of his assets, and
the business he directed is
administration),
outweighed by the underlying seriousness of the breaches, their frequency, and
their impact.
(b) Mr Zurcas expressly acknowledged that he failed to take appropriate
corrective steps when he became aware that the Premises
was being poorly managed
in his absence. That is, despite recognising the inadequacies of his night
managers and acknowledging that
the outdoor entertainment area was a source of
ongoing problems, he did not sufficiently increase his on-site presence or
adapt his management strategy.
(c) The Commission does accept that Mr Zurcas’ geographical distance
from the Premises may have created logistical challenges,
however the evidence
indicates that, once aware of regulatory failings, Mr Zurcas did not take
reasonable steps to rectify them in
a timely or effective manner.
(d) Mr Zurcas has stated that he no longer holds any directorships in entities
associated with licensed venues and does not presently
intend to re-enter the
industry. In Mr Zurcas’ oral evidence, he set out his extensive
history in the industry, and current
family associations with other licensed
venues. He left open the possibility of doing some work with those venues.
Without a period
of disqualification, there is nothing to prevent him otherwise
engaging in the industry. In those circumstances, a disqualification
appropriate specific deterrent to repeating similar breaches.
(e) The Commission is not satisfied that Mr Zurcas’s insight and
acceptance of responsibility now are sufficient factors to
protect against the
risk of future similar breaches.
125. Accordingly, and also taking into account favourably the passage of time
since the conduct occurred (including the length of
this inquiry), the
Commission is satisfied that a period of disqualification to 30 June 2026 is
warranted to ensure that Mr Zurcas
is not involved in the management or
operation of any licensed premises during that period.
Robert Bottazzi
assessing the appropriateness of the proposed disqualification of Mr Bottazzi,
the Commission has had regard to his compliance
record. Notably, on
20 July 2009, VCAT imposed a 12‑month disqualification
following his unlicensed liquor supply
at ‘Club Leeds’.
Nevertheless, almost 16 years have passed since VCAT’s disqualification
and unlicensed supply
of liquor does not feature in the grounds for disciplinary
action in this case.
Commission accepts that the imposition of a disqualification against Mr Bottazzi
under section 93D(1)(a)-(e) is appropriate.
the Commission is satisfied that disqualification is an appropriate disciplinary
action in this instance, the Commission is
not satisfied that the proposed
length of disqualification is appropriate.
Commission considers that the 12-month disqualification jointly proposed by the
parties exceeds what is necessary to meet objectives
of the LCR Act in respect
of Mr Bottazzi’s involvement. His role, while sufficient to render him a
“related person”
under section 93D(5), was confined to specific
evenings and operational decisions. The Commission considers that it lacked the
breadth seen in prior cases involving longer periods of
disqualification. In addition, the Commission acknowledges that:
(a) in December 2023, Mr Bottazzi voluntarily stepped away from the hospitality
industry and has not worked at a licensed premises
since then and has allowed
his RSA certification to lapse;
(b) although he is currently working as a company director of a web development
group, he is not drawing a wage and is relying financially
on his spouse’s
(c) there has been a substantial period since this inquiry commenced.
12-month disqualification period, proposed in the agreement, is for a longer
period than necessary to reflect the extent of his
role and the gravity of Mr
Bottazzi’s conduct with respect to the grounds of disciplinary action. In
particular: in seeking
to achieve general and specific deterrence, and to
otherwise facilitate the public protection aims of disciplinary proceedings.
three-month period of disqualification against Mr Bottazzi is a more appropriate
and proportionate outcome in all the circumstances,
particularly given that Mr
Bottazzi has since ceased working in the industry, has not engaged in similar
conduct elsewhere, and the
Commission accepts his evidence that he has no
intention to re-enter the sector in the near future.
Decision on disciplinary action
Ryans (as the then Licensee)
section 93(1)(b), the Commission imposes a fine of $15,000 on Ryans, payable
within 60 days of the date of this decision. The
Commission considers this
penalty proportionate to the gravity and frequency of the contraventions as set
George Zurcas
to section 93D(1), the Commission disqualifies Mr George Zurcas from:
(a) holding a licence or BYO permit (section 93D(1)(a));
(b) being a director of a body corporate that holds a licence or BYO permit
(section 93D(1)(b));
(c) being a partner in a partnership that holds a licence or BYO permit (section
93D(1)(c));
(d) having a beneficial interest in the shares or capital of any body corporate
that holds a licence or BYO permit (section 93D(1)(d));
(e) taking part in or being concerned in the management of any licensed premises
or any body corporate that holds a licence or BYO
permit or any licensed club
(section 93D(1)(e)); and
(f) being employed by a licensee or permittee in a role that involves the supply
of liquor or the supervision of staff (section 93D(1)(f)).
disqualification shall operate until 30 June 2026.
Robert Bottazzi
to section 93D(1), the Commission disqualifies Mr Bottazzi, for a period of
three (3) months from the date of this decision
(a) holding a licence or BYO permit (section 93D(1)(a));
(b) being a director of a body corporate that holds a licence or BYO permit
(section 93D(1)(b));
(c) being a partner in a partnership that holds a licence or BYO permit (section
93D(1)(c));
(d) having a beneficial interest in the shares or capital of anybody corporate
that holds a licence or BYO permit (section 93D(1)(d));
(e) in any way, whether directly or indirectly, taking part in or being
concerned in the management of any licensed premises or any
body corporate that
holds a licence or BYO permit or any licensed club (section 93D(1)(e)).
preceding 135 paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Mr James
O’Halloran (Deputy Chair), Mr Steven Brnovic
(Commissioner), and Ms Susan
Timbs (Commissioner).
All references to legislation
are references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
inspector’ is defined in section 3. The licensing inspector in this
inquiry is Inspector Andrew Miles of Victoria
Victoria Police submitted 35
alleged particulars with over 600 pages of supporting material.
‘Disciplinary
action’ and ‘grounds for disciplinary action’ are terms
defined in section 90(1).
Submissions on behalf of Robert
Bottazzi, 25 January 2024.
Directions hearing transcript,
16 April 2024, p5.
Undated letter from Tina Doyle,
received on 30 July 2024.
Victoria Police,
‘Particulars in Support of Application’, p2.
Directions hearing transcript,
12 December 2023, p4.
Statement of Senior Sergeant
Peter Shallard, 8 July 2024, p2.
Hearing transcript, 17
December 2024, p10.
On 8 November 2024, the
Commission received email correspondence from Ben Skinner on behalf of the
Administrators that the Licensee
company entered into an agreement to sell the
business of the Premises to 4 Pints, and that the sale is conditional upon the
of the Licence.
See LCR Act, s 44(3):
a person is not a suitable person to hold, or carry on business
under, a licence or BYO permit if the person or, if the person is
corporate, any director of the person has, within the preceding 3 years—
... been convicted (a) of an offence of supplying
liquor without a licence or of
supplying adulterated liquor or of an offence against any law relating to
customs or excise; or (b)
engaged in activities involving the trading in or
marketing of liquor in a manner contrary to the provisions of this
West Heidelberg RSL
Sub-Branch Inc v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2006] VCAT 347
; Egan v Director
of Liquor Licensing
[2007] VCAT 806.
Buzzo Holdings Pty Ltd
and Anor v Loison
[2007] VSC 31
Whiting v AMC Investments
(Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2005] VCAT 1830
, [21]; See also
Raz Pty Ltd & Anor v Director of Liquor Licensing (Occupational and
Business Regulation)
[2008] VCAT 857
, [11], [28].
Section 90(1)(a).
Section 90(1)(o).
Section 90(1)(q).
Section 108AD.
As at the date of this
decision, the maximum penalty is around $49,397.00.
Section 4(2), specifically,
“[i]t is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority,
discretion, jurisdiction and
duty conferred or imposed by this Act must be
exercised and performed with due regard to harm minimisation”.
With respect to public
protection, see
Ross v Planet Platinum Ltd (Occupational and Business
Regulation)
[2012] VCAT 1670
Victorian Commission for Gambling and
Liquor Regulation v Legend Enterprises Pty Ltd (Review and Regulation)
[2013] VCAT 1412
Buzzo Holdings Pty Ltd
and Anor v Loison
[2007] VSC 31
Hodgkin v Planet Platinum Ltd
(Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2011] VCAT 725
Hodgkin v Planet Platinum
Ltd (Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2011] VCAT 725
Holdings Pty Ltd and Anor v Loison
[2007] VSC 31
Parr v K Marketing Pty
Ltd (Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2010] VCAT 1108
Starera PL v Melbourne CC
[2000] VCAT 213
Parr v K Marketing Pty
Ltd (Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2010] VCAT 1108
Ross v Planet Platinum
Ltd (Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2012] VCAT 1670
[130]-[132].
Ross v Planet Platinum
Ltd (Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2012] VCAT 1670
Victoria Police, Written
Submissions, 5 August 2024, at [7].
Section 90(1)(e) of the
definition of “disciplinary action”.
Victoria Police, Written
Submissions, 5 August 2024, at [7].
As set out in these Reasons
for Decision.
Statement of Agreed Facts,
24 June 2024, at [11].
Hearing transcript, 17
December 2024, pp51-52.
Victoria Police, Written
Submissions, 21 March 2025.
Statement of Sergeant Susan
Mapleson, 15 April 2024, at [7] and [10].
Statement of Senior
Constable Natasha Dunn, 29 March 2024, at [3].
Statement of Acting Sergeant
Michael Calagaz, 27 December 2022, at [8]-[9].
Submissions of Robert
Bottazzi, 31 March 2025.
Submissions on behalf of
George Zurcas, 1 April 2025.
Submissions of Robert
Bottazzi, 31 March 2025.
Victoria Police, Written
Submissions, 21 March 2025.
Victoria Police, Written
Submissions, 5 August 2024, at [8].
Victoria Police,
Requestor’s Supporting Material, 17 April 2023.
Submissions on behalf of
George Zurcas, 1 April 2025.
Submissions on behalf of
George Zurcas, 1 April 2025.
Hearing transcript, 17
December 2024, pp54-55; Submissions of Robert Bottazzi, 31 March 2025.
Hearing transcript, 17
December 2024, pp49-50.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.65 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter