URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VDBT/1997/94.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:29:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ross v Hi-Struct Pty Ltd [1997] VDBT 94 (18 September 1997)
THE DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(DOMESTIC BUILDING CONTRACTS AND TRIBUNAL ACT 1995)
- DETERMINATION -
MR DAVID ROSS
Hi-STRUCT P/L
PRESIDING MEMBER:
MS M LOTHIAN
ORIGINATING DOCUMENT:
ORIGINAL APPLICATION
APPEARANCES:
MR ROSS IN PERSON.
MR PAPADOPOULOS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT.
DATE(S) OF HEARING:
14 AUGUST 1997
DATE OF DETERMINATION:
18 SEPTEMBER 1997
I MAKE THE FOLLOWING DETERMINATION:
The application is unsuccessful. I make no order as to costs.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION:
My Determination is made on the basis of submissions made in person by Mr
Ross and Mr Papadopoulos and submissions made in writing
on behalf of both
This matter is a claim for loss of rent for a property known as flat 8, 58
Wattletree Road, Armadale. The Respondent admits that it
built the property. The
Applicant is the owner of the property which he rents to tenants. The property
was sold to the Applicant
by a company which appears to have been incorporated
for the purpose of developing the site. There was no contract between the
and the Respondent.
The Applicant leased the property to the first tenants who occupied it in May
1995. On 25 March 1996 they notified Ms Tamara Israeli,
an employee of the
managing real estate agents, that there was a leak in the lounge ceiling. The
original tenants moved out and the
new tenants moved in on 7 June 1996. I accept
the evidence given for the Applicant that the new tenants were aware that there
a small leak, but neither they nor the Applicant were aware to of the extent
of the problem at that date.
It is agreed by the parties that there is a leak. Water enters the building
at the junction between the upstairs balcony and the wall,
travels along a beam
and drips through the ceiling of the lounge below at various points along the
beam. I accept the evidence of
Mr David Miller, given at the hearing of 15 July
1997, that when he attended the property the tenants had a line of buckets down
the middle of the lounge and the furniture all stacked on one side. Mr Miller
was called by the Applicant.
The claim of 17 February 1997 was in two parts. The first was for damage to
the building, the second for loss of rent consequent upon
the damage. The
Applicant was given leave to amend his claim by abandoning the first part on the
basis that payment has been received
from the Housing Guarantee Fund Ltd. (HGFL)
to rectify the damage.
The Applicant said that the HGFL told him he could not recover loss of rent
under the guarantee. Detailed evidence has not been provided
on this point and
the HGFL has been neither a party to these proceedings nor in attendance.
However on the basis of the Applicant’s
assertion it appears that the HGFL
made a representation to the Applicant about the extent to which he was entitled
to claim under
the guarantee, rather than making a "decision" not to compensate
the Applicant within the meaning of
House Contracts
Guarantee Act 1987
Damage to the property
At the hearing of 14 August Mr Papadopoulos admitted that the Respondent
accepts liability for the repairs and added that the Applicant
had been informed
of this at each "hearing" (the cases management conference of 6 February 1997
and the adjourned hearing of 15 July
1997) and had failed to respond to an
invitation to allow the Respondent to rectify the leak.
I am satisfied that the leaking ceiling would cause some loss of rent and
that the leaking ceiling in turn was caused by the failure
of the Respondent, or
possibly of one of its subcontractors, to properly construct the property.
The amount of rent claimed
The Applicant claims $3,919.00 representing loss of 20% of the rent of the
property from 6 June 1996 to 31 August 1997. I am satisfied
that this is the
loss the Applicant has suffered as rent statements were provided by the
Applicant. I am also satisfied that the
amount of 20% is reasonable as Ms
Israeli gave evidence, which I accept, that the lounge is approximately 20% of
the floor area of
the property and that the rent reduction was negotiated with
an officer of the Office of Fair Trading.
Is the Respondent liable?
There are two potential grounds for the Respondent to be liable. The first is
under the law of torts, for negligence. The second is
pursuant to the
It has been submitted on behalf of the Applicant that he is entitled to
damages for pure economic loss in accordance with the High
Australia’s decision in
Bryan v Maloney
(1995) 128 ALR 163, a case
in which it was decided that a builder owed a duty of care to the subsequent
purchaser of a house. The
judgement of three of the four judges finding for the
house owner concluded with the proviso:
"the nature of the property involved, namely a building which was erected to
be used as a permanent dwelling house, constitutes an
important consideration
supporting the conclusion that a relevant relationship of proximity existed
between ... the builder ... and
... a subsequent owner. That being so, the
decision is not directly decisive of the question whether a relevant
relationship of proximity
exists in other categories of case or as regards other
kinds of damage."
This invitation to limit the application of
Bryan v Maloney
accepted in a number of judgements, and particularly in the decision of the
Victorian Court of Appeal in
Zumpano and Anor v Montagnese and Anor
(1997) Aust Torts Reports 81-406.
the builders built their own home with no prospect of
immediate sale. The purchasers discovered, some years after purchase, that
was a minor fault in the plumbing system. The plumbing had been installed by a
licensed plumber who contracted with the builder.
If the claim had been for
breach of a building contract, the purchasers would probably have succeeded.
There was a failure by the
plumber and if there were a contract, the builders
would have provided that faulty work to their clients. In the absence of strict
contractual obligations and in the absence of proof of actual negligence by the
builders in the way they instructed or supervised
the plumbers, it was found
that the builders had breached no duty of care that they owed to the
purchasers.
In the matter in hand it has been submitted on behalf of the Applicant that
the nature of the defects allows the Tribunal to apply
the doctrine of res ipsa
loquitur. While it is likely that the builder failed personally or in
supervision of its sub-contractors,
this is not the only possible cause of the
leak. I am therefore unable to apply the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur.
In his judgment Brooking J raised many more questions than he answered. For
example, at page 63,704 he asked "Does the decision [
Bryan v Maloney
apply to dwellings which are not the principal residence of the purchasers, for
example, an apartment in or near the city for occasional
use, or a holiday
or Territory concerned which bears
on whether the duty of care should be
imposed?" He went on to say that there is an argument that "the protection
already afforded
by the legislation [the
House Contracts Guarantee Act
] at the expense of builders should tip the balance in deciding whether
in all the circumstances a duty of care should in addition
be imposed" [63,710]
He pointed out that there was no legislation in Tasmania where Mrs
Maloney’s house was situated.
His Honour also said that for a duty of care to exist, the fault complained
of giving rise to the loss should be "structural" and/or
affect the value of the
house. At page 63,706 His Honour described "structure" as "those parts of the
building which carry load in
addition to their own weight." There has been no
evidence led to show that the leaking was due to a "structural" failure, and as
attempts were made to rectify the defect using silicon sealer, it is most
unlikely that the problem was structural.
For all the reasons given above, I find that the Applicant has failed to
establish that the Defendant has breached a common law duty
of care owed to the
The Guarantee given under the
House Contracts Guarantee Act 1987
I have not had the benefit of argument from the parties or from the HGFL
concerning this matter, nevertheless it appears that there
may have been an
error in the manner in which the HGFL administered the Applicant’s
Section 7(3) of the 1987 Act provides in part:
"The liability of the approved guarantor ... is the liability to make good
loss or damage suffered by ... a successor in title of
the building
It appears that in the case in hand the HGFL has interpreted this section
very restrictively to mean that it must only pay for rectification
The extent of "loss or damage" has been considered on a few occasions by the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal. In the matter of
V and E Cordeiro v Housing
Guarantee Fund Appeals Committee and Housing Guarantee Fund Ltd
number 91/25120 decided 30 April 1992) Presiding Member K R Howie said:
"The reference in S.7(3) to "loss or damage" does not contemplate damages of
a general or intangible kind such as would cover compensation
for frustration.
Rather, it is a reference to the loss or damage that would normally flow as a
remedy for breach of contract. Such
damages are to provide compensation, as far
as money can, for any loss which is not too remote suffered as a result of the
of contract."
Mr Howie went on to quote the principle in
Hadley v Baxendale
[1854] EngR 296
On the issue of whether rent falls within the principle I have had the
benefit of reading the determination of the Tribunal in
Mifsud v Housing
Guarantee Fund Ltd and Crouch and Russell
(matter A67/96) where the member
said "I do not consider that loss of rent is a damage that may fairly and
reasonably be considered
to arise according to the usual course of things that
flow from the breach of a building agreement". This issue is also raised in
Dorter and Sharkey’s
Building and Construction Contracts in
(Law Book Co, loose leaf) where they say at paragraph 1.900:
"The contractor who fails to complete a contract for the construction of a
block of flats within an agreed time cannot ordinarily
be heard to say that the
employer’s rental loss was beyond his prevision. In a housing contract the
contractor will be taken
to know that his failure to complete the work on time
may result in the employer incurring losses for alternative accommodation and
storage where appropriate. It will be a question in each case of what a
reasonable contractor in the position of the defendant ought
to be taken as
having known. Rental paid by the employer after the contractual completion date
was allowed as a category of damages
Kennedy v Collings Construction Co
(1989) 7 BCL 25. A failure to mitigate denied the rental claim of
the employer in
Hutchinson v Harris
(1978) 10 BLR 19."
Nevertheless the learned authors were dealing with delay under a building
contract, which might be treated differently from a defect
discovered later.
I consider that the obligation to "make good loss or damage" is considerably
more extensive that the obligation to merely rectify
defective or incomplete
work. Compensating the owner for the need to move to other premises (if the
building is their home) or for
rent lost could well fall within this
obligation.
Can the Applicant recover from
the Respondent direct under the guarantee?
Under the 1987 Act the usual course is that the building owner makes a claim
on the HGFL and if it is satisfied that the claim is
justified and that the
defect will not be rectified by the builder, the HGFL pays the reasonable cost
of rectification to the owner.
The HGFL then obtains recovery of the amount paid
out from builder.
The 1987 Act gives building owners rights additional to those they have for
breach of contract or for breach of a duty of care. In
G and M Meehan Pty Ltd
v Housing Guarantee Fund Appeals Committee and Elsie Johnson and the Housing
Guarantee Fund Ltd
(AAT matter no. 1993/21261), the President, Judge Fagan
"The "guarantee" provided by the Act is not truly a guarantee but more in the
nature of an indemnity or statutory indemnification
scheme. It is pointed out
that S.7(1) shows that the protection is given not only to the contracting owner
but to his successors
in title. It was argued that S.7(3)(b) extends protection
to defects caused other than by the builder’s breach of his obligation.
was pointed out that S.11 extends the protection to cover foundation movement
even though not caused by a breach by the builder
of the building contract.
...the scheme set up by the Act shows that the word "guarantee" is not used
in the technical legal sense but rather in its ordinary
or popular sense of
providing a form of security and in the case of the Act, to owners who deal with
approved builders and their
Although the Applicant might have a right which could eventually be
reimbursed by the Respondent, it must pursue that right by making
against the HGFL rather than directly against the Respondent.
Mitigation of loss
As evidence and argument on this issue was put to me, I make the following
observations as they might be of assistance if the Applicant
makes a successful
claim for rent against the HGFL:
In normal circumstances it is the obligation of claimants to mitigate their
losses. In this matter possibilities for mitigation would
include allowing the
Respondent to return to the property to rectify the problem or having the fault
rectified by some other builder.
Mr Papadopoulos gave evidence at both hearings that an attempt had been made
in March of 1996 to rectify the problem on behalf of
the Respondent by Mr Howard
Willis. The Applicant gave evidence that Mr Willis attended the property and
quoted but did not do anything.
I prefer the evidence of the Applicant.
In any event, it is accepted by both parties that an attempt to rectify the
problem failed. Further, the Applicant gave evidence,
which I accept, that he
spoke to Mr Andrew Langdon and Mr Langdon indicated that he did not believe the
Respondent was financially
responsible for the problems and would not be paying
for Mr Willis to rectify the leaks. In these circumstances it was not reasonable
to expect the Applicant to allow the Respondent to return.
It appears to me that the Applicant has substantially mitigated his loss by
allowing a rent reduction. If he had failed to do so it
is quite possible that
he could have lost his tenant.
Nevertheless, the amount paid by the Housing Guarantee Fund Ltd for
rectification is only $6,270 in circumstances where the claim
for reduction in
rent received has been running for 15 months. I accept that it was reasonable of
the Applicant to try to have the
matter rectified by the Respondent and it was
also reasonable to leave the building unrepaired until the Housing Guarantee
had the opportunity to decide whether to accept or reject the
It was indicated by the Applicant’s representative at the first hearing
on 15 July 1997 that the HGFL had agreed to pay for
rectification. On this
basis, and allowing two weeks for rectification, I consider it would be
reasonable to allow the Applicant
loss of rent from 6 June 1996 to 31 July
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (34.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter