URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:24:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Frankston C156fran (PSA) [2025] PPV 26 (17 June 2025)
Frankston Planning Scheme Amendment C156fran
Biodiversity Policy Update
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
17 June 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
Frankston Planning Scheme Amendment C156fran
Biodiversity Policy Update
17 June 2025
Annabel Paul, Chair
Glossary and abbreviations
Biodiversity AP
Frankston City Biodiversity Action Plan 2021 – 2036
Frankston City Council
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (former)
Department of Transport and Planning
Frankston Beach Association Inc
Integrated Water AP
Frankston City Integrated Water Action Plan 2016 – 2026
Municipal Planning Strategy
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning Policy Framework
Urban Forest AP
Frankston City Urban Forest Action Plan 2020 – 2040
Amendment summary
The Amendment
Frankston Planning Scheme Amendment C156fran
Common name
Frankston Biodiverity policy update
Brief description
The amendment proposes to implement the Biodiversity Action Plan 2021-2036,
Urban Forest Action Plan 2020-2040, Integrated Water Action
Plan 2016-2026 and
Climate Change Strategy 2023-2030 by updating the Municipal Planning Strategy,
Planning Policy Framework and Schedule
to Clause 72.08 (Background
documents).
Subject land
The Municipality of Frankston
The Proponent
Frankston City Council
Planning Authority
Frankston City Council
Authorisation
26 June 2024 with conditions
18 July to 20 August 2024
Submissions
Number of Submissions: 8 Supported: 4 Supported with changes: 4 Opposed:
Panel process
Annabel Paul
Supported by
Laura Agius – Panel Coordinator – Planning Panels
Directions Hearing
Considered on the papers
Panel Hearing
Considered on the papers
Site inspections
Not conducted
Frankston PSA C156fran [2025] PPV
Date of this report
17 June 2025
Executive summary
Frankston Planning
Scheme Amendment C156fran (the Amendment) seeks to implement the key directions
from the following documents into
the Frankston Planning Scheme:
Frankston City
Integrated Water Action Plan 2016 – 2026 (June 2016) (Integrated Water
Frankston City
Urban Forest Action Plan 2020 – 2040 (June 2020) (Urban Forest AP).
Frankston City
Biodiversity Action Plan 2021 – 2036 (November 2021) (Biodiversity
Frankston City
Climate Change Strategy 2023 – 2030 (April 2023) (Climate Change
In particular, the Amendment seeks to update the
Municipal Planning Strategy in relation to environmental and landscape values;
coast and foreshore; waterways and wetlands; biodiversity and indigenous
vegetation; environmental risks and amenity, including climate
change; and
environmental sustainability and infrastructure. It also seeks to update
clauses of the Planning Policy Framework in
relation to the protection of
biodiversity; urban forest; urban design and integrated water management.
The Amendment encourages increased canopy tree coverage and protection of
biodiversity across the municipality; improved waterway
management and health to
reduce localised flooding and reliance on water mains; and designing and
managing built form and physical
infrastructure to better respond to climate
Key issues raised in submissions included:
science-based information in the Municipal Planning Strategy
projections on climate change impacts have not been addressed by the
deletion of
references to the ‘precautionary principle’ in addressing climate
recommendations
for a new strategic direction at Clause 02.02-2 (Environmental Risk and
process and
community consultation of the Amendment
the proposed
policy changes associated with the background documents, noting that some of the
actions would now be completed (more
specifically from the Integrated Water
background documents are not referenced in the MPS and do not align with
relevant legislation, policies and plans.
The Panel finds that the
Amendment is strategically supported and is expected to have positive
environmental, social and economic
Council has proactively sought to address submissions and made changes to the
Amendment to provide for a Day 1 version of the controls.
With these changes
there is only one submitter that has outstanding concerns with the
While understanding suggestions made by the submitter to encompasses a
broader range of scientific studies and strategies, the Amendment
provides appropriate updates to the Planning Scheme on the basis of the
background documents. The Amendment process has
been undertaken in accordance
Planning and Environment Act 1987
and the inclusion of the
background documents at Clause 74.02 rather than within the Municipal Planning
Strategy is in accordance
with the Practitioners Guide to Victora Planning
Based on the reasons set out in this Report, the Panel recommends that
the exhibited Frankston Planning Scheme Amendment C156fran subject to changes
shown in Appendix B that reflect the Day 1
1 Introduction
1.1 The Amendment
(i) Amendment description
purpose of the Amendment is to implement the key directions of the following
Council adopted documents into the Frankston Planning
Frankston City
Council Biodiversity Action Plan 2021-2036 (Biodiversity AP)
Frankston City
Council Urban Forest Action Plan 2020-2040 (Urban Forest AP)
Frankston City
Council Integrated Water Action Plan 2016-2026 (Integrated Water AP)
Frankston City
Council Climate Change Strategy 2023-2030 (Climate Change
Specifically, the Amendment proposes the following
Amend Clause
02.03-2 (Environmental and landscape values) of the Municipal Planning Strategy
(MPS) to introduce additional context
and both new and revised strategic
directions for the coast and foreshore, waterways and wetlands, biodiversity and
indigenous vegetation.
Amend Clause
02.03-2 (Environmental and landscape values) of the MPS to introduce new context
and strategic directions about the urban
Amend Clause
02.03-3 (Environmental risks and amenity) of the MPS to introduce additional
context and new and revised strategic directions
impacts and the Eastern Treatment Plant.
Amend Clause
02.03-5 (Built environment) of the MPS to introduce additional context and new
and revised strategic directions about
environmental sustainability, built form
and design, health and wellbeing and neighbourhood character.
Amend Clause
02.03-8 (Transport) of the MPS to introduce new strategic directions about
active modes of transport and emerging transport
Amend Clause
02.03-9 (Infrastructure) of the MPS to introduce new strategic directions about
infrastructure design and open space
Amend Clause
12.01-1L (Protection of biodiversity) of the Planning Policy Framework (PPF) to
retain and protect vegetation along vegetation
Amend Clause
12.05-2L (Frankston Landscape) of the PPF by updating clause numbering.
Insert Clause
12.05-2L-02 (Urban Forest) in the PPF to protect and enhance the urban
Amend Clause
15.01-1L-02 (Urban Design) of the PPF to encourage deep soil areas for canopy
Insert Clause
19.03-3L (Integrated water management) in the PPF to promote use of water
sensitive urban design including stormwater
Schedule to Clause 72.08 (Background documents) to include a reference to
Frankston City Council Biodiversity Action Plan
2021-2036, Frankston City
Council Urban Forest Action Plan 2020-2040, Frankston City Council Integrated
Water Action Plan 2016-2026
and Frankston City Council Climate Change Strategy
(ii) The subject land
The Amendment applies to the Frankston
municipality.
1.2 Background
Four of the submissions,
being from the neighbouring Council (City of Greater Dandenong) and servicing
authorities (Department of
Energy Environment Climate Action (DEECA), South East
Water and Transport for Victoria) supported or provided no comment to the
Submissions from Melbourne Water and the Country Fire Authority supported the
Amendment however requested changes to the wording of
the exhibited
documentation. Submission 3, from a resident, also supported the Amendment and
made suggested changes.
Frankston Beach Association Inc (FBA) made a submission objecting to the
In response to submissions, Council made several changes to the Amendment
documentation to resolve issues. These changes resolved
all submissions with
the exception of several of the matters raised by the FBA.
The changes are reflected in the Day 1 version of the Amendment.
1.3 Procedural issues
that there was a small number of submissions, and only one objecting party who
did not request to be heard, no hearing was held,
and the matter was considered
through a written process otherwise referred to as ‘on the
1.4 The Panel’s approach
Panel has assessed the Amendment against the principles of net community benefit
and sustainable development, as set out in Clause
71.02-3 (Integrated decision
making) of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment, together with the amendment documentation
background material. All submissions and materials have been considered by the
Panel in reaching its conclusions, regardless
of whether they are specifically
mentioned in the Report.
1.5 Versions of the Amendment
In response to
submissions, Council officers recommended changes to be made to parts of the
exhibited Amendment, as detailed in Table
These changes are reflected in the Day 1 version of the Amendment.
The Panel has considered these changes having regard to the identified issues
and accepts the changes are appropriate.
The Panel’s report is therefore based on this Day 1 version of the
Amendment (Document 11).
submissions and proposed changes
Submission No
Resolved issue
Proposed changes
1 Frankston Beach Association
Clause 02.03-3 Environmental risk and amenity – deletion of the
following text:
‘Apply the precautionary principle when planning for the City to
Reinstatement of Clause 02.03-3 Environmental risk and amenity.
‘Apply the precautionary principle when planning for the City to
1 Frankston Beach Association
Clause 02.03-3 Environmental risk and amenity – deletion of the
Protect the community from the economic, social and environmental risks
associated with flooding and increased flooding in the future
Clause 02.03-3 Environmental risk and amenity – recommend amending
the strategic direction as follows:
‘Protect the community from the economic, social and environmental
risks associated with climate change including flooding and
increasing flood
risk, sea level rise and storm surges
1 Frankston Beach Association
Proposes new strategic direction at Clause 02.03-3 Environmental risk and
amenity, with the following:
Careful planning for risks associated with sea level rise,
including inundation and flooding and an increased frequency of storm surges
extreme weather events, is pivotal to the protection of the community from
economic, social and environmental risks’
Clause 02.03-3 Environmental risk and amenity – recommend amending
the strategic direction as follows:
‘Protect the community from the economic, social and environmental
risks associated with climate change including flooding and
increasing flood
risk, sea level rise and storm surges
3 Private submitter
Clause 02.03-2 Environmental and landscape values – Inclusion of the
coastal dependent
’ with reference to
recreational and tourist use of the coastline and foreshore
as per the Victorian Governments Marine and Coastal Policy 2020 and Frankston
City Councils
Coastal and Marine Management Plan 2024
Amend context at Clause 02.03-2 Environmental and landscape values to
coastal dependent recreation and tourism
3 Private submitter
List ‘Centenary Park’ where sites of environmental significance
are listed i.e. Clause 12.01.1L and Clause 02.03-2.
Centenary Park is currently being reviewed for inclusion in the
Environmental Significance Overlay (ESO) which will be subject to
planning scheme amendment.
The submitter supports this and withdrew their concerns regarding this
6 Melbourne Water
Encourage Council to expand on why development along Kananook Creek
requires ‘careful planning’ with reference to flooding.
The context surrounding development near Kananook Creek is strengthened by
removing the word ‘
Amend context at Clause 02.03-3 Environmental risk and amenity to include
due to climate change impacts’
at the last paragraph.
6 Melbourne Water
Amend Clause 02.03-3 to include: ‘
protect the community from the
economic, social and environmental risks associated with climate change’
to avoid ambiguity and provide clarification on which risks Council seeks to
protect the community from.
Amend proposed Clause 02.03-3 Environmental risk and amenity to:
Protect the community from the economic, social and environmental
risks associated with climate change including flooding and increasing
risk, sea level rise and storm surges
6 Melbourne Water
Encourage Council to refer to the
Integrated Water Management Action
Plan (2016-2026
) to make clear the relevance of Clause 19.03-3L.
Recommend the introduction of a new objective at Clause 19.03-3L
To improve the quality of water and management of storm water runoff
through a water sensitive urban design approach
6 Melbourne Water
Consider the following specific strategic directions:
The protection of significant local assets like the Eastern Treatment
Providing greater water security by increasing Councils uptake of
alternative water sources
Improving the community capacity to engage in integrated management
activities and initiatives
Ensuring the protection and enhancement of high quality open spaces of
community health and recreation during extended periods of
Recommend the introduction of a new strategy to Clause 19.03-3L:
Encourage the use of climate resilient water sources including
recycled water for non-potable purposes
8 Country Fire Authority
Encourage Council to undertake further work to identify any conflicts or
gaps in bushfire policy.
Amend the Explanatory Report to address Clause 13.02-1S (Bushfire
Source: Council Panel Submission (Document 11)
2 Strategic issues
2.1 Planning context
chapter identifies planning context relevant to the Amendment.
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
section 4 of the PE Act
Municipal Planning Strategy
Planning Policy Framework
Clauses 12.01-1L (Protection of biodiversity)
Clause 12.05-2L (Frankston landscape)
Clause 12.05-2L-02 (Urban Forest)
Clause 13.01-1S (Natural hazards and climate change)
Clause 13.01-2S (Coastal inundation and erosion)
Clause 14.02-2S (Water quality)
Clause 15.01-1L-02 (Urban Design)
Clause 19.03-3L (Integrated water management)
Other planning strategies and policies
Plan Melbourne Directions 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5 , 6.6
Ministerial directions
Ministerial Direction 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments); Ministerial
Direction 15 (The Planning Scheme Amendment Process)
Planning practice notes
Planning Practice Note 46: Strategic Assessment Guidelines, September
2.2 Strategic justification
(i) Submissions
submitted the strategic basis for the Amendment was in response to
Council’s declaration (Council meeting of 18 November
2019) that there was
a climate emergency and an emergency response was required by all levels of
government, including local government.
In response, Council prepared the Climate Change Strategy, the Urban Forest
AP and the Biodiversity AP. The Integrated Water AP had
also been developed to
provide an integrated and sustainable approach to water management.
The Amendment seeks to incorporate the key findings of these action plans and
climate change strategy into the Planning Schene to
build resilience into the
Frankston City community through the planning application process.
Council submitted:
the Urban Forest
AP seeks actions to meet targets for increasing tree canopy throughout the total
municipality to a total canopy of
20 per cent by 2040
this measure is
to contribute to reducing the urban heat island effect and changing climate
the Biodiversity
AP provides actions to ensure that Council meets targets for increasing
community connection with nature, improving
habitat connectivity, protecting
flora and fauna, and ensuring biodiversity is both resilient to climate change
and contributes to
mitigating the impacts of climate change
the Integrated
Water AP seeks to reduce reliance on mains water, increase alternative water
supplies, better manage storm water and
wastewater, and improve the quality of
stormwater reaching waterways
the Climate
Change Strategy provides actions to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions and assist
the natural environment, community and
economy to adapt the climate
FBA welcomed the strategic basis of the Amendment to
introduce four environmentally focused plans into the Planning Scheme as
documents. FBA endorsed the strong policy direction and strategic
action to ensure canopy tree preservation and to reduce losses
to biodiversity.
However, the FBA considered that some of the proposed changes with the Amendment
reduced policy to generalised
statements that lacks the required information and
data on which to base strategic actions and plans.
All other submitters either supported the strategic basis of the Amendment or
did not object.
Melbourne Water supported Council’s efforts to improve the protection
of biodiversity and canopy coverage and the application
of integrated water
management principes and acknowledgements of climate change impacts.
DEECA supported the emphasis on biodiversity improvements, reducing the heat
island effect, mitigating localised flooding, enhancing
water security and
strengthening the City’s resilience to climate change.
Submitter 3 commended the formulation of the environmental and climate change
(ii) Discussion
The Amendment has received broad strategic support,
implementing key environmental actions.
Council’s Vision within the MPS at Clause 02.02 states that the Council
Plan contains several strategies to:
Protect and
enhance heritage, unique characteristics and the environment of the
municipality.
environmentally sustainable design innovation and architectural excellence.
healthy and safe environment for residents, workers and visitors.
transport planning by providing safe and functional pedestrian, bicycle and
vehicle networks.
Minimise the
impact of climate change, reduce pollution and encourage the sustainable use of
natural resources.
Protect and
preserve biodiversity and enhance the natural environment.
Directions at Clause 02.03 include:
significant coastal remnant vegetation and ecosystems
Ensure natural
coastal processes are protected
Manage the loss
and fragmentation of indigenous vegetation and Australian native vegetation to
avoid the loss of biodiversity
‘precautionary principle’ when planning for the City to help avoid
serious or irreversible climate change effects
environmentally sustainable design and integrated water management measures in
new development.
The PPF seeks to:
Protect and
enhance Victoria’s biodiversity (Cl 12.01-1S)
Protect and
enhance the marine and coastal environment (Cl 12.02-1S)
Protect and
enhance waterway systems, including river and riparian corridors, waterways,
lakes, wetlands and billabongs (Cl 12.03-1S)
Minimise the
impacts of natural hazards and adapt to the impacts of climate change through
risk-based planning (Clause 13.01-1S).
The Panel is satisfied that
the Amendment furthers these provisions of the Planning Scheme and is consistent
with the objectives of
planning in Victoria and objectives of the planning
at section 4 of the
Planning and Environment Act
(PE Act), that seeks (amongst other matters):
To provide for
the protection of natural and man made resources and the maintenance of
ecological processes and genetic diversity.
To provide for
explicit consideration of the policies and obligations of the State relating to
climate change, including but not limited
to greenhouse gas emissions reduction
targets and the need to increase resilience to climate change, when decisions
are made about
the use and
development
(iii) Conclusions
For the reasons set out in this report, the Panel
concludes that the Amendment:
is supported by,
and implements, the relevant sections of the Municipal Planning Strategy and
Planning Policy Framework
is well founded
and strategically justified
should proceed
with changes included in the Day 1 version of the
3 Climate change and coastal hazards
3.1 The issue
issue is whether the Amendment appropriately references climate change impacts
and coastal hazards.
3.2 Climate change impacts
(i) Submissions
1 was critical of the proposal to delete reference to research conducted by the
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation (CSIRO) at Clause
02.03-3 (Environmental risk and amenity) illustrating that Frankston City
Council is significantly
exposed to climate extremes and natural hazards.
Council stated that climate change impacts are a global issue and therefore
Frankston specific statements are not appropriate to be
included in the Planning
Submitter 1 referred to the report,
Port Phillp Bay Coastal Hazard
Assessment 2022
(Coastal Hazard Assessment), being a science-based
assessment by the CSIRO that they consider needs to be addressed in policy and
by strategic actions in the Planning Scheme. They noted that the
Coastal and Marine Management Plan 2023-2030
(CMMP) provided updated climate
change information.
Council stated that the Coastal Hazard Assessment
and have not been considered in the Amendment and:
the CMMP is
currently with the Minister for Environment for consideration
the Coastal
Hazard Assessment is to be implemented at the state level through its own
Planning Scheme Amendment.
(ii) Discussion
The Panel agrees with Council that the provision to
be deleted is a general statement that describes broad climate change impacts
rather than providing direction specific to Frankston. As part of the Victorian
Governments’ Smart planning reforms, councils
are directed to simplify and
modernise planning policy, that includes avoiding generic statements and
repetition.
The Amendment is based on four background documents. Including content from
other policies is beyond the scope of the Amendment.
3.3 Sea level rise
Submitter 1 considered
that up-to-date sea level rise projections by a scientific authority, such as
the CSIRO, should be including
in the MPS. They referred to the projected sea
level rise included in the CMMP
being a range modelled by the CSIRO from
0.8 metres to 1.5 metres above 1995-2014 levels at 2120 (Chapter 2.4, p.25).
The submitter suggests the following be included in the MPS at Clause 02.03-3
(Environmental Risks and Amenity).
The CSIRO projects a regional sea level rise between 0.8 metres and 1.4
metres by the year 2100. Sea level rise impacts in Frankston
City will be most
severe during storm surges and storm wave events that coincide with high tides.
Under the present sea levels, the
area under inundation under a 1% AEP storm
tide and a baseline sea level rise of 1.4 metres will undergo a two to
three-fold increase
in Frankston City.
In response, Council said the change to sea level rise of 0.8 metres by 2100
has been set by the Victorian Government and cannot be
changed by Council.
Council’s reference to the State level sea
level rise, is at Clause 13.01-2S (Coastal inundation and erosion), and under
heading Strategies states:
Plan for sea level rise of not less than 0.8 metres by 2100 and allow for the
combined effects of tides, storm surges, coastal processes
and local conditions
such as topography and geology when assessing risks and coastal impacts
associated with climate change.
While as a Statewide clause, this cannot be varied by Council, however in the
local policies a different sea level rise level could
be set if it was not less
than 0.8 metres by 2100.
The PPF currently references the 2017 version of the document,
Planning for Sea Level Rise Guidelines, Port Phillip and
Westernport’
. These guidelines are being updated by Melbourne
Water’s flood engineers. Until this work is done, the State level sea
rise benchmark remains at 0.8 metres by 2100.
The reports that form the basis of this Amendment have not provided evidence
that the projected sea level rise will be greater in
Frankston, and the Panel
notes that the State level benchmark is consistent with the discussion in the
Biodiversity AP, at Section
4.5 the Climate Emergency, noting (P.28):
Models of coastal inundation created by the Department of Environment, Land,
Water and Planning (DELWP) predict sea levels to rise
by 20, 47 and 82 cm by
2040, 2070 and 2100 respectively.
The reference to the projected levels in the CMMP referred to by the
submitter, relate to projections for Eastern Victoria (and not
just Frankston)
and note that these regional projections are for a high emission scenario.
For these reasons, the Panel does not support the additional clause relating
to sea level rise.
3.4 Inundation and flooding
(i) Submissions
1 did not support the proposed change at Clause 02.03-3 (Environmental risk and
amenity), given the significant concerns
with inundation and flooding.
The exhibited version of the Amendment sought to modify the clause as
Protect the community from the economic, social and environmental risks
associated with
flooding and increased flooding in the future
climate change
The submitter requested that references to flooding hazard be retained in the
MPS and suggested a Strategic Direction at Clause 02.03-3:
Careful planning for risks associated with sea level rose, including
inundation and flooding and an increased frequency of storm surges
and extreme
weather evets, is pivotal to the protection of the community from economic,
social and environmental risks.
In response to the submitters concerns, Council agreed to amend this
provision to:
Protect the community from the economic, social and environmental risks
associated with climate change
including flooding and increasing flood risk,
sea level rise and storm surges
(ii) Discussion
The Panel supports Council’s proposed wording
change at Clause 02.03-3, that reintroduces references to flooding and
flood risk, as requested by the submitter.
3.5 Precautionary principle
(i) Submissions
1 was critical of the proposed deletion of the direction at Clause 2.03-3
Apply the ‘precautionary principle’ when planning for the City to
The submitter noted that the precautionary principle is a guiding principle
recognised in a number of key documents including:
Intergovernmental Agreement on the Environment that seeks to integrate
environmental considerations into government decision making
National Strategy for Ecologically Sustainable Development
Environment
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
Environment
Protection Act 2017
Coastal Act 2018
(amened July 2021)
Coastal Policy 2020.
The submitter considered it imperative that the
precautionary principle is retained in the MPS, given the projected hazards
with climate change for Frankston, with incomplete understandings of
natural processes, to guide local strategic decision making.
They requested the
provision be reinstated.
Council agreed to reinstate this provision in the Day 1 version of the
(ii) Discussion
The Panel agrees with reinstating this provision in
Clause 2.03-3 as a guiding principle in consideration of climate change impacts.
(iii) Conclusion
The Panel concludes that the Amendment appropriately
addresses coastal hazards and no further change is required beyond the Day 1
4 Process and form of Amendment
4.1 The issue
issue is whether the process in which the Amendment has been facilitated is
appropriate and whether the background documents should
be refenced in the
4.2 Process and community consultation
(i) Submissions
1 stated that the following comments in the officers’ report (Council
meeting 11 September 2023) that the Amendment
is quite administrative
not considered to be controversial’,
to be misleading and underplay the extent of policy changes.
They were critical that the Amendment was not advertised in print media or on
Council’s ‘Engage Frankston’ website
and considered that the
changes would be better considered in a holistic revision of the MPS and
The submitter considered that the Amendment should align with all relevant
legislation, policies and plans such as the
Environment Protection and
Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
Environment Protection Act 2017
Marine and Coastal Act 2018
(amended 2021);
Marine and Coastal Policy
; and draft Frankston Coastal and Marine Management Plan 2022.
Council advised that it:
consulted with
the community on each of the background documents that form the basis of the
Amendment during their development and
before adoption
prepared them in
accordance with the relevant legislation.
Council added:
when preparing
the Amendment, the changes were developed through a Project Working Group in
consultation with the DTP prior to authorisation.
the Amendment
was formally exhibited from 18 July to 20 August 2024 for 4 weeks in accordance
with the PE Act.
(ii) Discussion
Council has facilitated the Amendment in accordance
with the provisions of the PE Act including four weeks of public notification
required. In addition, the community was consulted on the background documents
that formed the basis of the Amendment.
While a different form of Amendment that included other documents or broader
scope could have been pursued, the process has properly
informed the community
and given them the opportunity to comment. The notification of the Amendment
has been undertaken in accordance
with the PE Act requirements therefore broader
notification is not required. For these reasons, the Panel is satisfied that
proper process has been followed.
4.3 Background documents
(i) Submissions
1 questioned:
appropriateness of including the Integrated Water AP dated from 2016 as a
background document, when actions might reasonably be
expected to have already
been completed or perhaps superseded
the link to the
policy changes from the background documents given there is no reference to
these documents in the MPS.
Council submitted that DTP does not
allow documents to be referenced in the MPS, and all documents are refenced at
Clause 72.08 (Background
documents).
(ii) Discussion
The Practitioners Guide to Victoria’s Planning
Schemes, June 2024, DTP states at Section 6.6 (How to apply external documents),
It is important to avoid inclusion of external documents wherever possible to
keep schemes user-friendly and self-contained. Provisions
should ideally be
drafted to be stand-alone and not rely on external documents. In most instances,
it is preferable to extract relevant
decision making content from a document and
insert that information directly into the scheme.
Further at section 6.6.2 (How to refer to a background document), the Guide
A background document provides information that helps to understand why a
particular policy or provision has been included in the
planning scheme. ...
A background document is not part of the planning scheme and must not be
directly relied
on for decision making. If a background document contains content that is
necessary for
decision making (such as strategies or decision guidelines) then these must
be extracted
and placed in the relevant policy or control.
On this basis, the Panel supports the inclusion of the Integrated Water AP as
a background document as it has been used to inform
policy. Only those parts of
the document that are relevant have been included in the MPS. Other detailed
actions, which may have
been actioned or superseded, simply provide background
context and are not part of the Planning Scheme. Consistent with the directions
above, the background documents are appropriately included at Clause 72.08 and
do not need to be referenced in the MPS.
(iii) Conclusions
The Panel concludes:
The amendment
process has been undertaken in accordance with the PE Act and no further
consultation is required.
The inclusion of
the background documents at Clause 72.08 and not within the MPS is appropriate
and in accordance with the Practitioners
Guide to Victoria’s Planning
A Document list
Description
Provided by
Referred documents
24 April 25
Council report seeking amendment authorisation
Frankston City Council (Council)
24 April 25
Authorisation letter from DTP
24 April 25
Amendment documents:
Explanatory
Instruction
Strategic Directions
Biodiversity
Significant Environments and landscapes
Built Environment
Development Infrastructure
Schedule Background Documents
City Council Urban Forest Action Plan 2020-2040
City Council Integrated Water management Action Plan 2016-2026
City Council Biodiversity Action Plan 2021-2036
City Council Climate Change Strategy 2023-2030
24 April 25
City Planning Reports 11 September 2023
24 April 25
City Planning Reports 24 March 2025
24 April 25
Submissions 1, 1a, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
24 April 25
Submitter Contact Details
24 April 25
Summary of Submissions
Tabled documents
Panel Directions
Planning Panels Victoria (PPV)
Letter of corrected dates
29 April 25
Letter confirming hearing to be ‘on the papers’
28 April 25
Copy of all submissions
Council Part A and Day 1 version of Amendment
Appendix B Panel recommended planning
STRATEGIC DIRECTIONS
Urban Growth
Frankston's population is expected to have modest growth. The availability of
greenfield land is limited due to the designation of
the Urban Growth Boundary
and the green wedge areas.
Strategic direction:
Accommodate
population growth and housing demand in areas best suited to provide a quality
living environment for the intended residents.
Metropolitan Activity Centre
The Frankston Metropolitan Activity Centre (MAC) is one of nine Metropolitan
Activity Centres for the metropolitan area of Melbourne.
It provides a key
transport hub and attracts large scale developments, including those of a
commercial, residential, health, entertainment
and sporting
nature that serve
a wide catchment. In addition, residential development in and around the centre
is increasing.
Matters to be addressed in the centre include provision of housing,
connectivity and way finding, building and streetscape design
relationship to Port Phillip Bay and Kananook Creek.
The Frankston MAC will need to provide additional services and functions to
cater for both the local community and the broader south-east
Melbourne region
and the Mornington peninsula.
Strategic directions:
Encourage and
facilitate the continued role and development of the Frankston MAC as the major
community, employment and commercial
focal point for the municipality and
Incorporate high
quality urban design outcomes including engaging public spaces and greening of
Transform Nepean
Highway into a public boulevard providing an attractive and inspiring address
for Frankston.
Strengthen and
consolidate health and education uses in the MAC within identified precincts and
improve links to these uses from adjacent
Attract more
mixed-use development in the Frankston MAC.
Frankston's Green
Frankston's green wedge comprises of 4,500 hectares and is partly located
within the South East Green Wedge and Mornington Peninsula
Green Wedge. The
green wedges accommodate several different environmental, economic and social
values including wetlands, Eastern
Treatment Plant, sand resources and land fill
The green wedge plays an important role in protecting and preserving land for
agricultural and horticultural activities as well as
the protection and
conservation of flora and fauna within the area.
There is a need to ensure the ongoing protection and management of the green
wedge from unplanned urban land use and development.
Management of bushfire risk
is an ongoing issue and priority within each Green Wedge Precinct.
Strategic direction:
pressure for urban uses in the green wedge areas.
Proposed C156fran
Environmental and landscape values
The municipality’s extensive natural environment encompasses the coast
and foreshore dunes and scrub, heathlands, a diversity
of woodlands and forests,
environmentally significant creeks and internationally significant wetland
areas, and important landscape
Strategic direction:
Protect and
enhance significant remnant vegetation and ecosystems.
Manage competing
demands between environmental protection, landscape amenity, land use and
development.
The coast and foreshore
Frankston City’s coastline stretches 11 kilometres from Osprey Lane to
the north to Kackeraboite Creek at the southern border
of the municipality.
There is 54 hectares of remnant vegetation stretching from Olivers Hill to Keast
Park which provides for the
largest, continuous remnant coastal vegetation in
Melbourne. There are a number of overlapping aims for the foreshore areas,
accommodating a range of
coastal dependent
recreational and
tourism activities, protecting significant remnant vegetation and ecosystem
functions, preserving cultural values
and natural coastal processes, view lines
and generally making the most of one of the municipality’s major
From Oliver’s Hill there are spectacular views across the Bay to
Melbourne and eastwards over the Frankston MAC to Mt Dandenong.
Strategic directions:
Protect and
enhance significant coastal ecosystems and remnant vegetation.
important view lines and vistas from being obscured.
Ensure all land
use supports and positively contributes to natural processes, cultural and
environmental values.
impacts of urbanisation and encroachment of residential development on the
coastal environment, including beach and dune
erosion, environmental weeds,
visual and aesthetic degradation.
Waterways and wetlands
Frankston’s waterways and wetlands are key natural assets and provide
essential ecosystem services to the community. Seaford
Wetlands is Ramsar listed
and of international significance providing a resting place for a variety of
migratory water birds. The
main waterways within Frankston City are Kananook
Creek (and its tributaries which include Boggy Creek, Little Boggy Creek and
Creek) and Sweetwater Creek which flow to Port Phillip Bay.
Watson’s Creek arises within the municipality and flows to Western
The waterways and wetlands of Frankston City have undergone substantial
modification since European settlement. However, despite
this highly modified
environment, they still provide a refuge for local flora and fauna as well as
passive recreation opportunities.
Strategic direction:
waterways, coastal foreshore, wetlands and other habitats and ecosystems from
inappropriate development or environmental degradation.
naturally occurring processes of main waterways and
Biodiversity and indigenous vegetation
Areas of remnant indigenous vegetation (including hollow-bearing trees), on
both public and
private land, have been identified as having significance for
flora and fauna conservation such as the Langwarrin Woodlands, the Langwarrin
and Pines Flora and Fauna Reserves and Frankston Nature Conservation Reserve.
Frankston’s bushlands provide important refuge
for flora and fauna species
at risk of extinction. Minimising vegetation loss and the consequent decline in
biodiversity
is a significant challenge facing the municipality. Biodiversity on private
land is particularly susceptible to the adverse impacts
of further land
fragmentation, increased site coverages and inadequate land management
Strategic directions:
Minimise and
manage the loss and fragmentation of locally indigenous and native vegetation to
avoid loss of biodiversity.
enhance habitat corridors to sustain the health of indigenous flora and fauna
communities by allowing the sage and unimpeded
passage of fauna.
Minimise the
fragmentation and loss of habitat on land along biodiversity corridors
identified in the Strategic Framework Plan Clause
Protect mature
hollow bearing trees
replanting of indigenous plant species.
Urban forest
Council’s urban forest is the sum of all urban trees across the
municipality which are critically
valuable community assets for providing shade, intercepting stormwater,
proving habitat and food for wildlife, storing carbon and
enhancing the
character of streets and parks. Healthy and resilient urban forests are one of
the most efficient and cost-effective
mechanisms in adapting the municipality to
climate change, mitigating urban heat and improving the health and wellbeing of
the community
and liveability of urban areas.
Council’s urban forest faces a number of challenges including:
Continual loss
of tree canopy, estimated 1% loss every four years.
Climate change
creating harsher conditions for trees to survive and thrive
Strategic direction:
Protect and
enhance the urban forest to improve canopy cover and increase the liveability of
Environmental risks and amenity
Climate change impacts
Designing and managing built form and physical infrastructure to better
respond to a changing climate will contribute to improving
the liveability and
sustainability of Frankston City for the
benefit of the community. Reducing
emissions and achieving sustainable land use and development within the built
environment will
The large area of coastline and tidal creek environments are vulnerable to
any increase in sea level, and urban areas are more susceptible
to urban heat
island effect. There is also increased bushfire risks for rural and residential
development in bushland areas of the
municipality.
Careful planning is needed for all developments proposed in coastal waters,
along the foreshore, close to Kananook Creek in terrestrial
and riparian
ecosystems, and in low lying areas of the Frankston municipality including the
Frankston MAC
due to climate change impacts
Strategic directions:
‘precautionary principle’ when planning for the City to help avoid
serious or irreversible climate change effects.
Protect areas of
rural and residential development and subdivision from the threat of bushfire
where bushland vegetation is present.
Protect the
community from the economic, social, and environmental risks associated with
climate change
including flooding and increased flood risk, sea level rise
and storm surges
Ensure that land
use and development along the coastline and inland areas susceptible to storm
surges and inundation needs to respond
to the best available scientific
information for climate change risk.
development responds to a changing climate and helps mitigate against its
impacts by:
Incorporating
Environmentally Sustainable Development.
Prioritising
walking, cycling and use of public transport, shared transport modes and
low-emissions vehicles.
Integrating
water sensitive urban design to reduce impacts of localised flooding and sea
level rise.
Upgrading the
capacity of existing drainage network.
greener, cooler City that reduces urban heat island effect by:
Protecting and
enhancing vegetation on private land and in new development.
canopy cover and diversity of tree species in public open spaces, road reserves
and transport corridors.
Support the
community’s ability to prepare for, respond to and recover from extreme
weather events.
Adapt to and
mitigate the impacts of climate change, particularly in areas likely to be
impacted by sea level rise or extreme weather
Slope Instability
Several areas of known slope instability exist within the municipality. These
Olivers Hill -
an area historically documented for slope instability that has caused
significant damage to infrastructure including
roads and houses since the
The Cliff Road
area documented historically for landslides, slips, slumps and soil creep dating
The Sweetwater
Creek Lower area which extends from the foothills of Frankston Reservoir to Port
Philip Bay at the base of Olivers
Hill and includes the Sweetwater Creek Lower
Nature Reserve.
The potential for ongoing movement in these areas is
dependent on a range of factors including the need to manage environmental
such as vegetation cover, surface and subsurface drainage, slope
stabilisation, rock and soil disturbance, effluent and stormwater
disposal and
provision of services such as electricity, gas and telecommunications.
Strategic direction:
development takes measures to minimise risks of further erosion and
Eastern Treatment Plant
The Eastern Treatment Plant is an important metropolitan resource and needs
to be protected from encroachment by sensitive uses.
This facility produces high volumes of high-quality recycled water that is
currently used on some recreation reserves and housing
estates and has the
potential for wider application, including in agriculture and industry.
The Eastern Treatment Plant also provides a key refuge for local and
migratory water birds including many species of regional, state
and national
significance.
Strategic direction:
Ensure that the
use and development of land around the Eastern Treatment Plant is compatible
with the Plant’s operation and
is not odour sensitive.
Support the
ongoing operations and long-term future of the Eastern Treatment Plant to
continue to provide and improve the efficiency
and sustainability of grey water
use in the green wedge.
infrastructure to manage the risk of flooding to the Eastern Treatment Plant in
response to climate change.
Amenity protection
Care is required in siting and designing non-residential uses in residential
zones to avoid loss of privacy and amenity, while still
providing convenience to
residents living nearby.
Non-residential uses within and adjacent to residential areas may sometimes
impact residential amenity due to the poor design of buildings
or the spaces
around them. There is a need to locate non-residential uses appropriately and
ensure existing buildings (when used)
are retrofitted to address amenity issues
and new buildings are specific purpose designed and built to be responsive to
their setting
and respond to reasonable residential amenity expectations.
Strategic directions:
non-residential uses are responsive to their residential setting and maintain
existing standards of residential amenity.
conflicts between industrial, commercial and residential uses, by supporting
design and built form that address noise, air
quality, traffic and visual
Natural resource management
Rural areas will be maintained and there will be an emphasis on encouraging
agricultural land uses. Council seeks to encourage agricultural
production in
the Carrum Downs and Skye green wedge areas and rural residential development in
the Langwarrin south green wedge area.
Strategic directions:
Support the
retention of productive agricultural land in Carrum Downs and Skye.
Promote rural
residential development in Langwarrin south.
Council seeks to protect extractive industry sites shown on the Potential
landfill sites plan at 02.04 – 8, from incompatible
development:
No. 130 (CAs 19
and 19A) Quarry Road, Langwarrin.
Nos. 150-190
(CAs 17, 17A, 18 and 18A) Quarry Road, Langwarrin.
No. 230 (CAs 16
and 16A) Quarry Road, Langwarrin.
No. 260 (CAs 15,
15A and 15B) Quarry Road/McClelland Drive, Langwarrin.
Nos. 220-300
1-15, LP 13201)
Quarry Road/McClelland Drive, Langwarrin.
Nos. 60 and 65
(Lots 1 and
2, LP 146228T)
Harold Road, Skye.
No. 500 (Lot
and Lots 1 and 2, LP146228) Ballarto Road, Skye.
sites provide an important resource for the disposal of non-recyclable solid
waste for the municipality.
Land filling with solid waste is also a means of rehabilitating quarry sites
by filling large holes and reinstating the landscape
to relatively natural
surface levels. Rehabilitated land fill sites are usually used for public open
Strategic directions:
Protect existing
quarry sites from the encroachment of sensitive uses.
Plan for open
spaces and high priority conservation corridors to replace redundant extractive
and landfill activities.
non-urban zoning for land adjacent to existing extractive industry sites that
have been identified for potential land fill
Ensure that land
that uses that are potentially sensitive to solid waste landfill activities are
located outside recommended buffer
distances to maintain separation between
Proposed C156fran
Built environment and heritage
Built form and design
The municipality is undergoing land use and density change, in a number of
areas including at entrances from new freeway links and
larger scale development
in the Frankston MAC. While Council seeks to facilitate development, this change
needs to be sympathetic
to, neighbourhood character, environmental and heritage
High quality urban design is a key priority for development, both in the
public and private realms. As is also the need to protect
the significant
amenity benefits to the landscape and neighbourhood character quality, gained by
existing vegetation.
Strategic directions:
Improve the
design, amenity and quality of built form in the municipality.
Enhance the
image of the municipality at key entrances, viewpoints and along
boulevards.
Protect existing
canopy trees and provide deep soil areas for new tree canopy cover in urban
Protect and
maintain the integrity of significant Aboriginal culture and post-settlement
heritage places.
passive built form design and net zero carbon buildings.
and wellbeing
Council seeks to support the social, health and economic wellbeing of the
municipality’s communities through land use and development
Ensuring a healthy, connected community is a key priority.
Strategic directions:
active living and community connections through land use and development that
offers recreational and social opportunities.
access to services and community infrastructure for older people, people with
disabilities and vulnerable groups.
access to natural areas and open space to improve the communities health and
Neighbourhood character
There are a wide variety of environments within the City ranging from the
coastal foreshore to the rural residential areas. Many elements
contribute to
the individual character of different parts of the municipality. These elements
include topography, vegetation type
and density, building form, scale, siting,
materials and front fencing.
Development needs to respond to the particular elements of the built form and
natural environment that make up the character of Frankston.
Strategic directions
development respects the preferred landscape character and natural
environment.
development responds to its context and the preferred future character of the
Environmental sustainability
Council seeks to facilitate development that minimises adverse environmental
impacts and will be energy, water and waste efficient.
Strategic directions:
increased residential densities around centres with good public transport access
and a range of community and commercial services
and employment
opportunities.
environmentally sustainable design innovation and integrated water management
measures in new development.
environmentally sustainable urban environment and building design that
facilitates reduction in fossil fuel usage and greenhouse
emissions, integrated
water management, and efficient resource use and waste reduction.
renewable energy generation and energy efficient built
environments.
Changing demographic patterns, lifestyles and housing preferences are
creating a demand for a diversity of housing choices, including
higher density housing, particularly in established areas. It is important to
cater for this demand while protecting or
enhancing the character and
environmental values of the municipality.
The average household size in Frankston is continuing to decline, which means
more dwellings will be required to house the population
of the municipality,
even in areas where population is not expected to rise substantially.
Other factors that will influence the future form of housing development in
the municipality include:
A relatively
youthful population profile in Langwarrin and Carrum Downs and an ageing
population in other parts of the municipality.
pressure for housing and other development in the Frankston MAC and nearby
sections of the foreshore.
Strategic directions:
Encourage the
provision of affordable housing, in locations with existing services and
community infrastructure.
increased residential development while strengthening the character of
established residential areas.
Encourage the
delivery of new housing stock that reflects Frankston’s changing
population requirements.
Facilitate the
supply and even distribution of public and social housing stock across the
municipality.
Promote the
Frankston MAC as a location for significant higher density residential
development, including adjacent areas identified
Metropolitan Activity Centre Structure Plan
(Frankston City Council,
Low density residential areas
The low density residential areas at Frankston South and rural residential
areas to the south and east of Langwarrin occupy areas
of landscape quality and
sensitivity, contribute to housing diversity and add to the distinct character
of Frankston. The visual
impact of development in these areas tends to be a
function of development densities, including lot and dwelling size, and this in
turn has an impact on vegetation retention.
Strategic direction:
Encourage low
density development that protects significant landscape and vegetation
Economic development
A majority of Frankston’s residents travel outside of the municipality
for work, with only about one third recorded as being
employed within the
municipality. Diversification of the employment base to encourage economic
activity to employ residents is desirable.
Health and social assistance have overtaken retail as the largest employing
industry in the municipality. While manufacturing is the
largest contributor to
the economy in terms of gross revenue. Education also makes a significant
contribution.
The Carrum Downs industrial area is an important employment node where
hi-tech, sustainable industry is encouraged to locate.
It is anticipated that there will be a greater demand and scope for tourism
and personal service industries, e.g. leisure and recreation,
childcare, business and finance.
Strategic directions:
Support use and
development that provide for local employment and utilise local skills.
Consolidate and
expand the role of the municipality as the regional capital for health, retail,
education, hospitality, government
services, accommodation, and business
Establish the
municipality as a regional tourism and visitation destination.
Encourage the
emerging or expanding areas of health, education, manufacturing, tourism,
government services and construction through
the revitalization of existing
commercial and industrial areas.
Proposed C156fran
Frankston City Council values an integrated transport network that allows
choice of transport modes, and the movement of people and
goods in a safe and
efficient manner. The provision of such a network provides economic, social and
environmental benefits.
The municipality’s road network includes the Mornington Peninsula and
Peninsula Link Freeways and East Link Tollway, as well
as numerous arterial
roads managed by VicRoads and Council managed major, collector and local access
roads. The road network is largely
complete, with few large scale subdivisions
forecast for the future. The municipality is also served by over 1,000
kilometres of
footpaths and shared use paths that generally run along
Increasing freight handling from Port of Hastings will require an increase in
freight trains utilising the existing Frankston rail
line. This could result in
greater delays to the transport network, both cars and sustainable modes of
transport around Frankston.
Planning for a new freight rail line along Western
Port Highway dedicated for freight from the Port of Hastings, would reduce the
impact to Frankston’s transport systems.
The Frankston train line provides access to Melbourne while the Stony Point
V-Line service provides access through the Mornington
Peninsula. Twenty-four bus
services operate within the municipality, with many utilising the Frankston
Transit Interchange.
Strategic directions:
development that enhances public transport, pedestrian and bike
infrastructure.
Encourage active
modes of transport including walking, cycling and public transport over private
vehicle usage.
Facilitate the
efficient use of roads.
Plan for a rail
freight link between the Port of Hastings and a proposed inland port.
Support emerging
transport modes and technologies that complement existing travel
Proposed C156fran
Infrastructure
Council manages land, property and infrastructure assets on behalf of the
community. These assets directly support the services that
Council delivers to
the community and includes roads, drainage, shared paths, active and passive
open space reserves and community
facilities.
As the municipality continues to grow and mature opportunity exists to
encourage further reducing the use of water for all types of
development and
facilitate the use of alternative water sources.
Monash University Peninsula Campus and the Chisolm Frankston Campus are both
located within the Frankston MAC and provide expanded
educational courses
servicing the wider peninsula region. Further student growth is anticipated
within the campus encouraging the
planning for increasing and or incorporating
student accommodation within the vicinity of the campuses.
Strategic directions:
timely and adequate provision of infrastructure and services.
Identify and
respond to potential infrastructure limitations associated with
development.
Support the
growth and role of tertiary educational institutions and associated student
accommodation.
Minimise water
usage in domestic, commercial and industrial applications, and encouraging the
use of alternative water sources such
as stormwater and recycled water from the
Eastern Treatment Plant
design of new infrastructure is resilient to climate change.
A large number of council parks and public and private golf courses provide
residents with the opportunity for both passive and active
recreation. Council
seeks to enhance this network including links to regional open spaces within the
municipality and in adjoining
council areas, particularly for developing areas.
Council will ensure that the open spaces are developed with recognition of the
existing flora and fauna habitat and links.
Recreation activity nodes are identified along the coast, at Keast Park and
Station Street, Seaford, Kananook Creek mouth and Olivers
Hill, Frankston and
the potential to promote a coastal village theme at Seaford is also
identified.
Council’s strategic directions relating to open space are to:
Provide access
to open space and recreation facilities in developing areas.
Establish links
between areas of regional open space within and with adjoining municipal
Provide a wide
range of active and passive recreation and leisure opportunities.
Encourage the
provision of a network of open spaces and recreation facilities that supports
the protection and enhancement of biodiversity,
urban forest and habitat
Gaming machine gambling is a legal form of recreation for adult members of
the community and needs to be planned for among other forms
of entertainment.
While gaming can bring social and economic benefits, problem gambling can also
have negative impacts on some individuals,
their families and the broader
community. This is of particular concern in Frankston City Council where
gambling losses are high
relative to the Melbourne metropolitan area and several
gaming venues are located in areas of relative disadvantage where residents
vulnerable to problem gambling.
Council’s strategic directions for Gaming are to:
Minimise the
detrimental impacts of gaming on the community resulting from new gaming
Encourage a
reduction in the number of gaming machines in the
municipality.
DEVELOPMENT INFRASTRUCTURE
Development and infrastructure contributions plans
To facilitate the timely provision of planned infrastructure to communities
through the preparation and implementation of development
contributions plans
and infrastructure contributions plans.
Prepare development contributions plans and infrastructure contributions plans,
Planning and Environment Act 1987
, to manage contributions
towards infrastructure.
Collect development contributions on the basis of approved development and
infrastructure contributions plans.
Require annual reporting by collecting and development agencies to monitor the
collection and expenditure of levies and the delivery
of infrastructure.
Policy documents
Consider as relevant:
Development
Contributions Guidelines
(Department of Sustainability and Environment, 2003
- as amended 2007)
Infrastructure
Contributions Plan Guidelines
(Department of Environment, Land, Water and
Planning, November 2019)
Ministerial
Direction on the Preparation and Content of Development Contribution Plans and
Reporting Requirements for Development
Contributions Plans
Ministerial
Direction on the Preparation and Content of Infrastructure Contribution Plans
and Reporting Requirements for Infrastructure
Contributions
Infrastructure design and provision
To provide timely, efficient and cost-effective development infrastructure that
meets the needs of the community.
Provide an integrated approach to the planning and engineering design of new
subdivision and development.
Integrate developments with infrastructure and services, whether they are in
existing suburbs, growth areas or regional towns.
Integrated water management
To sustainably manage water supply and demand, water resources, wastewater,
drainage and stormwater through an integrated water management
Plan and coordinate integrated water management, bringing together stormwater,
wastewater, drainage, water supply, water treatment
and re-use, to:
account the catchment context.
downstream environments, waterways and bays.
Manage and use
potable water efficiently.
Reduce pressure
on Victoria's drinking water supplies.
drainage, water or wastewater infrastructure and operational costs.
Minimise flood
Provide urban
environments that are more resilient to the effects of climate change.
Integrate water into the landscape to facilitate cooling, local habitat
improvements and provision of attractive and enjoyable spaces
for community
Facilitate use of alternative water sources such as rainwater, stormwater,
recycled water and run-off from irrigated farmland.
Ensure that development protects and improves the health of water bodies
including creeks, rivers, wetlands, estuaries and bays by:
stormwater quality and quantity related impacts.
sediment and waste from stormwater prior to discharge from a site.
industrial and commercial toxicants in an appropriate way.
appropriate measures to mitigate litter, sediment and other discharges from
construction sites.
Manage stormwater quality and quantity through a mix of on-site measures and
developer contributions at a scale that will provide
greatest net community
Provide for sewerage at the time of subdivision or ensure lots created by the
subdivision are capable of adequately treating and
retaining all domestic
wastewater within the boundaries of each lot.
Ensure land is set aside for water management infrastructure at the subdivision
design stage. Minimise the potential impacts of water,
sewerage and drainage
assets on the environment.
Protect significant water, sewerage and drainage assets from encroaching
sensitive and incompatible uses.
Protect areas with potential to recycle water for forestry, agriculture or other
uses that can use treated effluent of an appropriate
Ensure that the use and development of land identifies and appropriately
responds to potential environmental risks, and contributes
to maintaining or
improving the environmental quality of water and groundwater.
Policy guidelines
Consider as relevant:
Any applicable
Sustainable Water Strategy endorsed under Division 1B of
Policy documents
Consider as relevant:
Victoria - Water Plan
(Victorian Government, 2016)
Environment
Reference Standard
(Gazette No.
Stormwater - Best Practice Environmental Management Guidelines
Stormwater Committee, 1999)
Permit Applications in Open, Potable Water Supply Catchment Areas
(Department of Sustainability and Environment, 2012)
guideline for water recycling
(Publication 1910, Environment Protection
Authority, March 2021)
information for the Victorian guideline for water recycling
(Publication
1911, Environment Protection Authority, March
Integrated water management
To improve the quality of water and management of stormwater runoff
through a water sensitive urban design.
Maximise on-site infiltration of stormwater by:
Limiting paving
or using pervious paving in new residential development, where possible.
Constructing
on-site stormwater detention with delayed release into the drainage system,
where appropriate.
Incorporating
on-site water recycling systems for run-off.
run-off into garden areas.
Ensure that
buildings and works do not increase or divert overland flows, causing increased
flooding on adjacent properties.
Enhance tree
coverage within areas of localised flooding to stem stormwater flows including
rain gardens and tree pits.
Encourage the
use of climate resilient water sources including recycled water for non-potable
Telecommunications
To facilitate the orderly development, extension and maintenance of
telecommunications infrastructure.
Facilitate the upgrading and maintenance of telecommunications facilities.
Ensure that modern telecommunications facilities are widely accessible and that
the telecommunications needs of business, domestic,
entertainment and community
services are met.
Encourage the continued deployment of telecommunications facilities that are
easily accessible by:
Increasing and
improving access for all sectors of the community to the telecommunications
access to transport and other public corridors for the deployment of
telecommunications networks in order to encourage
infrastructure investment and
reduce investor risk.
Ensure a balance between the provision of telecommunications facilities and the
need to protect the environment from adverse impacts
arising from
telecommunications infrastructure.
Co-locate telecommunications facilities wherever practical.
Planning should have regard to national implications of a telecommunications
network and the need for consistency in infrastructure
design and placement.
Telecommunications - Metropolitan Melbourne
Support the provision of high-quality telecommunications infrastructure in
Melbourne’s employment, urban renewal and growth
areas through early
planning for fibre-ready facilities and wireless infrastructure.
19.03-5S Waste and resource
To reduce waste and maximise resource recovery to reduce reliance on landfills
and minimise environmental, amenity and public health
Ensure future waste and resource recovery infrastructure needs are identified
and planned for to safely and sustainably manage all
waste streams and maximise
opportunities for resource recovery.
Ensure the long-term viability of waste and resource recovery infrastructure
(including state and regional waste and resource recovery
hubs) is secured
through the use of defined buffer areas that protect against encroachment from
incompatible land uses.
Ensure waste and resource recovery facilities are sited, designed, built and
operated so as to minimise impacts on surrounding communities
environment.
Enable waste and resource recovery facilities to be located in proximity to
other related facilities and to materials' end-market
destinations, to reduce
the impacts of waste transportation and improve the economic viability of
resource recovery.
Site, design, manage and rehabilitate waste disposal facilities to prevent or
minimise contamination of groundwater and surface waters,
litter, odour, dust
Integrate waste and resource recovery infrastructure planning with land use and
transport planning.
Encourage technologies that increase recovery and treatment of resources to
produce high value, marketable end products.
Encourage development that facilitates sustainable waste and resource recovery,
including facilities for Victoria’s container
deposit scheme.
Policy guidelines
Consider as relevant:
Any applicable
Regional Waste and Resource Recovery Implementation Plan.
Consider as relevant:
Waste and Resource Recovery Infrastructure Plan
(Sustainability Victoria,
and storage of combustible recyclable and waste materials - guideline
(Publication 1667, Environment Protection Authority, October 2018)
Best Practice
Environmental Management Guideline (Siting, Design, Operation and Rehabilitation
of Landfills)
(Environment Protection Authority, 2015)
Constructing and Operating Composting Facilities
(Publication 1588,
Environment Protection Authority, June 2015)
Recommended
separation distances for industrial residual air emissions
(Publication
1518, Environment Protection Authority, March 2013)
Management and Recycling in Multi-unit Developments. Better Practice Guide
(Sustainability Victoria, 2019)
Victoria A New Economy
(DELWP, February 2020
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.31 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter