URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VICmr/2025/76.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:31:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
'GB4' and Sustainability Victoria (Freedom of Information) [2025] VICmr 76; (16 June 2025)
Notice of Decision and Reasons for Decision
Sustainability Victoria
Decision date:
16 June 2025
Exemptions and provision considered:
Sections 30(1), 34(1)(b), 35(1)(b), 25
'GB4' and Sustainability Victoria
(Freedom of Information) [2025]
VICmr 76 (16 June 2025)
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION – landfill operators – disposal of
hazardous waste – Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
– Recycling
Victoria – development of government policy – commercially sensitive
information – public interest
All references to legislation in this document are to the
Information Act 1982
) unless otherwise stated.
Notice of Decision
I have conducted a review under section 49F of the
Agency’s decision to refuse access to a document requested by the
under the FOI Act.
My decision on the Applicant’s request differs from the Agency’s
decision and further information is to be released. However,
I am satisfied
sections 30(1) and 34(1)(b) applies to the document in part.
The document is to be released in accordance with the marked-up copy provided
to the Agency with my decision.
Please refer to the end of the decision for information about review rights
through the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
My reasons for decision follow.
Penny Eastman
Public Access Deputy
Commissioner
16 June 2025
Reasons for Decision
Background to review
Applicant made a request that was transferred to the Agency from the Department
of Energy, Environment and Climate Action, seeking
access to the
[t]he report, completed by [a third party] into the
short, medium and long term need for landfill disposal of category B hazardous
Agency identified one document falling within the terms of the request, being
[the report]. Access to the document was refused
in full under sections 30(1),
34(1)(b) and 35(1)(b). The Agency’s decision letter sets out the reasons
for its decision.
Review application
Applicant sought review by the Information Commissioner under section 49A(1) of
the Agency’s decision to refuse access.
the original FOI request to the Agency, the Applicant confirmed they do not
require personal affairs information in the document.
This information has
therefore been removed as it is irrelevant to the request.
Applicant and the Agency were invited to make a written submission under section
49H(2) in relation to the review.
have examined a copy of the document subject to review and considered all
relevant communications and submissions received from
the parties, including the
Agency’s response to my preliminary view as discussed below.
note Parliament’s intention the FOI Act must be interpreted so as to
further the object of the Act and any discretions conferred
by the Act must be
exercised, as far as possible, so as to facilitate and promote the disclosure of
information in a timely manner
and at the lowest reasonable cost.
conducting a review under section 49F, section 49P requires that I make a new or
‘fresh decision’. Therefore, my review
does not involve determining
whether the Agency’s decision is correct, but rather requires my fresh
decision to be the ‘correct
or preferable
This involves
ensuring my decision is correctly made under the FOI Act and any other
applicable law in force at the time of my decision.
Preliminary
provided the Agency with my preliminary view that the document was not exempt in
full. In doing so I advised I did not consider
the document was exempt under
sections 34(1)(b) or 35(1)(b), and provided a marked up copy of the document
with my view on the material
exempt under section 30(1).
Agency responded noting it understood but did not agree with my preliminary
view. It requested, in particular, that I reconsider
the application of section
34(1)(b) to a small amount of additional information, being the names of
businesses referred to in the
decision in relation to that information is described
Review of exemptions
Section 30(1) – Internal working documents
30(1) has three requirements:
(a) the document must disclose matter in the nature of opinion, advice or
recommendation prepared by an officer or Minister, or consultation
deliberation that has taken place between officers, Ministers or an officer and
a Minister; and
(b) such matter must be made in the course of, or for the purpose of, the
deliberative processes involved in the functions of an
agency or Minister or of
the government; and
(c) disclosure of the matter would be contrary to the public interest.
exemption does not apply to purely factual material in a
term ‘officer of an Agency’ is defined in section 5(1). It includes
a member of the agency, a member of the agency’s
staff, and any person
employed by or for the agency, regardless of whether they are subject to the
Public Administration Act 2004
(Vic) apply or not.
the circumstances of the matter, I consider the external consultant who
completed the report to be an officer of the Agency for
the purpose of the FOI
Act and my consideration of section 30(1).
First requirement
– Opinion, advice, recommendation, or consultation or deliberation
am satisfied that certain content in the document is in the nature of opinion,
advice or recommendation. I am also satisfied that
certain content contains
factual data that is intertwined with the opinions of agency officers.
the document also contains factual content that is not intertwined with opinion,
advice or recommendation and this factual
content is not exempt under section
Second requirement – Deliberative process
am satisfied the document was prepared for the deliberative processes of the
Agency in the development of the Victorian Recycling
infrastructure Plan
Third requirement - Would disclosure of the
documents be contrary to the public interest?
deciding if release is contrary to the public interest, I must consider all
relevant facts and circumstances remaining mindful
that the object of the FOI
Act is to facilitate and promote the disclosure of information. This requires a
‘process of the
weighing against each other conflicting merits and
The balancing of
public interest factors for and against disclosure does not begin from empty
scales or a blank page. Instead, I
consider the FOI Act requires the balancing
to occur from and within a default position that the document or information
deciding whether the information exempted by the Agency would be contrary to the
public interest, I have given weight to the following
(a) the right of every person to gain access to documents under the FOI Act;
(b) the degree of sensitivity of the issues discussed in the document and the
broader context giving rise to the creation of the
(c) the stage of a decision or status of policy development or a process being
undertaken at the time the communications were made;
(d) whether disclosure of the document would be likely to inhibit communications
between Agency officers, essential for the agency
to make an informed and
well-considered decision or participate fully and properly in a process in
accordance with the Agency’s
functions and other statutory obligations;
(e) whether disclosure of the document would give merely a part explanation,
rather than a complete explanation for the taking of
a particular decision or
the outcome of a process, which the Agency would not otherwise be able to
explain upon disclosure of the
(f) the impact of disclosing the document in draft form, including disclosure
not clearly or accurately representing a final position
or decision reached by
the Agency at the conclusion of a decision or process; and
(g) the public interest in the community being better informed about the way in
which the Agency carries out its functions, including
its deliberative,
consultative and decision-making processes and whether the underlying issues
require greater public scrutiny.
reviewed the document and submissions received, I am satisfied disclosure of
certain information would be contrary to the public
management of hazardous waste is a government responsibility carefully managed
and subject to significant public scrutiny.
these circumstances the public interest in disclosure often weighs heavily in
favour of transparency. However, this document contains
information prepared by
the Agency at an early stage of policy development. It also involves government
engaging with the private
sector that has specialist expertise. I note the
government is responsible for ensuring the community has access to the services
the facility provides, and that it delivers value for money in a competitive
environment.
my view, disclosure of certain information in the document could effect the
ability of government to deliver to the community the
management of hazardous
waste. This clearly would not be in the public interest.
may be that as time passes and the waste management options have been further
considered, that the document would be much less
sensitive and disclosure would
no longer be contrary to the public interest.
Accordingly,
at this time, certain information, as set out in the marked up copy of the
document provided to the Agency with the decision,
is exempt under section
I have determined that disclosure of certain information in the document would
not be contrary to the public interest.
purpose of the report is to inform the Agency’s strategic planning for
hazardous waste and development of the VRIP, which
I consider to be an issue of
public interest.
responsibility for landfill planning transferred from the Agency to Recycling
) after the report was completed. RV’s website provides
information about online consultation with stakeholders during March
2024 to inform the development of the VRIP. It also hosted online information
sessions to provide further insights to the
VRIP and gain feedback from
stakeholder participants.
consider some of the information to relate to current circumstances, for example
waste types and tonnage, that can be released without
harm to the Agency
fulfilling its functions.
also consider it to be in the public interest for agencies to be transparent and
accountable in the performance of functions and
the use of resources involving
tax-payer funding. I am of the view that disclosure of certain information in
the document is consistent
with the principles of good governance in promoting
trust and confidence in government.
Accordingly,
I have determined the remainder of the document is not exempt from release under
section 30(1).
Section 34(1)(b) – Business, commercial
or financial information of an undertaking
34(1)(b) provides a document is an exempt document if its disclosure under the
FOI Act would disclose information acquired
by an agency (or a Minister) from a
business, commercial or financial undertaking and:
(a) the information relates to other matters of a business, commercial or
financial nature; and
(b) the disclosure of the information would be likely to expose the undertaking
unreasonably to disadvantage.
Was the information acquired from a business, commercial or financial
undertaking?
document contains data relating to volumes of waste for landfill disposal that
was acquired from a third party business undertaking,
being a waste facility
note the Agency’s advice that since the document was written, the business
has been acquired by another business undertaking.
document also contains information about a number of waste disposal companies,
including the types of waste they manage.
Does the information
relate to matters or a business, commercial or financial nature?
am satisfied the data on volumes of waste for landfill disposal, and financial
data relating to gate fees and costs for landfill
disposal, are of a business,
commercial or financial nature.
Would disclosure of the
information be likely to expose the undertaking unreasonably to
disadvantage?
34(2) provides that in deciding whether disclosure of information would expose
an undertaking unreasonably to disadvantage,
for the purposes of paragraph (b)
of subsection (1), an agency or Minister may take account of any of the
following considerations—
(a) whether the information is generally available to competitors of the
undertaking;
(b) whether the information would be exempt matter if it were generated by an
agency or a Minister;
(c) whether the information could be disclosed without causing substantial harm
to the competitive position of the undertaking; and
(d) whether there are any considerations in the public interest in favour of
disclosure which outweigh considerations of competitive
disadvantage to the
undertaking, for instance, the public interest in evaluating aspects of
government regulation of corporate practices
or environmental controls—
and of any other consideration or considerations which in the opinion of the
agency or Minister is or are relevant.
phrase ‘expose the undertaking unreasonably to disadvantage’ in
section 34(1)(b), contemplates disclosure of documents
under the FOI Act may
expose a business undertaking to a certain measure of disadvantage. By the
introduction of the word ‘unreasonably’
in section 34(1)(b), I
consider Parliament determined this exemption applies where an undertaking would
be exposed ‘unreasonably’
to disadvantage only, rather than where
disclosure would result in any measure of exposure to disadvantage.
note that while the Agency consulted with the current management of the
[specified] facility, the Agency could not provide a copy
of the document to it
(given its confidentiality). This business undertaking was therefore unable to
assess specifically how disclosure
might affect them. However, I can see that
they advised they thought commercially sensitive information should be redacted
I note that in a second submission to OVIC, the Agency provided more information
the impact disclosure would have on the
current management of [the facility] and Recycling Victoria.
therefore acknowledge the difficulties with the Agency in processing the
request, also noting that responsibility for waste management
moved from the
Agency to Recycling Victoria in 2023, adding complexity to the decision.
also note that the Agency advised it was not able to consult with all the
businesses concerned because they would not have been
able to share the
document, and because some of the data is aggregated.
reviewed the document, and the Agency’s confidential submissions in
relation to section 34(1)(b) and consultation notes,
I am not satisfied
disclosure of certain information would place the businesses noted in the
document to disadvantage for the following
(a) while the information may not be known to
competitors, I consider the document contains information for the [specified]
specifically, that would be unique to it;
(b) much of the data regarding [the facility] relates to 2020-2021, around four
(c) some of the information is aggregated and therefore could not be attributed
to a certain business;
(d) some of the information in the document is general information about the
management of waste, types of waste, and relevant legislation;
(e) while I appreciate waste management is a competitive market, the document
does not contain technical detail of how [the facility]
is managed, or any
detail about how waste is treated or specific costs of any of its operations;
(f) I am not satisfied, based on the information before me, that the information
could not be released without causing substantial
harm to any of the businesses
(g) I consider the public interest in disclosure of information about the
facility, given community interest in it, and the potential
impact on the
community, outweighs any disadvantage experienced by disclosure of information
provided by any of the businesses concerned.
Accordingly,
I have determined that most of the document is not exempt under section
I note the Agency’s submissions about the competitiveness of the waste
management industry, and so I have determined
that the disclosure of the names
of certain business undertakings as highlighted by the Agency on [date] would
expose them unreasonably
to disadvantage.
therefore find that certain content is exempt under section 34(1)(b). This
information is reflected in the marked-up copy of the
document provided to the
Agency following my decision.
Section 35(1)(b) –
Information obtained in confidence
note that some of the information claimed exempt by the Agency under section
35(1)(b) I have determined is exempt under section
30(1). I have not further
considered section 35(1)(b) to that same information.
document is exempt under section 35(1)(b) if two conditions are
(a) disclosure would divulge information or matter communicated in confidence by
or on behalf of a person or a government to an agency
or a Minister; and
(b) disclosure would be contrary to the public interest as it would be
reasonably likely to impair the ability of an agency or a
Minister to obtain
similar information in the future.
35(2) provides that this section does not apply to information—
(a) acquired by an agency or a Minister from a business, commercial or financial
undertaking; and
(b) that relates to trade secrets or other matters of a business, commercial or
financial nature.
Was the information obtained in confidence?
information communicated by an individual to an agency was communicated in
confidence is a question of
doing so, it is necessary to consider the position from the perspective of the
communicator, noting confidentiality can be expressed
or implied from the
circumstances of a matter.
Agency’s decision letter provides the responses received during its third
party consultation with the EPA and RV, in seeking
their views on disclosure of
the document:
RV advised that the [report] “contains
confidential information received from landfill operators or other third
EPA responded...“[t]he report is based on considerable information
provided by EPA, which EPA has obtained because of the reporting
obligations of
proponents provided by the
Environment Protection Act 2017
information in the report that proponents give to EPA is used to regulate them,
which can lead to sanction for breach of the
law and subsequent review rights.
EPA gave this information to Sustainability Victoria (SV) in confidence. It
would not provide similar
information in future if it thought that SV would
disclose it, whether that is under the FOI Act. To the extent that the
information
appears in the document and to which the analysis by the authors of
the report could allow a person to determine the information
EPA has provided,
EPA considers that it should be exempt under section 35(1)(b) of the FOI
am satisfied that information obtained from the landfill operators and the EPA
to inform the report was provided in confidence.
Would disclosure
of the information be contrary to the public interest as it would be reasonably
likely to impair the ability of an
agency to obtain similar information in the
accept there was no statutory obligation on the EPA to provide information it
obtained under the
Environment Protection Act 2017
, to the Agency for the
purpose of producing the report. However, there is a statutory obligation for
the waste services concerned
to provide information to the EPA. Disclosure would
therefore not impede the collection of the information by the EPA.
am also mindful of the EPA’s position that would not provide similar
information in future if it thought the Agency would
disclose it to the extent
that disclosure could allow a person to determine the information EPA has
I also consider the EPA has an obligation to work with other government agencies
to deliver government services.
also note the information is at a high level, some is aggregated, and some is
very brief. I am not satisfied, in these circumstances,
that the information is
so sensitive that its disclosure would prevent the Agency from receiving similar
information in the future.
Accordingly,
I have determined the remainder of the information in the document is not exempt
section 35(1)(b).
– Deletion of exempt
or irrelevant information
requires an agency to grant access to an edited copy of a document where it
is practicable to delete exempt or irrelevant information
and the applicant
agrees to receiving such a copy.
Determining
what is ‘practicable’ requires consideration of the effort and
editing involved in making the deletions ‘from
a resources point of
and the effectiveness
of the deletions. Where deletions would render a document meaningless, they are
not ‘practicable’
and release of the document is not required under
section 25.
stated above, the Applicant does not seek access to personal affairs information
and therefore this content is irrelevant for the
purposes of this review.
have considered the effect of deleting irrelevant and exempt information from
the document. In my view, it is practicable for the
Agency to delete the
irrelevant and exempt information, because it would not require substantial time
and effort, and the edited
document would retain meaning.
the information before me, I am not satisfied the document is exempt in full
from release under
section 30(1)
I am satisfied certain information is exempt under
sections 30(1)
it is practicable to provide the Applicant with an edited copy of the document
with irrelevant and exempt information deleted in
accordance with
access is granted to the document in part.
document is to be released in accordance with the marked-up copy provided to the
Agency following my decision.
Timeframe to seek a review of my
either party to this review is not satisfied with my decision, they are entitled
to apply to VCAT for it to be
Applicant may apply to VCAT for a review up to 60 days from the date they are
given this Notice of Decision.
Agency may apply to VCAT for a review up to 14 days from the date it is given
this Notice of Decision.
Information
Alternatively, VCAT may be contacted by email at
admin@vcat.vic.gov.au or by
telephone on 1300 018 228.
Agency is required to notify the Information Commissioner in writing as soon as
practicable if either party applies to VCAT for
a review of my
party review rights
I have determined to release a document that contain information of a business,
financial, commercial nature relating to a business
undertaking, and information
claimed exempt under
section 35(1)(b)
, if practicable, I am required to notify
the relevant third parties of their right to seek review by VCAT of my decision
days from the date they are given
this case, I am satisfied it is practicable to notify the relevant third parties
of their review rights and confirm they will be
notified of my decision, either
on the date it is made or as soon as practicable thereafter.
When this decision takes effect
decision does not take effect until the third parties’ 60 day review
period expires. If a review application is made to VCAT,
my decision will be
subject to any VCAT determination.
Document No.
Date of document
Document Description
No. of pages
Agency Decision
OVIC Decision
Refused in full
Sections 30(1)
Release in part
Sections 30(1)
The document is to be released in accordance with the
marked-up copy provided to the Agency following my decision.
Drake v Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 24 ALR 577
Maryborough Mining Warden
[1975] HCA 17
(1975) 132 CLR 473
Department of Premier and Cabinet v Hulls
[1999] VSCA 117
Hulls v Victorian
Casino and Gambling Authority
(1998) 12 VAR
Ryder v Booth
[1985] VicRp 86
[1985] VR 869
XYZ v Victoria Police
Victoria Police
[2010] VCAT 255
referring to Barling v Medical Board of Victoria
(1992) 5 VAR 542
Mickelburough v
Victoria Police
[2009] VCAT 2786
The Herald and Weekly
Times Pty Limited v The Office of the Premier
[2012] VCAT 967
Honeywood v
Department of Human Services
[2006] VCAT 2048
RFJ v Victoria
Police FOI Division
(Review and Regulation)
[2013] VCAT 1267
The Applicant in section
50(1)(b) and the Agency in section
Sections 50(3F) and
Sections 49P(5),
50(3A), 50(3AB) and 52(3).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (324 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter