URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2020/59.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:24:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Vu v The Queen [2020] VSCA 59 (23 March 2020)
SUPREME COURT
OF VICTORIA
COURT OF APPEAL
S APCR 2018 0287
HUNG ANH VU
KAYE, T FORREST and OSBORN JJA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
12 March 2020
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
23 March 2020
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2020] VSCA 59
JUDGMENT APPEALED FROM:
[2018] VSC 732 (Tinney
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal – Sentence – Murder –
Recklessly causing serious injury – Found not guilty of
murder but guilty
of manslaughter – Total effective sentence of 15 years’ imprisonment
with non-parole period of 11 years
– Pre-trial offer to plead guilty to
manslaughter – Utilitarian value and sentencing benefits of plea offer
post-offence conduct mitigatory – Whether individual
sentences, total effective sentence and order for cumulation manifestly
excessive – Whether principle of totality infringed – Serious
examples of manslaughter and recklessly causing serious
Individual sentences within range – Order for cumulation manifestly
excessive – Leave to appeal granted
– Appeal allowed –
Resentenced to 13 years and six months’ imprisonment with non-parole
period of 10 years –
DPP v Grabovac
[1998] 1 VR 664
considered.
APPEARANCES:
For the Applicant
Mr S Bayles with
Mr J Connolly
Stary Norton Halphen
For the Respondent
Ms M A Mahady with
Mr P J Smallwood
Ms A Hogan, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
T FORREST JA
applicant was indicted to stand trial in the Supreme Court. He pleaded not
guilty to one charge of murder (charge 1), one charge
of attempted murder
(charge 2), one charge of intentionally causing serious injury (charge 3) and
one charge of recklessly causing
serious injury (charge 4). Charges 3 and 4
were put as alternatives to charge 2.
October 2018, the jury returned a verdict of not guilty to charge 1, but guilty
to manslaughter, not guilty to charges 2 and
3, but guilty to charge
3 On 26 November 2018, the applicant was sentenced
as follows:
Alternative to charge 1
Manslaughter
20 years’ imprisonment
12 years’ imprisonment
Causing serious injury recklessly
Crimes Act 1958
15 years’ imprisonment
6 years’ imprisonment
Total effective sentence:
15 years’ imprisonment
Non-parole period:
Pre-sentence detention:
Other relevant orders
: Forfeiture and disposal orders
4 The applicant applied for leave to
appeal against his sentence on the following grounds:
1. The order for cumulation was excessive and thereby
infringed the totality principle.
2. The learned sentencing judge erred by granting the applicant only a modest
benefit for the utilitarian value of his plea offer.
3. The learned sentencing judge erred by granting the applicant no benefit for
his plea offer other than for its utilitarian value.
4. The learned sentencing judge erred by not treating as mitigating the conduct
of the applicant immediately after the offending.
5. The individual sentences imposed for both offences, the order for cumulation
and the total effective sentence were manifestly
excessive, particularly in
a. The totality principle (see ground 1 above);
b. The finding that the recklessly causing serious injury was a mid-range
example of the offence;
c. The applicant’s offer to plead guilty (see grounds 2 and 3
d. The mitigatory effect of the applicant’s conduct immediately after
the offending (see ground 4 above);
e. There being, it is argued, some evidence of remorse, acceptance of
responsibility and a willingness to facilitate the course
of justice;
f. The finding that the applicant’s prospects of rehabilitation are
‘quite good’;
g. The finding that specific deterrence ‘does not loom large’ in
5 We have concluded that leave to appeal
against the sentence should be refused on grounds 2, 3, 4 and 5 (in part). We
shall grant
leave to appeal and allow the appeal on grounds 1 and 5 (in part).
Background to the
applicant lived in Sunshine West with Laura Chan for many years. They had two
children together. In 2013, the applicant was
imprisoned in New South Wales for
drug offences. He was absent from the family home until 2016. The children
were pre-teenagers
when he was
imprisoned.
his incarceration, Ms Chan commenced and maintained an intimate relationship
with Viet Nguyen. Mr Nguyen moved into the
Sunshine West property and the
couple were married in September 2015. This was kept secret from the
8 In August 2016, the applicant was
released from prison. Shortly prior to this, Mr Nguyen had moved out of the
Sunshine West house.
The applicant resumed living there with Ms Chan and their
children. Mr Nguyen moved to a nearby property and secretly continued
relationship with Ms Chan. Mr Nguyen was introduced to the applicant as a
9 Over the next 12 months, the applicant
heard rumours about Ms Chan’s relationship with Mr Nguyen. He confronted
Ms Chan about
the rumour but she denied it. The applicant’s relationship
with Ms Chan deteriorated; they slept in separate bedrooms and
in the weeks
leading up to the offending on 5 August 2017, they did not speak to each other.
10 On 5 August 2017, the
applicant’s mother and two sons confirmed to him the fact and extent of
the relationship between Ms
Chan and Mr Nguyen. The applicant telephoned Mr
Nguyen and invited him to the Sunshine West property. He then removed a large
knife from a drawer in the kitchen and concealed it beneath a cushion in
the living/dining area of the house.
applicant also telephoned his friend, Minh Nguyen, and told Minh of his concerns
Nguyen, and of his plans to confront
both of them at the Sunshine West property. Minh was sufficiently concerned
after this conversation
to cause him to drive to the Sunshine West property
where a group of the applicant’s friends had gathered.
12 The applicant consumed several glasses of
cognac in the company of his friends. He appeared depressed. His children were
in their bedrooms. Mr Nguyen arrived and after some time, Ms Chan also arrived.
She greeted the visitors and went to her bedroom.
13 The applicant went to Ms Chan’s bedroom,
and asked her to come out and talk to him. She refused and the applicant began
to drag her out of the bedroom. Ms Chan asked for time to get dressed. The
applicant left the bedroom and Ms Chan locked the door.
14 The applicant returned to the living room and
asked the visitors to leave the room so that he could speak to Mr Nguyen and Ms
in private. The visitors waited outside, near the front door of the
property. The applicant then went to Ms Chan’s bedroom,
kicked the locked
door open, took Ms Chan by the arm, and led her out into the living/dining area.
Mr Nguyen and Ms Chan were seated
in the living/dining area. Minh, upon hearing
the sound of the door being kicked, came back into the house through a bedroom
and took up a seat next to the applicant.
15 The applicant questioned Ms Chan and Mr Nguyen
to accept their denials and became irate. Minh tried to calm the
applicant. The applicant retrieved the hidden hunting knife while
Minh tried to
restrain him physically. He told Minh to ‘fuck off’ and broke free.
The applicant stabbed both Mr Nguyen
and Ms Chan to the
16 By the time this occurred, there were five
eyewitnesses to the events: Ms Chan, Mr Nguyen, Minh, Kim Nguyen (the
applicant’s
daughter) and Nam Nguyen (Minh’s brother). Four of
these eyewitnesses survived and all claimed not to have seen the stabbings
themselves. In sentencing, his Honour viewed their evidence with considerable
scepticism:
The evidence was very unsatisfactory. I make it clear I
do not hold that fact against [the applicant], but it does limit my ability
make specific findings of fact about the precise mechanics of the
It is likely that the victims were seated
at the dining table when they were stabbed.
applicant immediately attended to Mr Nguyen and told his daughter to call 000.
He applied pressure to the wound and provided
CPR. At some point, he took
another knife and held it to his chest, but was dissuaded from stabbing himself.
When police spoke to
the applicant at the crime scene, he stated that ‘[Mr
Nguyen] did suicide’. Shortly thereafter, he stated to another
officer that both victims were having an affair and had stabbed themselves out
18 Mr Nguyen died at the scene. He
sustained a single, very deep wound to the chest, coursing through subcutaneous
tissue, the right
pectoralis muscle, the second intercostal space, into the
pericardial sac, and then into the aorta, also penetrating the right lobe
lung. Death occurred very quickly.
19 Ms Chan sustained a
wound to the same part of the chest as Mr Nguyen. She bled from the right
internal thoracic artery, although
ultimately, surgical intervention was not
required and the damage repaired itself. She also suffered damage to a smaller
just below the skin, and a pneumothorax to the right lung which
partially collapsed. A small right haemothorax in the extra-pleural
the right lung was also observed and treated.
20 The applicant admitted to an old prior
conviction for illegal use of a motor vehicle resulting in a fine, and a more
recent conviction
for supplying a commercial quantity of a prohibited drug. On
appeal, this conviction was substituted with a conviction for supplying
indictable quantity of a prohibited drug. The applicant was sentenced to four
years and six months’ imprisonment with a
non-parole period of three years
and five months. It was while he was serving this sentence that the
relationship between the deceased
and Ms Chan developed.
21 On the plea, counsel for the applicant prepared
and tendered written submissions, and supplemented them with extensive oral
submissions.
In summary, counsel set out the following:
Applicant’s
The applicant
was born in Vietnam in 1971 and was, at the time of the plea, aged 47
youngest of three children, who were all born during the Vietnam War. His 84
year old father and 74 year old mother were
present throughout the trial.
applicant’s first 10 years in Vietnam were characterised by hardship and
deprivation. His family was separated, his father
was imprisoned for a time for
trying to leave the country and the children were withdrawn from school.
eventually fled Vietnam in 1981 by boat to Hong Kong. He then lived in an
overcrowded refugee camp for approximately four
or five years.
The family came
to Australia in approximately 1986. After initially settling in Adelaide, the
family came to live in Melbourne.
The applicant completed schooling to Year 11
at Maribyrnong High School.
employed in the textile industry and married when he was around 19 years old.
He and his then wife had three children together.
After working as
a mechanic, the applicant worked at Melbourne City Toyota as an air-conditioning
fitter. He was promoted to the
sales department and continued at this workplace
for 20 years. He worked long hours, six days a week and his marriage broke
He purchased the
Sunshine West property in around 2000, initially with a mortgage of about
$200,000. When he was imprisoned, his
partner, Ms Chan, took over the mortgage
and re-borrowed against the house.
Offer to plead
The applicant
offered to plead guilty to the offence of manslaughter. This offer was made in
writing both before and shortly after
the committal hearing, and again in verbal
discussions before the trial. The prosecution rejected the offer.
No formal offer
was put with respect to the injury to Ms Chan.
Counsel for the
applicant submitted that the applicant was entitled to a significant discount
for his offer to plead guilty. Counsel
submitted that the applicant should
receive a maximum utilitarian benefit and that the offer also evidenced genuine
Circumstances of the
Chan’s affair with Mr Nguyen did not mitigate the offending, counsel for
the applicant submitted that it provided important
context to the crimes.
The applicant
had spent three years in prison, away from his family and community. Upon
release, he was introduced to Mr Nguyen.
The two men became friends, and worked
and socialised together.
The applicant
worked hard to re-establish himself in the community and worked as a handyman,
using the skills he had gained in prison.
applicant first heard the rumours of Ms Chan and Mr Nguyen’s affair, he
did not act upon them straightaway. He said
to his daughter that he was going
to give Ms Chan the benefit of the doubt.
Events following the
Counsel for the
applicant submitted that the applicant’s conduct immediately after the
stabbings should be viewed as mitigatory,
as it demonstrated remorse.
Recklessly causing
serious injury
While the injury
to Ms Chan was serious, there was no evidence of any permanent or ongoing
impairment as a result of the injury.
22 Counsel for the applicant also drew
the court’s attention to the onerous nature of imprisonment, and submitted
should be a substantial measure of concurrency between the sentences
because the offences were committed in the same incident in
succession.
23 The prosecutor accepted that some
discount should be allowed for the applicant’s plea offer, however,
contended that the
judge should not conclude that the offer bespoke remorse,
contrition, acceptance of responsibility or a willingness to facilitate
course of justice. The prosecutor contended that these were serious examples of
these particular offences. Totality had work
to do and some concurrency was
appropriate, but sufficient cumulation was required to reflect that these were
two separate criminal
acts. The main sentencing purposes, so the prosecutor
submitted, were general deterrence, just punishment and denunciation.
Trial judge’s
sentencing reasons
24 In his sentencing reasons, the judge
summarised the facts of the case in similar terms to paragraphs
above. In sentencing the applicant, his
Honour said that he was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
the following facts:
applicant’s stabbing of both victims occurred in the context of his anger
and resentment towards them as a result of their
affair, which was confirmed to
the applicant on the day of the events.
The applicant
decided that he would confront both Mr Nguyen and Ms Chan, and lured the
deceased to his home for that purpose.
The applicant
hid the hunting knife in a location where he would be able to easily access it
during the course of the intended confrontation.
By his own admission, the
reason for secreting the knife was to use it for an illegal purpose in the
course of the proposed confrontation.
He physically
forced Ms Chan to come out from her bedroom to the dining table, intent on
confronting her.
applicant’s stabbing of both victims occurred in circumstances where Minh
was using all available means, including physical
force, in order to try to
prevent him from carrying out these attacks. Neither of the victims presented
any sort of physical threat
to the applicant.
Each stabbing
was inflicted by the applicant’s action of deliberately thrusting the
knife into the chest of the victims.
stabbings followed very closely upon each other. The applicant stabbed Mr
Nguyen first, and then Ms Chan.
The stab wound
to the deceased’s chest was a very deep one.
The stab wound
to Ms Chan’s chest, while not as deep, was still sufficient to penetrate
her chest and damage an important artery.
As a result, she suffered serious
injury as defined in
Crimes Act 1958
25 The sentencing judge considered the
applicant’s personal history as set out by counsel for the applicant on
sentencing the applicant for manslaughter, the judge took into account the
applicant’s offer to plead guilty to the crime
of manslaughter of Mr
There is no question that that [the applicant is]
entitled to a reduction in sentence on account of the utilitarian benefits
to the plea offer [he] made. Had [his] offer been accepted, no trial
would have been necessary, and there would have been the corresponding
time, resources and emotional energy expended in the
The judge considered, however, the
reduction in the applicant’s sentence to which he is entitled to be
‘quite modest’.
the circumstances, the judge was not satisfied that the applicant showed remorse
for his actions.
The only discount
to which the applicant was entitled was that flowing from the utilitarian value
of his plea offer.
27 The judge also took into consideration the
background to the applicant’s
the seriousness of the
crimes of manslaughter and recklessly causing serious
the applicant’s
prior criminal history and the fact that the applicant was on parole at the time
of this offending,
impact of the offending on his
The judge assessed the
applicant’s prospects of rehabilitation to be reasonably good, taking into
account the lack of any
prior convictions for crimes of violence, the fact that
Ms Chan said he had never been violent towards her previously in their
relationship,
his age and his good work
judge concluded that a ‘significant degree of cumulation is
Whilst it is true that [his] stabbings of the two
victims occurred as part of the one course of conduct, were very close in time,
and were seemingly carried out for much the same motive, it cannot be forgotten
that [he] carried out attacks upon not one but two
distinct victims, each attack
necessitating a decision by [him] to deliberately stab the particular
individual, and then [his] action
in pursuit of each decision. Furthermore,
each act was, in its own right, a serious criminal
29 The sentencing principles of
punishment, denunciation and general deterrence were said to be reflected in the
The sentence
also manifest[s] the denunciation by the Court of the
shockingly violent conduct which [the applicant] carried out. Furthermore,
sentence ... must be such as to bring it home clearly to others in the community
who may be minded to act with extreme violence
in carrying out attacks upon
partners and others, for reasons of anger, resentment and jealousy, that such
behaviour will be met
with strong
punishment.
This appeal
30 In his written case, the applicant
The order for cumulation of three years is manifestly excessive and
infringes the totality principle. The overlay in time, conduct
and context
requires substantially less cumulation than ordered. The aggregation of the
sentences is not a ‘just and appropriate
measure of the total criminality
(b) Ground 2:
benefit allowed for the utilitarian value is insufficient. His Honour erred in
concluding that a ‘quite modest’
discount was appropriate and that
when his Honour referred to ‘the overall circumstances of the case’,
he should have
identified what those overall circumstances were.
(c) Ground 3:
The judge erred by declining
to allow any sentencing benefit from the subjective aspects of the
applicant’s plea offer. Specifically,
his Honour failed to infer remorse
from the offer and erroneously characterised the offer as
‘pragmatic’ in the face
of a strong Crown case on the charge of
murder. The judge, it was contended, erred in using the applicant’s
forensic trial
decisions against him when determining whether there was remorse
or contrition.
(d) Ground 4:
The judge erred
in declining to treat the immediate post-offence conduct as a mitigating
feature. He should have accorded some benefit
for the 000 call, the application
of pressure to the wound and the attempts to resuscitate Mr Nguyen. It can be
contrasted to aggravating
post-offence conduct.
(e) Ground 5:
The individual sentences
imposed for both offences, the order for cumulation and the total effective
sentence are manifestly excessive.
31 It its response, the respondent
The order for cumulation is appropriate and the product of a correct
application of the totality principle. Separate harm was caused
to separate
victims in separate acts.
(b) Ground 2:
judge was entitled to conclude that the utilitarian discount for the
manslaughter plea offer be ‘quite modest’.
Alternatively, if his
Honour erred in this assessment, no different sentence should be imposed.
(c) Ground 3:
The judge was correct in
concluding there was no remorse. He was entitled to conclude that the plea
offer was made for a pragmatic
purpose which did not involve remorse, and he was
also entitled to conclude that there was no evidence of genuine contrition,
of responsibility and willingness to facilitate the course of
(d) Ground 4:
The post-offence
mitigatory conduct was only one factor in the overall factual matrix and it was
counterbalanced by other aspects
of the applicant’s immediate post-offence
conduct. In any event, his Honour took into account the post-offence mitigatory
conduct in the overall construction of an appropriate sentence for the
manslaughter charge.
(e) Ground 5:
complaint of manifest excess cannot be sustained. The individual sentences are
stern but within the permissible range, as is
the total effective sentence. The
judge categorised the manslaughter as a ‘very serious example of the crime
of manslaughter’,
in ‘the upper range of seriousness’. His
Honour was also entitled to find charge 2 as a serious example of the offence
recklessly causing serious injury. The sentence of six years is within the
permissible range.
32 There is considerable overlap between
the grounds. We shall make some general observations before individual
consideration of
those grounds. There can be no doubt that the individual
sentences are stern, the order for cumulation is stern and thus the total
effective sentence is also stern, as is the minimum term before parole
eligibility. A stern sentence, however, does not necessarily
bespeak manifest
excess. As this Court has repeatedly stated, a complaint of manifest excess is
difficult to establish.
applicant must show that the sentence was wholly outside the range of sentences
available to the judge.
Sentencing is a discretionary exercise and, in the absence of identifiable
error, an applicant must demonstrate that the sentence
imposed was not
reasonably open.
sentencing range for the crime of manslaughter is strikingly wide, as is the
range of criminal conduct that can cause the relevant
unlawful killing. The
range of conduct commences with ‘a joke gone
and extends to
conduct ‘just short of
We are of the
view that his Honour was correct in characterising this offence of manslaughter
as a ‘serious example of the
manslaughter’
‘the upper range of
seriousness’.
manslaughter verdict that can legitimately be characterised as ‘just short
of murder’. His Honour also correctly
characterised the recklessly
causing serious injury charge as a ‘serious example of that
34 In assessing the
overall objective gravity of the applicant’s conduct, we consider the
following factors, in combination,
establish a very high level of criminality
The applicant
planned a confrontation and secreted a lethal, large knife for use if necessary
in that confrontation.
The applicant
kicked in Ms Chan’s bedroom door and coerced her into the living/dining
The applicant
ushered other guests out of the room in which he and the two victims remained,
and in which he had secreted the hunting
The applicant
could not be physically deterred from attacking his partner and her lover.
Minh’s attempt gave the applicant
an opportunity to pause and withdraw.
The applicant
acted out of uncontrolled anger.
Both of the
applicant’s children were present in the house when he attacked Ms Chan
and Mr Nguyen.
The unlawful act
of stabbing Mr Nguyen in the chest to a depth of approximately 16 to 18 cm was
highly dangerous.
The unlawful act
of stabbing Ms Chan, also in the chest, was highly reckless and caused serious
injury. The applicant must be taken
to have realised that, when he stabbed Ms
Chan, this would probably cause her serious injury but proceeded regardless of
The motivation
for the applicant’s conduct was jealousy in a domestic context.
Nguyen nor Ms Chan was armed, nor did they present any form of physical threat
to the applicant. They were defenceless.
35 We shall initially consider grounds 2
and 3 together, then ground 4, and finally, grounds 1 and 5.
Grounds 2 and 3:
Utilitarian value and no subjective benefits of plea offer
36 These grounds are interrelated and can
be considered together. In essence, the applicant contends that he received
insufficient
sentencing benefit flowing from his offer to plead guilty to
manslaughter. It will be recalled that he originally made this offer
committal proceeding and confirmed it in writing after he was committed for
trial. The applicant contends that this insufficient
benefit was manifested in
(a) He received
an unacceptably modest benefit for the utilitarian value of his plea offer
(ground 2).
(b) He received no benefit at all
beyond this modest utilitarian discount, and in particular, the judge erred in
declining to accord
him ‘subjective benefits’, such as inferring
remorse, a willingness to facilitate the course of justice and an acceptance
responsibility for his actions (ground 3).
37 In our view, his Honour was entitled
to consider the ‘utilitarian’ value of the applicant’s offer
as relatively
modest in the scheme of the overall sentencing reduction available
arising from the plea offer:
Furthermore, I accept that there should be no diminution
in the reduction you receive for the utilitarian benefit due to the fact
the end, you did not plead guilty to manslaughter in front of the jury, and
indeed, conducted your trial on the basis that
you were not guilty of any
That is not to say that you are entitled to a significant discount in sentence
due to your plea offer. In my view, in the overall
circumstances of this case,
the reduction in sentence to which you are entitled is quite
judge accepted that a reduction in sentence ought result from the utilitarian
benefits of the plea offer. He further accepted
that there should be no
diminution of that reduction because the applicant did not plead guilty to the
offence of manslaughter before
the jury, and ran the trial on the basis that he
was not guilty of any crime. When his Honour made the observation that we have
cited in the previous paragraph, he was saying no more than the overall benefit
from the plea offer was ‘quite
because that
benefit was confined, in his view, to the full utilitarian benefit and no more
than that. In particular, the benefit
did not include subjective factors such
as inferring remorse, a willingness to facilitate the course of justice and an
of responsibility for his actions.
follows that it is incorrect to postulate that his Honour only granted the
applicant a modest benefit for the utilitarian value
of his plea offer. His
Honour contemplated an appropriate benefit for the utilitarian value of the
offer. That is, however, only
one component of the overall mitigatory benefit
claimed by the applicant as emanating from the plea offer. His Honour was not
of the claimed ‘subjective factors’ arising from the plea
offer. His Honour’s ‘quite modest’ remarks
must be understood
in this context.
40 Turning to ground 3, in our
view, the criticisms of the judge for declining to be satisfied as to the
claimed ‘subjective
factors’, arising from the plea offer, must be
rejected. Inferences of remorse do not necessarily follow from an offer to
plead guilty. The judge was entitled to conclude that the most likely
explanation for the offer was that pragmatic considerations
motivated it. The
applicant was confronted with a seemingly powerful case for murder, and one not
much less powerful for attempted
murder. He faced an extremely lengthy term of
imprisonment. Had his offer been accepted and had he then negotiated the
murder down to a lesser offence, he stood to reduce any sentence
imposed by a decade or more. There was much pragmatic attraction
to making the
offer. The case for remorse was further undermined by the applicant’s
post-offence lies (set out in paragraph
above) and that he conducted a defence
at trial in which he denied any criminal culpability whatsoever — that the
were some kind of accident.
applicant pointed to the immediate assistance he rendered to Mr Nguyen and his
participation in a 000 call. Despite this,
his Honour concluded that the
applicant had not exhibited genuine
and we consider that
this conclusion was open. The post-offence lies, the pragmatic attraction of
the plea offer and the conduct
of the defence at trial operated powerfully, in
our view, to extinguish any inference of genuine remorse that may have been
It will be recalled that part of the immediate post-manslaughter
conduct involved the applicant stabbing Ms Chan in the chest.
For similar
reasons, we consider that his Honour was entitled to conclude that there was no
acceptance of any responsibility by the
applicant or any sign of a willingness
to facilitate the course of
42 We refuse leave to appeal on grounds 2 and
Post-offence conduct as mitigating
43 This ground contends that the judge
erred by not treating as a mitigating factor the conduct of the applicant
immediately after
the offending. The applicant argues that asking his daughter
to call 000, attempting to staunch the bleeding from Mr Nguyen’s
and applying CPR and mouth to mouth resuscitation at the direction of the 000
operator, is conduct that ought to have been
viewed as mitigating.
44 We do not accept this ground. For the reasons
we have articulated under grounds 2 and 3, the judge was entitled to reject an
of remorse. We are of the view that the applicant has failed to
establish that his Honour did not take these matters, otherwise
favourable to the applicant, into account when considering the overall
circumstances of the offending. There was a little
that could be said in the
applicant’s favour, and a lot that could be said against him. We are
satisfied that his Honour’s
comprehensive reasons for sentencing embraced
a consideration of the entirety of this post-offence conduct, favourable and
unfavourable
to the applicant. This conduct, of course, included the
applicant’s assertions firstly that Mr Nguyen had stabbed himself,
that the two victims had stabbed each other and, later, that the stabbings were
an accident.
45 We refuse leave to appeal on
5(b)–(g): Manifest excess of the individual
46 These grounds as articulated
particularise much of the ground covered earlier in these reasons. The
applicant complains that no
or insufficient attention was paid to the totality
principle, the finding that the recklessly causing serious injury offence was
mid-range example, the offer to plead guilty, the mitigatory post-offence
conduct, the finding that the applicant’s prospects
of rehabilitation are
‘quite good’,
fact that there was evidence of remorse, and the finding that specific
deterrence does not ‘loom large in this
47 His Honour’s reasons are comprehensive and
conscientious. As we have said, this Court has regularly observed that
of manifest excess or inadequacy do not admit much argument. If a
sentence is ‘wholly outside the range’, this shortcoming
usually be obvious to any reasonable informed observer. The sentence must be
shown to be ‘unreasonable’ or ‘plainly
48 With these principles in mind, we
consider that both sentences under scrutiny are each particularly stern, but are
not wholly outside
the range of his Honour’s sentencing discretion. This
was a very serious example of the offence of manslaughter. The recklessly
causing injury offence was also a serious example of that crime. The applicant
secreted a murderous weapon under a cushion; he invited
his victims into his
other. These facts only have
to be recited to illustrate the gravity of this
offending. The judge’s stern sentence on each charge is a proper
of the competing factors in the sentencing exercise and within the
range available for offending of this gravity, notwithstanding
the mitigatory
factors that counted in the applicant’s favour.
49 We refuse leave to appeal on grounds
Grounds 1 and 5(a):
The totality principle
50 The applicant was sentenced to 12
years’ imprisonment on the manslaughter charge and six years’
imprisonment on the
recklessly causing serious injury charge. For the reasons
set out in paragraphs
herein, we are of the view that the
manslaughter offence was, as the judge correctly observed, at ‘the upper
range of seriousness’.
As we have said, we are not persuaded that the
sentence of 12 years’ imprisonment is wholly outside the range of his
sentencing discretion. Whilst we are of the view that sentencing
practices for this offence are of limited assistance, it seems
sentences at the top of the available range for manslaughter, following a plea
of guilty or an offer of same, congregate
at around 11
imprisonment,
or a little
51 Similarly, we have concluded
that the applicant has failed to demonstrate that the sentence imposed on charge
4 (recklessly causing
serious injury) is wholly outside the range of his
Honour’s sentencing discretion. We agree with his Honour that this is a
‘serious criminal offence’ and we consider the sentence of six
years’ imprisonment, representing 40 per cent of
the maximum sentence, to
be at the top of the range, but not manifestly beyond it.
52 Whilst we consider that the individual sentences
are within the range available to his Honour, we have had more difficulty with
the order for cumulation. It will be recalled that the judge ordered that there
be three years’ cumulation of the sentence
on charge 4 on the sentence for
manslaughter, resulting in a total effective sentence of 15 years’
imprisonment. Given our
assessment that the sentences on the manslaughter
charge and charge 4 are both at or close to the top of the available range, we
consider that up to this point, the principle of totality has not weighed
substantially in the sentencing mix. And yet, it had work
to do. Having fixed
upon the stern sentences for the individual charges, his Honour then turned to a
consideration of a just and
appropriate aggregate sentence as an appropriate
measure of the total overall criminality. In
Ormiston JA, with
whom Winneke P and Hedigan JA agreed, explained the various ways a sentence for
multiple charges could be structured
to reflect the sentencing principles of
totality and proportionality.
The sentences on individual charges could be moderated so as to reach an
appropriate total effective sentence, or alternatively,
unmoderated sentences
could be imposed on individual charges, and moderation (reflecting the
principles of totality and proportionality)
could be achieved through the
moderation of orders for cumulation. Ormiston JA considered that this latter
approach was preferable.
This Court has agreed with that preference on several
53 After some anxious consideration, we have
concluded that the order for cumulation is manifestly excessive and has resulted
head sentence that is manifestly excessive. There had to be some
cumulation; so much is clear. There were two separate victims
of two separate
stabbings. His Honour stated in his sentencing remarks:
Whilst it is true that your stabbings of the two victims
occurred as part of the one course of conduct, were very close in time, and
seemingly carried out for much the same motive, it cannot be forgotten that you
carried out attacks upon not one but two distinct
victims, each attack
necessitating a decision by you to deliberately stab the particular individual,
and then your action in pursuit
of each decision. Furthermore, each act was, in
its own right, a serious criminal offence. In those circumstances, it is clear
in my mind that a significant degree of cumulation is
54 We have observed (as did his Honour)
that the two offences were part of the one course of conduct, close in time, and
by the same relationship factors. Given the very significant overlap
in time, context and conduct, and particularly, the high sentences
both charges, we consider that the principles of totality and proportionality
ought to have operated to moderate the order
for cumulation to a considerably
greater extent than, in fact, occurred.
55 We shall refuse leave to appeal on
grounds 1 to 5(b)–(g).
56 We shall grant
leave to appeal on grounds 1 and 5(a), and allow the appeal against sentence on
these grounds, limited to the order
for cumulation only.
57 We shall quash the order for cumulation and in
its place, order that one year and six months of the sentence imposed on charge
4 be cumulated upon the base sentence imposed on the manslaughter offence. The
total effective sentence is therefore 13 years and
six months’
imprisonment. We set a minimum non-parole period of 10 years. We declare that
961 days, not including today,
have been served by way of pre-sentence
Charge on Indictment
Alternative to charge 1
Manslaughter
20 years’ imprisonment
12 years’ imprisonment
Causing serious injury recklessly
Crimes Act 1958
15 years’ imprisonment
6 years’ imprisonment
Total effective sentence:
13 years and 6 months’ imprisonment
Non-parole period:
Pre-sentence detention:
His children were aged 14 and
16 at the time of sentencing.
[2018] VSC 732
[24] (‘Reasons’).
Ibid [41]–[59].
Ibid [58]–[59].
Ibid [75]–[79].
Ibid [80]–[88].
Ibid [89]–[92].
Ibid [107]–[111].
Ibid [100].
Ibid [112].
[2010] VSCA 350
(2010) 31 VR 634
, 662–3 [127]–[128]
DPP v Zhuang
[2015] VSCA 96
(2015) 250 A Crim R 282
DPP (Cth) v Ramos
[2018] VSCA 290
DPP v Macarthur
[2019] VSCA 71
, [59]–[60].
[2010] VSCA 350
, 662–3 [127].
[2005] NSWCCA 377
160 A Crim R 1
, 27 [133]–[134] (Spiegelman CJ).
Reasons [81].
Ibid [113].
[2019] VSC 90
R v Mahoney
[2019] VSC 740
[2018] VSC 195
Mocenigo v The Queen
[2013] VSCA
[2004] VSC 508.
[2019] VSCA 287
Papadopoulos v The Queen
[2014] VSCA
[1998] 1 VR 664.
Ibid 675–84.
DPP v Green
[2020] VSCA 23
DPP v Drake
[2019] VSCA 293
[2018] VSCA 64
[2017] VSCA 20
Reasons [100].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (270 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter