URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2021/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sergei Yukhnevick at Holy Trinity on Chapel premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2021] VCGLR 29 (27 September 2021)
Decision and reasons
for decision
In the matter of an application by Sergei Yukhnevich under
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for internal review of a decision to
refuse to accept an out of time objection to an application for an on-premises
licence by Holy
Trinity on Chapel Pty Ltd, in respect of the premises proposing
to trade at 2A Brighton Road, St Kilda.
Commission:
Deirdre O’Donnell, Deputy Chair
Des Powell AM, Commissioner
Andrew Scott, Commissioner
Date of Hearing:
17 September 2021
Date of Decision:
27 September 2021
Date of Reasons:
27 September 2021
Appearances:
Sergei Yukhnevich, representing himself
Phil Cadman, Counsel for Holy Trinity on Chapel Pty Ltd instructed by Matthew
Elefanty of BSP Lawyers
Lilli Owens-Walton, Counsel Assisting the Commission
The Commission has determined to affirm the decision of the
Delegate and refuse to accept the out of time objection.
Deirdre O’Donnell
Deputy Chair
1. On 8 April 2021, Holy Trinity on Chapel Pty Ltd (
Proposed Licensee
applied to the Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation (the
) for an on-premises licence in respect of the premises
proposing to trade at 2A Brighton Road, St Kilda (
Licence Application
2. A delegate of the Commission notified the Proposed Licensee that the
public display period for the Licence Application was 12 April
to 10 May 2021.
On 3 May 2021, the Proposed Licensee wrote to the Commission requesting that a
new display period of 4 May to 1 June
2021 apply, asserting that a
communication error meant the public display had not yet commenced. The
Commission granted this request.
3. The public display period for the Licence Application was therefore a
28-day period between 4 May and 1 June 2021 (
Display Period
and the public objection period for the Licence Application was therefore a
30-day period between 4 May and 3 June 2021 (
4. On 4 August 2021, Sergei Yukhnevich (
) wrote to the
Commission seeking to make a submission in objection to the Licence Application.
5. On 5 August 2021, staff at the Commission advised the Applicant that the
Objection Period had concluded and therefore any submissions
made at this stage
may not be taken into consideration when assessing the Licence Application.
6. On 6 August 2021, the Applicant advised the Commission that he wanted to
make a submission, which he did on 10 August 2021. In
that submission, the
Applicant said that the Licence Application had not been publicly advertised and
had been lodged prior to a
related Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
) hearing regarding the planning permit being heard and decided.
7. On 12 August 2021, a delegate of the Commission refused to accept the
objection out of time (
Original Decision
). In the email containing this
Original Decision, the delegate said that the Commission had accepted, as had
been submitted in the
signed statement from the Proposed Licensee, that display
of the Licence Application had taken place as required. The Delegate advised
that the Commission would not take any further action regarding the display and
any further submissions on that point would not change
the Commission’s
Application for Internal Review
8. On 12 August 2021, the Applicant applied for internal review of the
Original Decision (
Review Application
) and requested a stay of the
Stay Application
9. In the Review Application, the Applicant alleged that the Proposed
Licensee had falsely declared that the Licence Application was
advertised during
the Display Period as there were no signs of advertising on display at that
time. In support of this proposition,
the Applicant said that the VCAT hearing
into the planning permit was held on 3 May 2021 and that, during the
following days and
weeks (coinciding with the Display Period), the VCAT member
and objectors visited the site and did not observe any signs of advertising.
Stay Application
10. In the Review Application, a request for a stay of Original Decision
until the Review Application had been determined effectively
sought to delay the
Licence Application until it had been determined, on review, whether or not the
objection should be accepted
out of time. If the out of time objection was
accepted on review, the Licence Application would proceed as a contested
application,
rather than as an uncontested application.
11. On 23 August 2021, the Commission determined to grant the Stay
Application.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
12. Division 2 of Part 9 of the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
) governs internal review applications. Under section 152, the decision
made by the delegate in the Original Application is a reviewable
decision and
the Applicant is an eligible person to apply for the review of that decision.
The Review Application was made pursuant
to section 153 of the Act.
13. Pursuant to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with
respect to the Review Application is to make a fresh decision
or varies the reviewable decision; or
aside the reviewable decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate.
14. In effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original
decision maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the application
for an out of time objection. In this case, the Commission must decide whether
the out of time objection; or
to grant the out of time objection.
Exercising the internal review power
15. Section 9 of the
Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor
Regulation Act 2011
) requires the Commission, in
exercising its internal review function, to have regard to the objects of the
Act and any decision-making
guidelines issued by the Minister under section 5 of
the VCGLR Act.
16. The objects of the Act are set out at section
4(1) and provide that:
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes
to, and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products;
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and
reducing risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
17. Section 4(2) of
the Act further provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion,
must be exercised and
performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the
misuse and abuse of
18. In exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
consider all the information, material and evidence before the original decision
consider further information or
19. Division 5 of the Act provides grounds for
different persons to object to liquor licence applications. Section 38
(1) Any person may object to the grant, variation or relocation of a licence
on the ground that the grant, variation or relocation
would detract from or be
detrimental to the amenity of the area in which the licensed premises or
proposed licensed premises are
(2) An objection must—
(a) be made to the Commission in writing within 30 days after the day on
which notice of the application for the grant, variation
or relocation was first
displayed under section 34(1); and
(b) state the reasons for the objection
20. Section 3A of the Act provides the following definition of
(1) For the purposes of this Act, the amenity of an area is the quality that
the area has of being pleasant and agreeable.
(2) Factors that may be taken into account in determining whether the grant,
variation or relocation of a licence would detract from
or be detrimental to the
amenity of an area include—
(d) the possibility of nuisance or vandalism;
(e) the harmony and coherence of the environment;
(f) any other prescribed matters.
(3) Nothing in subsection (2) is intended to limit the definition of
21. Section 3AA provides the following as to evidence constituting detraction
from or detriment to amenity of area:
For the purposes of this Act, evidence of any of the following factors,
which may occur inside, or a place outside a licensed premises
sufficiently proximate to, that premises, are taken to constitute evidence of
detraction from, or detriment to, the amenity
of the area in which the licensed
premises is situated—
(a) violent behaviour; (b) drunkenness; (c) vandalism; (d) using profane,
indecent or obscene language; (e) using threatening, abusive
or insulting
language; (f) behaving in a riotous, indecent, offensive or insulting manner;
(g) disorderly behaviour; (h) causing
nuisance; (i) noise disturbance to
occupiers of other premises; (j) obstructing a footpath, street or road; (k)
22. The Commission has discretion under section 174 of the Act to accept late
objections as follows:
At the request of any person, the Commission may—
(a) extend the time for making an objection under this Act in respect of
any particular application; or
(b) accept an objection made after the time under this Act for making that
objection has expired.
of an inquiry
23. Section 34 of the VCGLR Act provides that, subject to that Act, gambling
legislation or liquor legislation, the Commission may
conduct an inquiry in any
manner it considers appropriate.
24. During the conduct of an inquiry, section 25(3) of the VCGLR Act provides
that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence,
however must comply
with the rules of natural justice.
Material before the Commission
25. The Commission on review had before it all the information and material
before the delegate who made the Original Decision including:
of Display submitted by the Proposed Licensee, dated 2 June 2021 (
submissions by the Applicant dated 4 August 2021, 6 August 2021 and
10 August 2021; and
photographs showing the public notice of the Licence Application on display
Public Notice
), submitted to the Commission by the Proposed Licensee on
12 August 2021.
26. The Commission on review also had before it and considered:
Review Application, dated 12 August 2021;
submissions
by the Applicant:
support of the Stay Application and Review Application, dated 19 August
2021 attaching a copy of the VCAT decision in the proceedings
brought by the
Applicant for review of the planning permit for the Premises dated
5 July 2021
Yukhnevich v Port Phillip CC
[2021] VCAT 663
VCAT Decision
the Commission of construction works at the Premises, dated
31 August 2021; and
a public hearing, dated 8 September 2021;
submissions
by the Proposed Licensee:
the Stay Application, dated 19 August 2021;
the Review Application, dated 27 August 2021, attaching witness statements from
Reverend Kathryn Watt dated 25 August 2021 and
other visitors to the Premises
during the Display Period including:
1. Helen Guscott, dated 25 August 2021;
2. Nicholas Reilly, dated 25 August 2021;
3. Robin Anderson, dated 25 August 2021;
4. John Dyett, dated 25 August 2021; and
5. Brian Mueller, dated 25 August 2021.
in the further attachments to the submission dated 27 August 2021, the
curriculum vitae of the Proposed Licensee’s
sole director and character
references for the director;
whether the matter should be heard on the papers, dated 7 September 2021;
opposition to the public hearing, dated 9 September 2021; and
a screen shot of a Facebook post by the Applicant promoting the details of the
Commission’s remote hearing into the
Review Application, dated 13
September 2021.
Photographs
of the doors where the Public Notice is said to have been displayed at the
Premises taken by Commissioner Scott when he
visited the Premises on 22 August
Public hearing
27. On 7 September 2021, the Commission wrote to the Applicant and the
Proposed Licensee to advise that it considered the Review Application
heard on the papers. The Commission invited the parties to make a submission on
whether they consented to this.
28. The Proposed Licensee consented to the hearing being on the papers. The
Applicant requested a public hearing. On 17 September
2021, the Commission held
a public hearing via remote videoconference in relation to the Review
Application (
Reason for decision on review
Issues for determination on review
29. There are no statutory goal posts in the Act setting out the
considerations of the Commission when determining whether to exercise
discretion under section 174 to accept an out of time objection.
30. The Commission therefore considers it appropriate to satisfy itself
is an objection that, but for the time it was lodged, would otherwise be valid
under section 38; and
are compelling reasons to accept the out of time objection having regard to the
objects of the Act and all relevant circumstances.
Is there an objection?
31. As extracted in paragraph
, section 38 of the Act provides for any
person to object to a liquor licence application on the grounds that the grant
of the licence
would detract from or be detrimental to the amenity of the area
in which the proposed licensed premises are situated. The amenity
of an area is
defined in section 3A(1) as the quality that the area has of being pleasant and
agreeable and at section 3A(2) there
are factors that the Commission can
consider when determining whether an application would detract from or be
detrimental to the
amenity of the area.
32. In his initial correspondence to the Commission on 4 August 2021, the
Applicant said:
The Port Phillip Council approved application (875/2019) for a 300 seat
licensing venue (with 150 seat outdoor area) operating from
7am till as late as
1am. The licensing venue (2A Brighton Road, St Kilda) will be next to the St
Kilda Primary School (2B Brighton
Road, St Kilda). The venue will have parking
facilities for one car, it
thought that it will be safe for the
patrons to park on the streets around the school.
33. The Commission notes that the definition of amenity in section 3A of the
Act previously included the presence or absence of parking
facilities as a
consideration when determining whether the grant of a licence would detract from
or be detrimental to the amenity
This was removed in 2018 by
legislative amendment as Parliament determined that those factors better fell
within the remit of local
council considerations. However, the Commission notes
that the definition of amenity specifically states that it is not limited to
those factors in section 3A(2).
34. After that initial submission, the Applicant’s submissions
regarding his objection were primarily concerned with the alleged
display of the Public Notice, which was proffered as the reason that he
considered the Commission should accept his objection
out of time.
35. At the Hearing, the Commission sought to confirm whether it was accepted
by the parties that the Applicant’s objection was
based on amenity.
Counsel for the Proposed Licensee stated its view that the grounds for the
Applicant’s objection had not
clearly been defined and therefore were not
clearly based on concerns about amenity, though it was inferred by the Proposed
that amenity was likely to
be the nature of the objection. Counsel for the Proposed Licensee submitted that
VCAT had already considered
potential amenity concerns and that there were
protections in the planning permit to address these concerns.
36. At the Hearing, the Applicant asked the Commission for a definition of
the grounds of amenity, which was provided by Counsel Assisting.
In response,
the Applicant said that he provided that the primary reason for his objection in
the Review Application itself was to
get, not just his own objection accepted,
but to highlight to the Commission that the Public Notice had not been displayed
and therefore the local community had not had the opportunity to object
to the Licence Application.
The Commission’s view
37. The Commission considers that the Applicant likely intended to make an
objection on the ground of amenity by citing the size of
the proposed licensed
Premises (300 persons) and in the context of its location being close to a
primary school and with parking
for a single car only.
38. However, without the assistance of further information at the Hearing or
in written submissions, the Commission cannot conclusively
find that concerns
39. The Commission further notes the Applicant’s evidence at the
Hearing – after the definition of amenity was read aloud
the (alleged) lack of advertising during the Display Period was the essence of
his objection.
40. Therefore, the Commission is not persuaded that this objection is made on
the basis of section 38, though it is arguable and at
best it is inferred
(as submitted by Counsel for the Proposed Licensee).
Whether to accept the out of time objection
41. Notwithstanding the above finding that the
objection does not satisfy the requirements of section 38, the Commission
has considered
the other circumstances relevant to the Review Application and
whether the objection should be accepted out of time. In this task,
Commission has considered:
the Public Notice was appropriately displayed; and
public confidence in the Commission’s administration of the liquor
licensing regime having specific regard to:
importance of observing a statutory time limit; and
the Applicant’s circumstances outweigh the importance of observing a
statutory time limit.
Whether the Public Notice was appropriately displayed
42. In submissions to the delegate and in his written and oral submissions as
part of the Review Application, the Applicant stated
that the Public Notice was
not displayed during the Display Period and that the Statement of Display was
therefore fraudulent. In
support of this allegation, the Applicant relied
Proposed Licensee’s admission that it did not display the Public Notice
during the display period originally mandated by
the Commission of 12 April 2021
– 10 May 2021;
impact of pandemic restrictions on public awareness of the Licence Application,
including that:
lockdown coincided with the Display Period as it started on 27 May 2021. He said
that lockdown affected people’s lives,
including the community’s
ability to meet and discuss the Public Notice – if it was displayed
– and whether action
should be taken; and
to the then current restrictions related to the pandemic, public attention to
the Licence Application was reduced and it would
be prudent to request that the
Proposed Licensee advertise it again once restrictions are lifted to ensure
community awareness and
preservation of public
assertion that the VCAT member (referred to by the Applicant as a
‘government official’ in his written submissions)
and objectors to
the VCAT proceedings attended the site after the VCAT hearing and did not see
the Public Notice. The Applicant submitted
the VCAT Decision was in support of
this assertion and noted that the VCAT member did not mention or refer to the
Public Notice being
on display at the time of their visit and was thus evidence
that it was not on display at that time;
location of the Public Notice – if it was displayed – was on doors
of the Premises that are set back from the street
and obscured by plants and
therefore did not invite public attention as required by the Act. The Applicant
submitted that the doors
were five to eight metres away from Brighton Road and
were fully obscured by the growth of plants; and
Public Notice – if it was displayed – should have been displayed on
the public notice board next to the doors, which
invited public attention more
than the doors as it was not obscured by plants.
43. As part of its written submissions the Proposed Licensee submitted
photographic evidence in support of its Statement of Display
which showed the
Public Notice was displayed on two doors at the Premises. The Proposed Licensee
submitted that these two frontages
were selected to ensure maximum public
attention noting that the Brighton Road frontage was intended to be the front
entrance of
the Premises and the Chapel Street frontage had high foot traffic
and was near to sensitive uses. The Proposed Licensee submitted
decision to display the Public Notices on two frontages surpasses the
requirements in the Act for display of the Public
44. The Proposed Licensee submitted further evidence of the Public Notice
being displayed during the Display Period in the form of
multiple witness
statements from individuals who regularly attend the Premises and did so during
the Display Period, and which confirmed
that the Public Notice was on display
when they attended the Premises during the Display Period for various
. This included a
statement from the Priest in Charge at Holy Trinity Balaclava and Elwood
Anglican Church (
), which is located on the same title of land to
the north of the Premises. The Church owns the land that the Premises are
to operate on and will be the landlord when the Premises begins
trading, if the Licence Application is granted.
45. Counsel for the Proposed Licensee submitted that the Proposed Licensee is
an experienced operator of licensed premises in Victoria
and that the
allegations of fraud regarding the Statement of Display are grave and
unsubstantiated.
46. Counsel for the Proposed Licensee submitted that the Applicant’s
submissions at the Hearing conceded that he just did not
see the Public Notice
was not a basis for objection under the Act or reason for the Commission to
accept an out of time objection.
The Commission’s view
47. The Commission finds that the Public Notice of the Licence Application
was displayed in accordance with the Act. The Commission
accepts the Statement
of Display dated 2 June 2021 after the Display Period as conclusive
evidence that the display was discharged
according to the Act.
48. The Commission finds that there is ample evidence in support of the
Public Notice having been advertised during the Display Period
including the
Statement of Display and witness statements submitted by the Proposed Applicant.
The Commission finds there is no direct
evidence to support the
Applicant’s assertion that it was not displayed during that period,
besides his own evidence under
affirmation at the Hearing in which he alleged
that the Public Notice was not displayed.
49. The Commission does not consider that the reasons for decision in the
VCAT permit appeal, where the member failed to comment on
having seen the
Display Notice during their inspection of the site, carries any weight as
evidence that the Public Display did not
occur or that the Statement of Display
was fraudulent. Similarly, the Commission does not attribute any weight to the
indirect evidence
that the Public Notice was not displayed because members of
the public who visited the site after the VCAT hearing did not observe
50. The Commission does not accept that the doors of the Premises are
“five to eight” meters from the footpath on Brighton
Road and that
the Public Notice is therefore not visible from the street. The Commission
acknowledges that the photos of the display
show there are plants along the path
near the doors but it does not accept that, during the Display Period, the doors
were obscured
by those plants.
51. The Commission notes that neither the Commission’s nor the
Act’s expectations have changed with respect to the requirements
displaying the public notice in a ‘manner that invites public
attention’ as a result of the lockdown. However, the
Commission notes
that, during the Display Period, the lockdown was only in place for six of the
30 day Display Period (from 27 May
to 1 June 2021) and therefore it finds that,
if the lockdown had somehow affected the public display, the vast majority of
the Display
Period was not affected by it.
52. The Commission also finds that government restrictions in place would not
have unreasonably affected the community’s ability
to view the Public
Notice given community members within a five kilometre radius of the site
would have been able to pass by when
leaving their homes for the permitted
reasons under the Chief Health Officer’s directions.
53. Notwithstanding its findings above that the Display Notice was visible
from the street and was not obscured by plants, the Commission
accepts that the
Applicant did not see the Public Notice. However, this does not mean the Public
Notice was not displayed in accordance
with the Act and it is not a reason, in
itself, to allow an out of time objection unless there are other compelling
reasons to accept
it out of time, which will be discussed in the following
paragraphs.
Public confidence in administration of the Act
Importance of observing statutory time limits
54. In his submission at the Hearing, the Applicant contended that it is not
in the spirit of the Act for the Commission to be so
limited in the current
proceedings as to only consider whether to accept
objection out of
time given there are potentially many other objectors. The Applicant said that
the community will have to carry
on living with this development for years, and
they need an opportunity to have a say.
55. The Applicant submitted that the Commission should require the Proposed
Licensee to readvertise the Public Notice after the pandemic
restrictions are
eased, to ensure that the community is aware of the Licence Application and that
the public interest is preserved.
56. In written and oral submissions, the Proposed Licensee accepted that the
Commission has the discretion under section 174 of the
Act to accept out of time
objections and said the Commission must consider whether the exercise of that
discretion is ‘appropriate’,
noting that the following factors are
relevant to this determination:
limits in any public approval process are necessary to facilitate the timely
conduct of business and are expected to be observed;
Commission ought not exercise the discretion purely upon request;
equivalent discretion exists in the
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 1998
) at section 126(1) and that,
notwithstanding some distinctions between the provisions, the general principles
for use of section
162(1) of the VCAT Act should be adopted by the Commission in
its application of section 174 of the
57. The Proposed Licensee submitted that the current Application for
acceptance of an out of time objection would not satisfy the
general principles
for use of section 162(1) of the VCAT Act, if they were applied to section 174
of the Act.
The Commission’s view
58. The Commission was assisted by the parties’ submissions about how
it should exercise its discretion to determine whether
to allow an out of time
objection under section 174 of the Act.
59. The Commission considers that the liquor licensing industry is entitled
to certainty in the application process and that this
applies to the imposition
of time periods for objection by various representatives of the community
– the public, Victoria
Police and the local council. Once the relevant
time period has passed, while noting that the discretion in section 174 of the
exists to allow out of time objections, the Commission considers it is
reasonable for a proposed licensee to assume that its licence
application has
not been objected to, and for it to act accordingly.
60. The Commission finds that public confidence in the Commission’s
administration of the liquor licensing regime insofar as
this applies to the
application of time limits in the Act may be eroded if the Commission accepts
objections that are well out of
time without compelling reasons for doing so. In
this Review Application, the Applicant has not satisfied the Commission that
compelling reasons exist, as will be detailed in the following
paragraphs.
Whether the Applicant’s circumstances outweigh the importance of
observing statutory time limits
61. At the Hearing, the Applicant said that the community had been aware that
a licensed premises was due to open at that site since
2019, however the
proposal was for a small-scale restaurant, not a 300 person bar as is now
62. The Applicant said that he became aware of the new scale of the proposed
licensed premises through the VCAT planning process,
for which he appealed
against the issue of a permit. The Applicant’s permit appeal was heard by
VCAT on 3 May 2021 (prior to
the Display Period), but he did not approach the
Commission about the associated liquor licence application at that time because
he asserted that he was told by the local council to wait until after the VCAT
process was over.
63. The Applicant said that the VCAT Decision approving the planning permit
was handed down on 5 July 2021 but he did not receive
it until a few weeks
later during lockdown so it was not possible to contact the appropriate persons
at that time.
64. Counsel for the Proposed Licensee said that a full two months had passed
between the end of the Objection Period and the date
of the Applicant’s
objection. He submitted that section 174 of the Act is a remedial provision
which is intended to accommodate
a ‘near miss’ or a ‘stymied
attempt’ to object when an objector is not able to meet the statutory time
for objection. Counsel submitted that the Review Application was neither
a near miss nor a stymied attempt given two months had passed
Applicant objected and nothing – including lockdown - prevented him from
objecting during the Objection Period.
65. Counsel for the Proposed Licensee submitted that the evidentiary basis
for accepting an out of time objection should increase
as the time between the
end of the Objection Period to the date of the objection extends. He said that
after two months, the burden
on an objector should be heavy to justify an out of
time objection, to counter the significant prejudice likely to be suffered given
the Proposed Licensee is entitled to assume at that stage that – in the
absence of an objection during the objection period
– the prospects of the
liquor licence being granted are otherwise good and therefore certain
investments can be made on that
assumption.
The Commission’s view
66. The Commission is not satisfied that the objection is one based on
amenity as required by Section 38 of the Act.
67. Even if it was satisfied that the objection was based on amenity, it
considers that the reasons for whether the out of time objection
accepted must be compelling. This is particularly so in the current
circumstances where an extended time has elapsed between
the end of the
Objection Period and the submission of the objection.
68. The Commission finds that the Applicant was aware of a proposal to open a
licensed premises at the Premises since 2019 and that
the proposal had increased
in size since that time. The Commission accepts the Applicant’s submission
under affirmation at
the Hearing that he was told by the local council and VCAT
to wait until the planning permit appeal process was over before raising
objection with the Commission.
69. The Commission does not find it likely that there was a delay of weeks in
receiving the VCAT Decision if it was conveyed electronically
Applicant was the Applicant in that matter also. The Commission does not see how
lockdown would have prevented the Applicant
from determining whether to lodge an
objection between 5 July 2021 when the VCAT Decision was handed down and 4
August 2021 when
the Applicant first approached the Commission.
70. The Commission finds that given the Applicant was aware of the Licence
Application in early May 2021 when the VCAT matter was
heard, he had the
opportunity to approach the Commission earlier than 4 August 2021 to raise his
objection. The Commission finds
that it is reasonable to expect that he would
have done so within the Objection Period if he was concerned about the amenity
of the Licence Application, even if he had not observed the Display
Notice which contains information about how to submit an objection.
71. In this Review Application, the Applicant has
not satisfied the Commission that compelling reasons exist to override the
of the statutory time limit for objecting to a liquor licence
application and accept his objection out of time.
Decision on review
72. The Commission has determined to affirm the
decision of the Delegate and refuse the out of time objection.
The preceding
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Ms Deirdre
O’Donnell, Deputy Chair, Mr Des Powell AM, Commissioner
and Mr Andrew
Scott, Commissioner.
section 38(2)(a)
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
Section 157(2) to (5) of the
Act and section 25(3) of the VCGLR Act further prescribe the manner in which the
Commission is to undertake
internal reviews.
Section 9(3) VCGLR Act and
section (4) the Act.
See further
Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA 325
, which confirms that harm minimisation is
the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act and therefore the primary
consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although not to the exclusion of
the other objects).
The Act, section 157(2).
The Act, section 157(3).
Section 3A(2) used to include
three additional factors that may be taken into account in determining whether
the grant, variation
or relocation of a licence would detract from or be
detrimental to the amenity of an area: (a) presence or absence of parking
facilities,
(b) traffic movement and density and (c) noise levels until these
factors were repealed by the
Liquor and Gambling Legislation Amendment Act
Transcript, page 3 line 7.
Those activities included
running a dance class four times per week, attending Sunday service, attending
the office, gardening and
maintenance and to use the facilities adjacent to the
Proposed Licensee submission
dated 27 August 2021, page 6, referencing
Katsanis v Wyndham (Red Dot)
(4 May 2005)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (52.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter