URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/PPV/2025/44.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:25:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Macedon Ranges C147macr (PSA) [2025] PPV 44 (5 September 2025)
Macedon Ranges Planning Scheme Amendment C147macr and Planning
Permit Application PLN/2022/354
Benetas Retirement Village
Panel Report
Planning and Environment Act 1987
5 September 2025
How will this report be used?
This is a brief description of how this report will be used for the benefit
of people unfamiliar with the planning system. If you
have concerns about a
specific issue you should seek independent advice.
The planning authority must consider this report before deciding whether to
adopt the Amendment.
[section 27(1) of the
Planning and Environment Act
(the PE Act)]
For the Amendment to proceed, it must be adopted by the planning authority
and then sent to the Minister for Planning for approval.
The planning authority may also recommend to the Minister that a permit that
applies to the adopted Amendment be granted. The Minister
may grant or refuse
the permit subject to certain restrictions. [sections 96G and 96I of the PE
The planning authority is not obliged to follow the recommendations of the
Panel, but it must give its reasons if it does not follow
the recommendations.
[section 31 (1) of the PE Act, and
Planning and Environment
Regulations 2015
If approved by the Minister for Planning a formal change will be made to the
planning scheme. Notice of approval of the Amendment
will be published in the
Government Gazette. [section 37 of the PE Act]
Planning Panels Victoria acknowledges the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung People as
the traditional custodians of the land on which our office
is located. We pay
our respects to their Elders past and present.
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Panel Report pursuant to section 25 of the PE Act
Macedon Ranges Planning Scheme Amendment C147macr and Planning Permit
Application PLN/2022/354
Benetas Retirement Village
5 September 2025
Sarah Raso, Chair Adam Terrrill, Member
List of Figures
Glossary and abbreviations
Aged Care Permit
Planning Permit PLN/2020/473A
Amendment land
5 and part of 8 Neal Street, 78 and 80 Hamilton Street and part of the Neal
Street road reserve, Gisborne
Bush Nursing Hospital
Gisborne and District Bush Nursing Hospital
Cultural Heritage Management Plan
Community Infrastructure Assessment
Gisborne Community Infrastructure Assessment (SGS Economics and Planning,
Macedon Ranges Shire Council
Restrictive covenant in instrument number N077525L
Covenant land
Lot 1 on Plan of Subdivision 205979T
Document number
Design and Development Overlay Schedule 17
Department of Transport and Planning
General Residential Zone Schedule 1
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Permit Application
Planning Permit Application PLN/2022/354
Permit application land
5 and part of 8 Neal Street, 80 Hamilton Street and 1A to 10A and 61
Robertson Street, Gisborne
Planning Scheme
Macedon Ranges Planning Scheme
Planning Policy Framework
Anglican Aged Care Services Group (trading as Benetas)
Structure Plan
Gisborne Futures Structure Plan 2024
Subject land
Combined Amendment land and Permit application land shown in
Special Use Zone, Schedule 4 (Private Hospital)
Amendment summary
Amendment and Permit Application
Macedon Ranges Planning Scheme Amendment C147macr and Planning Permit
Application PLN/2022/354
Common name
Benetas Retirement Village
Brief description
Combined Amendment and Planning Permit Application to facilitate the
development of a retirement village
Subject land
5 and part of 8 Neal Street, 78 and 80 Hamilton Street and 1A to 10A and 61
Robertson Street, Gisborne
Anglican Aged Care Services Group (trading as Benetas)
Planning Authority
Macedon Ranges Shire Council
Authorisation
28 March 2024, with conditions
3 June to 12 July 2024
Submissions
Number of Submissions: 21 Opposed: 18
Panel process
Sarah Raso (Chair), Adam Terrill
Supported by
Gabrielle Trouse and Sarah Vojinovic
Directions Hearing
By video, 24 June 2025
Panel Hearing
21 (by video only) and 24 July 2025 (Planning Panels Victoria and by
Site inspections
Accompanied, 7 July 2025
Parties to the Hearing
Macedon Ranges Shire Council represented by Amelia Hunter of Maddocks
Anglican Aged Care Group/Benetas represented by Andrew Sherman and Karmen
Markis of Russell Kennedy Lawyers, who called expert evidence
- Bruce Message
of Colliers in healthcare and retirement living
Campbell of Hansen in urban design and planning
- Jason Sellars
of Stantec in traffic and transport
Jayne Guilmartin
Phillipa Butler
Macedon Ranges PSA C147macr [2025] PPV
Date of this report
5 September 2025
Executive summary
This is a combined
planning scheme amendment and planning permit application request to facilitate
the use and development of 5 and
part of 8 Neal Street, 78 and 80 Hamilton
Street, 1A to 10A and 61 Robertson Street, Gisborne (subject land) for a
retirement village.
Macedon Ranges Planning Scheme Amendment C147macr (the Amendment) seeks
rezone part of
the subject land from Special Use Zone Schedule 4 (Private Hospital) (SUZ4) to
General Residential Zone Schedule 1
apply Design and
Development Overlay Schedule 17 (DDO17)
amend Clause
11.01-1L to insert a new Gisborne/New Gisborne Framework Plan, to identify the
subject land as a preferred area for medium
density housing, and to correct an
error identified in the General Residential Zone label within the map
Schedule to Clause 52.02 (Easements, restrictions and reserves) to remove a
restrictive covenant.
Planning Permit Application PLN/2022/354 (the
Permit Application) seeks approval to use the subject land as a retirement
and to construct two separate three-storey apartment buildings
comprising 34 independent living units and 46 semi-detached single
storey retirement villas.
From the public exhibition process, 21 submissions were received, some in
support, others in objection and some making various comments
Amendment and/or the Permit Application.
A two day Hearing was held to consider the Amendment, Permit Application and
issues raised and to hear from submitters, Council and
the Proponent.
The key issues relate to:
justification
retirement living
built form and
removal of the
restrictive covenant.
Strategic justification and need for retirement living
The Panel considers the Amendment is well founded,
strategically justified and should be approved, and subject to including amended
conditions recommended by the Panel, a planning permit should issue.
The proposal will facilitate a development that will fulfil a very important
role for the Gisborne community. It will allow for well-located
suitable for elderly residents, in a town where more diverse housing is
explicitly sought and in a location close to existing
medical services and the
town’s commercial core. There is a clear need for retirement village
living on the subject land and
use of subject land for a retirement village is
consistent with the Planning Policy Framework, the GRZ1 and DDO17.
Built form and scale
The Panel finds the proposed built form acceptable,
with impacts on neighbouring properties considered reasonable. The proposed
respond to the topography of the land and are respectful of their
surrounds, with a maximum building height of 14 metres for the
buildings, and majority of the proposed built form made up of one and two
storeys. Off-site amenity impacts, including
overshadowing and overlooking are
well managed and acceptable.
Tree removal
One large native tree is proposed to be removed.
This is acceptable given the high quality landscape response, including
significant
new plantings proposed as part of the development, which should,
over time, lead to a substantial landscape cover. The proposal
has otherwise
made a considerable effort through its design to retain other significant trees,
including the mature trees near the
Neal Street boundary, and other mature trees
near the centre of the site.
Access and movement
The proposal will not result in adverse traffic or
amenity impacts. While there will be some degree of change to the surrounding
road network, it will be negligible with no adverse impacts. In terms of access
for emergency services, the Panel accepts that,
subject to a condition requiring
a construction management plan, including a traffic management plan prior to
construction commencement,
traffic and emergency access concerns can be
satisfactorily managed. The Panel supports Council’s position and
inclusion of a condition requiring improved pedestrian
infrastructure, including a pedestrian crossing and associated traffic calming
measures at Neal Street.
Restrictive covenant
The restrictive covenant should be removed because
its removal:
is consistent
with the principles outlined by the Mornington Peninsula C46 Panel and endorsed
by many subsequent panels
will facilitate
a proposal that is consistent with the Victorian planning objectives, and
complies with the Macedon Planning Scheme
will result in
broader community benefits resulting from the development of increased housing
diversity, and on balance, will outweigh
any negative impacts on interested
parties including beneficiaries of the covenant.
The Amendment will
deliver a net community benefit, and the interests of all Victorians is better
served by the removal of the covenant.
Recommendations
Based on the reasons set out in this Report, the
Panel recommends that Council:
Adopt Macedon Ranges Planning Scheme Amendment
C147macr as exhibited.
Issue Planning Permit PLN/2022/354 subject to
the permit conditions contained in Appendix
1 Introduction
1.1 The Panel
Panel was appointed under delegation from the Minister for Planning on 18 June
2025 under the provisions of
Section 96B
Planning and
Environment Act
(PE Act). The Panel is to consider the Amendment and
Permit Application and to hear submissions and evidence in relation to them.
The members of the Panel are:
Sarah Raso,
Adam Terrill,
The Panel was assisted by Gabrielle Trouse and Sarah
Vojinovic, Project Officers of Planning Panels Victoria.
1.2 The Amendment and Permit Application
(i) The subject land
combined Amendment and Permit Application seek to facilitate the use and
development of 5 and part of 8 Neal Street, 78 and 80
Hamilton Street and 1A to
10A/61 Robertson Street, Gisborne (subject land) for a retirement village. The
subject land is shown in
Subject land
Located on the western side of Neal Street, the subject land has a frontage
of 156 metres to Neal Street and a 231 metre interface
with Robertson Street,
with a total area of approximately 37,800 square metres.
It is partially occupied by aged care-related uses, including the Gisborne
Oaks Aged Care Facility and the former Elms Hostel in the
north-east corner. At
its southern end, on the corner of Hamilton Street and Neal Street is 76-78
Hamilton Street which comprises
former medical facilities which are now vacant.
This site was formerly the Gisborne and District Bush Nursing Hospital (Bush
Hospital) and is subject to approved Planning Permit PLN/2020/473/A
(Aged Care Permit) for a three-storey residential aged care facility
that is yet
to be constructed. Adjacent to this building is the Gisborne Opportunity Shop,
operating from a former dwelling. These
facilities are within the Amendment
area but are not included in the concurrent development application.
The subject land slopes approximately 9 metres from Hamilton Street in the
south down towards Robertson Street and contains a mix
of mature exotic and
native canopy trees.
Surrounding the subject land is a mix of residential dwellings, and medical,
open space and educational uses. To the south are low
scale dwellings facing
Hamilton Street, and to the west is a child care centre. To the north, across
Roberston Street, is public
open space in the form of sports ovals and fields
known as Dixon Field. To the east are medical clinics and associated uses,
with modern townhouses facing Neal Street, and further afield is the
Gisborne Town Centre.
(ii) Amendment and Permit Application
The combined Amendment and Permit Application
represent the second stage of a two-stage aged care and retirement village
master plan.
From a master planning perspective, the subject land has been treated in two
stages (see
stage 1 is the
Aged Care Permit allowing use and development of part of the land for an aged
care facility
stage 2 is the
Permit Application for a retirement
Architectural Plans – Stage 1 and Stage 2
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 2 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Anglican Aged Care Services Group (trading as Benetas) is the Proponent.
Macedon Ranges Shire Council (Council) is the Planning Authority.
Specifically, the Amendment proposes to:
rezone part of
the subject land and part of the Neal Street road reserve from SUZ4 to GRZ1
apply DDO17 to
part of the subject land
amend Clause
11.01-1L to insert a new Gisborne/New Gisborne Framework Plan, to identify the
land subject of the Amendment as a preferred
area for medium density housing,
and to correct an error identified in the General Residential Zone label within
the map legend
Schedule to Clause 52.02 (Easements, restrictions and reserves) to remove the
restrictive covenant in instrument number
N077525L (Covenant) from part of the
land which is the subject of the Permit Application.
Application seeks approval for the use of the subject land and as a retirement
village, construction of two separate three-storey
apartment buildings
comprising of 34 independent living units, 46 semi-detached single and double
storey retirement villas.
Specifically, the Permit Application seeks permission to:
use the subject
land for a retirement village
construct a
building and undertake works for the retirement village on the land
remove native
vegetation (one tree)
alter access to
a road in a Transport Zone 2 (TRZ2 – Principal road
The Amendment applies to 5 and part of 8 Neal Street, 78
and 80 Hamilton Street, 80 Hamilton Street and part of the Neal Street road
reserve in Gisborne (Amendment land). The Permit Application applies to 5 and
part of 8 Neal Street, 80 Hamilton Street and 1A to
10A (inclusive) and 61
Robertson Street, Gisborne (Permit Application land). See
Area subject of the Amendment and Planning Permit
Application
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 3 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
Source: Part A submission
(iii) History and background to the subject land and its
current use
The subject land has been used for health related
services since 1958. By way of background:
the Bush Nursing
Hospital opened on 23 March 1958 with six beds
in 1960, an
expansion took place increasing the Bush Nursing Hospital’s capacity from
six beds to 10 beds
expansion took place in 1976 further increasing the Bush Nursing
Hospital’s capacity from 10 to 16 beds
during the 1990s
the Bush Nursing Hospital Committee saw a need to plan for the construction of
30 bed nursing home
on 5 May 1986,
the 30 bed nursing home (Gisborne Oaks) was opened
on 1 July 1985,
the Gisborne and District Health Centre commenced with the objective of
providing a comprehensive range of health
services to the local community
on 21 March
1994, the Elms Hostel, a 30 bed hostel for the frail aged, opened
in late November
1994, the Bush Nursing Hospital, Gisborne Oaks Nursing Home, Elms Hostel and
Gisborne and District Community Health
amalgamated
in 1997, the
Bush Nursing Hospital closed and the Lifestyle Enhancement Program began and
continues to run today. St Mary’s
Medical Centre operated from this site
until approximately 2021
in 1999, the
dining area and living areas of the Elms Hostel were expanded
in 2000, eight
rooms (with en-suite) were erected as part of Gisborne Oaks
additional units at Bradley Court were
in 2004, an
additional 15 hostel rooms were built for the Elms Hostel and a special care
unit named Grevillea Court
on 12 October
2021, Council issued the Aged Care Permit.
the Bush Nursing
Hospital is closed – St Mary’s medical centre used this site for
consulting rooms until about 2021 and
has since ceased
Gisborne Oaks
continues to operate pending the outcome of the Amendment
a number of
affordable retirement housing units are currently leased at 1 to 10/ 61A
Robertson Street (part of the subject land) but
will be demolished pending the
outcome of the proposal
the Elms Hostel
and Grevillea Court closed
the Gisborne
Opportunity Shop on Hamilton Street continues to operate pending the outcome of
the proposal.
1.3 Background
Council provided a
detailed background to the Amendment and Permit Application in its Part A
submission, including a chronology of
events which the Panel has summarised in
Background to
the Amendment and Permit Application
6 August 2021
Proponent submitted the combined Amendment and Permit Application request
to Council under Section 96A of the PE Act
12 October 2021
Council issued the Aged Care Permit
10 May 2023
Council resolved to seek authorisation from the Minister for Planning to
prepare and exhibit the Amendment and Permit Application
28 March 2024
Authorisation of the Amendment approved subject to conditions
3 June to 12 July 2024
Exhibition of the Amendment and Permit Application
September 2024 to March 2025
Application on hold while Proponent progressed work on a Cultural Heritage
Management Plan (CHMP)
28 May 2025
Council resolved to request a Panel and refer all submissions
5 June 2025
Council requested a Panel
24 June 2025
Directions Hearing
7 July 2025
Accompanied site inspection of the subject land
21 and 24 July 2025
Panel Hearing
1.4 The Panel’s approach
issues raised in submissions were:
removal of the
the need for
retirement living
the future need
for a hospital or medical facilities
transfer of land
heritage values
built form and
The Panel has assessed the Amendment and Permit Application
against the principles of net community benefit and sustainable development,
set out in Clause 71.02-3 (Integrated decision making) of the Macedon Ranges
Planning Scheme.
The Panel considered all written submissions made in response to the
exhibition of the Amendment and Permit Application, observations
from its site
visit, and submissions, evidence and other material presented to it during the
Hearing. All submissions and materials
have been considered by the Panel in
reaching its conclusions, regardless of whether they are specifically mentioned
in the Report.
This Report deals with the issues under the following headings:
Design response
and amenity
Restrictive
The planning
1.5 Cultural heritage management plan
A CHMP is required for
an activity if all or part of the activity area is in an area of Aboriginal
cultural heritage sensitivity and
all or part of the activity is a high impact
Part of the subject land is in an area of Aboriginal cultural heritage
significance as shown in
noting a registered cultural heritage place has been identified on part of the
Map showing area of cultural heritage sensitivity
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 4 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
The use and development of subject land for a retirement village is
considered a high impact activity.
A statutory authorisation being:
a permit under
the PE Act such as the Permit Application
any approval
under any Act or regulation to develop land for all or part of an activity area
other than approval under the PE Act.
cannot be granted until a CHMP
has been approved in respect of the
CHMP 18698 has been prepared but not finalised. At the Hearing, the
Proponent advised the Panel:
ongoing discussions with the Registered Aboriginal Party (RAP)
in principal
support had been achieved by the Proponent from the RAP regarding the CHMP but
the CHMP had not been finalised.
As part of this process, the RAP
and Proponent agreed to altering Permit Application plans so that the area in
the purple (dashed
line shown in
) remains undisturbed and a portion of apartment building 1, extending into
Stage 1 (shown in the orange dashed line) is removed.
CHMP negotiated outcomes
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 5 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
The changes agreed with the RAP would necessitate changes to the plans for
the Permit Application. These were set out in the ‘CHMP
Plans’ filed with the Panel and circulated on 9 July 2025 (D17a to 17e).
shows the overall changes,
which are summarised as:
a reduced extent
of the clubhouse in apartment building 1 so it does not extend into the land
affected by the Aged Care Permit
deletion of the
retaining wall along the southern edge of the bowling green and the existing
embankment extending between apartment
building 1 and 2 retained
relocation of
the bowling green (to the north side of the east west access road) replacing the
north south road (RD02) extending from
the village green area towards Robertson
provision of a
new pavilion structure to the bowling green to support recreational use of this
deletion of the
turning area at the eastern end of road
Excerpt of CHMP negotiated outcome for the Permit
Application
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 6 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
No party considered that the CHMP negotiated plans necessitated re-exhibition
of the Amendment or the Permit Application, and the
Panel agrees. The plans
make changes that:
are internal to
the Permit application land
fundamentally alter the proposal
make no increase
to the number of independent living units or villas
do not alter
intensity of the use and development
do not alter
impacts on surrounding existing dwellings as the interface treatment with
existing dwellings remains the same as at shown
in the exhibited
1.6 Versions of the Permit
Panel directed Council to circulate a ‘Day 1’ version of the Permit
before the commencement of the Hearing, and a
final version with its closing
submissions. Council circulated:
a Day 1 Permit
final Hearing
day Permit (D22)
final version
Permit (D25).
The Day 1 version incorporated changes in response to
evidence, legal review and submissions. The final version incorporated further
changes in response to matters raised during the Hearing.
The Proponent provided written comments (D21) on the final versions
following the close of the Hearing.
Parties were given the opportunity to provide written comments on the final
versions following the close of the Hearing. Ms Jayne
Guilmartin elected to do
Except where stated otherwise, the Panel supports the changes in the Day 1
and final versions, which provide greater clarity and improve
the operation of
the controls.
The Panel has had regard to all comments on the final version in developing
its recommended version. The Panel’s recommended
Permit in Appendix B
uses Council’s final version as the starting point.
2 Strategic issues
2.1 Planning context
chapter identifies the planning context relevant to the Amendment.
Relevant references
Victorian planning objectives
- Section 4 of
Municipal Planning Strategy
- Clause 2.02
- Clause 2.03
(Strategic Directions)
- Clause 2.04
(Strategic Framework Plans)
Planning Policy Framework
- Clauses 11.01-
1S (Settlement), 11.01- 1R (Settlement – Loddon Mallee South), Clause
11.01-1L (Settlement – Gisborne
including New Gisborne), Clause 11.02
(Managing Growth), Clause 11.02-1S (Supply of urban land), Clause 11.03-3L
(Peri-urban area
– Gisborne (including New Gisborne)), Clause 11.03-5S
(Distinctive Areas and Landscapes)
12.01-2S (Native Vegetation Management), Clause 12.03-1S (River and riparian
corridors, waterways, lakes, wetlands and billabongs),
Clause 12.05-2L
(Landscapes – Macedon Ranges)
15.01-5S (Neighbourhood Character), Clause 15.01-5L (Neighbourhood character
– Macedon Ranges townships), Clause 15.03-2S
(Aboriginal cultural
16.01-1S (Housing supply), Clause 16.01-1L (Housing supply - Macedon Ranges),
Clause 16.01-2L (Housing affordability –
Macedon Ranges)
18.02-1S (Walking)
19.03-2S (Infrastructure design and provision)
Other planning strategies and policies
- Plan Melbourne
Direction 4, Policies 4.1, 4.2
- Victoria’s
Housing Statement 2024-2034
Victoria (2025)
- Loddon Mallee
South Regional Growth Plan
- The Macedon
Ranges Settlement Strategy (2011)
Outline Development Plan (2009)
- Gisborne Urban
Design Framework (2008)
Futures Structure Plan (July 2024) (Structure Plan)
- Macedon Ranges
Council Plan 2021 - 2031 (Year Three 2023/24 and Year Four
Planning scheme provisions
- Clause 32.08
(General Residential Zone)
- Clause 43.02
(Design and Development Overlay)
- Clause 45.06
(Development Contributions Plan Overlay)
- Clause 52.02
(Easements, Restrictions and Reserves)
- Clause 52.17
(Native Vegetation)
- Clause 52.29
(Land adjacent to the Principal Road Network)
- Clause 55 (Two
or more Dwellings on a lot and Residential Buildings)
Planning scheme amendments
- Macedon Ranges
Amendment C150macr
Ministerial directions
- Ministerial
Direction 11 (Strategic Assessment of Amendments)
- Ministerial
Direction 15 (The Planning Scheme Amendment Process)
Planning practice notes
Practice Note 43: Understanding neighbourhood character, September 2018
Practice Note 46: Strategic Assessment Guidelines, September 2022
Practice Note 91: Using the Residential Zones, July 2023
2.2 Permit triggers
Permit Application triggers a permit under the following provisions of the
Planning Scheme, under:
Cause 32.08-1
(GRZ1) a permit is required for use of land for a retirement village which is a
section 2 use
Clause 32.08-10
(GRZ1) a permit is required for buildings and works associated with a retirement
Clause 43.02-2
(DDO17) a permit is required to construct a building
Clause 52.02
(Easements, Restrictions and Reserves) a permit is required before a person
seeks to create, vary or remove an easement
or restriction or vary or remove a
condition in the nature of an easement in a Crown grant under
Subdivision Act 1988
Clause 52.17-1
(Native Vegetation) a permit is required for removal of vegetation on land
exceeding 4000 square metres in size
Clause 52.29-2
(Land Adjacent to The Principal Road Network) a permit is required to create or
alter access to a road in a TRZ2.
2.3 Strategic justification
(i) The issue
issues are whether:
the Amendment is
strategically justified
appropriate to apply the GRZ to the Amendment land.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
Many submitters questioned the strategic basis for
rezoning the subject land from a zone which facilitates medical care through
to a zone which facilitates residential development. Submitters were
concerned this change would decrease the opportunity for the
land to be used for
medical purposes through a future hospital or associated facility. Submitters
suggested that if the land was
rezoned for medium density housing, the best
opportunity for a hospital to cater for a growing population would be lost.
These concerns
arose in part from the history of the land as a Bush Nursing
Hospital and associated uses, and a desire to see a similar use re-established
in the future.
Other submitters considered the rezoning would undermine the town’s
developed planning framework, weaken protections for township
character, and set
a precedent for other isolated developments.
Some submitters considered the subject land should be used for a hospital, or
for a park or public open space.
Council submitted the Amendment was strategically justified, and was
consistent with the Municipal Planning Strategy by:
encouraging
increased growth within township boundaries
being designed
to fit comfortably with the character of Gisborne
supporting the
increasing demand for greater housing diversity, particularly small
residential facilities for older people on underutilised land in close proximity
to the Gisborne Town Centre.
Council submitted the Planning Scheme
provides strong direction to maintain township boundaries by building up
existing and centrally
located areas, whilst respecting the ‘country
town’ and ‘semi-rural’ character.
Council said the Amendment was compatible with the Macedon Ranges Statement
of Planning Policy which directs development to a hierarchy
of settlements
identified for growth and encourages infill development that respects the
township’s character. Council also
referred to a range of strategic
documents, including the Loddon Mallee South Regional Growth Plan, the Macedon
Ranges Settlement
Strategy, and the Structure Plan, which identify Gisborne as a
regional centre suitable for alternative forms of housing, including
density housing.
The Proponent submitted:
PSA C147 and the Permit Application are proposed within about 260 metres of
the Gisborne Town Centre, a regional centre and within
the township boundaries
of Gisborne. The proposal provides residential living options for the elderly on
an underutilised parcel
of land in very close proximity to the Gisborne Town
Centre and surrounding civic uses capitalising on the surrounds of the Subject
The Proponent called the planning and urban design evidence of Alistair
Campbell, who, in relation to the strategic justification
of the Amendment,
In summary, I consider the proposed urban design and planning considerations
contained within Amendment C147marc to be sound and worthy
of approval as they
seek to appropriately respond to this relatively large and somewhat complex site
and varied interface conditions.
As a combined Amendment and Application, it
seeks relatively minor adjustments to the Planning Scheme, by way of removing a
appropriate special use zone and extending a more general and
‘flexible’ residential zone across a portion (the remainder)
site and similarly extending an already existing and present overlay to ensure a
more localised response to built form and
local character context. These
amendments to the Planning Scheme are necessary to permit the approval of a
retirement village, which
has been designed to accord with the Planning Scheme
and is to sit sensitively on this rather large and corner site....Therefore,
briefly outlined above, I support the proposed Amendment C147marc for
Mr Campbell concluded that the use of the GRZ1, extension to DDO17 and
changes to Clause 11.01-1L were entirely appropriate.
(iii) Discussion
The Panel must decide whether the Amendment is
strategically justified, having regard to the Municipal Planning Strategy,
Policy Framework (PPF), and adopted Council strategies. Consistent
with much of Macedon Ranges, Gisborne benefits from a substantial
strategic planning over many years, and across many documents, from both Council
and State Government. The most common
aim amongst these documents is that in
seeking to protect landscapes and rural areas from development, existing
townships must be
further developed in central locations through diverse
housing, but in a way that maintains their semi-rural village character.
The Panel considers the Amendment achieves this aim, has a solid strategic
basis and is consistent with the PPF. It will promote
further residential
development on suitable and centrally located land, that is very close and
indeed a walkable distance to the
town centre. In doing this, it makes a small
but not insignificant contribution to preserving the town boundaries and
character that Macedon Ranges is valued for.
The Amendment will facilitate a development that will fulfil a very important
role for the Gisborne community. It will allow for
well-located housing
suitable for elderly residents, in a town where more diverse housing is
explicitly sought, in a location close
to existing medical services and the
town’s commercial core.
The subject land is ideally located for a residential zone and a retirement
village, and in many ways represents the perfect location
for such a use. This
is due to not just its location relative to the town centre, but also the
existing medical, social and allied
health facilities to the east, which,
together with the proposed development, will form a type of health and ageing
hub, with positive
relationships between uses.
The Panel finds that the GRZ is appropriate and a sensible choice. It is
consistent with surrounding zoning (including part of the
subject land itself),
and balances housing densification objectives with preserving character and
respecting the amenity of surrounding
dwellings. The SUZ is designed for
private hospitals and given the current aged care facility on the land, is
clearly outdated and
no longer reflective of its current use, let alone its
future use as envisaged by the Planning Scheme.
The Panel considers that its application in this case satisfies Planning
Practice Note 91 to apply the GRZ to areas “
suitable for housing
diversity and housing at increased densities in locations offering good access
to services, jobs and public transport”.
Similarly, the extension of DDO17 is logical given its current application on
surrounding land and to ensure that development is cognisant
of the need to
maintain the semi-rural and village character of Gisborne. The changes to
Clause 11.01-1L are consistent with the
direction of the PPF to encourage
residential development within township boundaries.
The Panel’s role is to consider the appropriateness of the proposed
uses, and it is beyond the scope of the Amendment to consider
alternative uses
such as those suggested by submitters including a future hospital, medical super
clinic or public park. In any
event, the GRZ1 will not prevent the development
of a hospital or similar clinic on the land, as it remains permissible under the
(iv) Conclusions
For the reasons set out in this report, the Panel
concludes that the Amendment:
is supported by,
and implements, the relevant sections of the Planning Policy Framework
is consistent
with the relevant Ministerial Directions and Practice Notes
is well founded
and strategically justified
should proceed
subject to addressing the more specific issues raised in submissions as
discussed in the following chapters.
It is appropriate and justified
to apply the General Residential Zone to the Amendment land.
2.4 Need for retirement living
(i) The issue
number of submitters raised concern about the use of the subject land for a
retirement village, on the basis that there is no demonstrable
retirement living in Gisborne and that it is preferable the land be used for a
hospital given the need for and availability
of health services.
The issue is whether it is appropriate to use the subject land for a
retirement village.
(ii) Evidence and submissions
submitters did not support the proposed use of the subject land as a retirement
village. They submitted there was no need for
retirement living and highlighted
the supply of retirement villages and aged care facilities already in the
region. They pointed
to examples of approved development, that in their view,
could accommodate Gisborne’s needs into the future, including:
Arcare Aged Care
an aged care
facility at 110 Willowbank Road
Warrina Aged
One submitter also highlighted the availability of
residentially zoned land within existing and future subdivisions in Gisborne,
Gisborne and Gisborne South, suggesting that these areas could more
appropriately accommodate any future retirement village development.
submitted that retirement villages typically serve a limited demographic,
primarily individuals and couples over the age
of 55 with a higher net worth
which, in the submitter’s view, did not justify the proposed use of the
subject land.
Council submitted that concerns about a lack of demonstrated demand for a
retirement village were not, in themselves, sufficient grounds
to refuse the
Amendment and Permit Application. Nonetheless, it provided evidence to support
the need for such a development.
Council highlighted recent population projections indicating that
Gisborne’s population is expected to grow to between 18,000
people by 2036, with the retirement-age population projected to grow by 21 per
cent. Council referred to the Gisborne
Futures Structure Plan 2024 (Structure
Plan) which notes:
Detached homes form 91% of housing stock, and 92% of these contain three or
more bedrooms. This lack of diversity means there is limited
opportunity for
older people to downsize from large family homes and remain in town, or for
single people or first home buyers to
enter the housing market.
The Structure Plan was informed by the Gisborne Community Infrastructure
Assessment (SGS Economics and Planning, 2023) (Community
Infrastructure
Assessment), which undertook a comprehensive review of community infrastructure
needs across the district. The assessment
canvassed the existing and approved
aged care facilities in the area and recommended that Council “
to support the allocation of residential aged care within the district ... this
brings with it a diversity of choice in service
uses and service
Council also submitted that while other existing and proposed retirement
village options exist, they do not offer the same proximity
to the Gisborne Town
Centre, or are differently configured, in ways that may limit accessibility or
In relation to the question of supply and demand, Council conceded that this
project could result in a potential surplus of retirement
living options.
However, it considered that this was acceptable because it would offer a
diversity of living options, provide employment
and opportunities for supporting
community and health care facilities.
The Proponent was more unequivocal, submitting that there is an undersupply
of retirement living in the area. It relied on the Community
Infrastructure
Assessment and its conclusion that residential aged care should continue to be
The Proponent called Bruce Message to provide expert evidence on the issue of
demand. Mr Message outlined current market trends for
accommodation, highlighting the major trend for accommodation paired with a
‘continuum of care model’
- integrating independent living with
access to higher levels of care as needs increase. He said:
The landscape of retirement living is increasingly diverging between
independent living and care-focused housing which is driven by
the growing
demand for comprehensive care services and the rising expectations for quality
accommodation. There is a clear trend
towards independent, active lifestyles and
care-focused accommodation as operators endeavour to meet the specific
requirements of
residents in need of varying levels of care.
Mr Message explained that the continuum of care model, in physical terms,
means a single precinct being able to deliver residential
aged care, retirement
living, assisted living, support at home services, occupational therapies,
general practitioner services and
daycare and respite accommodation. He
concluded that the proposal, together with the approved aged care facility,
fulfilled these
requirements as part of a wider health and wellbeing precinct.
He thought that “
what is proposed is where the industry is moving
On the question of need, Mr Message’s supply and demand analysis found
that there were no existing retirement villages within
an eight kilometre
catchment, although Mayflower Aged Care have approval for 35 retirement village
units. Based on estimated demand
(and assuming Mayflower is not constructed),
Mr Message concluded that by 2035, there would be an undersupply of 120
retirement village
Based on this undersupply, and the unique location, Mr Message concluded:
I support the approval and construction of a retirement village on the
Benetas Gisborne land as it delivers a strategic pillar in
a contemporary
integrated continuum of care model that will meet the modern consumer needs and
provide benefit to the Macedon Shire
Mr Message, under questioning, acknowledged that in his supply figures he had
not included the contribution of the Westport Park Retirement
Estate, which
according to Council, features 96 village units and was approved in 2021, on the
basis that it was outside the catchment.
(iii) Discussion
There was considerable
disagreement between submitters, who saw little need for a retirement village,
and Council and the Proponent,
who saw a demonstrative need.
It was evident at the Hearing, and from reading the submissions, there is
confusion over terms and definitions used in accommodation
for elderly persons.
This is particularly evident in the new ‘continuum of care model’
where different types of care
are on a spectrum and the differences are
therefore subtle. For example, at what point in the supply of care, does a
village, become an aged care facility. Clearly the later has greater
levels of care than the former but at which point does the
facility change in
definition.
This highlights the challenges of a supply and demand assessment to
demonstrate need, as the contribution of one facility may be discarded
included based on meeting unclear definitions, leading to different conclusions
from otherwise robust assessments.
If the approved Westport Park Retirement Estate was included and combined
with the Mayflower approval for 35 retirement villas, the
demand for 120 units
as identified by Mr Message would evaporate, turning an undersupply into a
modest oversupply.
However, there is a risk in not approving more aged care and retirement
villages based on the view that existing approvals equate
to sufficient supply.
This is because an approval is not the same thing as a constructed unit, and
there are various reasons why
a project may not proceed following approval. In
the context of housing affordability, Councils in recent times have pointed to
long lists of approved projects that have not proceeded to construction.
In this matter, the Panel does not consider it is critical to establish a
precise mathematical basis for a certain number of retirement
units as an under
or over supply. Of note, the demand projections are to 2036, and there will be
increased demand for aged care
and retirement units beyond that time
The Panel prefers the broader conclusion of the Community Infrastructure
Assessment which recommended Council support residential
aged care and seeks a
diversity of choice in service uses and service mix.
The Panel is also
persuaded by the Structure Plan which explicitly highlights the subject land as
‘proposed aged care/retirement
village’. Together, whatever the
actual supply and demand number is, these strategies provide solid support to
use the land
for a retirement village.
The Panel is comforted by the clear locational strengths of the subject land,
being walking distance to the town centre, and nearby
an approved aged care
facility and medical services. There is considerable potential to establish a
health and wellbeing hub as
canvassed by Mr Message, being achieved with this
Finally, as outlined in Chapter
the Panel finds that the use of the land for retirement village is consistent
with the PPF, the GRZ1 and DDO17. A strong theme
in the PPF is the
encouragement of medium density housing on the subject land, and more generally
land within the township boundaries
and close to the town centre.
(iv) Conclusion
The Panel concludes:
There is a need
for retirement living on the subject land.
subject land for a retirement village is appropriate.
2.5 Recommendation
The Panel recommends
Adopt Macedon
Ranges Planning Scheme Amendment C147macr as exhibited.
3 Design response and amenity
3.1 The issues
issues relate to whether the built form and scale of the proposed development is
appropriate, having regard to:
3.2 Evidence and submissions
A small number of
submissions raised concerns regarding the proposed design and built form.
Specifically, the submissions suggested
the dwellings
located along the southern boundary of the subject land should be reduced in
number and height
the southern
setback of these dwellings should be increased
the overall
building density and scale should be reduced, with greater provision of open and
green space
natural light and surrounding landscape should be improved.
concerns primarily originated from residents on the northern side of Hamilton
Street, who directly adjoin the subject land.
The Proponent submitted the proposed built form, including height, setbacks,
and density, was appropriate within its context and consistent
objectives of the Planning Scheme. In terms of height, the Proponent
the maximum
building height of 14 metres aligns with the intent for increased building
heights in Clause 53.17 (Residential Aged Care
Facilities), notwithstanding that
the clause does not formally apply to retirement villages
while the two
apartment buildings are 14 metres high, the majority of the site is made up of
single and double storey villa units.
The Proponent relied on urban
design evidence from Mr Campbell. Mr Campbell said the tallest elements were
centrally located within
the land, and well setback to minimise visual impact
and avoid amenity conflicts. He acknowledged the sensitivity of the southern
interface (to the Hamilton Street dwellings) and said this area of the subject
land comprised mostly single storey villas thereby
respecting this interface.
While part of this interface is proposed to include a three-storey element (the
apartment building),
Mr Campbell was comfortable with this given the generous
6.5 metre setback from the southern boundary, meaning it complied with the
setback standard of Clause 55 (even though this doesn’t formally apply).
He said this building was:
... designed and sited to have minimal impact on the surrounding Gisborne
streetscape, presenting only a limited profile to Neal Street.
The majority of
this building’s mass is restricted to the village’s internal
accessway. While the intensity of these
buildings is relatively intense, when
compared to existing forms in Gisborne’s residential areas, it is not
unreasonable.
Mr Campbell suggested that the topography of the land assists in reducing the
scale of this building when viewed from the Hamilton
Street dwellings, as they
sit higher in the landscape and look over the subject land. In summary, he
supported the proposed built
form and scale, and concluded that “
proposed site layout demonstrates a logical and considered planning response
that appropriately addresses access, built form arrangement/s,
internal amenity,
and site topography
In terms of the changes proposed in the CHMP negotiated plans, Mr
supported in
principle the deletion of RD02 and car parking spaces and their replacement with
a communal facility and more open (green)
considered the
implications on the arrangement and amenity of the immediately abutting proposed
single storey villas to be unacceptable.
Mr Campbell said he was
mindful, that as originally intended, these villas were to interface with an
accessway, effectively providing
them with a ‘street’ frontage and
outlook. However, under the CHMP negotiated plans arrangement, the two villas
to the western side (villa 6 and villa 4) would have a diminished
‘street’ presence and reduced outlook, due to the position
rear of the pavilion and its blank rear profile. He considered the impact of
the pavilion to most impinge upon the ‘sense
of address’ and outlook
from the living areas of villa 6. Therefore, he suggested that the northern
extent of the communal
pavilion be reduced and set back further from the
site’s Robertson Street frontage, to minimise concealment relative to
6’s front corner habitable room.
agreed that the
proposal would result in an increase in density but submitted this was in
keeping with its location within the township
boundary and proximity to the town
considered that
the generous setbacks, retention of canopy trees and strong landscape plan were
positive attributes
highlighted that
the Planning Scheme actively encourages diverse and medium density housing in
this location.
Council considered that the proposed height, and its
distribution through the site, would appropriately respond to the surrounding
area. More specifically, it submitted the three-storey built form was well
removed from the western and northern boundary, and well
setback from the
southern and eastern interfaces, allowing for landscaping to soften its
appearance. Council highlighted the Gisborne
Futures Draft Urban Design
Framework which recognises that heights of three to four storeys may be
appropriate in areas internal
to the land.
Council submitted:
While the visual impact of the proposal’s height is somewhat
complicated by the varying levels of the site, which changes dramatically
north to south and also slightly from west to east (at the southern boundary),
Council considers the proposed design response
and siting of taller built form
has appropriately responded to the natural topography of the land and the
surrounding development,
such that the height of the development is both in
keeping with surrounding built form and minimises impact of the height on the
amenity of surrounding properties.
In response to concerns about overshadowing, Council submitted that the
shadow diagrams indicate that the open space areas of surrounding
properties and
the Dixon Field Reserve to the north, will not be adversely affected by
overshadowing at any time during the Spring
equinox (22 September), including to
the properties to the south aligning Hamilton Street. In terms of overlooking,
Council highlighted
compliance with Clause 55.04-6 through the use of screening
or obscured glazing for upper level habitable room windows and balconies
potential overlooking may occur.
3.3 Discussion
For a large-scale
development comprising buildings up to three storeys, the Panel notes that
relatively few submissions raised concerns
regarding built form. Of those that
did, most originated from the northern side of Hamilton Street, where the
interface is more
exposed to potential amenity impacts.
The Panel finds the proposed built form to be acceptable, with impacts on
neighbouring properties considered reasonable. The proposed
heights respond to
and are respectful of their surrounds, with a maximum building height of 14
metres for the apartment buildings,
and majority of the proposed built form made
up of one and two storeys. This is consistent with the policy direction at
Clause 53.17
(Residential Aged Care Facilities) of the Planning Scheme which
recognises that buildings that cater for the elderly can have higher
More specifically, the design thoughtfully locates the taller built form
elements toward the centre of the subject land, away from
the more sensitive
southern interface along Hamilton Street. The architectural response is high
quality, offering a range of materials
and finishes across a variety of building
using a diverse
mix of species, will help soften the visual impact for
neighbours and create attractive, memorable spaces for future residents.
The Panel agrees with Mr Campbell that the proposed built form has been
carefully designed in response to both the site’s context
topography.
Notable features that act to mitigate built form impacts include:
northern and eastern interfaces, and part of the southern interface, front
public streets rather than private dwellings
the natural
slope of the land, falling from south to north, reduces the perceived height of
buildings when viewed from Hamilton Street’s
higher elevation
existing mature
street trees and on-site vegetation (most of which will be retained) further
screen and soften the built form from
the public realm.
Furthermore,
the surrounding context, which includes a variety of building heights and
styles, such as modern townhouses on the eastern
side of Neal Street, further
supports the proposed scale.
In relation to specific concerns raised by Hamilton Street residents, the
Panel acknowledges that the development will be visible;
however, the majority
of this interface is proposed to consist of single storey units. The
three-storey apartment building fronting
a small section of this interface is
well set back, will be generously landscaped, and due to the topography of the
land, will be
partially cut into the slope, reducing its perceived height and
ensuring it does not present as a typical three-storey structure.
In relation to overshadowing, the Panel agrees with Council that Standard B21
(Overshadowing) is comfortably met, and overlooking
has been appropriately
In terms of the CHMP negotiated plans and Mr Campbell’s recommendation
that the northern extent of the communal pavilion (club
house) be set back
further from the Robertson Street frontage to minimise its impact on villa
6’s front door and habitable
room, the Panel does not consider this
necessary. Whilst it might amount to an ‘improved’ design outcome
in the overall
context, this needs to be balanced against the loss of valuable
club house floorspace, a highly valued area to many residential retirement
aged car facilities. Leaving the club house unchanged outweighs the benefits of
improving the front space for one villa.
3.4 Conclusion
The Panel concludes the
built form and scale of the proposed development, including density, character,
height, setbacks, and amenity
impacts, are acceptable.
4 Removal of vegetation
4.1 The issue
issue is whether the proposed removal of native vegetation is acceptable.
4.2 Evidence and submissions
submitter raised concerns about the proposed removal of native vegetation. It
said there are inconsistencies in the Permit Application
and the number of trees
identified for removal. It submitted that tree 35, which sits between the
centre of the subject land and
the southern boundary, may have cultural
significance and should be retained.
The Proponent submitted that the removal of tree 35 is acceptable, and that
its loss will be offset by a comprehensive landscape proposal.
Council submitted the proposal appropriately addresses the requirements of
Clause 52.17 of the Planning Scheme, noting that it avoids
impacts on several
large trees. Only one tree, tree 35, requires a permit for removal under Clause
52.17. Council submitted that
the removal of tree 35 is ecologically acceptable
and will not significantly impact habitat for any rare or threatened
Council advised that following exhibition, it was identified that the Native
Vegetation Removal Report submitted with the application
incorrectly identified
tree 35’s circumference as being 124 centimetres, leading to the tree
being misclassified as a small-scattered
tree. Council submitted:
the actual tree
circumference means the tree should be classified as a large tree
misclassification impacts the offset calculation contained in condition 28
(shown as condition 26 in the Panel preferred version
of the Permit)
this error can
be corrected through a new Native Vegetation Removal Report being required to be
prepared via permit conditions and
an update to condition 28 (shown as condition
26 in the Panel preferred version of the Permit).
Council also noted
that the proposal was referred to the Department of Energy, Environment and
Climate Action in relation to the proposed
native vegetation removal, who
indicated its support for the proposal.
4.3 Discussion
Panel notes that tree 35 (a Mountain Gum) as unique because of its size and
prominence on the subject land, especially when viewed
from the Hamilton Street
dwellings. The Arborist Report submitted with the Permit Application notes that
the tree is possibly a
remnant tree and requires a permit for its removal under
Clause 52.17 of the Planning Scheme.
The Panel explored retaining the Mountain Gum with the parties, but its
location and very large tree protection zone meant it was
impossible without a
major redesign and significant loss of dwelling numbers.
While not ideal, the Panel considers that the removal of tree 35 is
justified, having regard to:
the considerable
effort made through the design to retain significant trees, including the mature
trees near the Neal Street boundary,
and other mature trees near the centre of
the high quality
landscape response, including significant new plantings proposed as part of the
development, which should, over time,
lead to a substantial landscape cover
the unreasonable
impact on the design should tree 35 have to be retained
the support of
the Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action, as the agency
responsible for ecological matters.
DDO17 includes a design
objective to ensure significant vegetation is protected. In this respect, the
Panel considers that the proposed
design strikes an appropriate balance between
built form layout and tree protection, particularly given the amount of mature
trees protected and retained and the offsets required pursuant to draft
permit conditions.
The Panel does not consider the removal of native vegetation has been
misrepresented. The permit trigger for the removal, destruction
or lopping of
native vegetation under Clause 52.17 of the Planning Scheme does not apply to
native vegetation that was planted or
established through direct seeding. The
Arborist Report confirms that only tree 35 is considered remnant and meeting the
of native under Clause 52.17. As a result, a permit is only required
to remove tree 35.
The Panel agrees with Council’s suggestion that a new permit condition
is needed to require an amended Native Vegetation Removal
Report to correct the
error in how tree 35 was classified.
4.4 Conclusion
The Panel concludes the
proposed native vegetation removal is acceptable.
5 Access and movement
5.1 The issue
issue is whether the traffic impacts associated with the proposal are
acceptable.
5.2 Evidence and submissions
A number of submitters raised concern in relation to traffic impacts
associated with the proposal. In particular, it was submitted
proposal might
restrict the access of emergency services to the properties along Robertson
Street and parents accessing the Manna
Gum kindergarten, both of which are
accessed from the Robertson Street slip lane
proposal will
contribute to increased traffic congestion on Hamilton Street and Neal
construction will impact emergency service access to surrounding residences
proposal will
result in unsafe pedestrian use (by elderly residents) at the junction of
Robertson Road and Neal Street due to truck
internal road
network is not wide enough to support public transport
Submitters requested that a construction management plan and
a traffic management plan be prepared and contain clear designation of
alternative access routes, a detailed construction schedule and details for
direct communication to construction management teams.
One submitter suggested that the Robertson Street service lane be made wide
enough to support public transport and another suggested
that a roundabout and
traffic calming measures should be included at the Robertson Street and Neal
Street intersection.
The Proponent relied on the evidence of Mr Sellers in relation to traffic,
transport and carparking.
Mr Sellers said:
the proposal
will have negligible impact on the performance of the surrounding road
the proposal
satisfies the statutory car parking requirement
the studies
proposed in a number of the villas should not be considered
‘bedrooms’ thereby impacting car parking numbers
Application is not required to provide bicycle parking
access is acceptable subject to flat sections being provided on any 1.20 section
of path at 15-metre intervals
the carparking
and vehicle access layout can be improved by further refinements, for example,
to provide pedestrian visibility triangles,
increasing the dimensions of certain
accessways and carparking spaces and garages
waste collection
can be satisfactorily addressed subject to further refinement.
relation to the CHMP negotiated plans, Mr Sellars was comfortable with the:
removal of Road
RD02 – the connection between the primary east west internal roadway and
its replacement with the bowling green
and function house. He said this will
not materially alter vehicle accessibility to/from the proposed development
introduction of the 11, 90-degree car parking spaces.
However, he
did not support the removal of the turning area for vehicles at the eastern end
of RD05 and said this would present difficulties
for larger vehicles using the
road, such as waste collection trucks. However, he said if the trucks were
limited to 6.4 metres and
could utilise the landscape areas to the south of RD05
to accommodate a three-point turn, this would be acceptable. In the event
larger emergency vehicle access (typically vehicles up to 8.8 metres) are
required at the end of RD05, Mr Sellers said they
would also require the use of
landscaped areas to turn around.
Department of Transport and Planning
The Department of Transport and Planning (DTP) made a submission to the
Amendment, stating that:
Although the proposed amendment is likely to be supported by the Head,
Transport for Victoria, the following comments are provided
to address road
safety impacts when assessing any future residential development of the subject
ROAD NETWORK
As per the Traffic Impact Assessment Report submitted by Cardno ref V181318
dated 24 January 2024:
• There must not be direct vehicle access from the subject land to
Robertson Street.
• The impact of the generated traffic movements from the site must not
adversely impact the operational efficiency of Neal Street/
Robertson Street
roundabout.
ACTIVE TRANSPORT
DTP notes that no pedestrian access or footpath exists along the Neal Street
frontage of the subject land and recommends that Council
require such provision
as part of any planning approval which may issue.
DTP also notes that there is currently no provision for occupants of the
subject land to safely access the significant public open
space area on the
north side of Robertson Street by foot.
Council is therefore strongly encouraged to provide for safe pedestrian
crossing opportunities at or near the Roberston Street/Neal
intersection.
Council was satisfied that the proposal will not result in adverse traffic or
amenity impacts. Council acknowledged that the increased
density proposed for
the site will result in some changes to the surrounding road network including
Neal Street and Robertson Street.
However, it considered any change would be
negligible and that the existing network could accommodate the increase in
vehicles safely
and without adverse impacts to traffic flows.
Council submitted it was satisfied that the removal of the accessway to
Robertson Street, as shown in the CHMP negotiated plans, will
not impact the
ability of the surrounding road network to accommodate the traffic generation
from the site.
In response to concerns that the proposal will result in unsafe pedestrian
use at the junction of Robertson Street and Neal Street
due to truck traffic,
Council did not consider that this intersection would give rise to a risk to
pedestrian safety given its distance
from the proposed development.
Accordingly, Council did not support the need for a roundabout at the
intersection.
In relation to concerns about pedestrian safety, Council sought a permit
condition requiring a pedestrian crossing be installed on
Neal Street, including
traffic management devices to the satisfaction of the responsible authority,
prior to the use commencing.
Council submitted construction impacts will be managed through a mandatory
construction management plan, including a traffic management
plan, ensuring
minimal disruption to residents and emergency access. Council also indicated
that public transport access using internal
roads was not expected and any
future consideration should be directed to Public Transport Victoria.
Council supported the recommendations of Mr Sellars through a series of
condition 1 updates to the plans as reflected in Council’s
final version
permit (D25).
5.3 Discussion
The Panel is satisfied
that the proposal will not result in adverse traffic or related amenity impacts.
While there will be some degree
of change to the surrounding road network, it
will be negligible with no adverse impacts. The existing network can
accommodate the
increase in vehicles safely and efficiently.
For size and habitation reasons, the Panel supports Mr Sellars’
position that it is not appropriate to assess the proposed studies
as bedrooms.
For this reason, the supply of car parking is justified.
In terms of access for emergency services, the Panel accepts that, subject to
a condition requiring a construction management plan,
including a traffic
management plan prior to construction commencement, the traffic and emergency
access concerns can be satisfactorily
The Panel supports Council’s position and recommends inclusion of a
condition requiring improved pedestrian infrastructure,
including a pedestrian
crossing and associated traffic calming measures at Neal Street. There was some
debate about the relevant
level of detail to be included in this permit
condition. The Proponent was keen to include specific detail and reference to
markings’, whereas Council’s preference was to keep it
simple to provide flexibility to negotiate alternate options if
required. The
Panel agrees with Council in this respect and has adopted Council’s
version of the condition as shown in its
final version Permit.
The Panel accepts that internal public transport access is not a current
requirement of the development and supports Council’s
position that any
future integration should be subject to consultation with the relevant transport
In terms of the changes proposed as part of the CHMP negotiated plans, the
Panel supports removal of the road connection to Robertson
Street. This will
not impact the ability of the surrounding road network to accommodate traffic
generation from the subject land.
In terms of the turning area for vehicles at
the eastern end of RD05, the Panel supports the condition agreed to by the
and reflected in Council’s final version Permit. This will allow
vehicles, including emergency vehicles, to undertake a three-point
turn, relying
on landscaped areas to the south of the road as required. The landscape plan,
when finalised, should allow for this.
5.4 Conclusion
The Panel concludes the
traffic impacts associated with the proposal are acceptable.
6 Restrictive Covenant
6.1 Background
Amendment proposes to revise the Clause 52.02 Schedule to remove the Covenant
from part of the subject land, known as Lot 1 on
Plan of Subdivision 205979T
(Covenant land) which is proposed to be developed as part of the Permit
Application.
(i) Covenant restrictions
The Covenant states:
(The burdened land) will not without the written consent of the transferor or
his legal personal representative:
(a) Use or permit the use of the land hereby controlled for any purpose other
than for a hospital, nursing home or similar use under
the control of the
transferee PROVIDED THAT should the said land have not been used for any such
purpose within twenty years of the
date of this transfer then it shall use or
permit the use of the said land for any purpose other than as a public park.
(b) Subdivide sell transfer or otherwise dispose of the said land.
Key aspects about the Covenant include:
referencing the
legal personal representative (who might initially have been an executor but is
now Equity Trustees) allowing for
consent to alternate uses
references to ’hospital’ then ’nursing home’ and then
including the words “
or similar use
stating that
unless one of those uses had commenced within twenty years, then the further use
of the Covenant land could only be for
(ii) Benefiting land
shows the burdened land (diagonal red) and land which benefits (green surround)
from the Covenant.
Land benefiting and burdened by the Covenant
To reduce the electronic size of this document, Figure 7 has been removed
from this version of the report. Contact Planning Panels
Victoria to obtain a
complete copy of the report.
The land burdened by the Covenant is developed and used as a ‘nursing
care’. The former Bush Nursing Hospital is not located on land affected
by the Covenant, nor is there any restriction
in relation to the part of the
green bounded land intended for use as retirement village.
Before commitments to proceed with any of the development proposals, the
Proponent advised that it made representations to Equity
Trustees about the
proposed retirement and aged care precinct and asked for the consent to
undertake the development (effectively
both Stage 1 and Stage 2). Specifically,
in 2018 Equity Trustees advised in writing that it:
Equity Trustees consents to the transfer of the Property to Anglican Aged
Care Services Group (trading as Benetas) (Benetas) for the
use and development
of the Property for a residential aged care facility and retirement living
development.
While the Proponent maintains the Covenant is redundant as a result of
consent being granted, it has sought removal of the Covenant
to avoid any future
Two of the lots who benefit from the Covenant (being 77 Robinson Street and
120 Hamilton Street) were owned by individuals who had
entered into a deed of
release with the Proponent, under which those owners had surrendered all rights
to the benefit of the Covenant.
All remaining beneficiaries to the Covenant were directly notified of the
Amendment and Permit Application on 31 May 2024.
One submission was received from a beneficiary of the Covenant (Submission
8). Submission 8 raised concern with the impact of construction
retirement village on access surrounding the site, including in emergencies,
however, did not raise concern with the removal
of the Covenant.
A submission was received from the owners of land at 77 Robinson Street,
Gisborne. As noted above, predecessors in title to the land
at 77 Robinson
Street, Gisborne entered into a deed of release with the Proponent in respect of
the Covenant, under which those owners
had surrendered all rights to the benefit
of the Covenant. Notwithstanding this, that submitter did not raise concern
with the removal
of the Covenant.
No further submissions or correspondence was received in response to
notification.
(iii) The principles for varying or removing a covenant
In determining whether the covenant should be
removed, the Proponent’s submission and legal advice supporting the
proposal referred
to the approach in the Mornington Peninsula C46 Panel
First, the Panel
should be satisfied that the Amendment would further the objectives of planning
in Victoria. The Panel must have
regard to the Minister’s Directions, the
planning provisions, MSS, strategic plans, policy statements, codes or
in the Scheme, and significant effects the Amendment might have on
the environment, or which the environment might have on any use
or development
envisaged in the Amendment.
Second, the
Panel should consider the interests of affected parties, including the
beneficiaries of the covenant. It may be a wise
precaution in some instances to
direct the Council to engage a lawyer to ensure that the beneficiaries have been
correctly identified
and notified.
Third, the Panel
should consider whether the removal or variation of the covenant would enable a
use or development that complies
with the planning scheme.
Finally, the
Panel should balance conflicting policy objectives in favour of net community
benefit and sustainable development. If
the Panel concludes that there will be a
net community benefit and sustainable development it should recommend the
variation or removal
of the covenant.
6.2 Procedural requirements
PE Act sets out special requirements for notice of an amendment that seeks to
vary or remove a restrictive covenant. In short,
all legal beneficiaries of the
Covenant must be directly notified, and a sign must be placed on the land.
The Panel is satisfied all legal beneficiaries were directly notified, first
by the Council’s broad notice to all landowners
who might be materially
affected by the Amendment and Permit Application, secondly by the installation
of two signs on the subject
land, and thirdly by the Council’s targeted
correspondence to all beneficiaries dated 31 May 2024.
A restrictive covenant can be removed by:
to the Supreme Court under the
Property Law Act 1958
Deed of Consent under the
Transfer of Land Act 1958
planning permit application
planning scheme amendment.
Methods 1 and 2 can be difficult and
costly and are used infrequently since the PE Act was amended to introduce
methods 3 and 4 of
removing a covenant.
6.3 Submissions
A number of submitters
(not beneficiaries) raised concerns in relation to the removal of the Covenant
and the impact of its removal
on meeting the purposes under which the land was
originally transferred from the Dixon family (the transferee).
Some submitters suggested the land should be gifted back to the Dixon family
or that the Proponent should reimburse the community
for any uplift in value of
the land due to the rezoning. It was also suggested that representatives of the
Dixon family were not
consulted on the proposal.
The Proponent submitted that the Covenant is drafted to facilitate the
development of part of the subject land for a nursing home,
hospital or similar
use. It said the Amendment and the Permit Application are generally consistent
with this direction. A retirement
village is being proposed and the changes
sought by the Amendment are proposed to further facilitate this use and the aged
which is the subject of the Aged Care Permit.
The Proponent submitted that net community benefit is achieved as the
Amendment will:
arguably redundant Covenant
ensure there is
no confusion regarding its application
ambiguity regarding its interaction with to the Permit
Application.
It submitted:
The practicalities are, in relation to a parcel of private land, there is no
realistic prospect of a brand new hospital being built
on the site on the small
area which is affected by the Restrictive Covenant. In relation to other medical
functions or activities,
these are, very well catered for and co-located in the
immediate area. This includes some of the land which is owned and controlled
Benetas to maintain that situation.
This proposal allows for (to adopt the jargon) the progressive ageing in
place through retirement village villas, independent living
units and then into
the aged care component (or nursing home). Supported, by design and not
coincidence, with co-located medical
and other support services.
One can make the case that this is in effect a similar use in concept to the
words of the Restrictive Covenant but in a 2025 context.
And a use undertaken by
one of Australia’s leading, not for profit faith based operators.
Council considered:
the removal of
the Covenant is strategically sound and has significant planning merit
there has been a
robust consideration of the interests of affected parties
the change would
facilitate a land use that complies with the Planning Scheme, and will result in
a net community benefit.
6.4 Discussion
(i) The principles
principles for removing a covenant by a planning scheme amendment, set out by
the Mornington Peninsula C46 Panel, have been widely
accepted and applied by
subsequent panels. The Panel agrees that these principles are appropriate to
guide consideration of whether
it is appropriate to remove the covenant from the
title to the Covenant land.
Several panels have found the principles are not tests or preconditions that
must be met before a covenant can be varied or removed.
Rather, they are
general principles to be applied in assessing whether the variation or removal
meets the objectives of planning
in Victoria and achieves a net community
Victorian planning objectives
The Panel considers that removal of the Covenant
would enable the orderly provision and co-ordination of a large land parcel that
has strong strategic support and will provide important housing and retirement
living services for the benefit of the Victorian community.
It would constitute
orderly planning because removing the Covenant would:
facilitate the
use of underutilised and well located land in Gisborne
development outcome that contributes to a diversity and affordability of housing
in Gisborne, while respecting the distinctive
characteristics of the Macedon
More broadly, the Amendment constitutes fair and orderly
planning by providing certainty for both the Proponent and the surrounding
community as to how the subject land will be used and developed in future.
Interests of affected parties
a covenant is proposed to be removed to facilitate a particular land use and
development outcome, as is the case here, it is
appropriate to consider the
interests of affected parties in the context of the impacts of the proposed use
and development.
The Panel accepts that no legal beneficiaries have objected to the removal of
the Covenant. They have, however, objected to the proposed
use and development,
as have a range of other interested parties who are not legal beneficiaries.
While the Covenant land has been used for health related services since 1958,
the proposed development will result in a more intensive
use of the land for
both retirement living and aged care purposes. The removal of the Covenant will
also facilitate more intensive
built form compared to what is presently on the
land or might be allowed were the Covenant to remain in place.
This will impact the interests of affected parties. The new built form, some
up to three storeys, will impact the amenity of the
nearby residential
properties for the reasons set out in Chapter
. The more intensive use of the subject
land will also create additional traffic and parking demands, as discussed in
The Panel is required to balance the present and future interests of all
Victorians. It must weigh potential impacts on affected
parties against the
broader benefits of removing the Covenant and facilitating the proposed
development and determine whether the
Amendment delivers net community
When considering the removal of a covenant using the planning scheme
amendment method, the private property rights of the beneficiaries
covenant are not a significantly weighty factor.
While the interests of affected parties (including beneficiaries) will be
adversely impacted by removing the Covenant, the Panel is
satisfied the
Amendment will ensure the redevelopment of the subject land (including the
Covenant land) is subject to high urban
design standards that will moderate the
impacts on affected parties to deliver acceptable planning outcomes.
Having determined there will be no notable detriment to affected parties,
removing the Covenant to enable the proposal will deliver
broader benefits by
facilitating enhanced and expanded aged care and retirement living to the
Gisborne community.
Planning Scheme compliance
Removing the Covenant, in conjunction with the
proposed rezoning, will enable a use and development that complies with the
Scheme. The proposed use of the subject land for a retirement village
and communal areas such as a club house, library, billiards
room and lounge,
intended to serve residents of the retirement village, is consistent with the
purposes of the GRZ1, when it seeks:
To encourage a diversity of housing types and housing growth particularly in
locations offering good access to services and transport.
To allow educational, recreational, religious, community and a limited range
of other non-residential uses to serve local community
needs in appropriate
The design response has paid specific regard to the design objectives of
DDO17 and is responsive to the neighbourhood character of
Overall, the removal of the Covenant would enable a use that demonstrates a
high level of compliance with the Planning Scheme’s
expectations for a
site in the GRZ1 in proximity to the Gisborne Town Centre.
Net community benefit
The Panel has found the
Amendment will deliver a net community benefit, for the reasons set out above
and in Chapter
(ii) Other matters
The Panel is not required to make findings on
whether proposal would breach the Covenant, or whether the proposal could
proceed without
removing the Covenant. Nothing in the PE Act, or the Mornington
Peninsula C46 Panel principles, requires consideration of whether
removal of the
covenant is necessary to allow the proposed development to proceed.
That said, it is entirely legitimate for the Proponent to seek to have the
Covenant removed through the Amendment to avoid the risk
of possible future
legal action for breach of the Covenant, and to align the future use and
development of the Covenant land with
the Planning Scheme.
6.5 Conclusion
Panel concludes removing the Covenant satisfies the relevant principles and
should be supported.
7 The planning permit
7.1 Relevant considerations
71.02-3 of the Planning Scheme requires a responsible authority considering a
permit application to take an integrated approach,
and to balance competing
objectives in favour of net community benefit and sustainable development.
Clause 65 of the Planning Scheme states:
Because a permit can be granted does not imply that a permit should or will
be granted. The Responsible Authority must decide whether
the proposal will
produce acceptable outcomes in terms of the decision guidelines of this
Clause 65.01 requires the Responsible Authority to consider, as
appropriate:
the purpose of
the zone, overlay or other provision
the orderly
planning of the area
the effect on
the amenity of the area
the extent and
character of native vegetation, the likelihood of its destruction, and whether
it can be protected, planted or allowed
to regenerate
the degree of
flood, erosion or fire hazard associated with the location of the land and the
use, development or management of the
land so as to minimise any such
Other matters to be considered include:
objections/submissions
comments and
decisions of referral authorities
other matters a
Responsible Authority must and may take into account under section 60 of the PE
Act, including the Victorian planning
objectives and the economic, social and
environmental impacts of the proposed use and development
government policy.
7.2 Discussion and conclusion
Council’s Part A
submission provided a helpful summary of the permit triggers, application
requirements and referral requirements
for the Permit Application under the
Planning Scheme. It also provided a summary of referral authority comments and
responses, and
a chronology of the Permit Application. The Panel has been
assisted by these in its deliberations.
The issues and impacts required to be considered in the decision guidelines
have been discussed at length in the issue-specific chapters
of this Report. In
essence, the Panel considers:
the proposal
will facilitate a development that will fulfil a very important role for the
Gisborne community. It will allow for well-located
housing suitable for elderly
residents, in a town where more diverse housing is explicitly sought, in a
location close to existing
medical services and the town’s commercial
there is need
for retirement living in Gisborne
use of subject
land for a retirement village is consistent with the Planning Policy Framework,
the GRZ1 and DDO17
the built form
and scale of the proposed development, including density, height, setbacks, and
amenity impacts, is acceptable
the proposed
native vegetation removal is acceptable
movement impacts have been appropriately addressed
removing the
Covenant satisfies the relevant principles and should be
On balance, the Panel considers that a permit should be
granted in accordance with the conditions in Appendix B.
The Panel concludes:
The Amendment is
strategically justified.
permit to use and develop the Permit land is appropriate.
7.3 Drafting
The Panel has used the
Council’s final version Permit (D25) as a base for its recommendations.
This version included changes
discussed and resolved throughout the Hearing
(i) Covenant condition
Council sought the inclusion of the following
condition in the Permit:
This permit will not come into effect until the covenant contained in
Instrument of Transfer N077525L in the Register of Titles is
removed to avoid a
breach of the covenant by this permit.
The Proponent resisted its inclusion and the Panel agrees. The condition is
unnecessary given a Permit cannot be issued if it will
result in a breach of the
Covenant. The condition will only add confusion for both the Proponent and the
Council administering the
conditions in the future.
(ii) Native Vegetation Removal Report
As discussed in Chapter
, the Panel agrees with Council’s
suggestion that a new permit condition is needed to require an amended Native
Vegetation Removal
Report to correct the error in how tree 35 was classified.
This is shown in the Panel’s proposed permit conditions in Appendix
(iii) Expiry
The Proponent sought to change this condition
provide clarity and improve drafting/ operation of
”. Essentially, the Proponent sought to link the completion
date for development to the commencement date of development, rather
issue date of the Permit.
Council did not agree to this change. It submitted that best practice calls
for this to be linked to the date the permit is issued
and the Panel agrees.
7.4 Recommendation
recommends:
Planning Permit PLN/2022/354 subject to the permit conditions contained in
Appendix B.
A Document list
Description
Provided by
Submitter map (provided to the Panel only)
[CONFIDENTIAL]
Macedon Ranges Shire Council (Council)
Panel Directions and Hearing Timetable (version 1)
Planning Panels Victoria (PPV)
Site inspection map
Anglican Aged Care Group/Benetas (Proponent)
Amended architectural plans
Part A submission, with attachments:
PLN.2020.473
– 5 Neal Street Gisborne
Outline Development Plan (2009)
Futures Structure Plan (July 2024)
Infrastructure Assessment, SGS Economics and Planning (2023)
Ranges Statement of Planning Policy 2019
Notification
to beneficiaries of the Covenant (redacted)
Expert witness statement of Alastair Campbell in urban design and
Expert witness statement of Bruce Message in healthcare and retirement
Expert witness statement of Jason Sellars in traffic and transport
CHMP negotiated outcome - Floor plans
CHMP negotiated outcome - Elevations
Submission, with attachments:
of submissions
of key corrections and clarifications
planning permit conditions - Day 1
Ranges Health and Anglican Aged Care Services Group amalgamation
announcement
Zone Map 36
Clause 37.01 Special Use Zone
Schedule 4 to the Special Use Zone: Private Hospital
Planning Permit PLN/2020/473/A
Management Plan for PLN/2020/473A
Management Plan for PLN/2020/473A
Plans for PLN/2020/473A
for Extension of Time PLN/2020/473
Preliminary
Aboriginal heritage test
Schedule 4 to the Special Use Zone: Private Hospital
to Council - proposed removal of Restrictive Covenant
to Use (and transfer) property
Authorities referred to in submission
Part B submission
Draft planning permit conditions - Day 1
Phillipa Butler
Submission speaking notes
Jayne Guilmartin
CHMP negotiated plans, and attachments:
of key changes
Decision of
Booth v Strathbogie Shire Council
[2023] VCAT 782
Additional turning circle plans, and attachments:
Vehicle (Fire Truck) Manoeuvre Area - Page 1 of 2
Vehicle (Fire Truck) Manoeuvre Area – Page 2 of 2
Email - Fence description, with attachment:
detail image
Final preferred version of planning permit conditions
Final preferred version of planning permit conditions
Comments on Council and Proponent final preferred versions of planning
permit conditions
Jayne Guilmartin
Comments on Council final preferred versions of planning permit
Final comments on Council preferred version of planning permit
Appendix B Panel
recommended version of permit conditions
The Panel recommended changes are based on the Council’s final version
Permit (D25) and are shown as:
Tracked Added
Tracked Deleted
Removal of covenant
This permit will not come into effect until the covenant contained in
Instrument of Transfer N077525L in the Register of Titles is
removed to avoid a
breach of the covenant by this permit.
Amended and endorsed plans – changes required
the use and development starts, amended plans must be submitted to and approved
by the responsible authority. When approved,
the plans will be endorsed and will
then form part of this permit. The plans must be generally in accordance with
the plans submitted
with the application but modified to show the following
details, to the satisfaction of the responsible authority:
a) the changes to apartment 1, apartment 2, communal pavilion (club house),
bowling green, village green, RD02, turn around area
to the east of RD05 and car
parks as reflected in the plans described as:
Village Development – Ground Floor Plan, drawing number TP101, revision 04
– WIP prepared by Demaine.
Village Development – First Floor Plan, drawing number TP102, revision 04
– WIP prepared by Demaine.
Village Development – Second Floor Plan, drawing number TP103, revision 04
– WIP prepared by Demaine.
Village Development – Roof Plan, drawing number TP104, revision 04 –
WIP prepared by Demaine.
Village Development – Elevations 01, drawing number TP201, revision 02
– WIP prepared by Demaine.
b) modifications that improve the accessibility and entrance to the dwelling
(typology RV06) to the west of the club house as shown
on plans referred to in
condition 1(a)
c) footpath alignments which ensure safe pedestrian access
d) external lighting scheme as required by condition 4 of this permit
e) requirements of the waste management plan as required by condition 5 of this
f) requirements of the stormwater management plan as required by condition 17 of
this permit
g) a new pedestrian crossing along Neal Street close to the crossover as
required by condition 19 of this permit
h) an updated native vegetation removal report (NVRR)
modifications
to provide turning arrangements to serve the internal and terminating road
within the development (the section of roads
4 and 5 in 1(a)) to ensure CFA
emergency vehicles up to a maximum length of 8.8 metres can leave the site in a
forward direction.
j) provision of a fire hydrant that meets the requirements in the
Requirements for Vehicle Access and Water Supply Requirements in Residential
Developments’ (CFA, 2022)
k) dimensions of garages to align with the following:
RV02, RV05 and RV07 satisfy the requirements of Clause 52.06 of the Scheme.
dwellings with double garage doors have a garage door in accordance with the
requirements of the Scheme and having regard to
the Australian Standard.
dwellings with single garage doors have a garage door opening width in
accordance with the requirements of the Scheme and having
regard to the
Australian Standard.
other single garage door openings in accordance with the requirements of the
Scheme and having regard to the Australian Standard.
spaces in Apartments 1 and 2 be in accordance with the Scheme
m) dimensions of the parallel visitor car spaces amended to satisfy the
requirements of the relevant Australian Standard
n) the removal of one of the resident car spaces in the Apartment 1 car park to
deliver unobstructed access to the stores or redesign
of the stores to ensure
appropriate access to the stores
o) the Neal Street access and internal roadway be in accordance with the
p) internal roadways providing access to the garages of the RV04 and RV06
dwellings provided with pedestrian visibility triangles
in accordance with the
q) the building line to the Apartment 2 car park with permeability to ensure
that 50% of the pedestrian visibility triangle in accordance
with the Scheme
r) for footpaths, flat sections be provided on any 1:20 section of the footpath
at 15m intervals.
Development not altered
development as shown on the endorsed plans must not be altered without the
written consent of the responsible authority.
the development starts, an amended landscape plan must be approved and endorsed
by the responsible authority. When approved,
the plan will be endorsed and will
then form part of this permit. The landscape plan must be prepared to the
satisfaction of the
responsible authority and be generally in accordance with
the plan submitted with the application but modified to show:
a) the locations of all proposed street tree planting within the Robertson
Street nature strip and the adjacent existing carpark
spaced at a minimum of (10) metres or infill between existing trees evenly,
whichever is the lesser
tree species selection to be consistent with the existing surrounding character,
be of a size suitable for nature strip widths
at maturity, and climatically
suited to the Shire of Macedon Ranges
b) new street trees in locations with offsets from infrastructure as per
Tree Management Policy
c) a plant schedule for proposed street tree species showing minimum supply size
of 45 litres/1.6 metre in height
d) an advanced tree planting detail with a minimum 26 litres Greenwell water
saver and number 3 hardwood stakes or a tree coach®
e) the following notations:
tree planting is to occur between April and September to maximise establishment
and survival.
tree locations shown on this plan are a guide only and may require adjustment to
coordinate with final service locations, Powercor
requirements, and ‘as
constructed ‘infrastructure.
installed, street tree locations are to be set out and approved on the land by
the responsible authority.
the responsibility of the contractor to confirm the location of all underground
services before any excavation starts.
f) the location of all existing street trees adjacent to the site
g) any street trees proposed for removal from the site clearly designated
h) details of tree protection zones for all street trees
External lighting scheme
the development starts, an external lighting scheme must be approved and
endorsed by the responsible authority. When approved,
the lighting scheme will
be endorsed and will then form part of this permit. The lighting plan must be
prepared to the satisfaction
of the responsible authority and specify the:
a) location of any lighting
b) lighting types and any means of construction
c) illumination levels and means of baffling for the lighting type to ensure
avoidance of adverse effects to nearby residential properties
and the river
d) hours of operation of lighting.
External lighting must be installed prior to the commencement of
the use and operated in accordance with the plan to the satisfaction
responsible authority.
Waste management plan
the development starts, a waste management plan must be approved and endorsed by
the responsible authority. When approved,
the plans will be endorsed and will
then form part of this permit. The waste management plan must be to the
satisfaction of the responsible
authority and include the following:
a) locations and dimensions of the waste collection areas
b) screening of the waste collection areas
c) the number of bins to be provided
d) method of waste and recyclables collection
e) hours of waste and recyclables collection
f) method of presentation of bins for waste collection
g) accessibility by waste collection vehicles
h) private collection contractors
size of collection vehicles
j) the following notation:
collection from the development must be carried out in accordance with the plan
to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
The responsible authority may consent in writing to vary these
requirements.
Deliveries and waste collection
and waste collection must only take place between the hours of 8am to 6pm
between Monday to Friday.
Operation of facilities
facilities provided within the retirement village including the clubhouse,
café, bar, hairdressing and beauty services,
must only be accessed by
retirement village residents and visitors only and not for general public
General amenity
use and development must be managed so that the amenity of the area is not
detrimentally affected, through the:
a) transport of materials, good or commodities to or from the land
b) appearance of any building, works or materials
c) emissions of noise, artificial light, vibration, smell, fumes, smoke, vapour,
steam, soot, ash, dust, waste water, waste products,
grit or oil
d) presence of vermin.
Development contributions
an occupancy permit is issued under the
Building Act 1993
, the applicant
a) pay the amount of the levy required under the
Gisborne Development
Contributions Plan
(SGS Economics and Planning, December 2023) to the
responsible authority; or
b) enter into an agreement with the responsible authority to pay the amount of
the levy within a time specified in the agreement.
Storage of goods
must not be stored or left exposed outside the building so as to be visible from
any public road or thoroughfare to the satisfaction
of the responsible
authority. Provision must be made for the storage and disposal of garbage to the
satisfaction of the responsible
authority. All garbage storage areas must be
screened from public view.
Exterior plant equipment
exterior plant equipment is to be placed on the roof of the development so as to
be visible from nearby residential properties
and public land to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority.
Tree protection
the development starts (including any demolition, excavations, tree removal,
delivery of building/construction materials and/or
temporary buildings), tree
protection fencing must be erected by the applicant around any trees identified
for retention on the endorsed
landscape plan:
a) to the satisfaction of the responsible authority
b) in accordance with the approved tree protection zone(s)
c) to form a visual and physical barrier
d) to be a minimum height of 1.5 metres above ground level
e) to include signage clearly marked “tree protection zone – no
entry” on all sides.
erected and approved by the responsible authority, the tree protection fencing
must be maintained in good condition and may only
be removed upon completion of
all development works, to the satisfaction of the responsible authority. Should
temporary access be
necessary within the tree protection zone during the period
of construction, the responsible authority must be informed before relocating
the fence (as it may be necessary to undertake additional root protection such
as bridging over with timber).
Environmental management
the development starts, an environmental management plan must be approved and
endorsed by the responsible authority. The plan
a) detail how issues such as erosion prevention, temporary drainage, dust
generation, and sediment control will be managed on-site
during the operation of
the permitted use
b) include details of a contact person/site manager so that this person can be
easily contacted should any issues arise.
Streetscape works
the issue of an occupancy certificate for the development, the tree planting and
nature strip grass rectification works shown
on the endorsed streetscape plan
must be completed and approved by the responsible authority. If the responsible
authority agrees
to defer the completion of streetscape works before the issue
of an occupancy certificate, the outstanding streetscape works must
be bonded to
the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
Construction
management plan
any works associated with the development start, a construction management plan
must be approved and endorsed by the responsible
authority. The plan must
a) measures to control erosion and sediment and sediment laden water runoff
including the design details of structures
b) include measures to reduce the impact of noise, dust and other emissions
created during the construction process.
c) measures to prevent the spread of environmental weeds and pathogens
d) the location of any construction wastes, equipment, machinery, and/or earth
to be stored/stockpiled during construction
e) where access to the site for construction vehicle
traffic including parking will occur
f) the location of any temporary buildings or yards
g) submission of a Traffic Management Plan.
The construction works on the land must be undertaken in accordance
with the endorsed construction management plan to the satisfaction
responsible authority.
Stormwater management plan
any works associated with the development start, a stormwater management plan
must be approved and endorsed by the responsible
authority. The stormwater
management plan must:
a) include details of the proposed stormwater management system, including
drainage works and retention and discharges of stormwater
to the drainage
b) show the development as a whole with legal point/s of discharge approved by
the responsible authority and any other statutory
authority from which approval
must be received for the discharge of drainage
c) show the stormwater runoff from all buildings, tanks and paved areas drained
to a legal point of discharge
d) include details of stormwater detention system to ensure 1 per cent annual
exceedance probability post-development flows are restricted
to pre-development
level of 20 per cent annual exceedance probability
e) demonstrate how the objectives of the
Urban Stormwater – Best
Practice Environmental Management Guidelines
(Victorian Stormwater
Committee, 1999) are satisfied
f) include all stormwater drains required to the legal point of discharge and
that pass through land other than the land within the
boundaries of the
development constructed at no cost to the responsible authority
g) show that the gross pollutant trap and maintenance is the responsibility of
the owner of land
h) include any on-site detention system designed by a suitably qualified civil
drainage engineer.
Parking and access
the development is occupied and the permitted use starts, the areas set aside
for the parking of vehicles and access driveways
as shown on the endorsed plans
a) constructed
b) properly formed to such levels that they can be used in accordance with the
plans and suitably sign posted
c) surfaced with an all-weather sealcoat or treated to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority to prevent dust and gravel from
being emitted from the
e) line marked to indicate each car space and all access lanes in accordance
with Australian Standard Line Marking AS 1742.2:2009.
f) clearly marked to show the direction of traffic along access lanes and
g) lit at night
At all times car spaces, access lanes and driveways must be kept
available for these purposes.
Once constructed, these areas must be maintained to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority.
The developer must install fully sealed pavements with kerb and channel, to
dimensions generally in accordance with the endorsed plans
for the internal
Pedestrian crossing
the permitted use commences, a raised pedestrian crossing must be installed at
the existing Neal Street crossing in accordance
VicRoads Supplement to
AS 1742.10.2009 Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
Control and Protection
, or to the satisfaction of the responsible
Polluted drainage and run-off
drainage must be treated and/or absorbed on the site from which it emanates to
the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
Polluted drainage must not be
discharged beyond the boundaries of the development from which it emanates or
into a watercourse or
easement drain.
polluted and/or sediment laden run-off is to be discharged directly or
indirectly into drains or watercourses. Soil erosion control
measures must be
employed throughout the works to the satisfaction of the responsible
Notification of permit conditions
works associated with the development start, the permit holder must advise all
persons undertaking the vegetation removal or
works on-site of all relevant
permit conditions and associated statutory requirements or
Detailed site plan
works associated with the development start, a detailed site plan must be
submitted to and approved by responsible authority.
The site plan must show all
native vegetation to be retained, including their respective dimensioned tree
protection zone and structural
root zone, inclusive of tree protection zone
notations in accordance with condition 3
other native vegetation must be removed, damaged, destroyed, felled, lopped or
uprooted other than the native vegetation shown
on the endorsed site plan and
included in the native vegetation removal report unless otherwise agreed in
writing by the responsible
Native vegetation
to the removal of any native vegetation, the permit holder must submit an
amended Native Vegetation Removal Report to the satisfaction
of the Responsible
Authority. The report must correct the circumference of tree 35 and recalculate
the offset based on this correction.
offset the removal of 0.031 hectares of native vegetation or any variation of
that amount which transpires from the amended NVRR
required by condition
, the permit holder must secure a native vegetation
offset that meets all the following:
a) A general offset of 0.005 general habitat units or any variation of that
amount which transpires from the amended NVRR required
by condition 1
b) located within the Port Phillip and Westernport Catchment Management
Authority or Macedon Ranges municipal district
c) have a strategic biodiversity value score of at least 0.080 (or any variation
of that amount which transpires from the amended
NVRR required by condition 1)
provide protection for at least one (1) small tree or a tree of a
size as transpires from the amended NVRR.
must be in accordance with the
Guidelines for the removal, destruction or
lopping of native vegetation
(DELWP, 2017).
any native vegetation is removed, evidence that the required offset for the
development has been secured must be provided to
the satisfaction of the
responsible authority. This evidence must be an established first party offset
site. This must include:
(a) a security agreement signed by both parties, and
(b) a management plan detailing the 10-year management actions and ongoing
management of the site
to the satisfaction of the by the responsible authority.
Every year, for ten years, after the responsible authority has approved the
offset management plan, the applicant must provide notification
management actions undertaken towards implementing the offset management plan,
to the department. An offset site condition
statement, including photographs
must be included in this notification
(c) credit extract(s) allocated to meet the requirements of the permit from the
Native Vegetation Credit Register.
A copy of the offset evidence must be endorsed by the responsible authority
and form part of this permit.
Weed prevention
construction and maintenance equipment, earth moving equipment and associated
machinery must be made free of soil, seed, and plant
material before taken onto
the works site and again before being removed from the works site to the
satisfaction of the responsible
authority. This is to help prevent the spread of
noxious weeds listed under the
Catchment and Land Protection Act
Tree protection
works associated with the development start, including any demolition,
excavations, tree removal, delivery of building/construction
materials and/or
temporary buildings, the erected tree protection fences must be inspected and
approved by the responsible authority.
following actions must not be undertaken in any tree protection zone as
identified on the endorsed plan:
a) materials, paving or construction works within the tree protection zone
b) excavated for underground services within the tree protection zone
c) materials or equipment storage within the tree protection zone
d) nothing is to be attached to any tree (including temporary service wires,
nails, screws or any other fixing device)
e) open cut trenching or excavation works (whether or not for laying of
services) undertaken within the tree protection zone
f) changes to the soil grade level within the tree protection zone
to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
excavations within the tree protection zone of retained trees must be undertaken
by hand or by approved non-destructive techniques
suitable in the vicinity of
trees in accordance with Section 9 of Australian Standard
AS4373-2007 Pruning
of Amenity Trees
, and must only be undertaken by, or directed and supervised
by, a suitably qualified arborist (minimum Australian Qualifications
Level 4) for endorsed works or for works subsequently approved by the
responsible authority.
works associated with the development start, including any demolition,
excavations, tree removal, delivery of building/construction
materials and/or
temporary buildings, a tree protection management plan prepared by suitably
qualified level 5 arborist must be submitted
to the satisfaction of responsible
authority. The report must:
a) detail the tree protection measures undertaken for all phases of demolition
and construction
b) include a site plan showing the tree protection zones
c) show all trees to be protected with tree protection fencing, including all
existing street trees adjacent to the subject site
d) show native vegetation “no go zones”
e) include tree protection signage
f) show construction staging relating to all tree management works
g) include a level 5 project arborist inspection timeframe and a compliance
h) include milestone reporting to the responsible authority relating to tree
works at each construction stage.
Expiry – use and development
permit will expire if one of the following circumstances applies:
a) The development is not started within 2 years of the issued date of this
b) The development is not completed within 4 years of the issued date of this
c) The use does not start within 2 years of the completion of the development.
In accordance with
Planning and Environment
an application may be submitted to the responsible authority for
an extension of the periods referred to in this condition.
Heritage Act 2006
See, for example,
Boroondara C123 (PSA)
[2012] PPV 29
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (14.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter