URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSCA/2019/287.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:24:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DPP v Ristevski [2019] VSCA 287 (6 December 2019)
SUPREME COURT
OF VICTORIA
COURT OF APPEAL
S APCR 2019 0091
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
BORCE RISTEVSKI
FERGUSON CJ, WHELAN and PRIEST JJA
WHERE HELD:
DATE OF HEARING:
15 November 2019
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
6 December 2019
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION:
[2019] VSCA 287
JUDGMENT APPEALED
DPP v Ristevski
[2019] VSC 253
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal – Sentence
– Crown appeal – Manslaughter – Respondent killed and
concealed wife’s
body in isolated bushland – Embarked on protracted
course of lies and deceit – Body found eight months later in decomposed
state – Unable to determine cause of death – Plea of guilty to
manslaughter – Sentenced to nine years’ imprisonment
with non-parole
period six years – Whether sentence manifestly inadequate – Appeal
allowed – Dumping and concealing
of wife’s body aggravating
circumstance – Refusal to reveal how or why he killed his wife
demonstrates absence of remorse
– Domestic setting of offending
aggravating feature – Resentenced by majority to 13 years’
imprisonment with non-parole
period 10 years –
DPP v England
[1999] VSCA 95
v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 231
considered.
APPEARANCES:
For the Appellant
Mr B F Kissane QC with Ms R J Sharp
Mr John Cain, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
For the Respondent
Mr D C Hallowes SC with Mr S Norton
Stary Norton Halphen
1 We have had the considerable advantage
of reading Priest JA’s reasons. We agree with his Honour that the appeal
allowed for the reasons that he gives, subject to what we say below.
In particular, we take a different view from his Honour as
to the appropriate
sentence to be
case is a good example of why each sentence imposed must be determined based on
the particular circumstances in which the offence
was committed and the
circumstances of the particular offender. Clearly, sentences imposed in other
cases are not to be treated
as precedents to be applied or
distinguished.
While current
sentencing practice is a factor to be taken into account, there are occasions
when there are too few relevantly similar
cases to enable a sentencing pattern
to be discerned.
In our view,
there simply are no truly comparable cases
3 This offence was ‘atypical’ in
the sense that there was no evidence of earlier domestic violence or serious
between husband and wife. But it was also ‘atypical’ in
that this is not a case where allowance can be made for a sudden
loss of control
in a ‘volatile’ emotional
There is no evidence of
the highly charged emotional environment in which domestic killings typically
occur. In fact the evidence
is to the contrary. There is no apparent reason
for, or context to, what the respondent did. That consideration flows into the
respondent’s immediate focus following the killing upon
self-protection.
4 His conduct in disposing of
Ms Ristevski’s body and the lies and deception he engaged in mean
that how his wife died will
never be known. What we do know is that he killed
her by unlawful and dangerous act(s); put her body into the boot of her car;
and disposed of her body in a remote location.
respondent lied to his daughter, to family and friends. He lied to police. He
participated in a media conference maintaining
that his wife had left the family
During the course
of the media conference, his daughter was visibly distressed.
He stood next to her and put his arm around her. He was a pallbearer
wife’s funeral, all the time knowing that he was the one who had killed
6 The respondent did more than maintain his
right to silence. He took active steps to avoid discovery of his crime and how
was caused.
7 The circumstances of this
crime include the positive acts that the respondent took to hide his involvement
in the death. He immediately
removed his dead wife’s body from their
remote location a considerable distance away. He carried or dragged her
body to a spot 66 metres from the road. In a manner which
must have involved
some significant time and effort, he concealed her body in such a way that she
might never have been found. When
it was found some eight months later, her
remains were between two tree trunks lying parallel and almost completely
concealed beneath
a number of branches and logs. Three of the logs weighed
between 13 and 39 kilograms. Those things make this crime more serious
would have been had the respondent not engaged in that
We regard this conduct as
significantly aggravating his offence.
respondent accepted that ‘the conduct of the respondent in disposing of
his wife’s body and subsequent lies and
deceit were a circumstance of
significant aggravation’.
respondent’s conduct also reveals an astonishing lack of remorse. Remorse
is a mitigating factor to be taken into account
where it is present.
Conversely, a lack of remorse is not an aggravating feature. To this day, the
respondent has shown not one
scintilla of remorse. He has subjected those
affected by the death to the most awful state of the unknown.
10 All of the respondent’s conduct took place
in a family setting. There was a time when the seriousness of such domestic
offences was not properly recognised. That is no longer the case. It
is also a significant aggravating feature of the crime committed
respondent that he killed his wife in her home. She should have been able to
live without any fear in her own home. It should
have been a safe place for
her. General deterrence and denunciation have particular importance in this
11 In favour of the respondent we take into
account his good character before the commission of this crime; his prospects
of rehabilitation,
as to which the prosecution does not contest the sentencing
judge’s conclusion that they are good; and his plea of guilty,
utilitarian value.
12 Further, this is a case where
it is necessary to take the greatest care to sentence the respondent for the
crime of which he has
been convicted. It is manslaughter, not
13 The maximum penalty for manslaughter is
20 years’ imprisonment. The respondent has no prior convictions and
he has pleaded
14 Taking all sentencing
factors into account, including those matters that favour the respondent, and
mindful of the fact that the
crime is manslaughter with a maximum penalty of 20
years’ imprisonment, it seems to us that in all the circumstances it is
just to impose a sentence of 13 years’ imprisonment. We would fix a
non-parole period of 10 years.
15 Pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1991
, we would declare that, but for the
respondent’s plea of guilty, we would have sentenced him to be imprisoned
for 15 years,
with a non-parole period of 12 years.
16 Somewhere between 8.58 am and 10.43 am
on 29 June 2016, the respondent, Borce Ristevski, killed Karen Ristevski, his
years. How he killed her is unknown. That is because, after he
killed her, the respondent dumped and concealed her body; so that,
by the time
her body was found eight months later, its state of decomposition was such that
any post-mortem determination of the
mechanism of death was impossible. Very
significantly, despite having had ample opportunity to do so, the respondent has
not disclosed
how he took Karen Ristevski’s
17 Almost 18 months after the killing, on 13
December 2017, the respondent was arrested and charged with murder. A contested
was conducted in July and August 2018, at the conclusion of which the
respondent pleaded not guilty to murder. Shortly afterward,
on 10 September
2018, the respondent made a written offer to the prosecution to plead guilty to
manslaughter. Unsurprisingly, given
that the respondent refused to reveal how
he killed his wife, that offer was rejected.
12 March 2019, the respondent’s trial for murder was to commence. After
legal argument on the issue, on 13 March 2019
the trial judge ruled that certain
post-offence conduct by the respondent could not be used to prove murderous
Later that day, the
prosecution filed an indictment charging the respondent with
manslaughter, to which he immediately pleaded guilty.
19 A plea hearing was conducted on 27
March 2019; and, on 18 April 2019, the judge sentenced the respondent to nine
imprisonment, with a non-parole period of six
20 By a Notice dated 13 May 2019, the Director of
Public Prosecutions appeals against the head sentence and non-parole period on a
single ground, contending that they are manifestly inadequate. There are six
‘particulars’ subjoined to the ground:
The learned sentencing judge:
(a) failed to fix a sentence commensurate with the circumstances of the
offending, giving too much weight to the lack of information
and dangerous act;
(b) failed to have sufficient regard to significant aggravating features when
determining the nature and the objective gravity of
the offending (cf the
circumstances of the killing), particularly in the context of family violence
and the breach of trust;
(c) failed to have sufficient regard to the impact of the Respondent’s
offending on the victims;
(d) failed to give sufficient weight to the principles of general deterrence,
specific deterrence, denunciation and just punishment;
(e) failed to have sufficient regard to the maximum penalty for the offence;
(f) placed too much weight on the matters in mitigation, particularly in light
of the lack of remorse, including the Respondent’s
plea of guilty and
prospects of rehabilitation.
21 For the reasons that follow, I would
allow the appeal and set aside the sentence first imposed. I would instead
sentence the respondent
to be imprisoned for 12 years, and would fix a
non-parole period of nine years.
Karen Ristevski’s killing and its aftermath
22 Before turning to the merits of the
appeal, it is necessary to say a little more about the circumstances of the
respondent’s
offending — so much as is known about it — and
its aftermath.
23 As I have said, at some time
between 8.58 am and 10.43 am on 29 June 2016, the respondent, then aged
killed his wife, Karen
Ristevski, aged 47, in their home in Oakley Drive, Avondale
The two had known each
other for 30 years and had been married for 27 of those
Their only child, Sarah,
then aged 21,
lived at home with
them. Apart from the respondent, Sarah Ristevski was the last person to see her
mother alive.
24 Within a very short time of killing
his wife, the respondent put her body into the boot of her own car and then
drove from the
house. He left the house at about 10.43 am in search of a
location to dispose of the body. Ultimately, his search led him to isolated
bushland in Loch Road, Macedon.
25 About 24 minutes
into the journey, the respondent turned off his mobile telephone to avoid it
being traced or detected. A little
later, he also deactivated the
deceased’s mobile telephone to avoid detection. At some undetermined
point, the respondent
disposed of his wife’s telephone, handbag and
wallet. They have never been found.
arriving at Loch Road in the Macedon Regional Park, the prisoner dumped his
wife’s body in an isolated and remote location.
He concealed the body to
such an extent that, as I have mentioned, it was not discovered for eight
months. The respondent then
returned home, arriving at about 1.03 pm. He
activated his mobile telephone when he reached Keilor Park at 12.51 pm.
27 I pause to note the circumstances in which Karen
Ristevski’s body was found. On 20 February 2017, two horticultural
contractors
had the job of poisoning pine trees growing in the Macedon Regional
Park. At about 12.15 pm, they were in the Macedon Regional Park
from Loch Road, Macedon, drilling into the base of a pine tree when they smelled
something. They approached an area
where they observed two large fallen logs
lying parallel on the ground. Between the two logs they observed a human skull
and a foot.
The foot was protruding up through several other logs, leaf litter
and sticks, which appeared to cover a
28 Police were called and Karen
Ristevski’s remains were recovered. The body had been placed on the
ground between the two
trunks. When discovered, the body was almost completely
covered by logs and branches. The remains — fully clothed apart from
socks or shoes — were badly decomposed and partially skeletonised.
29 At a post mortem examination conducted on 21
February 2017 the cause of death could not be determined. It was noted that the
hyoid bone was incomplete but, due to the decomposed and
degraded nature of the bone, it was not possible to ascertain whether this
due to ante mortem trauma, post mortem trauma or predation. Dental records were
required in order to identify formally the remains
as those of Karen
30 Returning to the day that the
respondent killed his wife, police established that Karen Ristevski had used a
computer at home to
visit various websites between 8.02 am and 8.48 am. She had
also accessed the messenger application ‘WhatsApp’ at 8.57
communicate with overseas suppliers of her clothing business. When Sarah
Ristevski left home that morning to catch the train
from Moonee Ponds to
Flinders Street Station — she caught either the 8.24 am or 8.34 am train
— she said goodbye to both
her mother and her
31 When his daughter arrived home from work
at about 6.30 pm, the respondent told her that the deceased had left the house
10.00 and 11.00 o’clock that morning to clear her head.
32 The next morning, 30 June 2016, the respondent
and his daughter reported Karen Ristevski missing to police. Knowing that he
in fact killed his wife the day before, the respondent told police that his
wife had become upset the previous day when they were
discussing the takings
from her shop, and had left the house saying, ‘I can’t talk to you
right now, I’m going
to clear my head’.
33 From the time of the initial report to police,
the respondent was asked by police on multiple occasions to provide a detailed
of his movements and those of his wife on 29 June 2016. The respondent
failed, however, to provide a full account of his movements.
He misled police
and deliberately lied about his movements and those of his wife. Thus, at a
media conference arranged by police
on 2 July 2016, the respondent maintained
that he and his missing wife had an argument about her shop’s takings, and
left the house to clear her head. During the conference, he stood next
to his daughter, and put his arm around her to comfort her.
The next day, 3
July 2016, he made and signed a statement to police which was replete with lies
of 29 June 2016 (and, for that matter,
other things).
34 In the afternoon of 4 July 2016,
the respondent disclosed for the first time to police that he had driven his
at about 10.30 am on the morning of her disappearance, falsely
suggesting that the fuel gauge had not been working. He then made
an additional
statement, confirming details of his previous statement and providing a more
thorough and detailed account of his personal
life, his relationship with his
wife, the business and their financial situation. Once more, the statement was
replete with lies,
designed to mislead police and divert them from discovering
that the respondent had killed his wife and disposed of her
35 In the course of their investigations,
police obtained CCTV footage from various locations and telecommunication data
from various
service providers. Data so obtained indicated that, at about 10.44
am on 29 June 2016, the mobile telephones of the respondent and
his wife left
the area of Oakley Drive. This was the respondent leaving home driving his
wife’s Mercedes-Benz. He had recently
killed her. Her body was in the
boot. He had commenced his journey to find a hiding place for the body.
36 On 8 July 2016, police conducted a record of
interview with the respondent. He made a ‘no comment’ interview.
on 28 July 2016, police had another recorded conversation with the
respondent under caution, in the course of which he continued
to lie and mislead
police in an effort to avoid any responsibility for killing his wife. Moreover,
in the course of their investigations,
police used listening devices and
telephone intercepts. During many monitored conversations, the respondent
continued to lie, so
as to distance himself from the
37 A particularly unpleasant aspect of the
respondent’s elaborate course of deceit is that, in full knowledge that he
his wife and disposed of her body, the respondent was a pallbearer at
his wife’s funeral on 6 March 2017, and comforted a number
relatives and friends.
38 The respondent was finally
arrested on 13 December 2017. By that stage investigations had established that
his accounts of his
movements could not be true and the evidence could only be
explained if he did indeed drive to Macedon Regional Park on 29 June 2017.
again, he made a ‘no comment’ record of interview. He was charged
with the murder of Karen Ristevski and remanded
in custody, where he has
remained ever since.
The submissions on the plea
39 Turning briefly to summarise the
submissions made to the sentencing judge, counsel for the respondent on the plea
submitted that,
although the plea of guilty was entered on the basis that the
respondent had killed Karen Ristevski by an unlawful and dangerous
was no basis for making any finding as to the circumstances of the killing, and
thus no basis for determining that the
respondent’s offence fell within
any particular level or range of unlawful and dangerous act manslaughter.
Counsel submitted
that, perhaps unusually, the respondent had no history of
violence with respect to his wife; although it was accepted that the sentencing
considerations relevant to crimes of violence committed in a
‘domestic’ setting had a role to play. Significantly, the
respondent’s counsel accepted the respondent’s disposal of his
wife’s body, and the manner in which this was done,
was an aggravating
factor. It was submitted that the respondent had no prior convictions (and
there were no intervention orders
in place); the respondent’s daughter had
given evidence that he was never aggressive towards her deceased mother. The
respondent’s
counsel submitted that the plea of guilty should not be
regarded as a late plea, and that the plea had significant utilitarian
40 Counsel for the Director submitted that
the respondent’s offence fell at the ‘high end’ of the range
of seriousness.
It was submitted that the sentencing judge should view the
respondent’s offending as very serious for four
• first, the respondent killed his
wife of some 27 years which places it as one of the worst examples of domestic
• secondly, he killed his wife in
their home, where she should have felt safe, secure and
• thirdly, the respondent has never
he killed the deceased (this also being relevant to the
issue of remorse); and
• fourthly, he has
never revealed
he killed her (also relevant to the issue of
41 The Director’s counsel submitted
that the respondent has shown no remorse. It was submitted that the offer to
plead to manslaughter
was devoid of any factual basis, the respondent refusing
to reveal how he killed the deceased. Whilst his failure to reveal what
occurred in the family home on the morning of 29 June 2016 is not an aggravating
feature, such failure indicates a complete and continuing
lack of remorse.
Counsel submitted that, given the failure to reveal how the killing was
accomplished, and the fact that the killing
occurred in a domestic context and
without explanation, the respondent’s offence must be categorised as one
of the ‘worst
examples’ of manslaughter to come before the Court.
The imposition of a sentence in the ‘mid-range’ would therefore
inappropriate.
Reasons for sentence
42 The judge’s reasons for sentence
were careful and very thorough.
43 After discussing
the respondent’s actions on the day of the killing (including the disposal
of his wife’s body),
his ‘rank deceit’ in the months
afterwards,
the judge said that
he accepted the prosecution submission that the respondent’s
‘disposal and concealment’ of
his wife’s body and the
‘many lies’ he had told — ‘worst of all’ to his
daughter — constitute
a circumstance of significant
aggravation’.
44 His Honour then turned to the victim impact
statements.
It is unnecessary
to set out what his Honour said in any detail. I note, however, that the judge
remarked that a ‘constant
source of anger and disbelief referred to in the
statements was [the respondent’s] active participation in [his]
observed that the respondent’s
disposal and concealment of Karen’s body in
Macedon resulted in family members not only having to cope with the anguish of
inexplicable disappearance but also with the fact that her remains were
significantly decomposed when she was found, eight months
disappearance.
45 The judge referred to the concession
made by the respondent’s counsel that, given his ‘failure to make
full and frank
disclosure’, the respondent’s plea of guilty
‘is not evidence of remorse’. There is, the judge said, ‘an
understandable bitterness expressed in some of the victim impact statements
the judge set out the procedural
His Honour observed
that, ‘particularly’ having regard to the respondent’s offer a
month after the committal to
plead guilty to manslaughter, he accepted the
submission of the respondent’s counsel that he should not treat the plea
judge then discussed the objective seriousness of the
After setting out the
competing contentions of the parties, his Honour stated the following
conclusions:
Ultimately, the view that I have arrived at is that I
have insufficient information to say whether your offence is a mid or upper
range example of manslaughter, although it is clearly not a low range example of
manslaughter because of the aggravating domestic
violence aspect. Without
knowing the level and duration of the violence perpetrated by you which caused
your wife’s death,
I simply cannot say whether your offending was mid or
upper range. I do not regard your silence as to how you killed your wife as
providing a sufficiently firm basis for drawing the inference that yours must
have been an upper range example of the offence of
manslaughter. Whilst the
community and the courts rightly abhor domestic violence, it is simplistic to
suppose that all domestic
violence manslaughter cases necessarily fall into the
upper range on the spectrum of seriousness for manslaughter. It takes little
imagination to think of circumstances where a domestic violence manslaughter
— for example, one involving a momentary loss
of control and a
comparatively low level of violence — could not reasonably be viewed as an
upper range example of the offence
of manslaughter.
48 His Honour then set out four things he
did know about the respondent’s offence — as distinct from his
post-offence
conduct — which elevated the objective gravity of the offence
‘above the low
his was a serious case of domestic violence — notwithstanding its isolated
character — because it resulted
in his wife’s death;
• second, Karen Ristevski was not only his
wife, but also the ‘devoted mother’ of the respondent’s
Sarah, with whom she was very close;
• third, the deceased was killed by an
unlawful and dangerous act in her own home, a place which should have been a
for her; and
• fourth, the
respondent’s wife was 47 years of age and, in the ordinary course of
events, should have lived for many
more years.
49 The judge
then discussed the respondent’s personal circumstances and the various
character references that had been provided
His Honour accepted
that, apart from the commission of the instant offence (and post-offence
conduct), the respondent had been a
person of good
respect to the respondent’s plea of guilty, his Honour once more noted the
concession by counsel that it did not indicate
remorse, but observed that the
‘plea of guilty is still deserving of a significant discount for its
utilitarian benefits’.
Of course, so the judge noted, the respondent
could not expect the kind of sentencing discount that he would have received had
made ‘full and frank disclosure’, enabling the judge to find that
the respondent was truly remorseful and doing all that
he could to ease the pain
of Karen Ristevski’s loved
respondent’s prospects of rehabilitation, the judge found, were
‘good’, given his ‘lack of criminal
antecedents and the
unchallenged character
references’.
an eye on current sentencing practices, the judge had reviewed ‘a
significant number of manslaughter
His Honour said
that the respondent’s case was ‘atypical’, in light of the
fact that many of the cases that the
judge had reviewed involved a
‘history of domestic violence, not an isolated outburst of
53 Finally,
the judge noted that — as had been conceded by the respondent’s
counsel — ‘principles of general
deterrence, denunciation and just
punishment must loom large’ in the sentencing process. The judge said
that, since he found
that the respondent’s prospects of rehabilitation are
good, he did not place much weight on specific deterrence or the need
the community from him, although ‘specific deterrence has some part to
play’ given the seriousness of the
respondent’s offence, his
post-offence conduct and his ‘continuing
The Director’s submissions on the appeal
54 Counsel for the Director in this Court
submitted that, having regard to the seriousness of the respondent’s
offending, and
to his post-offence conduct and lack of remorse, the head
sentence and non-parole period imposed upon him are wholly outside the
those reasonably open in the proper exercise of discretion.
55 In submissions redolent of a complaint of
specific error rather than manifest inadequacy, counsel for the Director
submitted in
writing that the judge ‘equated the inability to determine
how [the deceased] was killed with an inability to determine the
seriousness and gravity of the offending’, but that the true situation is
that the known circumstances of the offending
‘combine to mean the offence
is at the upper end of offending’. The inability to determine the
circumstances of the
killing, counsel submitted, arises directly from the
conduct of the respondent in disposing of the body and remaining silent.
for the Director submitted that, because the prosecution could not prove
beyond reasonable doubt precisely how the respondent killed
his wife, it could
not be said that the circumstances of the killing were serious. But the
converse is also true. It could not
be said the circumstances of the killing
were not serious. And simply because the circumstances of the killing cannot be
as serious (or otherwise), that does not preclude a finding that the
circumstances of the offending as a whole were serious. Counsel
submitted that
the respondent’s disposal and concealment of the deceased’s body,
and his post-offence lies and deceit,
are significant aggravating features which
simply are not reflected in the sentence
56 In the context of domestic violence,
general and specific deterrence, denunciation and just punishment all had a
significant role
to play in the respondent’s sentence. Counsel submitted
that they were not, however, adequately reflected in the sentence
imposed. Too
much weight, so it was submitted, must have been given to mitigating factors
(such as the plea of guilty) and prospects
rehabilitation.
57 Finally, counsel for the Director
submitted that there was no factor present that might attract the exercise of
the Court’s
residual discretion to dismiss the appeal.
The respondent’s submissions on the appeal
58 Counsel for the respondent submitted
that the sentence is well within the appropriate range and demonstrates that the
have properly synthesised all relevant factors.
59 It was submitted that the contention that the
respondent’s lack of remorse was an aggravating factor should be rejected,
as should the tacit suggestion that the respondent’s silence had resulted
in some mitigation of sentence. The judge, counsel
submitted, undertook a
‘careful and nuanced analysis’ of all relevant features in assessing
the seriousness of the respondent’s
offending. Consistently with
principle, so it was submitted, the judge was not satisfied to the requisite
standard that the respondent’s
silence demonstrated that the offence must
have been an upper range example of the offence of manslaughter. The
respondent’s
counsel submitted that judge’s reasons demonstrate that
he gave due weight to the aspect of domestic violence, properly noting
respondent’s case was ‘atypical’ for domestic violence
homicides given the absence of previous violence,
threats or intimidation.
60 The respondent’s counsel argued that it is
plain that the judge gave proper recognition to the impact of the
respondent’s
offence on its victims, and gave proper weight to general
deterrence, specific deterrence, denunciation and just punishment. It
submitted that the plea of guilty had utilitarian benefits, and the judge was
clearly correct to find that the respondent’s
prospects of rehabilitation
61 I note that no submission was advanced
in support of the exercise of the residual discretion.
Discussion and analysis
62 Much of the argument on the appeal
seemed directed to assertions of specific error. That may be because, as has
become customary,
the ground of appeal complaining of manifest inadequacy had
six subjoined ‘particulars’. In my opinion, however, supposed
particulars of manifest inadequacy are, at best, a distraction; and at worst,
are calculated to subvert the essential inquiry that
must be made when it is
asserted that a sentence is manifestly inadequate. Indeed, undue attention to
‘particulars’
invites a piecemeal consideration of the relevant
features of a case, inconsistent with an approach which intuitively synthesises
all relevant factors. As I observed in
To my mind — and despite some recognition being
given to the notion that a ground claiming manifest excess may be supported
particulars
(at least concerning
the ‘weight’ to be given to certain
— such so called
‘particulars’ of manifest inadequacy are of little or no utility,
since a conclusion that a sentence
is manifestly inadequate does not depend upon
attribution of identified specific error in the sentencing judge’s
Manifest inadequacy is a conclusion. Inadequacy is, or is not,
plainly apparent. A sentence is, or is not, unreasonable or plainly
Perhaps more often than
not, a conclusion of manifest inadequacy does not admit of elaboration save to
state the respect in which
the sentence is inadequate, such inadequacy resulting
because the wrong kind of sentence was imposed, or because the sentence imposed
is manifestly too short. The members of the appellate court will weigh for
themselves all relevant features of the respondent and
the offending —
including those that aggravate and those that mitigate — and intuitively
synthesise each factor bearing
on the exercise of the sentencing discretion. In
so doing the court must balance the often incommensurable factors bearing on the
exercise of the sentencing discretion, those factors frequently pulling in
different directions.
Ultimately, appellate intervention on the ground of manifest inadequacy is not
warranted unless, having regard to all of the relevant
sentencing factors
— including the degree to which the impugned sentence differs from
sentences that have been imposed in cases
which are truly comparable — the
appellate court is ‘driven to conclude that there must have been some
misapplication
principle’.
63 Part of the difficulty in this case
stems, so it seems to me, from the approach taken by the respondent’s
counsel on the
plea. Having provided the sentencing judge with written
submissions, counsel made the following oral submissions:
And what we have said there is Your Honour [is] not in a
position to say either this is a low level example or it’s within the
lower end of the range of unlawful and dangerous act manslaughters and similarly
Your Honour [is] not in a position to say it’s
at the higher end or within
the higher range of manslaughters by unlawful and dangerous act.
We say that in assessing the seriousness of the offending there [are] two
aspects I wish to take Your Honour to. The first is what
Your Honour can make
or can’t make about the circumstances of the killing itself and then
secondly the seriousness and what
Your Honour can make of the conduct engaged in
afterwards by [the respondent]. And we’ve endeavoured in our submissions
logically deal with those in turn but what we say is our first proposition
of manslaughter is Your
Honour [is] not in a position to find it’s low level and you’re not
in a position to find it's
high level.
64 Prosecuting counsel, having set out a
number of factors bearing on the seriousness of the respondent’s offence,
in response that
when one looks at those factors and absent an
explanation they’re the sort of factors that Your Honour has, it
end up in our submission as being a killing that falls within the
mid-range of offending; rather, it’s a killing that falls
within the high
65 In his reasons for sentence, having
noted that the practice of trying to determine whether a particular manslaughter
mid or upper range example of the offence had recently been
deprecated,
the sentencing judge
nonetheless set about determining where in the suggested range the
respondent’s offence fell. And as
I have mentioned, the judge ultimately
arrived at the view that he had insufficient information to say whether the
respondent’s
offence is a mid or upper range example of manslaughter
(although it clearly was not a low range example of
manslaughter).
66 The judge’s attempt to determine where in
the range of seriousness the respondent’s offence fell was not a very
exercise. Thus, Maxwell P and Hargrave JA observed in
it is in our opinion not helpful to debate whether, on
the spectrum of cases from least to most serious, the offending in this case
falls within a particular category such as ‘mid-range’ or
‘bottom of the high-range’ or other like classifications.
approach carries the risk that it will attract reference to current sentencing
practices for offences which have previously
been categorised in a particular
range, whatever the circumstances of the offending and the mitigating
circumstances. Such an approach
may lead to sentencing judges unconsciously
limiting their instinctive synthesis of a particular case by sentences in other
classified within a particular range, rather than considering the
individual facts of comparable cases.
In our opinion, it is best to avoid categorising cases as falling within a
particular ‘range’ and, instead, for sentencing
judges to have
regard to relevantly comparable, and current, cases as ‘yardsticks’.
This approach involves considering
where a case fits on the spectrum of
offending, and is the preferable way for sentencing judges to have regard to
current sentencing
practices as a factor in the instinctive
Beyond saying that the maximum penalty must be reserved
for cases in the ‘worst category’, and that a sentencing judge
every case is bound to consider where the facts of the particular offence and
offender lie on the ‘spectrum’ that
extends from the least serious
instances of the offence to the worst category (properly so
in my view, attempts to
shoehorn particular cases into categories of seriousness such as
‘upper’, ‘middle’
or ‘lower’, or to
characterise moral culpability as ‘high’ (or ‘very
high’), ‘middle range’
or ‘low’, are often
calculated to obscure the essential nature of the sentencing
these statements
were applied specifically in a case involving a sentence for
manslaughter.
68 Plainly, all cases of manslaughter
are serious, in the sense that a life has been lost and can never be restored.
Manslaughter
is, however, a crime which can be committed in ways the gravity of
which markedly differ. By its nature, manslaughter may vary from
nominal ‘to the very confines of
69 For cases other than those dependent on criminal
negligence, the foundation of the offence is an act (or acts) that is (or are)
unlawful and dangerous. The unlawful act is commonly (though not always) an
assault. In this case it may safely be inferred —
I do not take it to
have been contested by the respondent — that the respondent’s resort
to unlawful violence against
his wife amounted to an assault of some form or
another (albeit whether it was by some kind of blow, or by strangulation, or by
other application of force, cannot be determined). Given the state of the
evidence, however, it is impossible to reach any conclusion
as to the level and
duration of the respondent’s unlawful act (or acts) of violence.
70 Furthermore, by his plea, the respondent
admitted that his unlawful act (or acts) was (or were) also dangerous, in that,
standpoint of a reasonable person, his act (or acts) carried with it
(or them) an appreciable risk of serious injury to his
It can thus be said with
certainty that the respondent assaulted his wife in a domestic setting, in
circumstances where a reasonable
person in the circumstances would have realised
that his assault carried with it an appreciable risk of serious injury to her.
71 Notwithstanding the violence that he inflicted
upon her, however, one cannot say that Karen Ristevski’s death was other
an unintended consequence of her husband’s assault. By abandoning
the charge of murder, and accepting the respondent’s
plea to manslaughter,
the prosecution accepted that the respondent committed one or more unlawful and
dangerous acts, without any
intention of killing or causing really serious
injury to his wife. No matter how despicable in nature were the
respondent’s
actions immediately after he had brought about his
wife’s death, it must be borne steadily in mind that he did not fall to
sentenced as if he had murdered her.
plea, when addressing events that followed the killing, counsel for the
respondent submitted to the judge that ‘what
happens afterwards, both in
the disposal of the body and then the lies told, are aggravating features which
Your Honour has to take
into account in relation to penalty, and they [are] we
concede significant matters that Your Honour has to take into
73 In my view, the
respondent’s disposal of his wife’s body was a significant feature
aggravating of his offending, and
was emblematic of his complete lack of
remorse. Thus in
, Brooking JA (with whom Batt and Chernov JJA
agreed) said (albeit in the context of
The mere act of dumping the body after a murder has been
viewed as an aggravating circumstance. So in
R v Von Einem
King CJ, with whom Jacobs and Olsson JJ agreed, mentioned the dumping
of the body in a remote spot as part of his ‘recital
of essential
facts’, which at 218 he described as amply justifying the sentencing
judge’s view that the crime was of
unique seriousness. In
[1997] 2 VR 465
a very short time after the killing, the body of the murdered
child was wedged into a storm-water drain, where it was found three
later. The Court of Appeal, at 490, referred to the prisoner’s heartless
concealment of the child’s body, and
it is to be noted, having regard to
what I shall say later about remorse, that the hiding of the body was plainly
regarded as not
limited in its significance to the light which it threw on
remorse. For the court, having referred to the hiding of the body and
matters, went on to mention as a distinct matter the prisoner’s signal and
singular lack of remorse.
74 Not only does the dumping and
concealment of the deceased’s body
constitute a significant
aggravating feature of the respondent’s offending, it also demonstrates
that the respondent is not
afflicted by any pangs of remorse. Thus, one can
detect in the respondent no apparent sorrow or regret for what he has done, or
any desire to atone for the harm he has caused and to redeem himself. Of
course, the absence of remorse does not aggravate the respondent’s
offending, but it represents the absence of a feature which often significantly
mitigates sentence.
75 Furthermore, although the
respondent is under no obligation to reveal how he killed his wife —
thereby, perhaps, giving some
small measure of comfort to her friends and loved
ones — his failure to do so also bears directly on the issue of his
(or, more accurately, his lack of it). More importantly, in this case
there is much more than a bare refusal to reveal how he killed
his wife, since
the respondent embarked on a cynical and protracted course of lies and deceit.
Whether or not one accepts the concession
by his counsel that the
respondent’s lies constitute a significant aggravating feature of the
offence, the respondent’s
post-offence conduct shows generally that he is
devoid of any remorse.
76 Recognising as I do the
limited role of ‘comparable’ sentencing cases
(so-called),
I note that, of the
sentencing cases referred to by the respondent’s counsel, only the facts
bear some passing resemblance to those in the present case.
In that case, the applicant had killed his de facto partner. His version
that, in an attempt to stop her from going to purchase drugs, he held the
deceased in a bear hug, they fell, and she hit her
head both when falling and
when thrashing around while the applicant held her face down on a bed. After he
realised that she had
died, the applicant put the deceased’s body in a
shed for a couple of days, before dumping the body in bushland concealed by
branches. The body was found a day or so later. No cause of death could be
determined. After some initial reticence, the applicant
gave police an account
of what he had done.
applicant was tried and convicted of murder. His conviction for murder was
quashed in this Court, and a verdict of manslaughter
substituted. The 36 year
old applicant had offered to plead guilty to manslaughter, and had also offered
to give evidence against
another who had assisted him conceal his crime. There
was no evidence that the applicant had previously been physically violent
deceased (albeit that he had some relatively old convictions relating to
offences of assault and damaging property). Sentencing
the applicant to 11
years’ imprisonment, with a non-parole period of eight years, for
manslaughter, this Court considered that
the applicant’s offer to plead to
manslaughter ought to be taken into account not only as having some utilitarian
also as demonstrating some remorse, ‘leading to significant
mitigation of the sentence to be imposed’. The applicant’s
convictions were not regarded as being ‘particularly important’; his
prospects of rehabilitation were considered
to be good; and the need for
specific deterrence and community protection were regarded as being of minimal
significance. As against
those matters, the applicant’s attempts at
concealment of the body were an aggravating feature of the offence, and the
did not ‘lose sight’ of the need for general deterrence,
denunciation and just
punishment.
Since the crime of manslaughter may be committed in an
almost infinite variety of ways, sentences imposed for manslaughter fall into
very broad spectrum. Recourse to statistics and comparative sentences is not
particularly helpful, merely emphasising that the
sentences for manslaughter
widely vary. Axiomatically, however, the sentence in any given case of
manslaughter must depend on the
facts peculiar to it.
78 In the present case, the unlawful
violence that caused Karen Ristevski’s death was inflicted by her husband
in a ‘domestic’
setting, so much being an aggravating circumstance
of the offence. It may be inferred that the respondent thought that the
circumstances
of the killing were sufficiently serious that he needed to dispose
of his wife’s body so as to conceal the mechanism of her
manner in which he disposed of her body is, as the respondent’s counsel
conceded, a significantly aggravating feature
of his crime. Moreover, and also
significantly, the respondent has displayed not one skerrick of remorse for
having killed his wife,
the mother of his daughter. Not merely has the
respondent refused to reveal how he killed his wife, but he maintained the
of a grieving husband whilst weaving a web of lies and deceit. Against
those aspects, he can call in aid his previous good character
and prospects of
rehabilitation, and the utilitarian value of his guilty plea.
79 When looked at in this way, it may be
appreciated that the head sentence and non-parole period imposed simply are not
to reflect the seriousness of the respondent’s offence. Plainly,
in my view, the sentence imposed on the respondent was far
too low to reflect
the needs of general deterrence, denunciation and just punishment. This
Court’s intervention is required
to ensure that proper sentencing
standards are maintained.
80 The appeal should be allowed and the
sentence first imposed should be set aside. In lieu, I would impose a sentence
of 12 years’
imprisonment. Having given discrete consideration to
relevant factors,
I would fix a
period of nine years before the respondent be considered eligible for parole, so
much representing the minimum period
that justice demands the respondent serve
before being a candidate for conditional
81 Pursuant to
Sentencing Act
, I declare that, but for the respondent’s plea of guilty, I would
have sentenced him to be imprisoned for 14 years, with a
non-parole period
of 11 years.
In view of cls 8.1 and 8.2 of
Practice Note SC CA 1 (30 September 2019) and Guideline for the Preparation of a
Written Case prepared
by the Court of Appeal Registry (January 2017) we
make no comment in relation to the usefulness of particulars of manifest
Wong v The Queen
[2001] HCA 64
185 ALR 233.
See, for example,
[2016] HCA 48
(2016) 259 CLR 256
, 268 [25].
As to this, see
[2011] VSCA 274
(2011) 37 VR 329
, 333 [19]–[20].
DPP v England
[1999] VSCA 95
DPP v Ristevski (Ruling No
[2019] VSC 165.
The prosecution did not seek to challenge that ruling by
way of interlocutory appeal.
DPP v Ristevski
(‘Reasons’).
His date of birth is 14 March
They had bought a vacant block
of land on 21 June 1994, and moved into a house that had been built on the block
They met in 1986 and
married on 15 January 1989.
She was born on 31 May
Reasons [2]–[9].
Ibid [9]–[11].
Reasons [12]. His Honour
said that he had regard to:
[2019] VSC 90
[2009] VSCA 289
R v Boroviak
[2018] VSC 793
[2003] VSC 499
DPP v England
[1999] VSCA 95
[1999] 2 VR 258
v The Queen
[2013] VSCA
[2004] VSC 276
[2015] VSC 193
Ibid [24]–[29].
Ibid [30]–[37].
Ibid [38]–[51].
The cases were:
Lee v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 343
[2004] VSC 508
[2017] VSC 358
[2016] VSC 116
R v Veerman
[2015] VSC 193.
Reasons [55].
DPP v Weybury
[2018] VSCA 120
, 169 [50] (Priest JA) (‘
’) (citations and
emphasis as in reported version). See also
DPP v Cramp
[2019] VSCA 174
[56] (Priest, Niall and Weinberg JJA).
So far as relevant, cll 7.2
Practice Note SC CA 1
(30 January 2017), respectively provide
(emphasis added):
7.2 Where a ground of appeal is expressed in general terms – such as
‘the conviction is unsafe and unsatisfactory or
unreasonable’
– the ground must be sufficiently particularised to identify the matters
relied on. ...
7.5 The written case must, unless the Registrar otherwise directs:
d. set out the grounds of appeal, in accordance with the following
requirements:
i. grounds must be numbered consecutively, and must be specific rather than
expressed generally;
ii. each ground must be sufficiently particularised to identify the matters
complaints about the weight attributed to particular sentencing
factors are to be treated as particulars of a ground of manifest excess,
it is to be contended that a statement about weight made by the sentencing Judge
discloses a specific error
in describing the facts or evaluating their
significance, in which case the ground of appeal should be expressed
accordingly; ...
[2012] VSCA
–[13] per Maxwell ACJ and Hansen JA;
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Terrick
(2009) 24 VR 457
[2009] VSCA 220
per Maxwell
P, Redlich JA
and Robson AJA. Compare
Director of Public Prosecutions
(Cth) v Estrada
(2015) 45 VR 286
[2015] VSCA 22
and Beach JJA, and King AJA.
Dinsdale v R
202 CLR 321
175 ALR 315
[2000] HCA 54
, 325–6 [6] (Gleeson CJ and Hayne
248 CLR 483
298 ALR 637
[2013] HCA 31
per French CJ, Hayne, Kiefel,
Bell and Keane JJ;
at [4] per Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ; at
[79] per Gageler and Gordon JJ.
256 CLR 550
325 ALR 400
[2015] HCA 39
per French CJ, Keane and Nettle
at [59] per Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ. See also
Director of
Public Prosecutions v Zhuang
(2015) 250 A Crim R 282
[2015] VSCA 96
Director of Public Prosecutions v McInnes
[2017] VSCA 374
His Honour cited
, 165 [33]–[34] (Maxwell P and Hargrave JA), 170–1
[54] (Priest JA); and
, [31] (Ferguson CJ, Priest and Beach JJA).
[33]–[34] (citations as in reported version).
DPP v Dalgliesh
[2017] HCA 41
(2017) 262 CLR 428
, 445] at [52] per Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ, at
[82]–[83] per Gageler and Gordon JJ;
(2015) 256 CLR 550
325 ALR 400
[2015] HCA 39
(2016) 259 CLR 256
[2016] HCA 48
[54] (footnote at end of passage omitted).
[2016] HCA 48
, 265–6 [18]–[19] (Bell, Gageler, Keane, Nettle and Gordon
, 46–7 [45] (Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ).
, [31]–[32]
(Ferguson CJ, Priest and Beach JJA).
Timbu Kolian v The
[1968] HCA 66
(1968) 119 CLR 47
, 68 (Windeyer J);
[2000] VSCA 237
(2000) 2 VR 595
610 [46] (Batt JA);
R v AB (No 2)
[2008] VSCA 39
(2008) 18 VR 391
Sherna v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 242
(2011) 32 VR 668.
Wilson v The Queen
[1992] HCA 31
(1992) 174 CLR 313
, 335 (Mason CJ, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ).
DPP v Dalgliesh
[2017] HCA 41
(2017) 262 CLR 428
, 445 [52] (Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ), 454 [83] (Gageler
and Gordon JJ);
[2015] HCA 39
(2015) 256 CLR 550
, 560 [29] (French CJ, Keane
and Nettle JJ). See also
DPP v Zhuang
[2015] VSCA 96
(2015) 250 A Crim R 282
292–5 [29]–[37] (Redlich, Priest and Beach JJA).
Ibid [85]–[86].
Ibid [84] (Buchanan and
Neave agreeing).
[1996] VicRp 83
, 522 (Charles JA).
R v Mulvale
(Unreported, Court of Appeal, Winneke P, Callaway and Hampel JJA, 20 February
R v Bernath
[1997] 1 VR 271
, 278 (Callaway JA);
(1998) 99 A Crim R 483
[1998] 4 VR 244.
A Crim R 146
, 154 (Jenkinson J);
Power v The Queen
[1974] HCA 26
(1974) 131 CLR 623
628–9 (Barwick CJ, Menzies, Stephen and Mason JJ). See also
[1984] HCA 31
(1984) 54 ALR 765
Bugmy v The Queen
[1990] HCA 18
(1990) 169 CLR 525
536 (Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (308 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter