URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2025/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:36:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WTR [2025] VMHT 11 (20 May 2025)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
. The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2025] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan hospital
Mode of hearing:
Videoconference
Tribunal members:
Kim Magnussen (Legal Member)
Mark Arber (Psychiatrist Member)
Katrina Clarke (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from another location
With online video
Sophie Hastings
Legal representative, Mental Health Legal Centre
With online video
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal confirmed the
Community treatment order expiring on 04/09/2025.
This statement of
After the hearing your legal representative requested a
written explanation of the Tribunal's decision. A copy of this statement of
reasons will be given to your treating team as well as to you and your legal
representative.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because you applied to have
your Treatment order revoked (cancelled). The Tribunal had to have a hearing to
decide whether or not an order should remain in place.
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental
health and wellbeing principles (‘principles’).
Based on the
information provided in your hearing and our understanding of your
circumstances, the Tribunal identified the following
principles were
particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
autonomy – you find your treatment to be intrusive and restrictive and
want to manage your mental health care yourself.
Diversity of
care – you prefer holistic other non-pharmaceutical treatment including
talk therapy.
restriction – you want to manage your mental health care yourself
including making decisions about what kind of treatment
you will accept.
decision making – you have support in the community from your family and
your church.
Health needs
– you have a condition involving your back that needs treatment.
Dignity of risk
– as a person receiving mental health treatment you are entitled to assume
a degree of risk when making decisions
The Tribunal
must also give proper consideration to your rights under the
Charter of Human
Rights and Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’).
Compulsory treatment engages and limits a number of human rights protected under
the Charter including
consent, and where a person is being treated in hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your rights protected under the Charter, and
whether limits on them are reasonable, the Tribunal
must thoroughly examine
three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your file. Both you and your treating team spoke
to and answered questions from the Tribunal in the hearing.
representative also made submissions on your behalf. This statement of reasons
does not summarise all that information,
but the next section refers to the
information the Tribunal relied on to make its decision and explains
The Tribunal must have regard to your views and preferences. From
what you told the Tribunal and the materials we read you do not
like taking
medication for your mental health as it makes you feel like a guinea pig. You
did not wish to talk about what had happened
when you were subject to previous
treatment orders as the focus should be on your current order. Contrary to what
is said in your
report you did not abuse anyone, rather you were reaching out.
You have trouble with a back problem where there has been medical
negligence.
You did not stop taking medication by your own decision, you were told to stop
it. You have a supportive mother, and
your living conditions have nothing to do
with your mental health. You are very engaged in making and playing music and
want to continue
being successful at this as this is your main goal. You had a
successful music career, and you are focussed on getting others to
accept that
you are okay to resume this so they will give you more work. Overall, you feel
the mental health treatment you have received
has stymied your music career. You
do not wish to continuing working with your treating team and plan to be an
ambassador for mental
health. You look after yourself using meditation and by
having strong spiritual beliefs. Whilst there may have been a role for
in the past when you were suffering more, you feel that medication is
not needed at the moment because you have risen above it. You
will however,
pursue a legal path to stop treatment. You do not think there is any risk should
you completely cease treatment and
engagement with your treating team; in fact
there will be more harm to you if you continue with it.
Sophie made
submissions that you do not wish to be subject to a treatment order which is
intrusive and restrictive. You now have family
and a church community to support
you. Whilst you accept you have in the past had some disturbance of thought and
mood you do not
regard this as being an illness, rather it is a condition that
you live with. You don't accept that you need immediate treatment
of the kind
provided by your treating team and want a more holistic approach rather than
treatment with pharmaceuticals. You would
also prefer talking therapy and you
are keen to avoid any Court involvement. You can have less restrictive treatment
by having treatment
on a voluntary basis. You are a recent convert to a new
religion and derive support from the church community, whereas you do not
the treatment from mental health services to be therapeutic.
4. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the four questions that need to be answered under the
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
It was not clear to the Tribunal whether you
accepted you have an on-going mental illness, although you acknowledged you had
experienced
some mental health concerns in the past. The Tribunal was unable to
explore this with you during the hearing as you were unwilling
to discuss this.
However, the Tribunal accepted the clear evidence of your treating team
that for at least the last six years you have experienced
mental illness
involving a significant disturbance of thought and mood, for which you have
needed to be hospitalised for treatment.
Prior to your involvement with formal
mental health services, your family had noted you experiencing a depressed mood
in your teens
with suicidal statements, although there was no actual deliberate
self-harm. When you have been unwell you have presented with formal
disorder with rapid and pressured speech and disorganisation, grandiose
delusions and agitated mood and with aggressive behaviour.
These symptoms have
been shown to largely cease when you receive adequate treatment. You have needed
several admissions to hospital
for treatment to be reinstated.
(b) Does your mental illness mean you need to be treated now,
to try and prevent your mental health or physical health seriously
deteriorating;
or to prevent serious harm to you or someone else?
You told the Tribunal that you do not think you
need any further treatment of the kind proposed by your community mental health
You believe the things that will keep you well include meditation,
support from your church community, and being able to resume your
successful music career.
However, the Tribunal accepted the evidence of
your treating team that you required continued treatment, including medication,
prevent a serious deterioration in your mental health, and to prevent serious
harm to you and to others. This has been demonstrated
several times in the past
when you ceased treatment as your mental health deteriorated significantly to
the level that required you
to be admitted to and retained in hospital for some
time so that treatment could be reinstated. Being unwell in the past has had
negative effect of your close relationships, and you have at times placed
yourself in a position to suffer harm. You have been
verbally aggressive to
family and friends, and on one occasion you assaulted a psychiatrist when in
hospital. This behaviour is out
of character for you and is attributed to your
poor mental health at that time. Your mental health condition had also in the
caused you to have distressing suicidal thoughts, although the Tribunal
acknowledges this has not been the case for a considerable
(c) Will you receive immediate treatment if you are on a
treatment order?
The Tribunal accepted the evidence of your
treating team that you would continue to receive the necessary immediate
treatment if a
treatment order was made. Whilst the treatment would include
medication you would also be offered regular medical reviews and support
thorough a case management service. This would allow for other
non-pharmacological treatment including psychology, talking therapy,
and further
psychoeducation to deepen your understanding of your mental health and what
keeps you well.
(d) Is there a less restrictive means than a treatment order
that would enable you to receive immediate treatment?
Both you and your solicitor said that less
restrictive treatment was available with you being a voluntary patient, rather
being subject to a treatment order. However, from what you told the
Tribunal, if you were not on a treatment order you would stop
prescribed by your treating team and would not be willing to continue to engage
with your team for them to monitor your
mental health. The kind of treatment you
were willing to accept would, in the Tribunal’s view not be adequate for
your mental illness. In arriving at this conclusion, the Tribunal
noted that when you had ceased taking prescribed medication in
the past your
illness had relapsed, and you had needed to be admitted to hospital for this
treatment to be reinstated.
5. Decision
Given the Tribunal decided that all of the
compulsory treatment criteria applied to you the Tribunal confirmed a treatment
Treatment in hospital or in the community
was no suggestion that your treatment could not be provided in the community and
so the Tribunal confirmed your order as a community
Length of the Treatment Order
As your hearing was
make a decision about how long
your order should last. The Act sets the duration
of your order as the amount of time remaining on your order at the time of the
hearing. This means the duration of your order is unchanged and it will expire
on 4 September 2025.
Your treating doctor must revoke your treatment
order at any time if they believe the treatment criteria no longer apply.
Date of determination: 23/04/2025
[Signed by the legal member]
Kim Magnussen
Presiding member, on behalf of the Tribunal
Date: 20 May 2025.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143 Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
Section 5 What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (500 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter