URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VRAT/2009/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:39:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Homann (THO) - App 01 2009 [2009] VRAT 2 (24 March 2009)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
Appeal No 1 of 2009
In the matter of an Appeal
MR ANDREW HOMANN
AGAINST THE CONVICTION AND PENALTY OF NINE-MONTHS DISQUALIFICATION
IMPOSED BY THE RACING APPEALS AND DISCPLINARY BOARD FOR BREACHING
RULE RACING 175(h)(ii)
JUDGE WILLIAMS
, His Honour
Mrs A. Carlyon,
Mrs J. Spears, Adviser
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT MELBOURNE ON 24 MARCH
2009 AT 9.53 A.M.
MR P. KISTLER appeared on behalf the Appellant.
MR C. WINNEKE appeared on behalf of Racing Victoria Limited.
F I N D I N G
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal against the decision of the Racing
Disciplinary Board, which imposed a penalty of nine months disqualification
the offence with which
Mr Homann was charged namely breach of
Australian Rule of Racing 175(h)(ii), which reads as follows, "The committee of
any club or
the Stewards may punish any person who administers or causes to be
administered to a horse any prohibited substance, which is detected
taken from such horse prior to or following the running of any race".
Mr Homann has pleaded guilty both at the Disciplinary Board and before
this Tribunal. Has pleaded guilty of breaching that rule.
The facts of the
matter are not much in dispute. The horse, Irish Way, clearly from past tests,
had a resting TCO2 level of something
in the order of 30 to 31 millimoles per
litre, which is a fairly standard level.
On the day of the race in question,
9 September 2008, the
horse was tested at 9.08 a.m. at
Mr Homann's stables and found to
have a reading of
31.7 millimoles per litre. It was tested again
at the race track prior to the race, at 12.58 p.m., and found to have a reading
38.3. millimetres per litre.
Those matters are not in dispute and it was tested again on 12
September, three days later and again back to its fairly standard
resting level
of 30.4 millimoles per litre. It is clear then, from the facts that I have just
described, that between 9.08 a.m.
and 12.58 p.m. on race day, Tuesday, 9
September 08, there was a very substantial increase in the TCO2 level. An
increase of in
excess of 6 millimoles per litre.
The primary grey area or disputed area in the evidence relates to how
that elevation came about. His Honour, Russell Lewis, the
Disciplinary Board,
concluded and I quote at p.3 of that Board's decision, "The Board is satisfied
that the cause of the elevated
reading was a deliberate administration by Mr
Homann of alkalising agents, either by means of nasogastric tube or directly
The Board reached that conclusion on the basis of
O'Callaghan's evidence was that the increase in the level was highly unlikely to
be the result of a couple of handfuls of feed
mixed with bicarbonate and that in
the absence of any other explanation the most likely means of bringing about
such a substantial
increase in the TCO2 was by either nasogastric tubing or
directly into the mouth. It was that opinion that the Board accepted and
as the basis of its consideration of penalty.
Here today, before this Tribunal, Dr O'Callaghan has expanded his
evidence and has indicated that in addition to the mechanisms
that he previously
referred to, namely the nasogastric tubing or the directly into the mouth
administration, he would like to add
that a significantly greater amount of
bicarbonate in the feed of something in excess of 160 grams of bicarbonate,
anywhere between
160 grams and 300 grams, in fact, mixed with feed
could bring about the sort of increase that occurred in this case.
Mr Homann was given the opportunity to give evidence, which he
declined. However, through his counsel, Mr Kistler, he has adhered
previous explanation that the only thing that occurred in relation to the horse
that might explain the high reading was the
giving of feed mixed with
bicarbonate.
In relation to that explanation the Tribunal is aware that Mr Homann's
assistant, Mr Maloney, in his statement, which is part of
the evidence in this
case, agreed that he gave the horse some feed, which on the evidence, would have
included some bicarbonate.
He gave that to the horse sometime before, about
7.30 on that morning.
The amount of feed that was given was imprecisely described, but it was
said to be a couple of handfuls or a scoop and a half, or
something equally
inexact. Then Mr Homann has gone on to say that after the test that was done
at 9.08am and notwithstanding, apparently
the warning that the horse would be
tested again at the track, nevertheless he gave it more feed mixed with
bicarbonate to the extent
again of a couple of handfuls. Again, no doubt an
inexact description of the quantity. That is the only material available to the
Tribunal in relation to an explanation for the elevation.
The Tribunal however, is prepared to reach a different conclusion about
the explanation for the elevation of the reading, from that
reached by the
Disciplinary Board. The Tribunal considers there's no satisfactory evidence of
any administration, either by tubing
or any other blatantly dishonest means.
And that the most likely explanation is that the source of the TCO2 was
bicarbonate contained
in the feed.
However, the Tribunal emphasises the fact that it would appear that Mr
Homann was quite careless, even reckless as to the quantity
of bicarbonate, the
quantity indeed of feed that was given to the horse in total, on the morning of
He has stated previously, as part of the evidence in this case, that he
was fully aware of the rules against the administration
of illicit substances on
race day. Substances that may cause the rules to be breached, if detected. He
was fully aware of that.
The Tribunal is satisfied that Mr Homann took no adequate measures to
determine what amount of bicarbonate mixed in feed should
be given, if any was
going to be given on race day, so that there would be no significant
interference with the TCO2 level of the
horse. He sought no advice about this
matter. He made no tests of his own. He was simply completely unaware of what
effects the
amounts of feed mixed with bicarbonate were going to have on the
TCO2 levels.
Nor did he have any satisfactory method of measuring the amount of feed
or the amount of bicarbonate that was given to the horse
on the morning of the
race. No adequate instructions were given to Mr Maloney about the quantity to
give to the horse, in total.
Nor, the amount of bicarbonate to be mixed with
Nor is the Tribunal satisfied that there was any satisfactory method of
he, Mr Homann, measuring the amount of feed mixed with bicarbonate,
that he gave
the horse sometime after nine o'clock. The Tribunal repeats its conclusion is
that Mr Homann was quite careless, if
not reckless, in relation to the overall
method of mixing bicarbonate with feed and giving it to the horse and measuring
the effects
thereof and the quantities involved.
This however, is a better outcome for the appellant in that the
previous finding was that his actions involved deliberate administration,
whereas this Tribunal is prepared to accept that it was careless/reckless
administration.
In terms of penalty, there are a number of considerations. Obviously
it must stand to Mr Homann's credit that he has no prior convictions.
also stand to his credit that he pleaded guilty, both before the Board and this
The Tribunal is also aware of his circumstances as they've been
explained to us today and set out as they were to the Disciplinary
domestic and business circumstances. All those matters are taken into
On the other hand, as I indicated in discussion, this particular
offence against Rule 175(h)(ii) is a significant offence, a serious
The more common cases are those against Rule 178, the presentation at the race
track of a horse containing a substance
that it shouldn't contain or a substance
in excess of the threshold.
The Tribunal considers that the actual offence against 175(h)(ii),
which requires as an element thereof, the actual administration
of the substance
to be more significant, more serious.
As I said in discussion, it really goes without argument that for the
industry to allow occur the fact of trainers of horses, knowing
the rules about
race day, yet deliberately breaching them or disregarding them by giving their
horses illicit substances or substances
in amounts likely to exceed the relevant
thresholds, on race day, must be viewed as having the potential to bring the
industry into
considerable disrepute in the eyes of the public at
The whole notion of trainers meddling with various drugs and illicit
substances on race day to bring about a situation where the
horse is running
with an illicit level of a substance in its system is quickly going to bring the
industry into complete disrepute.
In order to deter trainers from such actions, it is this Tribunal's
view that the level of previous penalties seen in the record
that has been
handed to us is inadequate and need to be changed. No longer, in this
Tribunal's view would it normally be sufficient
for a mere fine or even a short
suspension to be imposed.
It is this Tribunal's view, as is frequently expressed in relation to
harness racing cases, that to blatantly breach this sort of
rule of racing
requires disqualification.
However, because of the different conclusion that has been reached in
relation to the mechanics of the administration, different
from the Board, the
Tribunal is prepared to allow the appeal in terms of penalty and reduce the
period of disqualification to one
of four months.
We are of the view that four months disqualification should act as a
significant deterrent to others in an attempt to prevent in
deliberate actions or reckless actions or careless actions in contravention of
I wish to express my gratitude to my colleagues for assisting me in
relation to the considerations involved in this matter. But
the decision
remains mine. I'm also prepared to order the return of the appellants
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (39.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter