URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VDBT/1997/78.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:29:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mickoska & Sau v HGF & ors [1997] VDBT 78 (6 November 1997)
THE DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
(DOMESTIC BUILDING CONTRACTS AND TRIBUNAL ACT 1995)
- INTERIM DETERMINATION -
VIRGINIA MICKOSKA & ABRAHAM SAU
HOUSING GUARANTEE FUND LTD.
(A.C.N. 006 258 233)
AUTUMN HOMES PTY LTD
(in liquidation)
PRESIDING MEMBER:
HIS HONOUR JUDGE DAVEY
FORM OF APPLICATION:
Application
APPEARANCES:
Mr Bolton of Counsel on behalf of the Applicant
Mr Laird of Counsel on behalf of HGFL Ms Stavrakakis of Counsel on
of the Third Respondent
There being no appearance
by the Second Respondent
DATE(S) OF HEARING:
3 November 1997
DATE OF DETERMINATION:
6 November 1997
INTERIM DETERMINATION:
1. The Application against HGFL is dismissed.
2. The Applicant pay the costs of HGFL such costs to be agreed between HGFL
and the Applicant and failing agreement to be determined
by the Tribunal. The
Second Respondent’s costs are reserved.
3. The proceeding is otherwise adjourned to a Case Management Conference on a
date to be fixed.
JUDGE DAVEY
CHAIRPERSON
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
VIRGINIA MICKOSKA & ABRAHAM SAU
HOUSING GUARANTEE FUND LTD.
(A.C.N. 006 258 233)
AUTUMN HOMES PTY LTD
(in liquidation)
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
1. In this proceeding at the request of the parties I referred two questions
for a preliminary hearing as follows:
(a) whether there is a guarantee by HGFL over the subject property;
(b) and whether the Third Respondent has any liability to the Applicant?
2. Only the first question was the subject of submissions before me and
accordingly I only propose to deal with that question in these
reasons and the
determination of the second question would have to wait another day.
3. The property which is described as Unit 2, 15 Johnson Street, Williamstown
was originally owned by Mr and Mrs Simonic ("the original
owners") and was part
of a two lot subdivision. On 21 February 1996 the original owners entered into
a building contract with the
Third Respondent Mr K. Gunn ("the first builder")
in respect to lot 2 and also at the same time into a separate building contract
in respect of lot 1. I was informed that the original owners intended to occupy
the house on Lot 1 and sell Lot 2.
4. The building contract in relation to lot 2 did not immediately proceed and
on 19 December 1996 the original owners entered into
a contract of sale in
respect to lot 2 to sell the property to the Applicants. Prior to that contract
having been signed the Applicants
had already entered into a building contract
with Autumn Homes Pty Ltd ("the second builder") on 10 December 1996.
Unfortunately
Autumn Homes Pty Ltd which apparently is a company which was owned
by the first builder has been placed into liquidation and accordingly
participate in this hearing. The contract of sale contained the following
special condition:-
"6. This contract is conditional subject to the Purchasers contemporaneously
entering into a Building Contract with K.T. Gunn for
a building to be
erected in accordance with identical plans and specifications and agreement
comprised in a Building Contract entered
into by the Builder and Vendor dated 21
February 1996 to erect the building as described and specified therein on the
subject land
for a cost of $108,500."
5. It is common ground that apart from the difference in the identity of the
builder and owners the building contract which the Applicants
entered into on 21
February 1996 was substantially identical to the contract and specifications
which the first builder had entered
into with the original owners.
6. The Applicants obtained possession of the property in early 1997 and the
second builder commenced work. At the time of the first
building contract the
first builder, who was a registered builder with HGFL, had arranged for a
standard guarantee in his name and
showing J. & C. Simonic as the owners.
That guarantee was issued on 26 March 1996, it has a commencement date of
21 February
1996 and an expiry date of 20/2/2003. When the second building
contract was entered into with the Applicants no new or additional
insurance was
arranged indeed I am informed that it was assumed at least by the Applicants
that the original insurance cover would
continue. On 1 May 1996 HGFL ceased to
be able to offer guarantees and was replaced by a new domestic building
insurance system
which is provided by private insurance companies. Accordingly
by late 1996 HGFL could not have entered into any guarantee arrangement
builder whether or not the builder was a registered builder with HGFL. Problems
arose when the second builder apparently
suffering from liquidity problems,
ceased work on site on 13 June 1997. HGFL has denied that its guarantee covers
the work carried
out under the second contract.
7. It is clear that unless it can be said that the first building contract
continued on foot and the second building contract is treated
as only evidence
of an assignment of the first building contract, that the property is not
protected by the HGFL guarantee provided
8. The Certificate of Guarantee which was tendered into evidence provides
"1. The builder has notified Housing Guarantee Fund Limited of an application
under s27(3) of the
Building Act 1993
for a building permit to perform domestic
building work. The builder has notified Housing Guarantee Fund Limited of
having entered
into a domestic building work contract namely to carry out
construction of a residence."
In addition to the above the guarantee provided
"(a) The builder and the owner of the property may have entered into an
agreement releasing the builder from any liability in relation
to the dwelling
if such an agreement has been entered into there may be no further claims
against HGFL. Inquiries in relation to
such an agreement should be made of the
owner or the builder of the dwelling."
On the reverse side of the Certificate it is set out that the guarantee
continues for the benefit successive owners so as to cover
the cost (up to
$40,000) of the the builder failing to complete and for the rectification of
defective work. In addition it provides
that the guarantee does not cover any
works performed by the builder/supervisor mentioned on the Certificate where "it
builder/supervisor whose name appears on the contract;"
The Guarantee is a statutory guarantee arising under the
House Contracts
Guarantee Act 1987
of that Act is as follows:
Part 2 (the part of the Act that relates to guarantees)
apply to the work of constructing a dwelling house if the dwelling house was
first sold under a contract that was entered
into on or after the commencement
of s158 of the Domestic Building Contracts and Tribunal Act 1995 unless:-
(a) the guarantee had been given under that part;"
Mr Bolton of Counsel who appeared on behalf of the Applicants submitted that
the contract that was entered into between his clients
and Autumn Homes Pty Ltd
was no more than an assignment of the original contract between Mr Gunn and the
Simonics. Accordingly as
that contract was entered into on 21 February 1996 s4
of the Act did not affect it and the original guarantee is still in force.
way of support for that submission he referred to the fact that the plans and
specifications form part of the second contract
were in the same form as the
plans and specifications forming part of the first contract and in addition the
contract sum remained
the same. Autumn Homes Pty Ltd was in effect he contended
no more than the alter ego of Mr Gunn and so the two legal entities should
treated as only being one. Mr Bolton was supported in his submissions by Ms
Stavrakakis of Counsel on behalf of Mr Gunn. Mr
Laird of Counsel who
appeared for HGFL strongly contested these submissions.
9. This is an unfortunate case and I have every sympathy for the Applicants.
I have no doubt that the Applicants believed that the
contract was subject to an
HGF guarantee and in addition they may not have paid any attention to the fact
that the name of the builder
was changed from Gunn to Autumn Homes Pty Ltd. In
this case Mr Bolton has I believe put before me all the arguments that were
open to him on behalf of his clients. However I am firmly of the
view that there is simply no basis upon which it could be held
that what took
place was no more than an assignment of the first building contract. Special
conditions 6 of the sale of land contract
makes it clear that what was required
in order to comply with that contract was for a new contract to be entered into
between the
Applicants and Mr Gunn. What took place, as I have already noted,
was that a contract was entered into between the Applicants and
Autumn Homes Pty
Ltd. No doubt the Applicant did not see any material difference between Mr Gunn
contracting in his own name or
his company’s name. However they are
different legal entities and so there simply could not have been an assignment
original contract. Autumn Homes Pty. Ltd. clearly had nothing which it
could assign and in addition I am of the view that it would
in the circumstances
have been extremely difficult to assign the benefits and burdens of the building
contract. It would have been
possible for the parties to enter into a novation
agreement which would have needed to have included all the original parties and
the Applicants. However even if this course had been adopted it would in my
view not constitute an assignment of the contract but
at best a novation,.
Messrs Greig and Davis the authors of "The Law of Contract" state at page 1023
as follows:-
"Novation occurs when a contract between A and B is discharged and replaced
by a new contract. Such a contract might be between the
original party or
involve a new party. For example between A and C. The effect of the latter
transaction can thus be that a right
owing by A to B is thereafter owed to C: or
that a liability that B was under to A is replaced by the same liability from C
It is, however, in legal analysis to be distinguished from an assignment.
As Windere J. pointed out in Olson v Dyson (1969) 120
CLR 365 at 388, novation
requires that the three persons involved all be parties to the transaction,
whereas an assignment is effective
without the consent or co-operation of the
debtor. A novation does not effect a transfer of liability, but the replacement
liability with another.
Accordingly it is abundantly clear that the statutory guarantee which was
attached to the first building contract in this case could
not be transferred
for the benefit of the second building contract. Mr Bolton did not attempt to
argue that the guarantee could
otherwise survive. In addition there is clearly
no substance in the argument that Mr Gunn and Autumn Homes Pty Ltd may be able
be treated as the same legal entity. The fact is they are not. For the
reasons I have given I do not think that even if that were
the case it would
change the ultimate result in this case. There is in my opinion no guarantee in
existence in relation to the second
building contract and accordingly the
Applicant can have no claim against HGF. The Application so far as it relates
to HGF will
have to be dismissed. In the circumstances I propose to order that
the Applicant pay HGF’s costs in this proceeding. Unless
those costs are
able to be agreed between the parties they will need to be fixed by me. Mr
Gunn’s costs of this proceeding
are reserved. The balance of the
proceeding is referred to a Case Management Conference on a date to be
JUDGE DAVEY
CHAIRPERSON
DOMESTIC BUILDING TRIBUNAL
g:\detch97\0557-97.doc
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (34.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter