URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/995.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:26:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kropf v Darebin CC [2025] VCAT 995 (7 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. P102/2025
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. D/648/2023
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic); Darebin Planning
Scheme; Partial demolition of existing church building and construct buildings
and construct and carry out
buildings and works for up to 24 dwellings (up to
three storeys) and reduction in parking; General Residential Zone, Schedule 2
Heritage Overlay, Schedule 264, Development Contributions Plan Overlay,
Schedule 1; Urban design and built form, neighbourhood and
landscape character,
streetscape setting, amenity, access and parking, demolition and heritage
restoration and change in use (residential).
Emily Kropf, Nick Alaimo & Others
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Darebin City Council
Ys Housing Ltd
SUBJECT LAND
34 & 34A George Street
RESERVOIR VIC 3073
HEARING TYPE
DATE OF HEARING
28 & 29 July 2025
DATE OF ORDER
11 November 2025
Kropf v Darebin CC [2025] VCAT 995
Permit granted
application P102/2025 the decision of the responsible authority is varied.
planning permit application D/648/2023 a permit is granted and directed to be
issued for the land at 34 & 34A George Street
Reservoir VIC 3073 in
accordance with the endorsed plans and the conditions set out in Appendix A.
Planning scheme clause
Matter for which the permit has been granted
Clause 32.08-7
Construct two or more dwellings on a lot.
Clause 43.01-1
Demolish or remove a building; construct a building or construct or carry
Clause 52.06-3
Reduce (including reduce to zero) the number of car parking spaces required
under Clause 52.06-5.
Peter Gaschk
APPEARANCES
For Emily Kropf, Nick Alaimo & Others
Peter English, Town Planner with Peter English and Associates.
For Darebin City Council
Carmela Tornatore, Appeals Advocate
For Ys Housing Ltd
Lachlan Molesworth, Barrister, By Direct Brief. Instructed by Oscar
McLennan, Director and Milly Gamlin, Architect.
INFORMATION
Description of proposal
Construction of twenty-four dwellings, up to three storeys in height,
including partial demolition and restoration/conversion of an
existing heritage
church building into a dwelling and reduction of parking.
Nature of proceeding
Application under
Planning and Environment Act
(Vic) – to review the decision to grant a permit.
Planning scheme
Darebin Planning Scheme (‘Scheme’).
Zone and overlays
General Residential Zone, Schedule 2 (‘GRZ2’).
Heritage Overlay, Schedule 264 (‘HO264’).
Development Contributions Plan Overlay, Schedule 1
Permit requirements
Clause 32.08-7: Construct two or more dwellings on a lot.
Clause 43.01-1: Demolish or remove a building; construct a building or
construct or carry out works.
Clause 52.06-3: Reduce (including reduce to zero) the number of car parking
spaces required under clause 52.06-5 or in a schedule
to the Parking
Key scheme policies and provisions
Clauses 02.03-4, 02.03-5, 02.03-7, 02.04, 11.01, 13.07-1L, 15.01, 15.03,
16.01, 18.01, 18.02, 32.08, 43.01, 45.06, 52.06, 53.18, 55,
65.01, 66 and 71.02
Land description
The review site is a rectangular lot with a frontage of 67.05m to George
Street and width of 65.53m (rear). The site has a depth of
approximately 72.15m
on the northern boundary, 74.68m on the southern boundary and an overall site
area of approximately 3000sqm.
The typography of the site is generally flat with a slight fall from the
rear to the front. Some scattered vegetation with canopy
trees exists,
primarily along the rear and front boundaries of the review site.
The site also contains the Reservoir Methodist Church (former) which was
constructed circa 1934. This building is an inter-war Gothic
Revival church,
set back from George Street and site boundaries. The church building has a
prominent gable roof, clad in terracotta
tiles and is listed as
‘significant’ with an individual heritage listing under the Scheme
(Heritage Overlay, Schedule
264 – ‘HO264’).
The site also includes a single storey ‘L’ shaped building
located at the rear of the church building towards the rear
of the site. This
building was previously used as a kindergarten and is now used for office
purposes. This later addition and other
buildings/structures on the site are
not significant or contributory under the HO264.
Partially to the north of the review site is a narrow strip of land that
appears to be a former ‘carriageway easement’
linking a medium
density development at 93-97 Edwardes Street with George Street. It appears
this strip of land is used for ‘external
storage space’ by the
medium density dwellings located along the northern boundary of the review site.
It is fenced and gated
accordingly (including a separate vehicle access crossing
onto George Street).
To the north of this strip of land is a group of four double storey
dwellings at 36-38 George Street.
To the east of the review site are two medium density developments at 35-37
and 39 Ashley Street, consisting of nine and five, single
storey, dwellings,
respectively. The rear dwellings associated with these two medium density
developments also abut a narrow carriageway
easement that currently separates
the rear of the review site from the sites in Ashley
To the south-east is a medium density development at 33 Ashley Street,
comprising one double storey and seven single storey brick
To the south of the review site is 32 George Street. This property
contains a single storey weatherboard dwelling, with a hipped
tiled roof. The
site is approximately 1000sqm in area and contains a low front fence with
screening vegetation immediately behind.
Opposite and further to the west of the review site are four sets of medium
density developments.
The surrounding area is strongly characterised by medium density housing
including single and double storey dwellings. Newer infill
detached housing is
also evident. Streetscapes in this neighbourhood feature landscaped front
setbacks with driveway crossing and
regular spacing between building form.
The review site is well located to the Edwardes Street/Reservoir Activity
Centre that includes a range of retail, office and community
services (300m) and
Reservoir Railway Station (750m).
Tribunal inspection
Unaccompanied of the review site and surrounds on 29 August 2025.
WHAT IS THIS PROCEEDING ABOUT?
review proceeding concerns an application under
Planning and
Environment Act 1987
(Vic) (‘P&E Act’) by Emily Kropf, Nick
Alaimo & Others (‘applicants’) regarding Darebin City
(‘council’) decision to issue a Notice of Decision
(‘NoD’) to grant a permit for planning permit application
in relation to the land at 34 & 34A George Street, Reservoir (‘review
issued a NoD to grant a permit on 7 January 2025. The NoD enables construction
of up to twenty-four dwellings, demolition
and associated building and works on
the review site, including the restoration and change of use of the former
heritage church building
into a four bedroom dwelling.
Summary of party submissions
submits the proposal is consistent with State and local housing policy and
objectives. It says the design appropriately addresses
existing and preferred
character outcomes sought in the GRZ2 and HO264. The council notes the proposal
achieves consistency with
relevant provisions of clause 55 of the
and is further supported by
housing policy changes arising from the recent gazettal of Amendment VC283
(‘AmVC283’).
submits amenity impacts have been appropriately addressed, noting the proposal
will achieve an amenity level that is ‘within
reasonable limits.’
Council is also satisfied the variation to onsite parking provision is
acceptable given the location of
the site to public transport options.
respondent supports the council’s decision. The respondent is a
‘not-for-profit’ charity that seeks to deliver
family-sized,
energy-efficient homes for moderate-income households.
respondent submits the proposal will deliver a high quality, purpose designed,
family housing development on a site that is well
serviced by nearby public
transport options, services and community infrastructure. The respondent also
says the proposal effectively
integrates existing policy objectives and
strategies and seeks to maximise housing opportunities in this locale that will
in net community benefit outcomes.
accepting the proposed permit conditions sought by council, the respondent also
seeks changes to the draft conditions as circulated.
note this review proceeding is not lodged as a ‘conditions’ review
under section 80(1) of the P& E Act. Nevertheless,
while this raised some
initial concerns for the applicants, all parties discussed and made
recommendations to the draft conditions
at the conclusion of the hearing. I
have assessed the draft conditions in this context.
applicants do not agree with council or the respondent and submit the proposal
is inappropriate when assessed against the following
Neighbourhood
Landscaping.
Visual bulk to
adjoining properties.
Carparking.
Overshadowing.
Overlooking.
Private open
space allocation.
Street tree
concerns were expanded upon by the applicants through the written and oral
submissions presented at the hearing by Mr English.
THE PROPOSAL
application seeks permission to construct up to 24 dwellings on the review site.
The proposed dwellings include a range of diversified
living units, including
triple storey and some double storey. The proposal includes the demolition of
all non-contributory structures
to the rear of the site, located behind the
heritage listed church. Demolition works are also proposed to the heritage
listed church,
to convert this building into an additional residential dwelling,
with a new internal front entrance, rear doors and skylights.
proposal includes a ‘contemporary’ design for the new dwellings
which include a mix of two, three and four bedrooms.
The proposed façade
of dwellings TH02 – TH05 to George Street (in attached row form) will
feature ‘zincalume’
treated, corrugated steel cladding. This row of
dwellings (Building 1) includes three storey form for dwellings TH02 –
with a double storey dwelling (TH05) placed on the northern boundary.
Building articulation is provided by sloped roof forms, angled
built form,
setbacks and use of window shrouds that seek to complement the angled roof form
of the former church building.
row of 11 dwellings TH06 – TH16 (Building 2) are proposed along the
northern boundary in three storey form, with one double
storey dwelling (TH16).
These dwellings are located behind the row of dwellings facing George Street,
extending towards the rear
boundary. Each dwelling will have a setback of 4.8m
from the northern boundary to be used as secluded private open space
The rear dwelling in this row (TH16) is sited on the rear
eastern boundary, with a wall height of 3.0m from natural ground level
sloping roof form is provided from the rear boundary (setback 1.57m) integrating
into double storey roof form above.
further row of eight double storey dwellings TH17 – TH24 (Building 3) is
proposed to be built over the at-grade car park area
along the southern
boundary. These dwellings will be set back 3.4m from the southern boundary and
3.0m from the eastern (rear) boundary.
Each of these dwellings will feature a
‘reverse living’ design, featuring two bedrooms and amenities at
first level,
with kitchen, living area and a 14.3sqm balcony proposed at second
level (overlooking a centralised communal area).
centralised communal open space area approximately 8.7m wide separates the two
rows of attached residential buildings (Buildings
centrally located vehicle access with waiting bay is proposed from George Street
between the former church building and the row
of street facing dwellings
(Dwellings TH02-TH05). The accessway will enter into an at-grade car parking
area located behind the
former church building. The at-grade on-site parking is
proposed along the site’s southern boundary for up to 23 cars (including
dedicated bicycle parking for 24 bicycles).
heritage church building will be restored and converted into a four bedroom
residence and remain ‘in-situ’ on the
site. External changes will
include new openings, window forms, roof skylights and internal
alterations.
Streetscape
perspective and layout/elevation plans of the proposal are provided
Figure 1: Front elevation street perspective – Source:
Decision Plans
Figure 2: Ground Level Plan – Source: Decision Plans TP10
Figure 3: Level 1 Plan – Source: Decision
Figure 4: Level 2 Plan – Source: Decision
Figure 5: Roof Plan – Source:
Decision Plans TP13
Figure 6: Elevation Plan West & East –
Source: Decision Plans TP30
Figure 7: Elevation Plan North & South Building 1 – Source:
Decision Plans TP31
Figure 8: Elevation Plan North & South Building 3 –
Source: Decision Plans TP32
PLANNING SCHEME AMENDMENTS
Amendment VC243
VC243 (‘AmVC243’), was gazetted 22 September 2023. The amendment
‘codified’ residential standards
and applies to the proposal as the
application was lodged in December 2023.
Amendment VC267
VC267 (‘AmVC267’) was gazetted 6 March 2025. This amendment
implemented a greater level of ‘codification’
to residential
standards under clause 55 provisions. However, the amendment does not apply
here as the application was lodged prior
to gazettal and therefore the
transitional provisions expressed in the amendment
This was not contested
between the parties.
AmVC267 also modified the wording of the purposes of the General Residential
Zone to ‘respond’ rather than ‘respect’
neighbourhood
character. The applicants submit that ‘either way,’ new development
applications ‘must continue
to have regard to the surrounding
character.’
Amendment VC283
VC283 (‘AmVC283’) was gazetted on 2 September 2025. This gazettal
occurred after the conclusion of the proceeding
and subsequent site inspection
by the Tribunal.
Explanatory Report accompanying AmVC283 states:
Amendment VC283 to the Victoria Planning Provisions and all planning schemes is
required to update the Planning Policy Framework
to implement Plan for Victoria
(Department of Transport and Planning, 2025). The amendment updates and
introduces policy, removes
references to Plan Melbourne 2017-2050: Metropolitan
Planning Strategy and makes general drafting improvements and clarifications.
the extent and nature of policy changes associated with this amendment, I issued
an order to provide an opportunity for the
parties to provide a written
submission addressing any implications arising from AmVC283 for this
proceeding.
submitted AmVC283 provided further policy support for the proposal, saying it
would help contribute to the housing targets
set for Darebin. The council also
highlighted the amendment reinforces opportunities to increase housing
opportunities within appropriate
locations, particularly development sites such
as the review site, which are close to nominated activity centres, rail stations
other service infrastructure.
respondent agrees with council and highlights the new housing targets set by
State Government. The respondent noted the amendment
replaces ‘Plan
Melbourne’ with an updated ‘housing statement,’ which is now
included at clause 11 (Settlements).
The respondent also highlighted the
amendment seeks to focus ongoing investment and residential growth in areas
close to activity
centres, including rail stations nominated in the Suburban
Rail Loop (‘SRL’) system.
respondent further notes Reservoir Rail Station is located within the SRL, which
is located approximately 500m from the review
site. The respondent says the
size of the review site delivers up to 24 new dwellings into Darebin, providing
opportunities for
further housing diversity.
respondent also sought to highlight new cultural heritage policy at clause
15.03-1S, that focuses attention on the restoration
and adaptation of existing
heritage assets. The respondent says the restoration and residential use of the
former heritage church
is consistent with AmVC283. Accordingly, the respondent
submits that the Tribunal should place weight on AmVC283 in supporting the
applicants say that AmVC283 does not alter specific planning controls at a local
policy level. They say there is already a focus
in the Scheme for growth and
investment into housing. The applicants note that Reservoir Rail Station, while
located in the SRL,
was not nominated as a Priority Project in the SRL. The
applicants also noted the amendment did not alter the relevant housing and
design provisions under clause 15.03-1S.
My findings
agree with council and respondent that AmVC283 provides an additional level of
housing policy support that is consistent with and
supportive of the proposal.
Importantly,
AmVC283 strengthens clause 15.03-1S regarding cultural heritage policy. The
proposal features the retention and change
of use of the existing former
heritage church building for residential use. I have therefore given this
WHAT ARE THE KEY ISSUES?
considered the respective submissions and evidence of the parties, assisted by
my site visit, I consider the following key
issues are relevant in my
determination of the proposal:
the proposal provide an acceptable planning response to its planning policy
proposal provide an acceptable planning response to amenity and neighbourhood
the proposal achieve an acceptable planning response to parking and
find the proposal will result in an acceptable planning outcome under the
Scheme, subject to the conditions set out in the attached
Appendix A to this
reasons and findings follow.
Does the proposal provide an acceptable planning response to
its planning policy context?
have set out the relevant zone and overlay provisions that applies to the review
site in my Information section above. More particularly,
I note the relevant
GRZ2 purposes seek:
To encourage
development that is responsive to the neighbourhood character of the area.
To encourage a
diversity of housing types and housing growth particularly in locations offering
good access to services and transport.
the key purposes of the HO264 seek:
To conserve and
enhance heritage places of natural or cultural significance.
To conserve and
enhance those elements which contribute to the significance of heritage
To ensure that
development does not adversely affect the significance of heritage
associated Statement of Significance for HO264 is also relevant and identifies
the heritage significance of the former church
Statement of Significance
What is significant?
The Reservoir Methodist Church at 34 George Street, Reservoir, constructed in
1934 to a design by Raymond G. Wilson, is significant.
It is a modest inter-war
Gothic Revival church set back from George Street by a lawn. The church has a
gable roof clad in terracotta
tiles. The walls of the church are red brick and
the street facing elevation has a red brick porch projecting towards the street.
The porch is entered from its sides, and it is flanked by pointed arched windows
on the wall of the main part of the church. The
wall of the porch facing the
street has a four-centred arched stained glass window. On the wall of the church
above the porch is
a smaller four-centred arched window. The side walls of the
church are divided into bays by piers/buttresses, with each bay having
arched window. Later alterations and additions and other buildings on the site
are not significant.
How is it significant?
The former Reservoir Methodist Church at 34 George Street, Reservoir is of local
historic, architectural and social significance
to Darebin City.
Why is it significant?
Historically, the former Reservoir Methodist Church is significant as a
representative example of a simple interwar Gothic Revival
church, which is
associated with the first phase of suburban development in Reservoir during the
inter-war period. The architectural
and historic significance of the church is
enhanced by its high level of intactness and its rarity value as the only
surviving inter-war
church in Reservoir. (AHC criteria A.4, B.2, D.2)
Socially, the former Reservoir Methodist Church is significant as a building
that is known, used and valued by the local community
over 70 years. It
illustrates the continuing strength of the Methodist faith as an important
denomination in Darebin in the twentieth
century. (AHC criterion G.1).
consider the retention and adaption of the former heritage listed church
building is an important part of the proposal and is a
positive planning
response to the context and setting of the site. I note this finding is
consistent with the council’s heritage
have also outlined the key policy context above that I have considered as part
of my assessment. I do not intend to repeat these
here. However, I note clause
15 provides support for new residential development that responds to its
physical context and character
setting (see clauses 15.01-1S, 15.01-2S and
15.01-5S), while clause 16.01-1-2S seeks to:
housing in designated locations that offer good access to jobs, services and
16.01-2S also supports the supply of affordable housing close to jobs, transport
and services. A relevant strategy under this
objective also seeks to:
improve housing
affordability by increasing choice in housing type, tenure and cost to meet the
needs of households as they move through
life cycle changes and to support
diverse communities.
applicants note the review site is in an ‘incremental housing change
area’ (Strategic Housing Framework Plan at clause
02.04-2). They note at
clause 02.03-5, this classification encourages a ‘moderate level of
change’ which they say is
‘generally consistent with the character
of the area and responsive to varying local conditions, allowing for moderate
growth and diversification over time.’
applicants submit that clauses 15.01-1L-01 (Urban Design), 15.01-5L
(Neighbourhood Character) and 16.01-1L-01 (Housing Growth)
also support the
notion of ‘low scale density development that respects existing
neighbourhood character in incremental housing
change areas.’
say the proposal has an unacceptable ‘high density rate’ on the site
that equates to 1:124sqm. They also submit
a three storey housing form across
the site is inconsistent with the predominantly low scale building form in the
area. The applicants
also highlight the ‘limited’ boundary setbacks
(including on-boundary walls) and significant parking reductions sought
proposal. They also note the new building form, at approximately 11.0m, will be
higher than the existing church building
at 8.4m and is not characteristic of
building heights in the area.
the applicant supports the retention of the existing former church building on
the review site, they say the new ‘attached
and vertical terrace form
proposed effectively introduces an entirely new typology’ into this
My reasons and findings
have not been persuaded by the applicants that the proposal will introduce
‘an entirely new building typology’ into
the area. My site visit
identified other contemporary styled buildings emerging. I find that the
proposal is consistent with the
planning policy context I have set out
find that reference to site density alone is not a satisfactory indicator that
the proposal is an overdevelopment. I consider that
a density rate used in this
way is a blunt tool.
note the Darebin Housing Strategy 2013 (revised 2015) (‘the
Strategy’) is a reference document in the Scheme at clause
16.01-1L-01.
(It is also a Background document at clause 72.08). It is a relevant document.
Importantly,
the Strategy provides objectives that apply to new development. The Strategy
enables changes in building form and density
when assessed against local
character and physical conditions. I have underlined relevant sections
Areas that are
reasonably close to public transport and activity areas
and relatively unconstrained so that a
moderate level of housing change over
time is encouraged
include a mixture of single and
semi-detached dwellings
as well as infill development including
storey town houses and villas, with scale and outcome dependent on local
character and conditions
. Medium density housing may be encouraged in
selected locations.
Within the incremental change areas, there are varying
local conditions that necessitate a different scale and built form outcome
(Tribunal emphasis added)
review site is also a large site (3000 sqm) which in the context of the existing
neighbourhood, offers an opportunity to design
a larger medium density proposal
that responds to this physical setting. I say this noting the decision plans
also show the building
site areas and garden area associated with this proposal
(source: Plan Drawing TP02, Revision E). In my view, these site areas do
reflect an overdevelopment of this large site.
strategy objective above also highlights an opportunity for a combination of two
and three storey built form as proposed. I am
satisfied the varied building
height of the proposal sits comfortably across the review site and is within the
height expectations
specified in the GRZ (11.0m or up to three storeys).
site visit of the area surrounding the review site also confirmed that there are
other large and substantive new built forms emerging
in the immediate area.
While I accept the building form proposed on the review site is contemporary, I
also find it is responsive
to the existing built form and setting of the former
heritage church building. I find this is a positive design outcome in relation
the primacy and character setting of the existing streetscape.
adaption of this building into a four bedroom dwelling is an important outcome
which is also consistent with the amended direction
of heritage cultural policy
that has been emphasised in AmVC283.
location and size of the review site also supports policy aspirations that seeks
higher density outcomes on sites that are close
to public transport and activity
centres. In this regard the site is well located to capitalise on existing
public transport options
(both train and bus) and is within comfortable walking
distance of existing business and community services in the nearby Reservoir
activity centre.
Nevertheless,
I have some concerns regarding the manner in which the proposal presents to the
street at the northern boundary of the
review site and to the adjoining dwelling
at 5/36-38 George Street. I share concerns with the applicants that the
existing street
rhythm and building spacing are important character elements to
be considered here.
I am satisfied the proposed side and rear setbacks of the two new rows of
dwellings (Buildings 2 and 3) are appropriate and
the centralised open space
area on the site offers meaningful landscape treatment and communal open space,
I find the double storey
massing form at the northern juncture of the site to
George Street is excessive at the upper level.
proposed on-boundary double storey form of Dwelling TH05 is inconsistent with
the streetscape setting. It is not reflective of
the spacing/rhythm of existing
built form I observed during my site visit. The on-boundary double storey wall
will also adversely
impact the visual outlook of the occupants in Unit 5/36-38
George Street.
address this concern, I will require deletion of the upper level bedroom 1 of
Dwelling TH05 (an area of approximately 3.7m X 3.0m),
to be replaced with an
open, upper level balcony form. This will necessitate some change to the roof
and wall boundary, including
overlooking screening of the side of the new
balcony form as it presents to the dwelling at 5/36-38 George Street.
I accept this change will reduce this dwelling to a single bedroom offering, the
placement of a balcony form at this corner
of the site is important to visually
reduce the appearance of excessive bulk and building massing at the upper level
at this important
view shed location.
similar design approach has been taken to the angled built form of Dwelling
TH02, that effectively opens out important views towards
the heritage building.
I consider this is a positive site response that helps maintain the visual
primacy of the heritage building
to the street.
the same manner, the removal of the upper level bedroom 1 in dwelling TH05 will
reduce the appearance of visual bulk to the street
and the public realm;
particularly as one moves along the street and seeks to obtain further views of
the former heritage church
applicants also raised massing concerns arising between dwelling TH16 and the
dwelling at 9/35-37 Ashley Street. I do not share
the same concerns with this
building interface. Noting the upper level of dwelling TH16 will be setback a
minimum of 1.57m from
the boundary with a sloping roof form that will integrate
into a double storey form.
applicants also expressed concerns regarding a proposed single car space to be
located in the front setback of dwelling TH05.
While I accept this design
feature was not a prevalent feature in the front setbacks of surrounding
properties, providing this front
area is devoid of any built form and the access
is formed through ‘grasscrete’ type material, I am satisfied this
can still perform an important landscape function for the dwelling. I will
include a condition to address this.
this additional design modification, I am satisfied the proposal will achieve an
acceptable planning outcome that is responsive
to the zone and overlay purposes
and the policy context that I have outlined and discussed above.
Does the proposal provide an acceptable planning response to
amenity and neighbourhood character?
applicants are concerned that backyard character will be adversely impacted by
excessive building bulk and massing associated
with the new development; when
viewed from the rear yards of 5/36-38 George Street, 32 George Street and
9/35-37 Ashley Street.
that variations sought to the Standard B17 building envelope should not be
supported in these circumstances, particularly
where they say, the level of bulk
and massing would impact the amenity and outlook of occupants from all three
rear yards.
applicants submit that any Standard B17 building envelope encroachment should be
viewed as unacceptable. They say that elevations
along the northern and eastern
elevations of Building 2 and elevations along the southern and eastern
elevations of Building 3 are
non-compliant with Standard B17 and the western
elevation of Building 2 are non-compliant with the B17 setback (5.09m required
4.8m proposed).
applicants note the decision plans show a compliant setback of dwelling TH05 to
the northern boundary. However, they say this
compliance relies on the setback
being calculated to the northern side of the adjacent former right-of-way. They
submit, when calculated
from the northern boundary of the review site, dwelling
TH05 encroaches both Standards B17 and B18.
applicants also submit that excessive overshadowing will be generated by the
proposal into the rear open space area of the property
at 9/35-37 Asley
The applicants say this
open space area is already compromised in relation to existing sunlight and the
proposed height and location
of the development will further impact available
sunlight penetration into this backyard in the afternoon.
applicants also have concerns regarding overlooking from the first and second
levels of dwellings TH17 – TH21 and the first
floor of dwelling TH22.
They submit the proposed design of this building row will result in overlooking
that will adversely impact
the neighbour’s amenity at 32 George
applicants also say that dwellings TH06 – TH16 fall short of the 40sqm of
SPOS. The say this is ‘symptomatic’
of an overdevelopment of the
site. They also note the root systems of the existing street tree (Tree 1) may
be adversely impacted
by the proposed centralised vehicle crossover in George
Street into the review site.
My reasons and findings
am satisfied the proposed design change removing the upper level bedroom 1 and
replacing this with an open balcony form for dwelling
TH05, will in my view,
appropriately address amenity impacts and character setting concerns raised by
the applicants at the northern
boundary and achieve an acceptable planning
outcome in regard to Standard B17.
note the objectives associated with side and rear setbacks (Standard B17) and
walls on boundaries (Standard B18) seek to achieve
the following design and
amenity outcomes:
Side and rear setbacks objective (Standard B17)
To ensure that the height and setback of a building from a boundary
the existing or preferred neighbourhood character and limits the impact on the
amenity of existing dwellings
or small second dwellings.
Walls on boundaries objective (Standard B18)
To ensure that the location, length and height of a wall on a boundary
respects the existing or preferred neighbourhood character and limits the
impact on the amenity of existing dwellings
or small second dwellings.
(Tribunal emphasis added)
I outlined above, the objectives require combined consideration of amenity
impacts to adjoining properties and a design response
that respects existing or
preferred neighbourhood character in the context of existing dwellings.
on my review of the relevant elevation plans (TP30/31/32) and layout plans, I
find the Standard B17 and B18 variations sought
by the respondent are modest and
acceptable in the context of existing interface conditions with adjoining
properties. The design
outcomes will result in a planning response that will be
consistent with the objectives expressed above.
4.8m side setback will be provided to the northern boundary for Building 2. I
am satisfied this setback will enable meaningful
landscaping along this
interface. The southern boundary setback of Building 3 is narrower to
accommodate under croft parking. Importantly
however, the upper level built
form of Building 3 will be set back 3.4m to this side boundary. I agree with
council this design
approach is acceptable given the existing dwelling at 32
George Street is separated from the southern boundary of the review site
existing vehicle driveway.
the eastern interface, I note steps are underway by adjoining landowners to gain
adverse possession of the 3.0m wide parcel
of land owned by the deceased estate
of Mr Henty. I agree with council this parcel of land effectively provides
important buffer
distance between dwelling TH16 and the existing dwellings at
9/35-37 and 5/39 Ashley Street.
also note a 3.6m setback is proposed between dwelling TH24 and the existing
dwelling at 9/35-37 Ashley Street. I am satisfied this
will enable meaningful
landscape buffer treatment between these interfaces.
noted above, the design approach for dwelling TH16 incorporates an on-boundary
wall and sloping roof treatment set back 1.5m from
the boundary interface,
leading into the upper level of that dwelling. I find this is an acceptable
design treatment given the existing
dwelling at 5/39 Ashley Street does not
present any habitable room windows to this interface and includes an alternative
to its east.
I find the on boundary wall construction forming part of the proposal is
appropriate given the context of this large site
and the variations sought to
Standards B17 and 18.
submitted shadow diagrams also show the dwellings at 5/39 Ashley Street and the
dwelling at 9/35/37 Ashley Street will experience
some additional shadow from
2.00 pm onwards. However, I am persuaded by council that the additional shadow
impact to the SPOS of
these dwellings must also take into consideration the
title conditions and boundaries created by the Henty Estate land.
say this noting the decision guidelines of Standard B21 require consideration of
the following matters:
the amenity of existing dwellings
or small second dwellings.
sunlight penetration
to the secluded private open space of the existing
dwelling or small second dwelling.
The time of
day that sunlight will be available
to the secluded private open space of
the existing dwelling or small second dwelling.
a reduction in sunlight on the existing use of the existing secluded private
emphasis added)
assessed in the context of the underlined matters expressed in the guidelines
above, I am satisfied the additional overshadowing
impacts between 2.00 pm -
3.00 pm into the existing secluded private open space conditions associated with
the above properties is
acceptable.
decision plans indicate there may also be some overlooking potential into the
SPOS areas of adjoining dwellings. I am satisfied
this can be appropriately
addressed through screening devices that meet Standard B22 to identified
windows/balconies of these dwellings.
I support the retention of
council’s condition 1(p) to address this matter. However, I will also
include additional screening
treatment to the upper level windows of dwelling
TH22 as sought by the applicants.
applicants also raised concerns regarding the amount of SPOS provided for
dwellings TH06 – TH16. I am satisfied the overall
communal open space
setting provided on the site, combined with the SPOS areas provided at ground
level for dwellings, appropriately
addresses the corresponding objective of
Standard B28 that seeks ‘to provide adequate private open space for the
recreation and service needs’ of future occupants.
the protection of the existing street tree in George Street. I am satisfied
council’s draft landscape conditions
(4-6) will ensure the existing street
tree in George Street will be protected during the construction period of the
Neighbourhood character and landscaping
applicants submit the proposal will not provide an acceptable planning response
to neighbourhood character and landscape treatment.
They say the proposal
should respond to and respect existing neighbourhood character. They point to
the relevant description of
the existing character of Precinct E6 of the Darebin
Neighbourhood Character Precinct Guidelines (‘Guidelines) which applies
the review site.
description states that streetscapes in this precinct are generally ‘low
scale and open.’
to the same Guidelines, the applicants submit the proposal fails to acknowledge
the preferred character statement for Precinct
E6, noting that new dwellings
should encourage the following:
Designing new
dwellings that interpret elements of the Interwar era in a contemporary manner,
while respecting existing period architecture.
Encouraging more
contemporary architectural styles in streets that have few period dwellings.
These buildings must adopt the predominant
scale, form and setbacks of their
streetscape context, while showing design innovation.
Respecting the
predominant height and setbacks of nearby buildings.
regard to landscape treatment the applicants submit the following:
There is limited
landscaping capacity along the southern interface of building three;
A large 20.0m
lemon scented gum proposed in the south eastern corner of the site is an
unrealistic expectation in a 1.0m wide landscape
strip and building setback of
3.4m from the boundary.
Construction of
dwelling TH05 on the northern boundary eliminates any potential for landscaping
along this interface.
A two-storey
wall adjacent to the northern boundary introduces an element which is completely
out of context within the neighbourhood
character setting.
A principal car
park is proposed within the front setback of Dwelling TH05.
indicate a permeable wire fence to the church. A timber picket fence is a more
appropriate outcome.
My reasons and findings
have addressed key character and landscape considerations under the first key
issue heading above. This includes amending the building
form of dwelling TH05
that will reduce the visual impact and massing of double storey form to the
northern corner of the review site.
have also found the overall height and appearance of the proposal provides an
acceptable planning response to the existing streetscape.
Particularly noting
the proposed maximum height of the building forms across the site is consistent
with and generally below the
height provisions specified in the GRZ2.
am also satisfied the discrete building envelope locations and setbacks of the
three distinct building modules to the front and
side boundaries of the review
site appropriately responds to the street setting I observed during my site
visit. The retention of
the former church building in situ, combined with a
centralised vehicle access and communal open space spine, will also enable
‘blue-sky’ views through the site to maintain the existing
rhythm and built form spacings I observed along George Street.
The proposed
height of Buildings 2 and 3 is also respectful of the height and setting of the
former church building when observed
from the public realm.
also find the contemporary design features and building layout proposed for the
new residential development is appropriate given
the physical and visual setting
of the former heritage church building. I note this was also the opinion of
council’s heritage
I also do not share the same
concerns raised by the applicants regarding the ‘zincalume’
façade cladding treatment.
Noting I observed use of similar material in
the surrounding area during my site visit.
also note the respondent table a revised landscape plan at the hearing that
demonstrated a smaller species of lemon scented gum
could be located in the
south east corner of the review site. I support this approach and will add this
into the respective landscape
plan condition (condition 4) in Appendix A.
style fencing is also proposed at the George Street frontage in council’s
draft conditions (condition 1(j)). The respondent
supports this and I have
retained this in the set of conditions at Appendix A.
the reasons stated above, I am satisfied the proposal will result in an
acceptable planning response to amenity and neighbourhood
Does the proposal achieve an acceptable planning response to
parking and traffic?
proposal seeks to accommodate 24 spaces (one per dwelling), with 23 car spaces
in the under croft car park area to the rear of
the existing former church
building. One open car space is proposed in the front setback area for dwelling
to the under croft car park is proposed by a centralised driveway with a passing
bay and crossover from George Street. A communal
bike shed is proposed within
the car park area, with a total of 24 bicycle spaces.
applicants submit the proposal will result in an unacceptable impact on the
surrounding area if the reduction in carparking is
Their written
submission provided a table based on the number of proposed bedrooms per
dwelling, showing a shortfall of 18 parking
spaces. While they accept that
George Street has some capacity to absorb overflow parking, they contend this
overflow would result
in adverse amenity impacts to surrounding residents and
introduce an inequitable expectation for similar reductions that may occur
the future.
respondent submits that clause 52.06 enables consideration of parking reduction,
particularly highlighting the locality is well
served by public transport
options. The respondent also provided a detailed Traffic Impact Assessment,
prepared by One Mile Grid,
dated 20 December 2023 (‘TIA report) that
supports reduced parking under this clause. I comment further on this
concurs with the shortfall of 18 on-site parking spaces as submitted by the
applicants. However, council considers the site’s
access to a range of
public transport options and its ‘walkability’ to the Reservoir
Activity Centre also supports the
level of on-site parking reduction
was not presented with any other traffic or parking evidence during the course
of the hearing. However, I was directed to the respondent’s
prepared by One Mile Grid Traffic Consultants. I note this formed part of the
further application material required and
considered by council in issuing its
TIA report confirms the review site has ‘excellent public transport
accessibility, with a wide variety of transport modes.’
The report notes
the Reservoir Railway Station is located approximately 10 minutes walking
distance from the site. The following
table is provided from that report,
identifying the modes of transport and distance to each mode. The TIA report
also notes the
review site has a healthy Walk Score rating of 82/100, indicating
that most ‘day to day’ errands are able to be accomplished
Figure 9: Public Transport Provision Table – Source:
Traffic Impact Assessment, One Mile Grid, 20 December 2023.
TIA report notes that design standards for the proposed car park area satisfy
clause 52.06-9 and includes relevant swept path
plans that demonstrate that
vehicles can enter and leave and safely. Including safely negotiating access
into the under croft car
park area with ‘adequate clearances and no
corrective manoeuvres.’
TIA report also confirms the proposal has a shortfall of 18 car spaces and
provided a parking demand assessment in accordance
with clause 52.06-7 to assess
the parking demand likely to be generated by the proposal.
findings of the TIA demand assessment concluded that dwellings within the review
site could be expected to be appealing to potential
owners/tenants who do not
have the need to park a vehicle at their place of residence.
TIA report also assessed capacity for on-street car parking in the area. Survey
work was undertaken and estimated up to 116 on-street
car parking would be
available for parking in George Street and Edwardes Street. According to the
survey results, the report found
that approximately half of the on-street car
spaces would be available during peak occupancy use at midday and evening times
on the TIA Wednesday and Saturday survey times).
TIA report is thorough and is a relevant matter in my assessment. In the
absence of any contrary evidence, I have given this
weight in my assessment of
the traffic and parking concerns raised by the applicants.
My reasons and findings
on the survey work and findings in the TIA report, I am satisfied the reduced
parking provision sought by the respondent will
result in an acceptable planning
outcome that is supported by clause 52.06 and associated policy.
review site has excellent access to public transport modes and I am satisfied
the existing traffic road system is capable of accommodating
the additional
traffic movements arising from the proposal.
am also satisfied the street network and availability of on-street parking will
be sufficient to ensure the proposal does not result
in any loss of amenity to
residents in the area.
find the proposal will achieve an acceptable planning response to parking and
traffic as sought under relevant provisions of clause
WHAT CONDITIONS ARE APPROPRIATE?
conditions circulated by the council before the hearing were discussed between
the parties at the conclusion of the proceeding.
have considered the oral submissions made by parties. The conditions set out in
the Appendix A to this decision reflect these discussions
and my reasons and
findings expressed above.
the reasons stated above I have included a condition 1 requirement to delete the
upper level bedroom 1 of dwelling TH05 to address
building massing to the street
and towards the adjoining dwelling.
have also included a standard condition regarding the prohibited use of gas
reticulation to the proposed development in accordance
with legislation
requirements.
have also specified the form and height of the proposed canopy tree in the
southeast corner of the site (4(a)).
also included draft conditions that seek to confirm that no more than three
rooms in each of dwellings TH02 to TH24 are to
be used as bedrooms at any one
time. I have deleted these conditions on the basis they unnecessary and
enforceability will be problematic.
have also undertaken minor editing and formatting of the council’s draft
conditions which do not change their purpose or intent.
the reasons given above, the decision of the responsible authority is varied. A
permit is granted subject to conditions as set
out in Appendix
Peter Gaschk
APPENDIX A – PERMIT DESCRIPTION AND CONDITIONS
PLANNING SCHEME
Darebin Planning Scheme
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Darebin City Council
ADDRESS OF THE LAND
34 & 34A George Street
RESERVOIR VIC 3073
THE PERMIT ALLOWS:
Planning scheme clause
Matter for which the permit has been granted
Clause 32.08-7
Construct two or more dwellings on a lot.
Clause 43.01-1
Demolish or remove a building; construct a building or construct or carry
Clause 52.06-3
Reduce (including reduce to zero) the number of car parking spaces required
under Clause 52.06-5.
CONDITIONS TO APPLY TO THE PERMIT:
the development starts, including before the commencement of any demolition
allowed by the permit, amended plans to the satisfaction
of the Responsible
Authority must be submitted to, and approved by, the Responsible Authority. When
approved, the plans will be endorsed
and will then form part of this Permit.
The plans must be drawn to scale with dimensions and must be generally in
accordance with
the plans submitted with the application (identified as Pages
TP03, TP04, TP05, TP06, TP07, TP10, TP11, TP12, TP13, TP20, TP21, TP22,
TP24, TP25, TP26, TP27, TP28, TP29, TP30, TP31, TP32, TP41, TP44, and TP60 in
Revision E of project no. 2301 prepared by YS
Housing and dated July 2024) but
modified to show:
(a) Deletion of bedroom 1 at the upper level of dwelling TH05 to be replaced
with an open balcony form with overlooking screening
to the northern section of
the balcony to meet Standard B22 requirements.
(b) Annotated dimensions of the car parking space for dwelling TH05 (the
northernmost dwelling facing the street) to achieve compliance
standards of Clause 52.06-9 and use of ‘grasscrete’ type or similar
paving to the proposed vehicle access to
integrate with landscaping proposed in
the front setbacks of dwellings TH02-TH05.
(c) Annotated dimensions demonstrating all of the building (excluding any porch)
for dwellings TH02 to TH05 being setback from the
frontage (western boundary) by
at least 6.03 metres.
(d) Annotated dimensions of the heights of the fences separating the Secluded
Private Open Space of dwelling TH02 to TH05 to comply
with Standard B29 at
Clause 55.05-5 of the Darebin Planning Scheme.
(e) Annotated dimensions of the heights of the front fences to comply with
Standard B32 at Clause 55.06-2 of the Darebin Planning
(f) The provision of pedestrian visibility splays measuring 2.0 metres (width
across the frontage) by 2.5 metres (depth into the
site), to the
and southern sides of the crossovers to George Street. Where within the
site, the splays must be at least 50% clear of any
visual obstructions
(structures, vegetation and the like). The splays may include an adjacent entry
or exit lane where more than
one lane is provided, or adjacent landscaped areas,
provided the landscaping in those areas is less than 900mm in height.
(g) Removal of the north-facing windows of dwelling TH05.
(h) Relocate the Hot Water Unit of dwelling TH16 to a location within the
eastern side of the Secluded Private Open Space, or any
other location to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority.
(i) The front fence for the church building to be timber pickets or another
material to the satisfaction of the responsible authority,
with detailed
dimensioned plans of the fence included.
(j) A cumulative provision of at least 5 cubic metres of storage in the First
Floor porch, underneath each dwelling’s First/Second
Floor stairway and on
the Second Floor Balcony of each dwelling TH17 to TH24.
(k) The portion of the southern crossover which serves vehicles finished in
(l) A comprehensive schedule of construction materials, external finishes and
colours (including colour samples).
(m) Details of the fences on the northern, eastern
and southern boundaries (except within 9 metres of the western boundary of
land) in accordance with Condition No. 12 of this Permit.
(n) The location of all plant and equipment (including air-conditioners,
condenser units, rainwater tanks, solar panels, hot water
units and the like).
These are to be:
where possible;
or screened to be minimally visible from the public realm;
conditioners located as far as practicable from neighbouring bedroom windows or
acoustically screened; and
into the design of the building.
(o) The location of water and electricity metres. Where metres would be visible
from the public realm, these are to be:
where possible;
on a side boundary or adjacent to the accessway; and
from view using either landscaping or durable screening that integrates with the
development.
(p) The northern window of the northern First Floor bedroom of dwelling TH08 and
the southern First and Second Floor windows of each
dwellings TH17 to TH21 and
the First Floor windows of dwelling TH22 with either:
sill with a minimum height of 1.7 metres above finished floor level;
fixed external screen with a maximum permeability of 25% to a minimum height of
1.7 metres above finished floor level; or
obscure glazing (not film) with a maximum transparency of 25% to a minimum
height of 1.7 metres above finished floor level.
Where fixed screens are being utilised a section diagram must be included to
demonstrate how the screens minimise overlooking of adjoining
properties.
Screens must be constructed of durable materials and be integrated with the
design of the development.
(q) Any fencing visible from the street, other than fencing along common
boundaries shared with an adjoining site, to be of a design,
colour and quality
of material (not timber palings) that matches the character of the
development.
(r) Any modifications required as a result of the
approved Landscape Plan required by Condition No. 4 of this Permit.
(s) Annotations detailing Tree Protection Zone(s),
associated tree protection fencing and tree protection measures
accordance with the requirements of Condition No. 5 and 6 of this Permit.
(t) Any modifications required as a result of the approved Sustainable
Management Plan (SMP) required by Condition No. 7 of this
East and West upper-level windows to be operable: two awning style windows or
both casement style.
operable shading devices to all west and east facing windows and glazed doors to
habitable rooms drawn and labelled with
ASD (Adjustable Shading Device) on the
floor plan and elevations. The first-floor window shading devices must be
operable from within
the dwelling. Include a product diagram or section of the
proposed device (must not be roller shutters for any street facing glazing).
Ensure windows that have external adjustable shading can open when using the
Horizontal,
fixed, external shading devices to all north facing habitable room windows and
glazed doors where not located directly
under an eave or overhang. Draw and
label all shading on the plans and elevations with FSD (Fixed Shading Device).
Provide a dimensioned
section diagram or photograph of the shading. The depth
of the device must be equal to 25% of the distance from sill height to the
of the device. The device must also extend horizontally to both sides of the
window or glazed door by a distance equal to the
depth of the device.
glazing 'DG' to all habitable room windows, glazed doors and skylights annotated
on each individual glazing unit and specified
on the material/colour
schedule/window legend. New operable glazing doors to church-dwelling to be
double-glazed and existing wall
vents to be renovated.
location and size of all rainwater tanks, labelled, including a notation
indicating that the rainwater tank will be collecting
from specified roofed area
(sqm) and servicing all toilets. The tanks must be accessible for maintenance,
leak detection and repair.
Water Efficient Gardens, annotate rainwater tank connection to garden, noting
that no potable water is to be used for irrigation.
Location of taps and floor
waste on balconies / courtyards, clearly annotated. Size of Vegetated area
labelled (sqm), as defined
of the permeable surfaces with a cross section – if permeable paving as
per Darebin WSUD guidelines.
3kW minimum photovoltaic array solar panels per dwelling, facing North with tilt
angle annotated. Panels must be located
to avoid being overshadowed.
the ESD table to show items that cannot be drawn e.g. NatHERS, ACH, building
material certifications (PEFC timber, E0, Non-VOC
etc), glazing properties
(U-value, SGHC), appliance ratings and cooling/heating ratings; A minimum 4/4/5
WELS rated Shower/Toilet/Taps;
a minimum 4 Star WELS Dishwasher.
and label: Ceiling fans to all bedrooms. The clothesline for each dwelling.
Skylights and note as operable. Skylights to Church
must have operable shading.
Electrical power points to bike parking area for E-bikes.
roof specified with a Solar Absorptance value of less than or equal to 0.50 on
the plans and in the Materials/Finishes schedule.
The driveway specified as no
darker than ‘Medium’ i.e. with a Light Reflectance Value of 40 or
6 visitor bike parking or bike rails.
of a minimum 32A dedicated circuit from switchboard to carparks to allow for
electric vehicle charging for each carparking
bathrooms to have humidity-controlled exhaust fans.
of food and garden waste facilities.
Landscape, WSUD, Garden Plans.
(u) The provision of a Stormwater Management System
Plan, including a Water Sensitive Urban Design Plan, in accordance with Standard
W1 of Clause 53.18-4 of the Darebin Planning Scheme. (Refer to Condition No. 9
of this Permit.)
(v) The provision of a Site Management Plan in accordance with Standard W3 of
Clause 53.18-6 of the Darebin Planning Scheme. (Refer
to Condition No. 10 of
this Permit.)
(w) Any modifications required as a result of the approved Waste Management Plan
(WMP) required by Condition No. 11 of this Permit.
When approved, the plans will be endorsed and form part of this Permit.
development as shown on the endorsed plans must not be altered without the prior
written consent of the responsible authority.
new dwelling allowed by this permit must not be connected to reticulated gas
services (within the meaning of clause 53.03 of the
relevant planning scheme).
This conditions to have force and effect after the development authorised by
this permit has been completed.
plans are endorsed under Condition No. 1 of this Permit, a Landscape Plan to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority
must be submitted to and approved by
the responsible authority. When approved, the Landscape Plan will be
endorsed and will then
form part of this Permit. The Landscape Plan must be
prepared by a suitably qualified person and drawn to scale with dimensions and
must incorporate:
(a) The specie of tree proposed in the south east corner of the subject land
Eucalyptus Woodwardii
(Lemon flowering gum – 12.0m x
(b) Tree protection measures in accordance with Condition No. 5 and 6 of this
(c) Any modifications relating to landscaping required as a result of the
Sustainable Management Plan required by Condition No. 7
of this Permit)
(d) Any modifications relating to landscaping required as a result of the Water
Sensitive Urban Design Plan/Report required by Condition
No. 9 of this
(e) Details of all existing trees to be retained and all existing trees to be
removed, including overhanging trees on adjoining properties
and street trees
within the nature strip. The genus, species, height and spread of all
trees must be specified. All existing trees
to be retained must be retained and
protected in accordance with Australian Standards.
(f) A planting schedule of proposed vegetation detailing the botanical name,
common name, size at maturity, pot size and quantities
of all plants.
(g) A diversity of plant species and forms including at least:
(8) large sized canopy trees in the private open space of the proposed
development, with a minimum mature height of 10m or more.
At the time of
planting these trees are to be from 50L size pots and at least 2m in
(12) medium sized canopy trees in the private open space of the proposed
development, with a minimum mature height of 8m. At
the time of planting these
trees are to be from 50L size pots and at least 2m in height.
(12) small sized canopy trees in the private open space of the proposed
development, with a minimum mature height of 4m. At
the time of planting these
trees are to be from 50L size pots and at least 2m in height.
(h) No trees are to be located in the church’s front setback, i.e. both to
the west of the church building and to the south
of the main crossover.
(i) Annotated graphic construction details showing all landscape applications
and structures including tree and shrub planting, retaining
walls, raised
planter bed and decking.
(j) Type and details of all surfaces including lawns, mulched garden beds and
permeable and/or hard paving (such as pavers, brick,
gravel, asphalt and
concrete) demonstrating a minimum site permeability of 20%. Percentage cover of
permeable surfaces must be stated
on the plan. Where paving is specified,
material types and construction methods (including cross sections where
appropriate) must
be provided.
(k) Hard paved surfaces at all entry points to dwellings.
(l) The location of all plant and equipment as shown (including air
conditioners, letter boxes, garbage bins, lighting, clotheslines,
storage, bike racks and the like).
(m) Type and details of edge treatment between all changes in surface (e.g.
grass (lawn), gravel, paving and garden beds).
(n) An outline of the approved building/s including any basement, the location
of entry doors, windows, gates and fences.
(o) The location of both existing and proposed overhead and underground
services. Conflicts of such services with the existing and
planting must be avoided.
(p) Clear graphics identifying trees (deciduous and evergreen), shrubs,
grasses/sedges, groundcovers and climbers.
(q) Scale, north point and appropriate legend.
(r) Landscape specification notes including general establishment and
maintenance requirements.
The requirements of the endorsed Landscape Plan must be complied with and
implemented to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
The development must not be occupied, unless otherwise approved by the
responsible authority in writing, until the landscaping works
shown on the
endorsed Landscape Plan are completed to the satisfaction of the responsible
No later than seven (7) days after the completion of the landscaping, the
permit holder must advise council, in writing, that the
landscaping has been
The landscaping shown on the endorsed Landscape Plan must be maintained to
the satisfaction of the responsible authority, including
by replacing any dead,
diseased, dying or damaged plants to the satisfaction of the responsible
All landscaped areas must be provided with an appropriate irrigation system
to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
the development (including demolition) starts, tree protection fencing (TPF)
must be erected in accordance with the following
requirements to provide a Tree
Protection Zone
TPZ (radius from the base of the tree trunk)
Eucalyptus leucoxylon
(Yellow Gum)
Nature strip
Eucalyptus leucoxylon
(Yellow Gum)
Nature strip
Chamaecyparis lawsoniana
(Lawson's Cypress)
Neighbouring property (eastern boundary neighbour)
*As defined in Arboricultural Impact Assessment prepared by Treetec
Professional Tree Services and dated 8 December 2023.
following tree protection measures must be implemented for trees identified in
the table to Condition No. 5 of this Permit:
(a) Tree protection measures must be in accordance with Australian Standard
AS4970 – 2009: Protection of trees on development
sites or as otherwise
approved in writing by the Responsible Authority.
(b) Tree protection fencing must be constructed of star pickets and chain mesh
(or similar) to the satisfaction of the Responsible
Authority. The tree
protection fence must remain in place until construction is completed or unless
otherwise agreed by the Responsible
Authority in writing.
(c) The tree protection fencing must be maintained at all times and may only be
moved the minimum amount necessary for approved buildings
and works to occur
within a Tree Protection Zone (TPZ). The movement of the fencing to allow
such buildings and works shall only
occur for the period that such buildings and
works are undertaken, after which time the full extent of the fencing must be
reinstated.
(d) Tree 1 will require an exploratory dig, to a depth of 300mm below existing
grade, using a non-destructive method such as manual,
pneumatic or hydro
excavation is undertaken. The excavation must be undertaken under supervision of
an AQF Level 5 arborist. The
excavation should expose the area of encroachment
within the SRZ of tree 1, to ensure that no large roots, greater than 40mm in
are within this footprint.
If roots of this size are discovered, they must remain in situ and an
engineering solution, such as suspending the slab of the proposed
implemented to avoid the severance of these roots.
Roots smaller than 40mm in diameter within this SRZ encroached area may be
severed to facilitate the footings of the proposed design.
Any severance or engineering solution must be undertaken/designed in
co-ordination with a suitably qualified arborist.
TPZ fencing can only be reduced by the minimum amount necessary for
construction of the approved crossover.
(e) All excavations for the construction of the proposed southern crossover are
to be supervised by a suitably qualified and experienced
arborist with all root
pruning undertaken in accordance with section 9 of AS4373-2007 Pruning of
Amenity Trees.
(f) The proposed building footprint within the SRZ and TPZ of tree 7 must be
constructed using root sensitive footings. The proposed
courtyard paving must be
constructed at or above the existing soil level, with permeable materials, and
with no trenching or major
excavation inside the TPZ of tree 7. The new fence
construction must use the existing fence post holes where possible and where new
post holes are needed within the TPZ of tree 7, these must be dug by hand. If
roots greater than 40mm are found, they must remain
in situ and the post hole
must be moved further away from the tree. If roots less than 40mm are found,
these can be cut with a sharp
clean tool by a suitably qualified arborist. These
works will be closely supervised by the project arborist, to ensure there is no
inadvertent impact to the roots of this tree.
(g) A qualified arborist must oversee all works in and around Tree Protection
Zones (TPZ) for trees 1, 2, and 7.
(h) All services must be routed outside ‘Tree Protection Zones’. If
there is no alternative to passing through the protection
zone, the local
authority and the consulting arborist must be advised in writing on the need for
directional boring beneath root
zone; this must be maintained at a minimum depth
of 45cm in soil depth when inside the TPZ of a retained tree.
(i) Except with the written consent of the responsible authority:
area within the TPZ and Tree Protection Fencing (TPF) must be irrigated during
the summer months with 1 litre of clean water for
every 1cm of trunk girth
measured at the soil/trunk interface on a weekly basis.
area within the TPZ of Trees No. 1, 2, and 7
must be provided with 100mm
layer of coarse mulch.
vehicular or pedestrian access, trenching or soil excavation is to occur within
a TPZ, save for that allowed to complete the approved
development.
storage or dumping of tools, equipment or waste is to occur within a
(j) Any pruning works must be conducted in accordance with the Australian
Standard AS4373 - 2007: Pruning of Amenity Trees
and undertaken by a
suitably qualified arborist.
(k) The construction of the crossover (and any other buildings and works within
a TPZ) must be undertaken under the supervision and
direction of a qualified
(l) Where applicable to a nature strip tree, a TPZ is confined to the width of
the nature strip.
(m) Where applicable to a tree on a neighbouring lot, a TPZ only applies where
within the site.
(n) Before any development (including demolition) starts, all existing
vegetation shown on the endorsed plan(s) to be retained must
be marked and that
vegetation must not be removed, destroyed or lopped without the written consent
of the Responsible Authority.
plans are endorsed under Condition No. 1 of this Permit, an amended
Sustainability Management Plan (SMP) to the satisfaction
of the responsible
authority must be submitted to an approved by the responsible authority. When
approved, the amended SMP will be
endorsed and will then form part of this
Permit. The amended SMP must be generally in accordance with the document
identified as
Sustainable Design Assessment prepared by YS Housing and dated 12
February 2024
but modified to show:
(a) Provide preliminary NatHERS ratings assessments for all thermally unique
dwellings and achieve an average of at least 7 Stars;
and Provide preliminary
NatHERS ratings assessments for the retrofitted church.
NatHERS ratings must be updated to include all skylights.
skylights to be double-glazed and operable.
(b) Specify 4 Star WELS rated toilets.
(c) If claiming in BESS a Building Users Guide, provide a further description of
what information is going to be included.
(d) Amend the BESS report (and any other corresponding documentation) to:
4 star WELS rated toilets in the BESS water category.
the updated heating and cooling loads and overall star rating obtained from the
preliminary energy ratings in the dwelling
Energy Profiles.
(e) A STORM report and stormwater management response that maintains a minimum
STORM score of 100% but is modified so that:
is consistency between the plans, SMP and STORM report.
equivalent minimum 2000L rainwater tank to each dwelling, plumbed to flush
toilets, independent of any on site detention requirements.
must not use proprietary products, buffer strips, swales or large areas of hard
surface draining to in-ground raingardens.
rainwater tanks are used: Their reliability a minimum of 80%.
raingardens are used: A minimum of 1 square metre in size, and 2% – 4% of
the catchment area they are treating. The catchment
area must be a minimum of 25
square metres and detailed to Darebin’s preferred design.
(f) An amended WSUD (Water Sensitive Urban Design) catchment plan that is
consistent with the STORM report, clearly showing:
and size/s of rainwater tanks (labelled) including access to underground tank
maintenance.
all stormwater will drain, downpipes clearly marked and the direction of flow
shown with arrows (including roof, balconies,
driveway and raingarden).
permeable areas dimensioned;
stormwater catchment areas (impervious areas and roofs) clearly marked and
dimensioned (in sqm) and connected to corresponding
Water Sensitive Urban Design
(WSUD) treatment measures.
Where alternative ESD initiatives are proposed to those specified in this
condition, the responsible authority may vary the requirements
of this condition
at its discretion, subject to the development achieving equivalent (or greater)
ESD outcomes in association with
the development. When submitted and approved to
the satisfaction of the responsible authority, the amended SMP and associated
plans will be endorsed to form part of this permit. No alterations to
the SMP may occur without the written consent of the responsible
development must not be occupied until a report to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority prepared by the author of the
Sustainability Management
Plan (SMP) endorsed under Condition No. 6 of this Permit, or similarly qualified
person, is submitted to
the responsible authority, confirming that all measures
specified in the SMP have been implemented in accordance with the endorsed
plans are endorsed under Condition No. 1 of this Permit, a detailed Stormwater
Management System Report to the satisfaction
of the responsible authority must
be submitted to and approved by the responsible authority. When approved, the
Stormwater Management
System Report will be endorsed and will then form part of
this Permit. The report must include:
(a) Details of how the stormwater management system is designed to meet the
current best practice performance objectives for stormwater
quality contained in
the Urban Stormwater - Best Practice Environmental Management Guidelines
(Victorian Stormwater Committee, 1999),
assessment using an industry recognised stormwater tool;
to be used and details of these treatment measures including
cross sections,
materials, plants and drainage directions;
location of stormwater treatment measures in relation to buildings, sealed
surfaces, neighbouring properties and landscaped areas;
plan illustrating where all impervious surfaces will be treated and
construction and maintenance schedule;
(b) Details of how the stormwater management system contributes to cooling,
improving local habitat and providing attractive and
enjoyable spaces;
(c) Consideration of how the WSUD stormwater treatment measures will integrate
with on-site detention requirements;
The requirements of the endorsed Stormwater Management System Report must be
implemented and complied with to the satisfaction of
the responsible
plans are endorsed under Condition 1 of this Permit, a Site Management Plan to
the satisfaction of the responsible authority
must be submitted to and approved
by the responsible authority. When approved, the Site Management Plan will
be endorsed and will
then form part of this Permit. The Site Management Plan
must be generally in accordance with Melbourne Water’s
Keeping Our
Stormwater Clean – A Builder’s Guide
(2002) and must describe
how the site will be managed prior to and during the construction period,
including requirements for:
(a) Erosion and sediment.
(b) Stormwater.
(c) Litter, concrete and other construction wastes.
(d) Chemical contamination.
The requirements of the endorsed Site Management Plan must be implemented and
complied with to the satisfaction of the Responsible
plans are endorsed under Condition 1 of this Permit, a Waste Management Plan to
the satisfaction of the responsible authority
must be submitted to and approved
by the responsible authority. When approved, the Waste Management Plan will be
endorsed and will
then form part of this Permit. The Waste Management Plan
(a) Ensure all bin types, bin sizes, the size of the waste storage area/s and
any other relevant detail/s specified in the Waste
Management Plan are shown to
scale on the endorsed plans.
(b) Explain how and where waste will be stored on the site.
(c) Detail the size and location of general, recyclable, [*FOGO and glass] waste
(d) Include a plan that shows:
waste storage and collection area.
length and width of the footpath/ nature strip directly abutting the site
location of any available on-street carparking, loading zones and tram/bus
location of all street furniture, light poles, electricity poles, driveways,
street trees, bus shelters or similar obstructions.
location of the bins within the road reserve, with a minimum gap of 300mm
between bins and other obstructions.
private waste collection is required, type and size of collection vehicles,
frequency of collection, times of collection, location
of collection point for
vehicles and location of bins prior to collection.
The plan may require bin sharing or that collection be undertaken by a
private contractor if it cannot be demonstrated to the satisfaction
Responsible Authority that the kerb-side collection of individual bins will not
cause car parking and/ or amenity issues.
Where waste is collected by a private contractor,
bins must not be stored off site before and after collection.
The provisions, recommendations and requirements of the approved Waste
Management Plan must be implemented and complied with to the
satisfaction of the
Responsible Authority.
Waste storage and collection must not affect the amenity of the surrounding
Waste storage and collection must not cause any interference with the
circulation and parking of vehicles on abutting streets.
*FOGO: Food Organics and Garden Organics
development must not be occupied until a fence to a minimum height of 1.8 metres
above natural ground level is erected along the
southern, northern and eastern
property boundaries, except within 9 metres of the western boundary. The fence
must be constructed
to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
If the existing fences on the southern, northern and eastern with a
height less than 1.8 metres is structurally sound, the fence height
increased by the addition of a free-standing, self-supporting trellis adjacent
to the fence to the required height. If used,
such trellis must be a maximum of
25% visually permeable and be fixed, permanent, durable and of materials,
finishes and colour that
will blend in with the development.
the completion of the constructed ground floor level(s), and before the starting
of the building frame or walls, a report prepared
by a licensed land surveyor to
the satisfaction of the responsible authority must be submitted to the
responsible authority, confirming
the ground floor level(s). The report must be
submitted to the responsible authority no later than 7 days from the date of the
inspection.
The development must not be occupied until a
report prepared by a licensed land surveyor to the satisfaction of the
responsible authority
is submitted to the responsible authority, confirming the
floor level(s).
buildings or works are to be constructed over any easement or other restriction
on the land or any sewers, drains, pipes, wires
or cables under the control of a
public authority or the responsible authority without the prior written consent
of the responsible
authority and/or any relevant authority with vested interest
in the easement
the use starts, an automatic external lighting system capable of illuminating
entry to each unit, access to each car parking
space, each car parking space
itself, and all pedestrian walkways must be provided on the land to the
satisfaction of the responsible
The external lighting
must be designed, baffled and located to prevent any adverse effect on adjoining
and nearby land to the satisfaction
of the responsible authority.
walls on the boundary of the adjoining properties must be cleaned and finished
to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
land must be drained to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
guttering, rain heads, pipes including downpipes, fixtures, fittings and vents
servicing any building on the site including those
associated with a balcony
(a) concealed in service ducts or otherwise hidden from view; or
(b) located and designed to integrate with the development,
All to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
plant, equipment, services or structures other than those shown on the endorsed
plans are permitted above the roof level of the
buildings without the prior
written consent of the responsible authority.
plant and equipment proposed on the roof of the building must be located to be
minimally visible from the public realm or screened
in a manner that integrates
with the design of the development, to the satisfaction of the responsible
must be made on the land for letter boxes and a slot for newspapers to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority.
occupation of the development, the areas set aside for the parking of vehicles
and access lanes as shown on the endorsed plan(s)
(a) constructed;
(b) properly formed to such levels that they can be used in accordance with the
(c) surfaced with an all-weather sealcoat;
(d) drained;
(e) line-marked to indicate each car space and all access lanes; and
All to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
spaces, access lanes and driveways shown on the endorsed plans must not be used
for any other purpose without the prior written
consent of the responsible
the occupation of the development all vehicular crossing(s) must be constructed
to align with approved driveways to the satisfaction
of the Responsible
Authority. All redundant crossing(s), crossing opening(s) or parts thereof must
be removed and replaced with
footpath, nature strip and kerb and channel to the
satisfaction of the responsible authority.
to the issue of a Building Permit in relation to the development approved by
this permit, a Community Infrastructure Levy and/or
Development Infrastructure
Levy must be paid to Darebin City Council in accordance with the approved
Development Contributions Plan
development must include no more than 24 dwellings.
Permit will expire if either:
(a) The development does not start within three (3) years from the date of this
(b) The development is not completed within five (5) years of the date of this
As relevant, the responsible authority may extend the times referred to if a
request is made in writing:
(a) Before this Permit expires;
(b) Within six (6) months after the expiry date; or
(c) Within twelve (12) months after the expiry date if the request relates to
the completion of the development or a stage of the
development.
– End of conditions –
A planning permit is not
triggered under the DCPO1.
Council advised that the
land immediately adjacent and along the rear boundary of the review site,
includes a ‘former carriageway
easement’ that is currently used as
secluded private open space by the rear dwellings located at 35-37 and 39 Ashley
(‘the Henty Land’). I was also informed this land is
currently progressing through ‘vacant possession’ procedures
respective dwelling owners.
The submissions and evidence
of the parties, any supporting exhibits given at the hearing and the statements
of grounds filed have
all been considered in the determination of the
proceeding. In accordance with the practice of the Tribunal, not all of this
will be cited or referred to in these reasons.
As worded prior to gazettal of
The HO264 does not require a
permit for internal alterations to the former church building.
AmVC267 inserted a transition
provision in residential zones to provide that any application lodged before the
commencement date
can continue to be assessed under the provisions in force
immediately before the commencement date.
D'Andrea v Boroondara
[2023] VCAT 1148
Costa v Banyule CC
[2023] VCAT 1273
Oechsle v Frankston CC
[2023] VCAT 1356
referred to.
Ling v Whitehorse CC
[2023] VCAT 307
referred to.
Decision guidelines stated are
those in place prior to the gazettal of AmVC243.
Darebin Neighbourhood
Character Precinct Guidelines (Planisphere, 2007).
Council’s heritage
adviser also supported the contemporary design outcomes associated with the
proposal in relation to the
retention and setting of the former church building
(advice dated 10/1/24).
Alameddine v Darebin
[2023] VCAT 839
and Mavrikis v Darebin CC
[2024] VCAT 646
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (12.3 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter