URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/984.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:26:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nillumbik SC v Chetcuti [2025] VCAT 984 (7 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NO. P495/2025
Application for enforcement order lodged under
section 114
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic); request to reopen the main
hearing of the enforcement order application made after the main hearing
concluded but before the
Tribunal issued its decision, in circumstances where
the respondents did not lodge a statement of grounds or submissions and did
attend the main hearing of the enforcement order application; reliance on
natural justice and procedural fairness; claimed extenuating
circumstances;
request to reopen the main hearing refused.
APPLICANT / RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Nillumbik Shire Council
FIRST RESPONDENT
Joseph Daniel Chetcuti
SECOND RESPONDENT
Jayden Michael Chetcuti
SUBJECT LAND
58-66 Black Gully Road
DIAMOND CREEK VIC 3089
HEARING TYPE
Practice day hearing
DATE OF HEARING
10 October 2025
DATE OF ORDER
7 November 2025
Nillumbik SC v Chetcuti [2025] VCAT 984
INTERIM ORDER
Amend VCAT application
section 127
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic), the application is amended to be in the form of the amended
application for enforcement order dated 26 June 2025, as further
amended on 15
Parties to proceeding
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic), the following person is joined as a party and respondent to the
proceeding:
Jayden Michael Chetcuti
No further hearing dates and no further material will be
application by the first respondent, Joseph Daniel Chetcuti, and the second
respondent, Jayden Michael Chetcuti, to:
or recommence the main hearing of the application for enforcement order;
any further material with respect to the application for enforcement
is refused.
application for enforcement order that is the subject of VCAT Application
P495/2025 will be determined by the Tribunal based on
the material received from
the parties inclusive of the material filed for the practice day hearing held on
10 October 2025 and a
decision in VCAT Application P495/2025 will follow in due
Susan Whitney
APPEARANCES
For Nillumbik Shire Council
Mr Luke English, solicitor, of DSA Law.
For Joseph Daniel Chetcuti
Mr Jacob McCahon of counsel instructed by Mr Michael Cooper, solicitor, of
Just Law Victoria.
For Jayden Michael Chetcuti
Mr Jacob McCahon of counsel
instructed by Mr Michael Cooper, solicitor, of Just Law Victoria.
WHAT IS THIS PROCEEDING AND PRACTICE DAY HEARING ABOUT?
practice day hearing arises in highly unusual circumstances.
Application P495/2025 is an application for enforcement order (‘EO
Application’) that was accompanied by an application
for interim
enforcement order (‘IEO Application’). I provide brief details
regarding each application further below.
short, the Tribunal:
its decision for the IEO Application on 19 June 2025;
the EO Application on 4, 5 and 6 August 2025 but has not yet issued its decision
for the EO Application; and
Joseph Daniel Chetcuti (‘first respondent’) nor Jayden Michael
Chetcuti (‘second respondent’) attended
or were represented at the
hearing of the IEO Application or the hearing of the EO
Application.
presided over the hearing of the EO Application.
practice day hearing was requested by the first respondent and second
respondent.
practice day hearing request was received after the hearing of the EO
Application.
effect, the first respondent and second respondent now seek to respond to the EO
Application, and reopen the hearing of the EO
Application, including calling
expert evidence in relation to the proposed enforcement orders, before I make a
decision on the EO
Application.
the reasons that follow, I will not hear any further from the first respondent
or second respondent and I will make my decision
on the EO Application based on
the material that has been received by the Tribunal, inclusive of the material
filed for the practice
day hearing held on 10 October 2025.
Information about the EO Application
first respondent is the owner and occupier of the land at 58-66 Black Gully
Road, Diamond Creek (‘Land’).
second respondent is a resident of the
Land is in the Rural Conservation Zone – Schedule 3 (‘RCZ3’)
of the Nillumbik Planning Scheme (‘Scheme’)
and is subject to the
Bushfire Management Overlay (‘BMO’) and the Environmental
Significance Overlay – Schedule
1 (‘ESO1’), as to part.
Nillumbik Shire Council (‘Council’) lodged the EO Application under
section 114
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Act’) on 28 May 2025.
Council lodged the EO Application with respect to four activities that it
alleges have occurred on the Land:
importation of fill onto the Land, which it alleges constitutes earthworks under
the Scheme, use of the Land for the purposes
of a Store and/or for Refuse
disposal under the Scheme and which it alleges is also development of the Land;
storage of goods, machinery and vehicles associated with the second
respondent’s business on the Land;
destruction of native vegetation, which it alleges is in contravention of the
Scheme; and
use and development of a large shed that was constructed pursuant to a planning
such that it has become
another dwelling on the Land. The Council alleges that this results in the Land
being used for the purposes
of three dwellings, which is contrary to that
planning permit and also contrary to the existing use rights that the Council
enable the Land to be used for the purposes of two
short, the enforcement orders proposed in the EO Application seek:
the use of the Land for the purpose of Store and/or Refuse disposal to
removal of all trucks, trailers, plant and equipment from the Land;
the earthworks on the Land to cease and the removal of all earthmoving plant and
equipment from the Land;
imported fill material to be removed from the Land;
demolition of the extension to the shed as well as all other buildings
constructed on the Land since 4 March 2014; and
revegetation
of the Land.
Council also seeks the first respondent and second respondent to pay its costs
of the EO Application and that it be reimbursed
the application and hearing
the time the EO Application was lodged, only the first respondent was named as a
respondent.
to the Tribunal issuing the interim enforcement order (‘IEO’), the
Council included the second respondent as
a respondent to the EO Application
(this is discussed further, below).
was no appearance at the hearing of the EO Application by or on behalf of the
first respondent or second respondent, nor did
the first respondent or second
respondent file a statement of grounds or a submission for the EO
Application.
Information about the IEO Application
Council lodged the IEO Application under section 120 of the PE Act in the
application form dated 28 May 2025.
IEO Application did not pursue all of the alleged breaches that are pursued in
the EO Application, only addressing the alleged
importation of fill onto, and
earthworks on, the Land.
the first respondent was named as a respondent to the IEO Application.
IEO Application was heard by the
on 6 June 2025.
first respondent did not appear, and was not represented at, the IEO Application
hearing, nor did the first respondent file a
statement of grounds or submissions
for the IEO Application.
19 June 2025, the Tribunal issued the IEO against the first respondent.
IEO describes the contravention as follows:
Carrying out earthworks on the Subject Land in the Rural Conservation Zone
without a planning permit, in breach of clause 35.06-5
of the Nillumbik Planning
Scheme which provides that a permit is require [
] for earthworks
specified in a schedule to the zone, if on land specified in a schedule.
Schedule 3 of the Rural Conservation Zone (RCZ3) provides that a permit is
required for the receipt, importation, stockpiling or
placement of more than 100
cubic metres of fill on all land in the RCZ3.
More than 100 cubic metres of fill has been received, imported, stockpiled
and/or placed on the subject land without a planning permit.
IEO comprises the following orders:
no later than
4:00pm on 23 June 2025
, the Respondent must
(a) receiving or importing any fill onto the Subject Land;
(b) placing or stockpiling any fill on the Subject Land; and/or
(c) spreading or working the fill on the Subject Land.
Respondent must enable any authorised officer, or nominated representative, of
the Responsible Authority to access the Subject
Land at any time during normal
business hours to inspect the Subject Land to monitor compliance with this
Interim Enforcement Order.
order applies until further order of the Tribunal.
Council was required to serve the IEO on the first respondent, which occurred by
way of personal service to the second respondent
at the Land on 22 June
noting that the first
respondent was not present on the Land at the time of service.
Amendment of the EO Application
to the EO Application, the Council served an amended version of the EO
Application, along with other documents, on the first
respondent as well as upon
the second respondent. The amended EO Application included the second respondent
in the EO Application
and the covering letter stated that the Council would seek
to join the second respondent to the proceeding at the main hearing commencing
on 4 August 2025.
Council explained
that it sought to
join the second respondent because since lodging the EO Application, the Council
had become aware of the second
respondent’s involvement in activities on
Council pursues the second respondent in his capacity as an occupier of the Land
and, as the Council alleges, a person on whose
behalf the use and development
has been carried out. To this end, the Council relies on a copy of an ASIC
for the company
‘Execute Concrete Pumping Pty Ltd’ that identifies:
registered office of the company, and its principal place of business, as being
the Land; and
sole director and secretary and only shareholder of the company, as being the
second respondent.
second respondent was also served with a copy of the IEO and the
Tribunal’s order dated 19 June 2025.
these letters, the Council sent further correspondence to both the first
respondent and second respondent on 15 July
stating that it had come to
the Council’s attention that the correspondence provided to the first
respondent and second respondent
dated 30 June 2025 contained errors, and
including a copy of the amended proposed orders that the Council would be
pursuing in this
proceeding.
4 August 2025, at the main hearing of the EO Application, the Council explained
that the error in the document was the accidental
omission of the orders sought
with respect to seeking fee reimbursement and costs from the respondents.
4 August 2025, at the main hearing of the EO Application, I made oral orders
amending the EO Application and joining the second
respondent as a party to this
proceeding, having been satisfied based on the material before me that the
amended EO Application had
been brought to the attention of the second
respondent and the first respondent. Given the subsequent actions by the first
and second respondent, described above, it is apparent that the
second respondent and the first respondent were made aware of the
Application, along with the hearing of the EO Application, and that this was the
case at the time I made the oral orders
on 4 August 2025.
I heard from the second respondent during this practice day hearing, and given
that at issue was the current version of the
EO Application, it follows that in
this order arising from the practice day hearing I should include the written
orders that perfect
the above two oral orders that I made on 4 August 2025 at
the main hearing of the EO Application.
PRACTICE DAY HEARING
Request for Practice Day Hearing
the hearing of the EO Application, the Tribunal received correspondence dated 12
September 2025 from Michael Cooper, a solicitor
of Just Law Victoria, acting on
behalf of the first respondent requesting an opportunity to provide a defence to
the EO Application.
That correspondence states as follows:
Tribunal was also provided with a copy of the ‘Authority to Act’
dated 11 September 2025 given by the first respondent
to Mr Cooper.
response to the above correspondence from Mr Cooper, the Tribunal’s
Registry informed the first respondent that they would
need to lodge an
application to request a practice day hearing be listed to consider the matters
raised in that correspondence.
17 September 2025, the first respondent lodged an application requesting the
listing of a practice day hearing, which resulted
in this practice day hearing
being listed. That request reiterated all of the grounds as were relied upon in
the correspondence dated
12 September 2025 other than ground 4, which was
Purpose of Practice Day Hearing
purpose of this practice day hearing was:
to consider the
matters raised in the request for practice day hearing dated 17 September 2025;
directions about the future conduct of the proceeding.
short, in this practice day hearing I had to decide whether, at this point in
time, I should give the first respondent and/or the
second respondent the
opportunity to provide submissions and material, including expert evidence, in
relation to the EO Application
before I make my decision in the EO Application.
In effect, this would amount to either a reopening or recommencement of the
of the EO Application.
Procedural requirements for Practice Day Hearing
parties were required to pre-file submissions for the practice day, with any
submission being less than 10 pages in length and
which must attach any
supporting evidence and documents.
4:00pm on 30 September 2025, the first respondent and the second respondent were
required to provide their submissions and associated
material to the Tribunal
and all parties.
6:00pm on 2 October 2025, the submissions of the first respondent and the second
respondent were filed with the Tribunal and provided
to the Council, which was
three days after the due
4:00pm on 7 October 2025, the Council was required to provide its submissions
and associated material to the Tribunal and all parties.
3:45pm on 7 October 2025, the submissions of the Council and its associated
material were filed with the Tribunal and provided
to the first respondent and
the second respondent, which was within the required time.
practice day hearing was scheduled to commence at 11:30am on 10 October
11.20am on 10 October 2025, the first respondent and the second respondent each
filed affidavits with the Tribunal and the Council,
which was ten days after the
Tribunal’s ruling on late filing of material
Council objected to the late filing of written submissions for the practice day
hearing and also the late filing of the affidavits
of the first respondent and
the second respondent.
hearing from the parties, I determined that I would receive the late-filed
material. Largely this was because this practice
day hearing was listed to hear
from the first respondent and second respondent with respect to the claimed
reasons and extenuating
circumstances that they contend warrant a reopening or
recommencement of the hearing of the EO Application. In the circumstances,
disallowing the late-filed material (including the two affidavits) would mean
that, in effect, I would not be able to hear from them
on these matters, thereby
undermining the purpose of this practice day hearing.
receiving the late-filed material, I was mindful to ensure that the Council was
provided with sufficient time to review and prepare
a response, so as to ensure
that fairness was afforded to the Council.
PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS AT THE PRACTICE DAY HEARING
First respondent and second respondent
the practice day hearing, the representative for the second respondent confirmed
that sometime after 11 September 2025, the
second respondent engaged Mr Cooper
to also act for him.
their written submissions, the first respondent and second
respondent:
a. provide some details about what they term ‘key
dates’, including that:
first respondent was overseas in Malta between 9 June 2025 and 6 July 2025;
first respondent engaged Mr Cooper on 11 September 2025; and
Cooper wrote to the Tribunal on 12 September 2025 in relation to this
on procedural fairness and claim that it will be ‘contrary to justice and
for the Tribunal
to make its decision without providing them with an opportunity to file and rely
on material in support of their
case now that they are legally represented;
with respect to non-attendance at the main hearing that there
...a confluence of circumstances between the date the Applicant applied for a
final enforcement order and the date of final hearing
that resulted in
noninvolvement. Nevertheless, the Respondent maintains that he has not abandoned
his right to be heard.
with respect to the alleged breaches
The Applicant’s submissions characterise the Subject Land as having been
used for refuse disposal, involving approximately
45,000m³ of fill, causing
adverse ecological impacts. The Respondent disputes this characterisation.
Expert evidence from Atma
Environmental will demonstrate that: the soil/fill
remains fertile and non-toxic and that the works can be remediated in a manner
consistent with the Planning Scheme.
with respect to the enforcement orders
The Applicant seeks extensive enforcement orders, requiring survey reports, EPA
classifications, demolition of buildings, and broad
revegetation requirements.
Such proposed orders go beyond what is necessary for compliance and fail to
account for permissible and
ongoing uses under cl 35.06-1 and cl 35.06-2 of the
Planning Scheme.
that they do not seek to reagitate a hearing that will contest all aspects of
the Council’s case but instead intend to
mirror the statement of grounds
filed in VCAT Application
making multiple
concessions and focusing on the specifics of remedial
...file expert evidence from Atma Environmental (addressing soil composition and
remediation); provide a licensed survey establishing
natural ground levels; and
prepare a practical remediation and revegetation plan in compliance with the
Planning Scheme.
that the Tribunal do one of the
the hearing of VCAT Application P495/2025 for them to make the same submissions
they intend to make in VCAT Application P773/2025;
VCAT Application P495/2025 with VCAT Application P773/2025 so that submissions
can be made about both proceedings at the same
Tribunal reserve its final decision in VCAT Application P495/2025 until VCAT
Application P773/2025 is heard and determined, to
enable the Tribunal to adjust
any enforcement order issued with respect to the Land, as
appropriate.
substantive content of the affidavit of the first respondent and the second
respondent is extracted at Appendix A to these Reasons.
Through these
affidavits, the first respondent and second respondent provide their explanation
of how they became aware of VCAT Application
P495/2025 (and VCAT Application
P773/2025) and their actions with respect to the current proceeding.
the first respondent nor the second respondent were called to speak to their
affidavits.
addition to what was contained in the written submission and the affidavits,
through their oral submissions, the first respondent
respondent:
the deadline imposed by the Tribunal’s order to respond to the IEO
Application had a ‘disorienting and overwhelming
effect’ on the
first respondent;
that as lay people they were up against the significant resources of a model
litigant and large public corporation (i.e. the
Council), which contributed to
their overwhelm;
acknowledge
that service of the IEO Application and the EO Application occurred properly and
that the claimed extenuating circumstances relate to both their lack of
sophistication around complex areas of law and the
tight deadlines, especially
from when Mr Cooper was engaged on 11 September 2025;
acknowledge
that they are at fault and that there has been a breach in relation to the Land
and concede that the soil deposited on
the Land can be characterised as refuse
or waste and that it was disposed of for consideration. However, they dispute it
being toxic;
that they wish to be involved in discussing the mechanics of the proposed
enforcement orders sought by the Council, having
regard to expert evidence that
they will obtain regarding the state of the soil and how much should be removed
from the Land.
the first respondent and second respondent seek to reopen the main hearing of
the EO Application in order to call expert
evidence and make submissions
regarding any enforcement order that might be issued for the Land and do not
seek to reagitate the
entire main hearing or challenge that they are at
Council resists the request by the first respondent and second respondent. The
Council submits that the Tribunal should make a
decision in the EO Application
without hearing any further from the first respondent and second
respondent.
Council observes that not all of the five ‘grounds’ specified in the
correspondence dated 12 September 2025 were pursued
by the first respondent and
second respondent either in the pre-filed written submissions for the practice
day hearing or the oral
submissions at the practice day hearing.
Council filed affidavits of Helen
in support of its
submissions for this practice day hearing.
her affidavit, Ms Steele states that she served the first respondent with the
IEO Application and the EO Application on 2
the affidavit of Vince Pepi prepared for VCAT Application P773/2025 (filed in
this proceeding through this practice day hearing),
Mr Pepi states that on 20
July 2025 he personally served the first respondent with documents for VCAT
Application P495/2025 that
included information about the date of the main
Council observed that the first respondent and second respondent did not
challenge the content of the affidavits of Ms Steele
or Mr Pepi, from which the
Tribunal should take it that the content of those affidavits is accepted by the
first respondent and second
respondent.
any event, the Council submits that there is now before the Tribunal evidence
from both parties that the first respondent and second
respondent were properly
and lawfully served with the EO Application and therefore were aware of the main
hearing of the EO Application.
Council submits that the assertions by the first respondent and second
respondent that they did not understand the case against
them and that there
were lots of complex documents does not warrant what they are now requesting.
The Council submits that ‘if
you don’t understand it, you get
someone to help, you go to a lawyer’.
the Council refers to correspondence with the first respondent dated 7 June
2024, 31 July 2024 and 23 August 2024 in relation
to the earthworks happening on
the Land, meaning that the first respondent’s receipt of the IEO
Application and the EO Application
was not the first contact from the Council
Council submits that much of the timeline that has been presented by the first
respondent is a distraction because it relates
to the initial service of, and
his reaction to, the IEO Application and the EO Application, and he is not
seeking to reopen the IEO
Application.
Council submits that the first respondent and second respondent have not given
any reason or evidence for not participating in
the main hearing of the EO
Application, which is what they are seeking to reopen. In particular, the first
respondent and second
respondent have not explained the inaction between
personal service of the EO Application material on the first respondent on 2
2025 and him departing Australia on 9 June 2025, or, between the first
respondent returning to Australia on 6 July 2025 and him engaging
a solicitor on
11 September 2025.
Council submits that natural justice is not one-sided and the Tribunal needs to
also consider the Council’s interests and
the impost on both the
Council’s and the Tribunal’s resources of accommodating the request.
With respect to this, the
has correctly followed all procedural and other steps (including payment of all
Tribunal application and hearing fees), properly
bringing and prosecuting its
application and it is now entitled to a timely decision.
has engaged its own solicitors and has already prepared extensively for the
hearing, presenting evidence and submissions
over three whole days of hearing
time, during which five lay witnesses and two expert witnesses gave detailed and
thorough evidence,
all of which was appropriately tested by the Tribunal.
submits that in all of these circumstances, the interests of justice do not
require the Tribunal to provide any opportunity
to the First Respondent to make
any submissions or call any evidence before a final decision is
Council emphasised that, through their oral submissions, the first respondent
and second respondent wholly concede the breach
with respect to the bringing of
fill onto the Land and the use of the Land for refuse disposal for
consideration, only taking issue
with the content of the fill (i.e. whether it
Council relies on the Tribunal decision in
Fazal v Legal Services
’) and the Tribunal’s summary of the established
principles to consider when seeking to reopen a hearing to enable additional
evidence to be called:
...the considerations to be applied are summarised a pithy way in a case Ms Nida
referred to in her submissions of 18 March 2024,
Draper v Simonds
: It was there stated that fresh evidence should be
admitted only when (1) it is so material that the interests of justice require
it, (2) the evidence if believed would most probably affect the result, (3) the
evidence could not by reasonable diligence have been
discovered before, and (4)
the evidence could be admitted on conditions which ensured no prejudice to the
other party be reason of
its introduction late.
[footnote omitted]
this respect, the Council submits:
that ‘the further evidence has not been disclosed (or even adequately
described), it is clearly not possible to reach
the conclusion that it is so
material that the interests of justice
it to be considered by the
the same reasons, it cannot be concluded that the further evidence would
‘most probably’ affect the
cannot be a claim that the evidence could not ‘by reasonable
diligence’ have been discovered
Council submits that it will be prejudiced by the late introduction of any
Council notes that the enforcement orders it seeks contain a degree of
flexibility and enable review by the Tribunal through the
if documents submitted, or
actions undertaken, are not to the satisfaction of the Council acting in its
capacity as a responsible
authority. This includes in relation to identifying
any imported fill that is unsuitable for retention on the Land and identifying
and describing any works to be undertaken to appropriately and safely remove all
fill and return the Land to natural ground level.
Council submits that the first respondent and second respondent do not come to
the Tribunal with ‘clean hands’ in
making their request to reopen
the main hearing of the EO Application. This is because the Council submits that
the material that
it has filed indicates that the first respondent has breached
the IEO through receiving or importing fill onto the Land (up to a
certain date,
before the main hearing of the EO Application) and spreading and working the
fill on the Land, including on 23 September
The Council submits that
this is important in these circumstances, where the first respondent and second
respondent come to the Tribunal
seeking a highly unusual indulgence.
Council submits that in the facts and circumstances of this matter, there is no
benefit whatsoever to the determination of the
EO Application or the management
of what is occurring on the Land and the management of what is occurring on the
land the subject
of VCAT Application P773/2025 of any of the courses of action
proposed by the first respondent and second respondent. Further, the
concerned that the breaches of the IEO that have been observed on the Land will
continue to occur if the Tribunal allows
any of the pathways sought by the first
respondent and second respondent. In any event, the Council submits that there
will likely
be different types of remediation plans for the Land and for the
land the subject of VCAT Application P773/2025, given the different
Parties’ agree that Tribunal can have regard to all of
this material in determining EO Application
asked the parties whether, in the event that I did not grant the request of the
first respondent and second respondent to reopen
the main hearing of the EO
Application, I could have regard to the material and submissions filed for the
practice day hearing in
determining the EO Application. I note that this
includes concessions and acknowledgments by the first respondent and second
and material that was not before me during the main hearing of the EO
Application held on 4, 5 and 6 August 2025.
response, all parties agreed that all of this material was now before the
Tribunal in VCAT Application P495/2025 and that I should
have regard to it in
determining the EO Application.
TRIBUNAL’S DECISION FOR THE PRACTICE DAY HEARING
Five grounds initially relied upon
first respondent and second respondent initially requested this practice day
hearing on the basis of five grounds, reducing this
to four grounds in the
request form dated 17 September 2025.
the practice day hearing, the first respondent and second respondent only really
pursued one of those grounds, being that it was
in the interests of natural
justice and procedural fairness that the main hearing be, in effect, reopened to
enable them to call
evidence and make submissions on the enforcement orders
five grounds that were initially referenced included that there were
‘extenuating circumstances’ that explained the
non-attendance of the
first respondent and second respondent at the main hearing of the EO
Application.
that this practice day hearing was listed at the request of the first respondent
and second respondent on the basis of multiple
grounds, I expected the first
respondent and second respondent to make submissions advancing each of those
grounds. This did not
occur. This might be because some of those grounds were
not factually correct. For example, the fifth ground asserts that the first
respondent had ‘been overseas in Malta for the past eight weeks and had no
knowledge of the final hearing’, which is
incorrect having regard to the
first respondent’s own
explanation was advanced as to why all grounds were not relied upon. In
circumstances where some of these grounds are factually
incorrect, a clear
explanation should have been provided as to why these grounds were initially
asserted as justifying the listing
of a practice day hearing in what are highly
unusual circumstances.
will now deal with the ground that was actively pursued by the first respondent
and second respondent, being the ground relating
to natural justice and
procedural fairness, after which I will address the claimed ‘extenuating
circumstances’ that were
explained in oral submissions in response to
questions from the Tribunal.
Reliance on natural justice and procedural fairness
The first respondent and second respondent were served the EO
Application and were informed about the main hearing
Tribunal is bound by the rules of natural
and must act fairly and
according to the substantial merits of the case in all
proceedings.
In short, the
Tribunal is required to act fairly in all the circumstances of a case.
is required to afford natural justice to parties will vary from one case to
another. At its heart, this obligation requires the
Tribunal to provide a party
with a fair opportunity to put its case, relative to the applicable statutory
framework and the facts
and circumstances of each case. This concept extends
beyond just the main hearing and includes the way in which the Tribunal conducts
a proceeding beforehand, including matters such as the timeline for the filing
of evidence and submissions.
applicable to the present case, the obligation to afford natural justice is
effectively at one with the notion of providing procedural
fairness: both
concepts refer to providing a party with a fair opportunity to present their
case, relative to the circumstances of
an application for enforcement order, a respondent does not need to participate
in the proceeding or attend a main hearing. However,
if that is the choice made
by a respondent, there may be certain consequences that flow from that choice,
including that a respondent
might have orders made against them that are adverse
to their interests.
an application for enforcement order, the onus is on the applicant to prove its
case and to satisfy the Tribunal that an enforcement
order should be issued.
This means that even where a respondent does not attend a main hearing, it does
not follow that an enforcement
order will automatically be issued; the Tribunal
must still be satisfied in the particular facts and circumstances that the
breach/es have occurred, that the circumstances warrant the Tribunal
exercising its discretion to make the enforcement order, and,
that the proposed
terms of the enforcement order are appropriate, or perhaps, need
refinement.
the present case, the first respondent and second respondent were given the
opportunity to participate in, and attend the main
hearing of, the EO
Application.
was through being served with the EO Application and the associated Tribunal
orders that provided the first respondent and second
respondent with the
opportunity to lodge a statement of grounds, evidence and submissions in
relation to the EO Application.
first respondent’s affidavit confirms that he was properly and lawfully
served with the IEO Application and the EO Application.
second respondent’s affidavit confirms that he was properly and lawfully
served with the EO Application.
the affidavits and submissions from the first respondent and second respondent
explain their reaction to receiving these applications
and the timelines on
which this occurred. However, in my view, none of this material explains why the
first respondent and second
respondent:
not file a statement of grounds for the EO Application;
not file any evidence or submissions for the EO Application; and
not attend the main hearing of the EO Application.
what I take from the material before me, including the material filed by the
first respondent and second respondent, is that
each of them were aware of the
EO Application and, for whatever reason, chose to disregard both the EO
Application itself and the
main hearing of the EO Application.
accept that the solicitor acted promptly to contact the Tribunal once he was
instructed by the first respondent (and, at some point
thereafter it is said,
the second respondent). However, this is to be distinguished from the action, or
inaction, of his clients,
being the first respondent and second respondent.
these circumstances, I am left to conclude that the first respondent and second
respondent made a conscious decision to not participate
in the EO Application at
that time and to not attend the main hearing of the EO Application; in effect,
to ignore the EO Application.
justice requires a party to be given a fair opportunity to participate in a
proceeding, including the main hearing of that
proceeding. This opportunity was
available to the first respondent and second respondent. What they choose to do
with that opportunity
is a matter for them but actions, and inaction, has
consequences. It cannot be that a respondent who, in effect, ignores an
application
brought against them can then have the main hearing of that
application reopened because they want it to be so.
a separate matter, the first respondent claims that he never received the IEO
that was served on him, via the second respondent
at the Land.
Ms Steele’s affidavit,
which was not challenged by the first respondent, it is established that service
of the IEO properly occurred.
the second respondent failed to provide the IEO and associated correspondence to
the first respondent, this is not the Council’s
the request is not to reopen the IEO Application. Rather, the request is to
reopen the main hearing of the EO Application
in circumstances where both the
first respondent and second respondent acknowledge receipt of the EO
Application.
Claimed lack of understanding does not justify reopening the
main hearing in the circumstances
the first respondent and second respondent claim that they did not understand
the EO Application. While this may have been the
case, this does not explain why
neither the first respondent nor the second respondent responded to the EO
Application nor attended
the main hearing of the EO Application.
circumstances where a person is served with material of a legal nature that they
do not understand, the prudent course of action
is to contact someone who can
assist them; for example, a lawyer. Which is what the first respondent did after
being served with
VCAT Application P773/2025, ‘perceiving that there was
no alternative’.
explanation has been given to the Tribunal as to why the first respondent and
second respondent did not take this action earlier,
when served with any of the
material for VCAT Application P495/2025. And this is in circumstances where
there was prior contact with
the first respondent in 2024 in relation to the
earthworks then occurring on the Land, meaning that this proceeding is not the
time that the first respondent had heard about the Council’s
concerns with respect to the earthworks occurring on the Land.
the circumstances before me, the assertion that the first respondent was
overwhelmed and disoriented when initially served with
the IEO Application and
the EO Application does not explain why the first respondent did not attend the
main hearing of the EO Application,
that came some time after he was initially
served. I observe that the claimed overwhelm and disorientation was not of such
so as to prevent the first respondent from travelling overseas to
Malta, as he had planned to do.
Evidence sought to be relied upon does not justify reopening
the main hearing in the circumstances
first respondent and second respondent wish to call expert evidence to address
various matters relating to the earthworks on the
Land and the Council’s
proposed enforcement orders.
respect to this, the Council referred to the Tribunal’s comments in
that deal with the admission of fresh evidence, asserting that the
request by the first respondent and second respondent fails all
four of the
established limbs.
facts and circumstances in
are different to those before me,
including because the person in
who was seeking to reopen the
hearing and call additional evidence had appeared at the hearing and mounted a
defence to the case
brought against them, including calling witnesses. As such,
arguably many of the considerations discussed in
do not arise,
given they assume participation in the proceeding prior to the request to reopen
the hearing and call further evidence.
Notwithstanding
the differences, to the extent that the principles discussed in
applicable to the request before me, I agree with the Council that the request
by the first respondent and second respondent
fails each of the limbs.
respect to the first and second limb, based on the material before me, I am not
satisfied that the evidence sought to be called
is so material that the
interests of justice require it, nor that the evidence, if believed, would most
probably affect the result.
I say this in circumstances where:
have no substantive information before me regarding the expert evidence that
will be called, other than a very brief reference to
its broad subject matter;
first respondent and second respondent do not dispute that there is a breach of
the Scheme and do not seek to reopen the main
hearing to reagitate the breach,
just the terms of, and extent of, any enforcement order made;
expert evidence sought to be relied upon can still be utilised in preparing the
documents required under the proposed enforcement
orders, if an enforcement
order is made by the Tribunal and on those terms. This includes the expert
evidence dealing with soil composition
and remediation, the preparation of a
licensed survey establishing natural ground levels, and, preparing a practical
remediation
and revegetation plan. I say this mindful of the flexibility in the
proposed enforcement orders, such that certain decisions regarding
the amount of
fill to be removed, and the effect of the fill removal on the Land, are left to
be decided through consideration of
further documents to be prepared by
specialists and filed for the Council’s approval. If those documents are
not approved by
the Council, there are separate review rights available to the
respondents under the PE Act with respect to those decisions; and
on oral submissions, it appears that the first respondent and second respondent
do not want to remove all of the fill from the
Land. Even if I was to reopen the
main hearing, the decision as to whether all of the fill should be removed from
the Land is a decision
for the Tribunal. In any event, in circumstances where,
during this practice day hearing, the first respondent and second respondent
have conceded that they are using the Land for the purposes of refuse disposal
for consideration, which is a prohibited use in the
RCZ3, they would need to
persuade the Tribunal that fill should remain on the Land, including the fill
that is covering native vegetation
(if that is sought to be retained),
notwithstanding that the use is prohibited. This is irrespective of the content
of the fill (i.e.
whether it is toxic or otherwise).
respect to the third limb, I note that in
the Tribunal discussed
the applicable principles when a claim to reopen a hearing is based on contended
fresh evidence, which –
‘unavailable or not reasonably discoverable
before’ – becomes ‘known and
available’.
principles include asking why the evidence was not called at the hearing, before
the closure of the party’s case.
this respect, it is not apparent to me why the expert evidence could not, by
reasonable diligence, have been discovered before:
I have not been provided any
reason as to why the expert evidence now sought to be called and relied upon was
not available at the
time of the main hearing of the EO Application.
accept that, as explained to me, the experts now engaged for VCAT Application
P773/2025 are sought to also be used in this proceeding
(i.e. VCAT Application
P495/2025). This explains why the first respondent and second respondent now
have experts that they wish to
rely upon; it does not explain why those experts
were not engaged earlier and were not called at the main hearing of the EO
Application.
respect to the fourth limb, I do not think that the evidence could be admitted
on conditions that ensure no prejudice would be
caused to the Council as a
consequence of its late introduction.
Council filed detailed material in support of the EO Application, including
calling five lay witnesses and two expert witnesses
and pre-filing written
submissions, and then attended three days of main hearing during which the
Council and its witnesses answered
numerous questions posed by the Tribunal. If
the main hearing was reopened, those witnesses would likely need to be recalled.
would be at a cost to the Council, although I do note that there are
avenues available for a party to seek to recover its
more importantly in the circumstances, reopening the main hearing would delay an
outcome in the EO Application, resulting
in the Land remaining in its current
state, with any associated impacts, until a decision is made in the EO
Application. This would
be in circumstances where the first respondent and
second respondent do not contest there has been a breach with respect to the
and where, in any event, the proposed enforcement orders (if issued)
enable their experts to participate in the production of documents
site remediation.
Accordingly,
in these circumstances I find that reopening the main hearing would prejudice
the Council and, in any event, possibly
be of limited utility to the
Tribunal’s ultimate decision.
, the overriding principle was said to be that the Tribunal must
consider whether, when taken as a whole, the justice of the case
favours the
granting of leave to reopen the hearing. For the above reasons, I find that in
the circumstances, the justice of this
case does not favour the reopening of the
main hearing of the EO Application.
Conclusion: reliance on natural justice and procedural
the above reasons, I find that in the circumstances, natural justice and
procedural fairness does not demand that the main hearing
of the EO Application
be reopened as requested by the first respondent and second
respondent.
Claimed extenuating circumstances
the practice day hearing, I asked the first respondent and second respondent to
specifically explain the claimed ‘extenuating
circumstances’ that
were referenced in the second of the grounds, given this was not explained in
the pre-filed written submissions.
first respondent and second respondent provided oral submissions with respect to
this ground.
oral submissions referred to the first respondent becoming overwhelmed and
disoriented at receiving the IEO Application material
and the EO Application
material. I have addressed this earlier.
first respondent and second respondent also referred to the Council being a
large public corporation that was well resourced,
inferring (but not stating
outright) an inequity between the Council and the first respondent and second
respondent in conducting
this proceeding.
Council’s preparation of comprehensive materials in support of the IEO
Application and the EO Application, and any notion
of inequity between the
parties, does not explain why the first respondent and the second respondent did
not attend the main hearing
of the EO Application.
Council has a statutory duty under the PE Act to uphold the Scheme and, in
lodging this proceeding, was discharging that duty.
The EO Application (and IEO
Application) are brought in the Tribunal’s original jurisdiction and need
to satisfy the Tribunal
that an enforcement order should issue. Accordingly, the
materials need to be appropriately detailed.
the circumstances, I do not regard the Council’s preparation of detailed
material in support of its applications, explaining
the site and matrix of facts
and alleged breaches, to be unexpected or unreasonable.
I have not been presented with any submissions or evidence that establish any
extenuating circumstances warranting or explaining
the failure of the first
respondent and second respondent to attend the main hearing of the EO
Application.
these facts and circumstances, I find that this is not a reason to reopen the
main hearing of the EO Application.
foregoing reasons, I am not satisfied on the material before me that there are
any circumstances that warrant the reopening or
recommencement of the main
hearing of the EO Application to enable the first respondent and second
respondent to make any further
submissions for, or call expert or other evidence
in respect of, the EO Application.
Accordingly,
for the reasons given above:
will not hear any further from the first respondent or second respondent;
will make my decision on the EO Application based on the material that has been
received by the Tribunal to date, which includes
the material that was filed by
the parties for this practice day hearing and the submissions made at this
practice day hearing. This
is because I agree with the parties that all of this
material now forms part of the Tribunal file for VCAT Application P495/2025
is now before the Tribunal for consideration in making its decision in VCAT
Application P495/2025.
Susan Whitney
SUBSTANTIVE EXTRACTS OF AFFIDAVIT OF THE FIRST RESPONDENT AND
AFFIDAVIT OF THE SECOND RESPONDENT
Affidavit of Joseph Daniel Chetcuti affirmed on 10 October
Affidavit of Jayden Michael Checuti affirmed on 10 October
The submissions and evidence
of the parties, any supporting exhibits given at the hearing and the statements
of grounds filed have
all been considered in the determination of the
proceeding. In accordance with the practice of the Tribunal, not all of this
will be cited or referred to in these reasons.
Affidavit of Jayden Michael
Chetcuti dated 10 October 2025, [1].
Planning permit
375/2012/05P.
Noting that in the RCZ3, the
use of a site for more than one dwelling is prohibited.
Member Perlstein presided at
the hearing of the IEO Application.
Affidavit of Helen Steele
sworn on 4 July 2025.
In its letter to the second
respondent dated 30 June 2025.
Affidavit of Vince Pepi dated
5 July 2025, exhibit VP-3, where the ASIC search statement is dated 26 May
By express post.
Given the submissions were
filed after 4.00pm, the submissions are taken to have been filed on the
following day –
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Rules 2018
Submissions on behalf of
the respondent, 2 October 2025, [12].
Ibid, [14].
Ibid, [15].
Ibid, [16].
VCAT Application P773/2025
is an unrelated application for enforcement order (and interim enforcement
order) that was lodged by
the Council against the second respondent and another
legal person with respect to a parcel of land on the opposite side of Black
Gully Road, where the alleged breaches are similar to those in issue in the
current proceeding.
Submissions on behalf of
the respondent, 2 October 2025, [18].
Ibid, [19].
Ibid, [20].
Affidavit of Helen Margaret
Steele sworn on 3 October 2025.
Affidavit of Vince Pepe
sworn on 7 October 2025 for VCAT Application P495/2025 and Affidavit of Vince
Pepe sworn on 27 August 2025
for VCAT Application P773/2025 although the
affidavit refers to the VCAT application number as ‘TBC’.
Outline of practice day
hearing submissions on behalf of the applicant/responsible authority, [44].
Ibid, [38]-[40].
[2024] VCAT 980.
Outline of practice day
hearing submissions on behalf of the applicant/responsible authority, [66].
Ibid, [67].
Ibid, [68].
Ibid, [69].
Section 149(1)(c) of the PE
Through the affidavit of
Vince Pepi prepared for this proceeding, Mr Pepi states that on 23 September
2025 he saw a blue excavator
being operated in the northern central portion of
the Land, working on piles of fill material and spreading that material
Affidavit of Joseph Daniel
Chetcuti affirmed 10 October 2025.
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Affidavit of Helen Margaret
Steele sworn on 4 July 2025.
Affidavit of Joseph Daniel
Chetcuti affirmed on 10 October 2025, [16].
Albeit it is unusual for
all of a party’s costs to be ordered to be paid by another party in this
section 109
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (12.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter