URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCGLR/2021/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:28:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Yimart Australia Pty Ltd at Wine More Cellars premises (Liquor-Internal Review) [2021] VCGLR 28 (14 September 2021)
DECISION AND REASONS FOR DECISION
In the matter of an application by Yimart Australia Pty Ltd under
section 153
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for an internal review of a
decision to refuse to grant an application for a renewable limited licence for
the premises trading as
Wine More Cellars located at 163 Whitehorse Road,
Commission:
Ms Deirdre O’Donnell PSM, Deputy Chair
Mr Des Powell AM, Commissioner
Mr Andrew Scott, Commissioner
Date of Decision:
14 September 2021
Date of Reasons:
14 September 2021
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of
the Delegate and, in substitution, grant the renewable limited licence
to the conditions set out in Appendix A.
Deirdre O’Donnell
Deputy Chair
REASONS FOR DECISION
The Original Application
1. Wine More Cellars is a small liquor store in Deepdene selling primarily
premium quality Australian and international wines. Yimart
Australia Pty Ltd
) wishes to conduct relatively small on-site wine tastings
for which patrons will be charged.
2. The Applicant currently holds a packaged liquor licence (32054479)
) for the premises at 163 Whitehorse Road, Deepdene (the
). The PLL authorises the sale of liquor in sealed containers for
consumption off the licensed premises. The Applicant can also conduct
tastings for its customers under
Liquor Control Reform Act
). However, this PLL does not permit it to conduct
tastings on the Premises which are paid for.
3. Deepdene is close to Kew, Balwyn, Canterbury and Hawthorn. The primary
customers of the business are locals who, according to the
Applicant, frequently
travel internationally and have a sophisticated taste in wine and liquor. The
business predominantly sells
red and white wine, beer and spirits, and also
sells other types of liquor.
4. The Directors of Yimart Australia Pty Ltd are Mr Jiaming Yan and Ms Ruonan
Zhang. Mr Yan has been involved in the liquor industry
for over 10 years and has
developed a collection of more premium, niche and specialised wines from France,
Italy and other countries.
After the Applicant purchased the business in
mid-2019, its focus has been on selling premium, niche and specialised wines and
liquor that are not usually sold in larger chain liquor stores.
5. On 29 September 2020, the Applicant applied to the Victorian Commission
for Gambling and Liquor Regulation (the
) for a renewable
limited licence for the Premises (
Application
) to enable
paid tastings, when such supply was in support of the primary licensed activity
under the PLL.
6. The Applicant stated that it wanted to conduct 1-2 paid wine tasting
classes per week in an area of the Premises marked as a private
tasting room for
up to 20 people. The Applicant stated that the scale and scope limitations would
be met by the high quality of the
liquor and the nature of its customers, locals
who enjoy a sophisticated taste in wine and liquor.
7. In its application, the Applicant set out how its business trades
primarily in premium wine that is niche and specialised as well
as craft beers.
Due to this, the Applicant is unable to offer free tastings to customers because
of the costs involved. However,
given the premium and specialised liquor sold by
the business, customers generally wish to engage in tasting prior to making
purchase. The Applicant has been unable to facilitate tastings due to the
conditions of the PLL.
8. On 29 September 2020, a delegate of the Commission (
advised the Applicant that the scale and scope of the proposal was not
sufficiently limited and another type of licence may be more
appropriate to
supply liquor for consumption on the Premises. The Applicant was invited to
further detail how the Original Application
would meet the required scale and
scope limitations.
9. The Applicant responded on 7 October 2020 and amended the Original
Application, including a set area for tasting, a private tasting
area within the
red line plan and reduced trading hours.
10. In accordance with section 33(1) of the LCR Act, a copy of the Original
Application was served on Victoria Police on 29 September
2020. On 26
October 2020, Victoria Police informed the Commission that it did not object to
the grant of the Application.
11. In accordance with section 33(2), a copy of the Original Application was
served on Boroondara City Council on 29 September 2020.
On 29 October 2020.
Boroondara City Council informed the Commission that it did not object to the
grant of the Original Application,
however did raise concern over the private
tastings occurring while customers were in the store and the length of the
operating hours.
12. On 20 November 2020, the Delegate determined
to refuse the Original Application. The Delegate did not consider that the scale
and scope of the supply of liquor as proposed was limited in nature. Further,
the Delegate did not consider the grant of a renewable
limited licence for the
scale proposed to be a responsible development of the industry and considered
the Applicant’s proposal
was more aligned to a General Licence, given that
the Applicant was seeking to supply liquor for on-premises consumption at a
that holds an off-premises licence (the
Original Decision
The Review Application
13. On 9 December 2020, the Licensee applied for
an internal review of the Original Decision (the
Review Application
Applicant also sought to vary the Review Application as
“(1) a. The quantity of liquor that may be supplied for
consumption in the licensed area
to be restricted to the maximum of three (3)
standard drinks per patron;
b. No more than 30 patrons to be in the licensed
area at any one time”
The red line plan
was also amended, with the Applicant clarifying that
it no longer sought to provide wine tasting classes or use the office for
14. The Applicant submitted that the Review Application was limited in scale
and scope on the basis that “the licensed activity
is the sale of liquor
for consumption on the licensed premises ancillary to the conduct of the
business under [the PLL]”, such
that the licensed activity is not
equivalent to a general licence as it is far more restrictive.
15. The Applicant further submitted that the proposed supply is further
limited by the restrictions on the number of patrons who are
to be in the
licensed area at any one time. Evidence was given that the accessible area in
the licensed area is approximately 8 metres
x 8 metres or 64 square metres. The
proposed supply is also limited to a maximum of three (3) standard drinks per
16. The Review Application was listed for public hearing on 11 May 2021.
LEGISLATION AND THE TASK BEFORE THE COMMISSION
The Commission’s internal review power
17. Division 2 of Part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications.
Under section 152, the Original Decision is a reviewable
decision, and the
Licensee is eligible to apply for review of that decision. The Review
Application was made under section 153 of
the LCR Act.
18. Pursuant to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with
respect to the Review Application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the reviewable decision; or
(b) sets aside the reviewable decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers
appropriate
19. Under the LCR Act, an application for a renewable limited licence may be
contested or uncontested. Pursuant to section 3(1), an
uncontested application
an application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation of a
licence or BYO permit in respect of which any objections are
received under
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division for that
objection (or that period as extended under
20. The Review Application is uncontested, as was the Original Application,
as no objections were received. The Commission on review
stands in the shoes of
the original decision maker and, in respect of an uncontested application, must
(a) grant the application (and may do so subject to
conditions)
(b) refuse to grant the
application
Exercising the internal review power
21. Section 9 of the
Victorian Commission
for Gambling and Liquor Regulation Act 2011
) requires the
Commission, in exercising its internal review function, to have regard to the
objects of the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines issued by the Minister
under section 5 of the VCGLR
22. The objects of the LCR Act are set out in
section 4(1):
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm arising from the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
23. Section 4(2)
of the LCR Act provides further that:
It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion,
must be exercised and
performed with due regard to harm minimisation and the risks associated with the
misuse and abuse of
24. In exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker
(b) may consider further information or
(c) may, in respect of uncontested applications on review, have regard to any
matter the Commission considers relevant, make any
enquiries the Commission
considers appropriate but is not required to give any person an opportunity to
be heard concerning the
application
25. Section 44(2)(b) of the LCR Act empowers the
Commission to refuse to grant the Review Application on various grounds,
granting of the application would detract from or be detrimental to the amenity
of the area in which the premises to which the
application relates are situated;
granting of the application would be conducive to or encourage the misuse or
abuse of alcohol.
Under section 49 of
the LCR Act, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the grant
of an application.
26. In relation to limited licences, section 26(1) of the LCR Act states the
Commission may grant a limited licence only if satisfied
that the scale and
scope of the supply of liquor the subject of the licence is limited in
Conduct of an inquiry
27. Section 34 of the VCGLR Act provides that subject to that Act, gambling
legislation or liquor legislation, the Commission may
conduct any inquiry in any
manner it considers appropriate. During the conduct of an inquiry, section 25(3)
of the VCGLR Act provides
that the Commission is not bound by the rules of
evidence, however, must comply with the rules of natural justice.
MATERIAL BEFORE THE COMMISSION
28. The Commission on review had before it and considered all material before
the Delegate, which included the Original Application
consisting of:
(a) a completed application form for a renewable
limited licence, dated 29 September 2020;
(b) submissions from the Applicant, dated 25 September 2020;
(c) a statement of display, dated 2 November 2020;
(d) a plan or depiction of the licensed premises, submitted on 7 October 2020
Old Red-line Plan
(e) a copy of the Responsible Service of Alcohol Certificate of Ruonan Zhang;
(f) a plan or depiction of the Premises including the extension to the licensed
area, submitted on 9 December 2020 with the Original
New Red-line
29. The Commission also had before it and considered additional information
and evidence including:
(a) the Review Application, dated 9 December 2020 with attached submission;
(b) the reasons for decision of the Delegate, dated 20 November 2020; and
(c) correspondence between the Licensee and Commission clarifying the
Licensee’s submission which further limited the scale
and scope of
proposed supply of liquor compared with the Original Application, dated
1 July 2021.
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
Limited in scale and scope
30. The central issue for the Commission is whether it is satisfied that the
scale and scope of the supply of liquor the subject of
the Review Application,
being the supply of liquor for tasting on the licensed premises, is limited in
nature in accordance with
section 26 of the LCR Act.
31. On 11 May 2021, the Commission conducted a public hearing to consider the
Review Application. The Applicant was represented by
one of its directors, Mr
Yan, and Mr Jeffrey Rohde. Mr Rohde is an employee at Wine More Cellars.
32. Mr Yan explained to the Commission at the
hearing that the selection available to customers for tastings will ideally be
to three or four choices only. It will be a business decision to
determine the available product.
33. Mr Yan further explained that his intention was that tastings would be
marketed or communicated to familiar, returning customers,
who are looking for
more recommendations, and not as a service offered to strangers.
34. Upon questioning by the Commission, Mr Yan confirmed that the pour will
be limited, “usually we will only pour 50 to 75
ml” and that there
is no intention to pour full glasses”.
35. The Applicant submitted that the intended pricing model for tastings
would be based on the “normal retail price” for
the selected wines,
rather than the marked-up prices usually charged at some other on-premises
36. Following the Commission’s comments at the hearing, the Applicant
provided further submissions on the proposed limitations
in scale and scope, by
email on 1 July 2021.
37. The limitations in scale and scope proposed by the Applicant have been
adjusted during the Review Application. A summary of the
limitations proposed by
the Applicant for the Commission’s consideration with regard to section 26
is as follows:.
(a) Limitations upon the available hours and days that the Licensee proposes to
supply liquor across six days. Notwithstanding being
licensed until 10pm on most
days, the trading hours for the business have been:
Monday Closed;
Tuesday and Wednesday 12:00PM – 7:00PM;
to Saturday 12:00PM – 8:00PM; (and)
Sunday 12:00PM
(b) The quantity of liquor that may be supplied for tasting in the licensed area
is restricted to a maximum of three (3) standard
drinks per patron.
(c) No more than 30 patrons to be in the licensed area at any one time.
(d) The Applicant no longer seeks to provide wine tasting classes or use the
office for tasting.
(e) Limitations as to the type of liquor which the Licensee proposes to supply
for tasting, with a maximum of 5 products being offered
at any given time and no
spirits to be served.
(f) The portion size of liquor is to be limited to not more than 100ml
(regardless of glass size).
(g) A niche market of customers, comprising locals and returning customers who
wish to taste and enjoy new, specialised and premium
liquor. The Applicant has
no interest in offering paid tastings of ordinary liquor which may be purchased
in containers and consumed
off premises.
Commission’s view
38. The Commission considers that the Licensee’s business offers a
premium range of liquor for sale and that the paid tastings
proposed by the
Applicant are ancillary to the conduct of the business under the PLL.
39. The Commission finds that, by the Applicant limiting the supply of liquor
for tasting, as referred in paragraph 37, the scale
and scope of the proposed
supply of liquor the subject of the Review Application is limited.
40. The Commission finds that the fact that the Premises is currently open
for 45 hours per week, over six days is a relevant limitation,
effectively reduces patronage to a level lower than what would be anticipated if
it was open for ordinary trading hours.
41. For the reasons detailed above, the Commission is satisfied that the
scale and scope of the proposed supply of liquor is sufficiently
nature to meet the ‘scale and scope’ requirement of section 26 of
the LCR Act.
Discretion to grant or refuse the licence
42. The Commission has a discretion under section 44(1) to grant or refuse
the Review Application. In exercising this discretion,
the Commission must have
regard to the objects of the LCR Act.
43. The Commission may also refuse to grant the Review Application on the
basis of any of the following matters listed in section
44(2)(a) and (b) of the
(a) that the applicant is not a suitable person to hold or carry on business
under the licence or BYO
(b) that the granting of the application would detract from or be detrimental to
the amenity of the area in which the premises to
which application relates are
(c) that the granting of the application would be conducive to or encourage the
misuse and abuse of alcohol
(d) that the applicant does not have adequate knowledge of the LCR
(h) that the application has not been made, displayed or advertised in
accordance with the LCR
44. The Commission considers that the supply of liquor for tasting at the
Premises is unlikely to result in a detriment to the amenity
of the area in
which the Premises are located to a degree which would warrant the refusal to
grant the Review Application.
Misuse or abuse of alcohol
45. The Commission
considers that the supply of liquor for tasting at the Premises is unlikely to
increase the risk of misuse and
abuse of alcohol at the Premises and,
accordingly that there is no ground to refuse the Review Application under
section 44(2)(b)(ii)
of the LCR Act.
Whether to exercise discretion to grant the licence having regard to the
objects of the LCR Act
46. The Commission is satisfied that the Review Application meets the
requirements of section 26 of the LCR Act, and the Commission
is satisfied that
there are no grounds for refusal under section 44(2) of the LCR Act. After
having regard to the objects of the
LCR Act, particularly the harm minimisation
object, the Commission has determined to grant the Review Application.
47. The Commission has determined to set aside
the decision of the Delegate and, in substitution, grant the renewable limited
subject to the conditions set out in Appendix A.
The preceding 47 paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of
Ms Deirdre O’Donnell PSM, Deputy Chair, Mr Des Powell
AM, Commissioner and
Mr Andrew Scott, Commissioner.
Renewable Limited
This licence is a renewable
limited licence and authorises the licensee to supply liquor on the licensed
premises for consumption
on the licensed premises during the trading hours
specified below
SUPPLY OF LIQUOR
The supply of liquor is
restricted to tastings of wine and beer only.
The supply of wine and
beer for tastings is limited to 3 glasses per person, per transaction, per
The portion size of liquor is to be limited to not more than 100ml
(regardless of glass size)
The point of supply of liquor is the licensed
premises during the time the tastings are on offer.
The licence has effect
only during those times when liquor is supplied for the purposes of tastings to
members of the public provided
this is within the trading hours specified
Liquor may only be supplied in an open container.
this licence shall be displayed at the point of supply of liquor at all times
when tastings are on offer.
TRANSFER OF
This licence must be surrendered if the packaged liquor licence in
respect of these premises is transferred to another person, unless
transferee is granted a transfer of this licence.
TRADING HOURS
Good Friday and Christmas Day No trade
and Wednesday Between 12 p.m. and 7 p.m.
Thursday to Saturday Between 12
p.m. and 8 p.m.
Sunday Between 12 p.m. and 7 p.m.
Section 157(2) to (5) of the
LCR Act and section 25(3) of the VCGLR Act further prescribe how the Commission
is to undertake internal
Conversely, a
“contested application” is defined in section 3(1) as being
an application for the grant, variation, transfer or relocation of a
licence or BYO permit in respect of which any objections are
received under
Division 5 of Part 2 within the period set out in that Division for those
objections (or that period as extended under
sections 44, 49 and 157.
Act, section 44 and 157.
Act, sections 9(3) and (4).
See further
Kordister Pty Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] VSCA
, which confirms that harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of
the LCR Act and therefore the primary consideration in
liquor licensing
decisions (although not to the exclusion of the other
LCR Act, section
LCR Act, section
LCR Act, section 44(4).
Section 44(2)(a) which
applies only ‘in the case of a grant or transfer of a licence or BYO
44(2)(b)(i).
44(2)(b)(ii).
(2)(b)(iii).
44(2)(b)(v).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (7.81 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter