URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHT/2024/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:36:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
NTC [2024] VMHT 20 (23 September 2024)
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s statement of reasons
issued pursuant to
section 380
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act
The patient and persons attending the hearing have been de-identified
and allocated randomly selected pseudonyms for privacy reasons.
Other details
that may lead to the identification of the patient may have also been omitted.
The Tribunal’s omission of these
details does not affect its decision or
its reasons for decision.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
[2024] VMHT
HEARING DETAILS
Patient’s name:
Date of hearing:
Treating service:
Metropolitan hospital
Mode of hearing:
Videoconference
Tribunal members:
Arna Delle-Vergini (Legal Member)
David Baron (Psychiatrist Member)
Charlotte Stockwell (Community Member)
Who was at the hearing?:
With online video from the health service
With online video
With online video
Robbert Roos
Legal representative, Victoria Legal Aid
With online video
With online video from the health service
With online video from the health service
Tribunal’s decision:
The Tribunal revoked your
temporary treatment order.
This statement of reasons:
the hearing your legal representative requested a written explanation of the
Tribunal's decision. A copy of this statement of
reasons will be given to your
treating team as well as to you and your legal representative.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
1. Reason for the hearing
This hearing was held because you were on a
temporary treatment order due to end on 04/09/2024. You also applied to have
your temporary
treatment order revoked (cancelled). The Tribunal had to have a
hearing before the temporary treatment order expired to decide whether
make a treatment order.
2. The law the Tribunal had to apply to make a decision
To make this decision the Tribunal had to
consider whether the compulsory treatment criteria applied to you. The
compulsory treatment
criteria are listed in the
Mental Health and Wellbeing
(‘the Act’) and are attached.
Under the Act the Tribunal must give proper consideration to the mental
health and wellbeing principles (‘principles’).
Based on the
information provided in your hearing and our understanding of your
circumstances, the Tribunal identified the following
principles were
particularly relevant to its decision:
Dignity and
autonomy – you prefer voluntary treatment over compulsory treatment, and
said it was not good for your recovery
when your status changed to compulsory.
It’s important to you to make your own decisions about your mental health
When other people are making decisions for you it makes you feel
restriction – you told the Tribunal you could be treated least
restrictively in the community. You have the benefit of
private health
insurance, a private treating team, loving and supportive family and a
supportive friend you can live with.
decision making – your preference is to make your own decisions about your
mental health treatment in consultation
with your private treating team, and
with the support of family and friends.
carers – your dad and CA want you to be well. Your mother, who did not
attend the hearing but is in regular communication
with the treating team, also
wants you to be well.
Dignity of risk
– consumers have a right to take reasonable risks to achieve their
recovery goals and to achieve personal growth,
self-esteem, and overall quality
of life. You have lived experience of managing your own mental health without
compulsory treatment.
This has included managing your mental illness without
recourse to optimal recommended treatment as you find the optimal recommended
treatment slows you down and impacts your quality of life. You told the Tribunal
you aim to return to managing your own mental health.
The Tribunal
must also give proper consideration to your rights under the
Charter of Human
Rights and Responsibilities
(‘the Charter’).
Compulsory treatment engages and limits a number of human rights protected under
the Charter including
consent, and where a person is being treated in hospital, freedom of movement.
To give proper consideration to your rights protected under the Charter, and
whether limits on them are reasonable, the Tribunal
must thoroughly examine
three things:
whether the
compulsory treatment criteria apply to you;
if it is making
or confirming a treatment order, whether you can be treated in the community;
if authorised to
do so, how long the treatment order should last.
3. Overview of the information provided to the Tribunal at the
As you know your treating team prepared a report
for your hearing that they gave to you and to the Tribunal, they also provided
documents extracted from your file. Both you and your treating team spoke
to and answered questions from the Tribunal in the hearing.
representative also made submissions on your behalf. This statement of reasons
does not summarise all that information,
but the next section refers to the
information the Tribunal relied on to make its decision and explains
The Tribunal must have regard to your views and preferences. From
what you told the Tribunal and the materials we read you do not
agree with the
diagnosis you have been given by the treating team but do agree you experience a
mental illness in the form of Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). You also
believe you have attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). You sought a
psychiatric opinion, but it had not been completed by the time of the
hearing. You agreed you needed to come to hospital which is
self-presented but have found a prolonged stay in hospital counter-therapeutic.
Your lawyer, Robbert, told us you can be
treated less restrictively because you have a lot of lived experience of
managing your mental
illness without the need for compulsory treatment. Prior to
your hospitalisation you were not taking regular medications, having
weaned off most medications in consultation with your private psychiatrist. You
had also reduced contact with your private
psychiatrist first to three monthly
and then to once a year. At the time of admission, the only medication you were
using to manage
your mental health was a benzodiazepine taken as needed.
You don’t agree that the deterioration in your mental health was a
consequence of not being medicated but, rather, was brought
overseas where you fell in love. When you noticed your mental health was
suffering you went to stay with your father
for a couple of days but forgot to
bring your Valium. This impacted your ability to sleep, and these two factors
combined led to
you experiencing panic attacks which you sought help for. The
Tribunal was told you want to return to the care of your private psychiatrist
and psychologist. Whilst your preference is not to take lithium, you would not
change your medication regime without consulting your
private psychiatrist. You
are also willing to reside with a friend and you agreed to maintain contact with
your father, who is a
General Practitioner, and your mental health
The Tribunal must also have regard to the views of your carer. From
what your father and his partner, CA, told the Tribunal, being
in the hospital
environment has not been good for you. They are grateful for the care you have
received from the treating team and
have valued their continued communication
with them and your mother. CA questioned if continued hospitalisation was
therapeutic for
you. They told the Tribunal you are well supported in the
community. You have a supportive family. Your father described the friend
plan to stay with as reliable and said that he would bring you back to hospital
if you were not complying with the treatment
4. The Tribunal’s decision about the compulsory treatment
The following summarises what the Tribunal
decided in relation to the four questions that need to be answered under the
treatment criteria.
(a) Do you have a mental illness?
According to the report prepared by the treating
team for the Tribunal hearing you have experienced symptoms of mental illness
periodically
since age 12. Prior to coming to Melbourne, you had two psychiatric
admissions in another state. You were commenced on lithium, palipiridone
propranolol. This is your first admission in Melbourne. The admission commenced
when you self-presented to hospital experiencing
panic attacks. Leading up to
your admission you had not been taking regular medication other than a
benzodiazapine taken as needed.
Upon admission you refused to take lithium as
you were experiencing a somatic delusion that you were pregnant and did not want
baby to be harmed. Your status was then changed from voluntary to
compulsory. Your family reported that you had been talking in metaphors,
speaking loudly, restricting your food intake, getting minimal sleep and
responding to internal stimuli. You were saying unusual
things such as “if
I move wrong, I will explode” and stating that you needed to be sacrificed
to save your two brothers.
You were throwing things, slamming doors, breaking
objects and you were verbally aggressive to them. At hospital you requested a
substance to get holes in your lungs. Upon presentation you were irritable,
anxious, labile, hypervigilant and displayed significant
restlessness. You were
hearing the voice of a man who you felt was holding your soul. You were paranoid
that your ex-partner was
stalking you. Your speech was pressured, and your
thoughts were disorganised with a tendency to couple ideas together that were
You were overfamiliar with people leading to sexual safety breaches.
These symptoms lessened after you commenced on a mood stabiliser
antipsychotics.
The symptoms described by your family and treating team
are consistent with symptoms of psychosis and mania. Given these symptoms
abated with the inclusion of mood stabilising and antipsychotic medications, the
Tribunal was satisfied that you have experienced
a significant disturbance in
thought, mood and perception.
(b) Does your mental illness mean you need to be treated now,
to try and prevent your mental health or physical health seriously
deteriorating;
or to prevent serious harm to you or someone else?
When you are not receiving treatment for your
mental illness your mental health can seriously deteriorate. You were not
regular treatment prior to your hospitalisation and by the time you
presented to hospital your symptoms were serious enough to require
an admission.
Leading up to your admission you travelled overseas and fell in love with a
person you believed to be your soul mate
despite only knowing him for three
days. You also had become aggressive and volatile with family members who were
caring for you.
This is not typical behaviour for you. On the ward you were
disinhibited and this led to two sexual safety breaches. You also let
consumer into the Gender Sensitive Area at the hospital.
degree and were working in your first job in that position when you became
mentally unwell. You have not been able to work
in that profession since. You
were also recently dismissed from your job in an unrelated field. Historically,
you have posted bizarre
content on social media which increases the risk of
ongoing damage to your reputation. With treatment, these symptoms and consequent
behaviours are better managed.
For these reasons the Tribunal was
satisfied you need immediate treatment to prevent serious deterioration to your
mental health and
to prevent serious harm to yourself in the form of
misadventure and reputational risk.
(c) Will you receive immediate treatment if you are on a
treatment order?
The Tribunal was satisfied you will receive
immediate treatment if you are on a treatment order by way of psychiatric
reviews, case
management, psychotropic medications and psychosocial supports.
(d) Is there a less restrictive means than a treatment order
that would enable you to receive immediate treatment?
The treating team did not believe you could be
treated less restrictively. They told the Tribunal you had only recently agreed
start taking medications and that you were experiencing residual symptoms.
The treating team believe you lack understanding of your
mental illness,
minimise the symptoms you have experienced and the impacts those symptoms have
on your behaviour as well as loved
ones, and fail to appreciate the risks
involved in living with an untreated mental illness. They also told the Tribunal
appreciate the critical role medications play in your mental health
treatment plan.
Your lawyer, Robbert, told the Tribunal you can be
treated less restrictively. You have a supportive family, private health
somebody to live with who can monitor your mental health while you
are recovering, a private psychiatrist and a private psychologist.
Robbert also
pointed to your lived experience which included help-seeking behaviours. You
told the Tribunal you weaned off lithium
two years prior to this admission and
you have managed your mental illness using benzodiazepines alone and attending
psychiatric
reviews. You said you can recognise your early warning signs, which
include feeling stressed and falling in love. You were honest
not wanting to take lithium but acknowledged that it would be dangerous to just
stop medications. You noted you
have not done this previously and only weaned
yourself off medications under the supervision of your psychiatrist. You told
the Tribunal
you felt like your rights had been violated by being made a
compulsory patient and it made you feel unsafe. You said the hospital
staffed and cannot provide you with holistic treatment you need which would
include not just medications but talk therapy
and having activities you can
The Tribunal agreed you could be treated less restrictively.
Whilst it accepted the treating team’s evidence that you appear
minimal understanding of the extent and impact of your mental illness, including
the risks involved in having no or sub-therapeutic
treatment, it did not accept
that there was not a less restrictive means of you receiving the treatment if an
order wasn’t
made. Notably, you accept that you need to continue taking
the recommended medications until a psychiatrist advises otherwise. You
supportive family, a private treating team, and can live with a friend who has
lived experience of mental illness and who
cares about you a lot. The Tribunal
was satisfied that you are help-seeking and that you have enough supports around
you to ensure
you receive treatment. The Tribunal was also satisfied that
continued inpatient treatment was not consistent with your recovery goals
could potentially hinder your recovery. For these reasons the Tribunal was
satisfied that this criterion was not met.
5. Decision
Given the Tribunal was not satisfied all the
compulsory treatment criteria applied to you the Tribunal revoked your temporary
Date of determination: 30-08-2024
[Signed by the legal member]
Arna Delle-Vergini
Presiding member, on behalf of the Tribunal
Date: 23 September 2024.
Further information:
Patients have the right to apply to the Tribunal
at any time to have the Treatment Order revoked if they believe the treatment
no longer apply. Contact the Tribunal on 9032 3200 or toll free on 1800
242 703 (country callers only) or by email mht@mht.vic.gov.au
information.
Parties have the right apply to the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (VCAT) for a review of the Tribunal’s decision
within 20 business
days after either the Tribunal’s determination or receiving a statement of
reasons (whichever is the later).
humanrights@vcat.vic.gov.au for more information.
A ‘party’ is
the person who is the subject of the hearing (the patient), their treating
psychiatrist and any party joined
by the Tribunal.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
Meaning of mental illness in this Act
(1) Mental illness is a medical condition that is characterised by a
significant disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory.
(2) A person is not to be considered to have mental illness by reason only of
any one or more of the following—
(a) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
political opinion or belief;
(b) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
religious opinion or belief;
(c) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular
philosophy;
(d) that the person expresses or refuses or fails to express a particular sexual
preference, gender identity or sexual orientation;
(e) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
political activity;
(f) that the person engages in or refuses or fails to engage in a particular
religious activity;
(g) that the person has engaged in a certain pattern of sexual behaviour;
(h) that the person engages in conduct that is contrary to community standards
of acceptable conduct;
(i) that the person engages in illegal conduct;
(j) that the person engages in antisocial behaviour;
(k) that the person is intellectually disabled;
(l) that the person uses drugs or alcohol;
(m) that the person has a particular economic or social status or is a member of
a particular cultural or racial group;
(n) that the person is or has previously been involved in family conflict;
(o) that the person is experiencing or has experienced psychological distress;
(p) that the person has previously been diagnosed with, or treated for, mental
(3) Subsection (2)(l) does not prevent the serious temporary or permanent
physiological, biochemical or psychological effects of using
drugs or alcohol
from being regarded as an indication that a person has mental
Section 143 Compulsory treatment criteria
compulsory treatment criteria for a person to be made subject to a temporary
treatment order or treatment order are that—
(a) the person has mental illness; and
(b) because the person has mental illness, the person needs immediate treatment
to prevent—
(i) serious deterioration in the person's mental or physical health; or
(ii) serious harm to the person or to another person; and
(c) if the person is made subject to a temporary treatment order or treatment
order, the immediate treatment will be provided to
the person; and
(d) there are no less restrictive means reasonably available to enable the
person to receive the immediate treatment.
Section 5 What is treatment?
(1) A person receives treatment for mental illness if professional skill is
(a) to remedy or alleviate the person's mental illness; or
(b) to alleviate the symptoms and reduce the ill effects of the person's mental
(2) Treatment includes electroconvulsive treatment and neurosurgery.
(3) Detention is not treatment.
(4) To avoid doubt, treatment means treatment for mental illness.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (514 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter