URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VicLiqComm/2024/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:44:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Roslyn Wagg at Oak and Hound Wine Bar [2024] VicLiqComm 16; (7 November 2024)
Decision and reasons for
In the matter of an application under
section 153
Liquor Control
Reform Act 1998
by Ms Roslyn Wagg for an internal review of a decision by a
delegate to refuse an application for a general licence for the premises
as Oak and Hound Wine Bar, located at 188 Barkly Street, Ararat
Commission:
John Larkins, Acting Chair
Mr James O’Halloran, Deputy Chair Ms Susan Timbs, Commissioner
Appearances:
Roslyn Wagg as the Applicant
Mr Michael Majewski, Counsel Assisting the Commission
Date of Hearing: 3 July 2024
Date of Decision: 7 November 2024
Date of Reasons: 24 December 2024
The Commission has determined to set aside the decision of the
Delegate and, in substitution, grant another licence instead namely,
a temporary
limited licence subject to the conditions as set out in Appendix A.
Original Application
14 November 2023, Roslyn Wagg (
) applied to the Victorian Liquor
Commission (
) under the
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
for a general liquor
Original Application
) for the premises located at 188 Barkly
Street, Ararat (
Applicant applied for a general licence so that she could trade at the Premises
as the ‘Oak and Hound Wine Bar’, selling
a range of local wines, and
a small selection of craft beers, for consumption both on and off the Premises
during the following trading
FOR CONSUMPTION OFF THE LICENSED PREMISES
Sunday Between 10am and 11pm Good Friday and ANZAC Day Between 12noon and 11pm
On any other day Between 7am and 11pm
FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE LICENSED PREMISES
Sunday Between 10am and 1am the following morning Good Friday and ANZAC
Day Between 12noon and 1am the following morning On any other
day Between 7am
and 1am the following morning
Maximum internal patron capacity: 40 Maximum external patron capacity: 20
addition to the provision of liquor, the Applicant proposed to offer food by way
of a range of charcuterie (i.e., cold cooked meats)
boards and also to offer
soft drinks and coffee.
Approximately
once a month, the Applicant also proposed that the Premises would feature live
music by solo or acoustic musicians on
a Friday or Saturday, between the hours
27 December 2023, in accordance with section 33, a copy of the Original
Application was served on the Chief Commissioner of Police
) and the Ararat Rural City Council (
23 January 2024, Victoria Police informed the Commission that it did not object
to the grant of the Original Application.
All references to legislation are
references to the LCR Act unless stated otherwise.
Council did not lodge an objection. In addition, the Commission did not receive
any public objections from the display of the
public notice.
Original Decision
2 April 2024, the Delegate refused the Original Application (
) on the basis that the Applicant was not a suitable person to hold
a liquor licence.
question of suitability arose from material before the delegate of the
Commission (
), that liquor inspectors of the Commission
Liquor Inspectors
) had attended the Premises on 10 November 2023, in
response to two anonymous complaints that the Applicant was purportedly trading
in liquor without a licence (
2023 Incident
Application for Internal Review
Applicant made an application for internal review of the Original Decision on 19
April 2024 (
Review Application
27 May 2024, the Commission invited the Applicant to provide additional
documents that she intended to rely on. The Commission
also invited the
Applicant to provide copies of any correspondence between the associate
nominated by the Applicant – Anthony
Miles-Morland (
– and a third party, which may be relevant as to the issue of
suitability.
28 June 2024, the Associate submitted further documents that he and the
Applicant intended to rely on as part of the Review Application.
Legislation and the Commission’s task
The Commission’s internal review power
2 of Part 9 of the LCR Act governs internal review applications. Under section
152, the Original Decision is reviewable,
and the Applicant is eligible to apply
for a review of the Original Decision. The Review Application was made pursuant
to section 157(1), the specific task for the Commission with respect to the
Review Application is to make a fresh decision
(a) affirms or varies the Original Decision; or
In its correspondence to the Applicant
inviting further relevant material, the Commission referred to the operation of
section 130F,
which addresses a person’s protection against
self-incrimination.
(b) sets aside the Original Decision and substitutes another decision that the
Commission on review considers appropriate.
effect, the Commission on review stands in the shoes of the original decision
maker and must make a fresh decision with respect
to the Original Application.
In this case, the Commission must decide whether to:
(a) grant the Original Application and, if so, whether to do so subject to
conditions;
(b) refuse to grant the Original Application.
to section 158(2), in circumstances where the Original Decision was a refusal to
grant a liquor licence, the Commission may,
on review, grant a different liquor
licence than that originally applied for.
Determination of an uncontested application
an application is an uncontested application, pursuant to section
Subject to Division 3, the Commission must grant or refuse
to grant an uncontested application at any time after the expiry of the
for objection under Division 5 (or that period as extended under section
to section 44(2), the Commission may refuse to grant an application on certain
grounds, including:
(a) that an applicant is not a suitable person to hold or carry on business
under the licence (section 44(2)(a));
(b) that an applicant does not have an adequate knowledge of the LCR Act
(section 44(2)(b)(iii).
44(3) states:
Without limiting the reasons why a person is not a
suitable person to hold, or carry on business under, a licence... a person is
a suitable person to hold, or carry on business under, a licence ... if the
person or, if the person is a body corporate, any director
of the person has,
within the preceding 3 years—
(a) been convicted, whether in Victoria or elsewhere, of an offence of
without a licence or of supplying adulterated
or of an offence against any law relating to customs or excise; or
Section 157(2) to (5) further
prescribes the manner in which the Commission is to undertake internal
Sections 44, 49 and 157.
Sections 44 and 157.
(b) engaged in activities involving the trading in or marketing of
in a manner contrary to the provisions of this Act.
Commission also considers it appropriate to have regard to the suitability of
persons who are associates of the Applicant. Section
3AC provides a definition
of associates being:
(1) For the purposes of this Act, an associate of a person (the
(a) a person who—
(i) holds or will hold any relevant financial interest, or is or will be
entitled to exercise any relevant power (whether in right
of the person or on
behalf of any other person) in any business of the first person involving the
sale of liquor; and
(ii) by virtue of that interest or power, is able or will be able to exercise
a significant influence over or with respect to the
management or operation of
that business; or
(b) a person who is or will be a director, whether in right of the person or
on behalf of any other person, of any business of the
first person involving the
sale of liquor; or
(c) if the first person is a natural person, a person who is a relative of
the first person, other than a relative—
(i) who is not, and has never been, involved in any business of the first
person involving the sale of liquor; or
(ii) who will not be involved in the business the first person proposes to
conduct as a licensee or permittee.
(2) In this section—
, in relation to a person, means—
(a) the spouse or domestic partner of the person; or
(b) a parent, son, daughter, brother or sister of the person; or
(c) a parent, son, daughter, brother or sister of the spouse or domestic
partner of the person;
relevant financial interest
, in relation to a business
involving the sale of liquor, means—
(a) any share in the capital of the business; or
(b) any entitlement to receive any income derived from the business;
(c) any entitlement to receive any payment as a result of money advanced;
relevant power
means any power, whether exercisable by
voting or otherwise and whether exercisable alone or in association with
(a) to participate in any directorial, managerial, or executive decision;
(b) to elect or appoint any person as a director.
section 3(1) defines “director” to include:
(a) any person occupying or acting in the position of director of the body
corporate, by whatever name called and whether or not validly
appointed to
occupy or duly authorised to act in the position; and
(b) any person in accordance with whose directions or instructions the
directors of the body corporate are accustomed to act.
44(4) provides that, before granting or refusing an uncontested application
under subsection (1), the Commission may:
(a) have regard to any matter the Commission considers relevant; and
(b) make any enquiries the Commission considers appropriate.
Exercising the internal review power
172D(3) and 172U(3)(b) require the Commission, in exercising its internal review
function, to have regard to the objects
of the LCR Act and any decision-making
guidelines in respect of the regulation of liquor issued by the Minister. The
objects of the
LCR Act are set out at section 4(1) as
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to contribute to minimising harm including by—
(i) providing adequate controls over the supply and consumption of liquor;
(ii) ensuring as far as practicable that the supply of liquor contributes to,
and does not detract from, the amenity of community
(iii) restricting the supply of certain other alcoholic products; and
(iv) encouraging a culture of responsible consumption of alcohol and reducing
risky drinking of alcohol and its impact on the community;
(b) to facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed facilities
reflecting community expectations; and
(c) to contribute to the responsible development of the liquor, licensed
hospitality and live music industries; and
(d) to regulate licensed premises that provide sexually explicit
entertainment.
24. Section 4(2) further provides that:
It is the intention of Parliament that every power, authority, discretion,
must be exercised and
performed with due regard to harm minimisation.
3(1) defines “harm” as follows:
means harm arising from the misuse and abuse of alcohol,
(a) harm to minors, vulnerable persons or communities, including groups
within communities; and
(b) family violence; and
(c) anti-social behaviour, including behaviour that causes personal injury or
property damage.
exercising the internal review power, the Commission:
(a) must consider all the information, material and evidence before the original
decision maker;
(b) may consider further information, material or evidence.
Commission considers that, while the grounds of refusal outlined in section
44(2) are relevant considerations, the determination
of an uncontested
application was ultimately to be made pursuant to section 44(1) and section
157(1) at the discretion of the Commission,
with reference to the objects of the
section 49, the Commission may impose any condition it thinks fit on the grant
of an application.
Conduct of an inquiry
stated above, section 44(4) provides that the Commission may have regard to any
matter it considers relevant and make any enquiries
it considers
appropriate.
172W(3) provides that the Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence but
may inform itself in any way it thinks fit,
and is bound by the rules of natural
See further
Kordister Pty Ltd v
Director of Liquor Licensing
(2012) 39 VR 92
[2012] VSCA 325
confirms that harm minimisation is the primary regulatory object of the LCR Act
and therefore the primary consideration in
liquor licensing decisions (although
not to the exclusion of the other objects).
Section 157(2).
Section 157(3).
Material before the Commission
Commission on review had before it, and considered, all the information,
material and evidence before the Delegate at first instance:
(a) Certificate of completion of RSA Program for Anthony Miles-Morland, dated 7
September 2023.
(b) Certificate of completion of RSA Program for Roslyn Wagg, dated 7 September
(c) Australian Securities and Investment Commission Record of Registration for
Business Name for ‘Oak & Hound Wine Bar’,
dated 26 September
(d) Certificate of completion for New Entrant Training for Anthony
Miles-Morland, dated 5 October 2023.
(e) General licence application, dated 11 November 2023.
(f) Declaration of Associates for Roslyn Wagg, dated 11 November 2023.
(g) Declaration of Associates for Anthony Miles-Morland, dated 11 November
(h) Questionnaire for Roslyn Wagg, dated 11 November 2023.
(i) Questionnaire for Anthony Miles-Morland, dated 11 November 2023.
(j) Declaration of right to occupy for 188 Barkley Street, Ararat, dated 11
November 2023.
(k) Email correspondence passing between Jess Wright (Team Leader, Ararat
Regional Team – Compliance) and Roslyn Wagg, dated
18 November 2023.
(l) Planning permit no. PA3334 issued by Ararat Rural City Council, dated 22
November 2023.
(m) Certificate of completion of New Entrant Training for Roslyn Wagg, dated 22
January 2024.
(n) Application lodgement notification by Victoria Police, dated 23 January
(o) Statement of display for the general licence application, dated 29 January
(p) Suitability submission of Roslyn Wagg, dated 12 March 2024.
(q) Proposed Red Line Plan for ‘Oak & Hound Wine Bar’,
(r) Limited licence no. 36167753, undated.
Commission on review also considered the following materials:
(a) Decision email from Nick Kotsiopoulos (Assistant Manager, Processing and
Determination – Delegate of the Victorian Liquor
Commission) to Roslyn
Wagg, dated 2 April 2024.
(b) Memorandum by Roslyn Wagg, dated 15 April 2024.
(c) Application for internal review, dated 19 April 2024.
(d) Statement of Reasons for the Decision, dated 30 April 2024.
(e) Memorandum by Roslyn Wagg, dated 4 May 2024.
(f) Character reference letter by Chris Eagle, dated 14 June 2024.
(g) Letter of Support by Tom Clark (President, Greater Ararat Business Network),
dated 18 June 2024.
(h) Character reference letter by Andrew Emery (Commander, Fire Rescue Victoria
– Country Fire Authority), dated 20 June 2024.
(i) Character reference letter by Jodie Hallam (District Business Manager,
Country Fire Authority), dated 25 June 2024.
(j) Letter of Support by Tim Harrison (Chief Executive Officer, Ararat Rural
City Council), dated 26 June 2024.
(k) Character reference letter by Jeffrey Whittaker AFSM, undated.
(l) Photographs of text messages between Anthony Miles-Morland and the separate
business operator between 09/23-10/23, undated.
Public Hearing
3 July 2024, the Commission held a public hearing of the Review Application
). The Applicant appeared self-represented, and the Associate
appeared as a witness.
the commencement of the Hearing, the Commission – for completeness and in
fairness to the Applicant and the Associate present
– again drew attention
to section 130F, which addresses a person’s protection against
self-incrimination (see note 2
to paragraph 11 above).
Post-Hearing Conference
3 October 2024, in light of the then forthcoming listing at the
Magistrates’ Court of the mention hearing relating to the
Liquor Control
) prosecution against the Applicant and the Associate
Magistrates’ Court Mention
), the Commission held a video
conference with the parties (
). This was primarily directed at
ensuring that the operation of section 44(3)(a) was again brought to the
attention of all parties,
At the Hearing, the Commission informed
the Applicant and the Associate that it is a reasonable excuse to refuse or fail
questions or provide information that they are required to answer or
provide under the LCR Act if the answer of the question or provision
information would tend to incriminate them. See section 130F(1).
given its potential relevance depending on the outcome of the prosecution. Mr
Scott Belcher, solicitor, appeared at the conference
on behalf of both the
Applicant and the Associate.
Mr Belcher’s request, the Commission agreed to stay the internal review
decision until after the outcome of the Magistrates’
Court Mention on 1
November 2024.
the conclusion of the Conference, the Commission emphasised that no decision had
been made by the Commission but raised with the
parties an alternative outcome,
namely, a temporary limited licence rather than a renewable limited licence as
raised in the Hearing.
On behalf of both
the Applicant and the Associate, Mr Belcher indicated that they would be
receptive to a grant of a temporary limited
licence if that was the decision of
the Commission.
Reasons for decision on review
Issues for determination on review
deciding whether to exercise its discretion to affirm, vary or set aside the
Original Decision and in turn grant or refuse a liquor
licence, the key issues
to be determined by the Commission are:
(a) the suitability of the Applicant to hold a licence for the purposes of
section 44(2)(a); and
(b) whether the Applicant has an adequate knowledge of the LCR Act.
deciding whether to grant or refuse a licence, the Commission must also consider
(a) granting of the application would detract from or be detrimental to the
amenity of the area in which the premises are situated;
(b) granting of the application would be conducive to or encourage harm.
Furthermore,
in exercising its discretion to grant or refuse a liquor licence, the Commission
must have regard to the objects of the
LCR Act, with particular regard to the
object of harm minimisation.
Transcript, pp45-47.
Suitability of the Applicant
Assessing suitability
addition to assessing suitability against the objects of the LCR Act, the
Commission can also be guided by principles applied in
previous decisions. This
includes ensuring that the public have confidence in the liquor industry.
Commission must be satisfied that the Applicant has the ability to manage a
licensed premises in a manner that promotes harm minimisation
and complies with
a licensee’s obligations under the LCR Act.
Submissions and evidence
regarding suitability
to the Applicant’s submissions to the Commission and evidence at the
Hearing, the following sequence of events occurred
in approximately September
2023, prior to lodging the Original Application:
(a) The Applicant became aware that LCV was taking a minimum of twelve weeks to
process liquor licence applications.
(b) The Applicant announced via social media that she and the Associate were
opening a wine bar in Ararat. Subsequently, the holder
of limited licence no.
36167753 (a separate and unrelated liquor licence holder) reached out to the
Associate offering her advice.
(c) The separate licence holder advised the Applicant and the Associate that
they could use her liquor licence to supply liquor at
the Premises, as long as
patrons made an advance booking.
(d) From this advice the Applicant was under the impression that, by virtue of
purported discussions between the separate licence
holder and LCV, LCV was
satisfied that “it would be fine” to operate the Premises under the
separate licence holder’s
licence in such a way. On that basis, the
Applicant made plans to open for trade on the Melbourne Cup weekend in 2023, and
apply for her own licence in the quieter winter months.
UPK Pty Ltd Decision and reasons
for decision
(30 July 2024) (deidentified).
Memorandum by Roslyn Wagg, dated 15
April 2024, p1. See also Transcript, p38.
Memorandum by Roslyn Wagg, dated 4
May 2024, p1. See also Transcript, p25.
See n12, p1. See also Transcript, p9
Ibid, p1. See also Transcript,
Applicant said that her willingness to rely on the separate licence
holder’s advice especially stemmed from the separate
holder’s own experience working “within the Grampians region”
and the Associate’s employment connection
Applicant also gave evidence to the effect that the separate licence holder
seemed to have apparent knowledge of liquor licensing
requirements due to
running her own local microbrewery.
Applicant stated in her submissions of 15 April 2024 and 4 May 2024
(a) “we now understand that we did not follow due diligence, and operated
without a valid licence”;
(b) “we now acknowledge that our level of due diligence was not what was
required, and we did the wrong thing”;
(c) “we now understand we were not operating legally”.
Section 44(3)
44(3) provides relevantly that, without limiting the reasons why a person is not
a suitable person to hold or carry on business
under a licence, a person is not
a suitable person to hold or carry-on business under a licence if the person
within the preceding
three years –
(a) been convicted, whether in Victoria or elsewhere of an offence of supplying
liquor without a licence; or
(b) engaged in activities involving the trading in or marketing of liquor in a
manner contrary to the provisions of the LCR Act
a result of the 2023 Incident, LCV brought charges in the Ararat
Magistrates’ Court against both the Applicant and the Associate
selling liquor when not a licensee, contrary to section 107(1); and with
indicating that the Premises was licensed when it was
not a licensed premises,
contrary to section 116(a).
1 November 2024, the Applicant and the Accused pleaded guilty to the charges.
The Magistrates’ Court sentenced each of them
to a good behaviour bond
– without conviction – and a payment of $500 to the Court
Transcript, p26.
See n12, p1.
See n13, p2.
44(3)(a) is mandatory in its terms and renders a person unsuitable to hold a
licence if that person has been convicted of
supplying liquor without a licence
within the preceding 3 years. As set out in paragraph 35 above, the Commission
brought the terms
of section 44(3)(a) to the attention of the Applicant and her
lawyer during the Conference.
neither the Applicant nor the Associate were convicted of an offence, section
44(3)(a) does not render either party unsuitable
to hold a licence.
the offence of indicating that the Premises was licensed when it was not a
licensed premises, contrary to section 116(a)
could fall under section 44(3)(b),
which does not require a conviction to render a person unsuitable.
the Commission finds that the activity engaged in by the Applicant, being
indicating that the Premises was licensed when
it was not a licensed premises,
contrary to section 116(a), is not the type of activity intended to be caught by
subsection 44(3)(b)
for the reasons that follow. The Commission considers that
section 44(3)(b) has a significant consequence being that of a finding
unsuitability.
to the context of section 44(3), the Commission notes that section 44(3)(a)
deals with the circumstances of a person having
been convicted of an offence of
supplying liquor without a licence. This is an offence against section 107(1) of
the LCR Act and
includes conduct amounting to ‘offering’ liquor for
sale. Section 107(1) is one of the most serious offences in the LCR
Commission considers that Parliament’s intention was for a conviction to
be recorded for this offending conduct, in order
to automatically render a
person unsuitable. It would appear incongruous for the Commission to determine
that conduct which fails
to meet the threshold for a conviction under section
107(1) would automatically fall within subsection 44(3)(b) to render the person
unsuitable anyway.
Commission notes that, even if it found that the Applicant had contravened
section 44(3)(b), it holds a discretion under section
44(2)(a) to either grant
or refuse a licence. In exercising that discretion, the Commission must
carefully consider all the circumstances.
Insofar as the potential contravention
of section 44(3)(b) is concerned, the Commission is not persuaded that the facts
and circumstances
are sufficient to justify it exercising its discretion to
refuse grant of the liquor licence to the Applicant.
Bourke’s Liquor Laws
, p1911 LCR 44.15
Whether the Applicant and the Associate have demonstrated insight into the
the Applicant and the Associate informed the Commission that they closed the
Premises after the inspection by the Liquor Inspectors,
and that it has remained
closed ever since. The Commission considers this fact is not in dispute.
Commission considers that the Applicant has demonstrated insight into her
offending. She acknowledged that there was “naivety
on [her and the
Associate’s] part not to make enquiries [themselves]” with LCV.
Specifically, the Applicant expressed
regret at having failed to make further enquiries with LCV prior to trading at
the Premises
in November 2023.
Commission also notes the Associate as acknowledging that he and the Applicant
“were probably remiss not to follow up”
On behalf of himself and the Applicant,
the Associate stated that “[their] biggest mistake was not doing [their]
due diligence
on moving forward and making sure that [...] the information
[they] were getting [from the separate business operator] was correct”.
Furthermore,
as set out in paragraphs 46-47 above, the Commission was informed that both the
Applicant and the Associate pleaded guilty
before the Magistrates’ Court
to offences stemming from the 2023 Incident. The guilty pleas by the Applicant
and the Associate
reinforce that they have insight into the offending and accept
responsibility.
balance, the Commission is of the view that the Applicant and the Associate have
provided sufficient evidence to demonstrate that
they have insight into and have
taken responsibility for the offending.
Public confidence
is important that the public have confidence in the liquor industry and
confidence in the administration of the liquor industry.
, Both the public and the Commission
expect licensees to be fully aware of this and to actively take measures to
reduce the risk of
harm associated with the supply of alcohol.
Commission was impressed by the character references provided as part of the
Review Application. Many of the referees appear to
be senior, experienced
professionals within the emergency services sector who hold positions of
accountability and responsibility.
They generally described both the Applicant
and the Associate as
Transcript, p8.
Galafaro v Director of Liquor
[2009] VCAT 919
Buzzo Holdings Pty Ltd & Anor v Loison
[2007] VSC 31.
upstanding individuals who consistently demonstrate professionalism, ethical
responsibility, and a commitment to supporting their
colleagues and community
members. One reference in particular stated that that they are confident of
their ability to adhere to the
requirements of such a privilege (as a licensee)
including adherence to correct regulatory and compliance requirements. The
considers that the referees’ endorsements reflect a confidence
in the Applicant’s suitability to fulfil the obligations
of running a
licensed premises.
the 2023 Incident, on balance, the Commission does not consider that this matter
gives rise to significant doubt as to the
Applicant’s (or the
Associate’s) character such that the community would lack confidence in
the Applicant being able
to fulfill the obligations of a liquor licensee. This
view is supported by the lack of any prior criminal history preceding the 2023
Finding regarding suitability
considered all the materials before the Commission and having regard to the
objects of the LCR Act, the Commission is not satisfied
that the Applicant is an
unsuitable person to hold, or carry on business, under a licence; nor that the
Associate is an unsuitable
person for the Applicant to otherwise be an
unsuitable person to hold, or carry on business under, a licence.
Adequate knowledge of the LCR Act
Commission may also consider whether to refuse to grant a liquor licence on
grounds that the Applicant does not have adequate
knowledge of the LCR Act.
Commission accepts the explanations of the Applicant and the Associate that they
had acted naively and had erroneously relied
on the separate licence
holder’s advice to operate the Premises when unlicensed. The Commission
also accepts that both the
Applicant and the Associate have accepted
responsibility for the 2023 Incident and have demonstrated a genuine willingness
with the requirements of the LCR Act. The plea of guilty to both
charges by the Applicant and the Associate reinforces that they
now have an
adequate knowledge of the operation of the LCR Act.
that the RSA Certificate and New Entrant Training for both the Applicant and the
Associate have been provided, the Applicant
in evidence showed an understanding
of the requirements of the LCR Act regarding minors and serving intoxicated
Commission does not in this instance consider this to be a ground upon which to
refuse the liquor licence. Despite this, the Commission
encourages the Applicant
the Associate to take all necessary and reasonable steps to ensure that they
develop an enhanced understanding of the LCR Act. In
turn, this will assist in
ensuring that they maintain strict compliance with their obligations under the
LCR Act, the regulations
and any licence, particularly if granted on an ongoing
Alternative licence category
Commission has power under section 158(2) to grant a different licence than that
originally applied for where the Original Decision
was a refusal to grant a
liquor licence which is the case in this proceeding.
Applicant applied for a general licence for the Premises which, due to the broad
permissions a general licence allows a licensee,
is considered a high-risk
licence category. In particular, the long trading hours of a premises with a
general licence can lead to
increased alcohol consumption and associated public
health and safety concerns. Research has shown a correlation between extended
hours of alcohol availability and higher incidences of alcohol-related harm,
including violence, public disorder, and health issues.
The Commission would
therefore expect an applicant for a general licence in most circumstances to
provide detailed documentation
and demonstrate proactive risk management
strategies to minimise alcohol related harm and to ensure there is no detraction
detriment to the amenity of the area.
what is actually now sought and will be permitted is a relatively modest and
highly restricted licensed operation with limited
potential to raise the
prospect of impacts on amenity or to cause alcohol related harms, if such
licence is managed responsibly and
within the confines of the strict conditions
imposed by the Commission.
Furthermore,
the licensee will be, in effect, on a form of probation for the period of the
temporary licence assuming that it is intended
to apply for a permanent and
potentially expanded licence in the future. This also provides an additional
safeguard against any irresponsible
conduct of the temporary licence and an
opportunity for those involved to demonstrate competence in the operation of the
over that period.
Ararat Rural City Council (Council) granted Planning permit number PA3334
Planning Permit
) on 22 November 2023 in respect of the Premises which
allows the Premises to be used for ‘licensed retail premises trading
wine bar for the consumption of alcohol, and the provision to purchase take away
alcohol’ subject to the following conditions:
a) The Hours of Operation are Thursday – 5pm to 11pm; Friday and Saturday
– noon to 11pm; and Sunday – noon to
b) No more than 30 patrons may be present on the Premises at any time.
Commission notes that the general licence applied for and the Planning Permit
granted are significantly different in hours and
patron numbers.
the Hearing, the Commission engaged in a discussion with the Applicant regarding
the potential suitability of an alternative licence
The Commission informed the Applicant
that, while its application for a general licence would be assessed, the
Commission may also
consider the possibility of a limited licence as an
alternative option that might provide an opportunity for the Applicant to
on a more contained scale and scope, aligning with a “crawl before
you walk” approach. In addition, due to the scale
and scope requirement
per section 26 of the LCR Act (see further details below), a limited licence is
normally considered lower risk
compared to a general licence.
stated in paragraph 37, the Commission had raised with the Applicant and the
Associate the possible suitability of a temporary
limited licence rather than a
renewable limited licence. A temporary limited licence is normally considered
lower risk than a renewable
limited licence as it is for a fixed period and
cannot be renewed.
Commission’s consideration of the exercise of its discretion under section
158(2) to grant a temporary limited licence as
appropriate is discussed
Consideration of grant of Temporary Limited
14 provides that a limited licence “authorises the licensee to supply
liquor at the times determined by the Commission
and specified in the
licence”. However, unlike other categories of licences, limited licences
are subject to the additional
restriction found at section 26 in that the
Commission may only grant a limited licence if satisfied “that the scale
of the supply of liquor the subject of the licence is limited in
Scale and Scope Requirement
are no statutory signposts which prescribe specific factors for the Commission
to consider in determining whether the Scale
and Scope Requirement is met. On
previous occasions the Commission has considered “the nature, location,
duration or frequency
Transcript pp45-49.
During the Conference, Mr Belcher
– on behalf of the Applicant – expressed the Applicant’s
willingness for the Commission
to grant a limited licence, should it consider a
limited licence category to be more appropriate for the purposes of the Review
Application.
of the hours of operation of a licence in
question” as relevant to the Scale and Scope Requirement.
their evidence at the Hearing, both the Applicant and the Associate provided
further details about how they intend to operate the
Premises. In summary, the
Applicant and the Associate gave evidence to the effect that:
(a) the Applicant would operate the Premises only during the trading hours
specified in the Planning Permit (as set out in paragraph
(b) the Associate would also work at the Premises during the trading hours as
specified in the Planning Permit.
Associate has contributed financially to the setup of the business and would
work front-of-house serving patrons, however, “ongoing
Applicant’s] business for her to run”;
(c) the Premises would only seat a maximum of 30 patrons, in accordance with the
maximum patron capacity as specified in the Planning
(d) the liquor supplied at the Premises would consist of wine from seven local
wineries and a small range of craft beer from one
local brewery;
(e) while the Premises would offer liquor for sale for off-premises consumption,
it would not be taking any orders for off-site delivery;
(f) the range of charcuterie boards offered by way of food at the Premises would
consist of local offerings, e.g., “a nice
small cheese platter or a large
platter if a larger group came in”. This would be available at all times.
There is otherwise
no kitchen on the Premises.
Commission considers that the supply described above appears to be restricted in
scale and scope. In particular, the Commission
notes that the hours of supply
are far more limited than any ordinary trading hours as defined at section 3(1)
or as sought in the
Original Application, and that food will be available at all
times when liquor is available for supply.
that basis, and in conjunction with the conditions specified in Appendix A,
Pursuant to section 158(2), the Commission is satisfied
that the Scale and Scope
Requirement is met.
Transcript, p4.
Commission must also determine whether the grant of a temporary limited liquor
licence would detract from or be detrimental to
the amenity of the area in which
the Premises are located, which may give rise to a ground of refusal under
section 44(2).
the Commission notes the Applicant’s evidence at the Hearing that the
Premises would not have loud music. The Applicant
said that, at present, the
Premises would only feature “jazz through Spotify”. As for any live
music, the Applicant would
only seek to have “a single person to come just
maybe with a guitar or their own music”. Due to the small size of the
Premises, the Applicant is looking to only have “very quiet”,
“acoustic music” that is not above background
level so that patrons
are able to converse easily amongst themselves.
Furthermore,
notwithstanding that the Applicant specified in the Original Application that
the external maximum patron capacity was
20 patrons outside, the Applicant
clarified during the Hearing of the Review Application that the Premises does
not have any room
outside. The intention is to have the maximum number of 30
patrons remain inside.
on the nature of the Premises and the limited scope of the permit granted by the
Council, the Commission is satisfied that,
on balance, the grant of a temporary
limited licence subject to the amenity conditions detailed in Appendix A would
not detract from
or be detrimental to the amenity of the area.
application may be refused if granting the application would be conducive to or
encourage harm.
Commission considers that in all circumstances, given the limitations on the
supply of liquor specifically proposed in Appendix
A, that the risk of harm
would be minimal. The Commission also notes that the requirement for service of
food with the supply of
alcohol also assists in the responsible service of
alcohol and the minimising of the risk of harm.
Commission further notes that both the Applicant and the Associate have
completed the RSA program.
Transcript, p13.
Section 44(2)(b)(ii).
Applicant completed the New Entrant training in January 2024. The Associate
completed that training in September 2023, prior to
the commission of the
offences. The Commission requires the Associate to retake that training no later
than 30 May 2025 in order
to obtain an enhanced knowledge of the Act and to
ensure that he maintains strict compliance with the LCR Act and the licence. A
condition will be imposed on the licence to this effect.
to the above reasons, the Commission does not consider that granting a temporary
limited licence would be conducive to or encourage
Objects of the LCR Act
the Commission is satisfied that no grounds for refusal exist under section
44(2), the Commission must exercise its discretion
whether or not to grant the
proposed temporary limited licence by the Commission with regard to the objects
of the LCR Act, particularly
harm minimisation, which is the primary
the imposition of the conditions in Appendix A, the Commission is satisfied that
adequate controls will exist over the supply
of liquor and that any harm should
be minimised. Accordingly, the Commission considers that the grant of a
temporary limited licence
in this instance would not be contrary to the LCR
Act’s object concerning harm minimisation.
the Commission considers that granting the temporary limited licence would
facilitate the development of a diversity of licensed
facilities reflecting
community expectations in furtherance of the object outlined in section 4(1)(b).
In her application, the Applicant
stated that there was no other similar
licensed premises serving a range of local wine in or around Ararat.
Decision on review
regard to all the matters set out above, the Commission has determined to set
aside the decision of the Delegate and to exercise
its discretion under section
158(2) to grant a temporary limited licence subject to the conditions set out in
Appendix A.
The 94 paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Mr
John Larkins (Acting Chair), Mr James O’Halloran (Deputy
Chair), and Ms
Sue Timbs (Commissioner).
licence is a limited licence and authorises the licensee to supply liquor on the
licensed premises for consumption on and off
the licensed premises during the
trading hours specified below.
The licensee shall not cause
or permit undue detriment to the amenity of the area to arise out of, or in
connection with the use of
the premises to which the licence relates during or
immediately after the trading hours authorised by this licence.
The licensee must not permit the playing of any live or recorded music on the
premises at higher than background music levels at any
Supply of liquor
supply of liquor shall be limited to no more than 10 lines of wine and 10 lines
The quantity of liquor supplied per order for off premises consumption must
not exceed two 750 ml bottles of wine and six 375 ml bottles/cans
of beer, and
supply is limited to one order per person per day.
Provision of food
Food must be
available for purchase at all times that liquor is being supplied.
Restrictions on sales and Deliveries
licensee must not use the above licensed premises to supply liquor to a person
who makes an off-premises request.
Responsible Service of Alcohol
staff involved in the supply or service of liquor must have completed an
approved Responsible Service of Alcohol course within
the preceding three
All copies of the Responsible Service of Alcohol certificate for each member
of staff must be at one central place within the licensed
area for inspection if
requested by a member of Victoria Police or a Liquor Inspector.
By no later than 30
May 2025, any associate of the licensee
pursuant to
Liquor Control Reform Act 1998
must complete a New
Entrant Training course including the current associate must recomplete the
Training course by such date.
Maximum capacities
30 patrons.
Period of licence
This licence has
effect and continues in force from 7 November 2024 until 7 November 2025
inclusive, during the trading hours specified
Trading hours
Thursday Between 5pm and 11pm
Friday and Saturday Between 12pm and 11pm
Sunday Between 12pm and 9pm
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (5.76 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter