URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2025/986.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:27:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bryant v Stonnington CC [2025] VCAT 986 (6 November 2025)
VICTORIAN CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT LIST
VCAT REFERENCE NOS. P813/2025 AND P818/2025
PERMIT APPLICATION NO. 798/24
Planning and Environment Act 1987
Planning and Environment Act 1987
application to cancel or amend a permit, application to stop development,
standing of applicant, notice of application to the Tribunal,
application
summarily dismissed.
Lance Bryant
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Stonnington City Council
St Edmonds JV Pty Ltd
Gemma Bryce
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
Stonnington City Council
St Edmonds JV Pty Ltd
SUBJECT LAND
4-12 St Edmonds Road
PRAHRAN VIC 3181
HEARING TYPE
Preliminary Hearing
DATE OF HEARING
14 October 2025
DATE OF ORDER
6 November 2025
Bryant v Stonnington CC [2025] VCAT 986
Proceedings
P813/2025 and P818/2025 remain as separate proceedings but were heard and are
determined together under
section 82(1)(b)
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
applications in proceedings P813/2025 and P818/2025 are dismissed under
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) because
each is misconceived.
proceeding P813/2025 the hearing listed for 8 December 2025 is vacated. No
attendance is required.
proceeding P818/2025 the hearing listed for 5 December 2025 is vacated. No
attendance is required.
applications in proceedings P813/2025 order P818/2025 under
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic) to restrain development are
additional party is joined to proceedings P813/2025 order
Sarah Porritt
APPEARANCES
For Lance Bryant
Lance Bryant, in person
For Gemma Bryce
Gemma Bryce, in person
For Paola Moderne and Justyn Winter
Paola Modernel, in person
For Lindsay Jane Barnard and Kyle Biller
Lindsay -Jane Barnard, in person
For Stonnington City Council
Georgina Strachan, town planner
For St Edmonds JV Pty Ltd
Rory O’Connor, solicitor, Hall and Wilcox
INFORMATION
Description of proposal for which a permit was
The planning permit issued allows for:
Use land for
office and dwellings in an Activity Centre Zone.
Construct a
building or construct or carry out works in an Activity Centre Zone.
number of car parking spaces required under the car parking
Nature of proceedings
Applications under
Planning and Environment Act
(Vic) – to cancel or amend a permit
Applications under section 93of the
Planning and Environment Act
(Vic) for an order that no development occur on the land.
Planning scheme
Stonnington Planning Scheme
Zone and overlays
Activity Centre Zone – Schedule 1
Development Contribution Plan Overlay – Schedule 1
Incorporated Plan Overlay – Schedule 3
10 September 2025 Stonnington City Council (‘Council’) issued 798/24
(‘Permit’) which allows the construction
of a building at 4 –
12 St Edmonds Road, Prahran. The permit allows a large building to be
constructed on land within the Activity
Centre Zone – Schedule 1 of the
Stonnington Planning Scheme.
Bryant and Gemma Bryce have submitted separate applications to cancel the Permit
which were the subject of a preliminary hearing
at which both matters were heard
Bryant and Gemma Bryce and surrounding residents were original objectors to the
Council granting a permit when they were first
notified of the application. The
Council decided to refuse to grant a permit and notified the objectors of its
decision to refuse
to grant a permit.
Edmonds JV Pty Ltd (‘St Edmonds JV’) exercised its right to apply to
the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(‘Tribunal’) for a
review of that decision.
Bryant and Gemma Bryce both say that any notice they received of that
application for review being made to the Tribunal and
of the hearing dates for
that review were deficient.
objectors to the application including Lance Bryant lodged statements of grounds
but did not attend the compulsory conference
held by the Tribunal. As it
transpired the Council and St Edmonds JV settled the matter at the compulsory
conference on terms which
required the Council to issue the Permit – which
that settlement, some of the original objectors were surprised and disappointed
by the outcome. Two separate proceedings
were lodged with the Tribunal which
sought to cancel the permit, to reconvene the compulsory conference and to allow
them to participate
in that process.
proceedings are brought under
section 89(1)
Planning and Environment
(Vic) (‘PE Act’) and both seek to cancel the
applications are made on the basis that notice of the application for review was
received significantly after the date by which
the Tribunal had ordered that
notice be given.
are other original objectors who received notice of the review prior to the date
by which the Tribunal had required it to be
is clear and undisputed is that notice was given, in the sense that envelopes
appropriately addressed were placed in the mail.
The service about which I have
clear evidence in the form of an affidavit is corroborated by the
contemporaneous statement of service
provided to the Tribunal and the timely
receipt of notice by at least one previous objector.
issue of a permit at the conclusion of a lawful process brings with it real and
valuable permission. The circumstances in which
the rights obtained can be
removed by the Tribunal are limited and applicants for cancellation of a permit
must meet specific requirements.
analysed the facts before me, in the context of the relevant provisions of the
PE Act, I have found that the applicants do
not fall into a category of person
who have the right (or standing) to make an application to cancel or amend the
have also found that there is no legislative basis upon which the Tribunal could
cancel or amend the permit.
this reason, I have ordered that the applications be dismissed as they are
misconceived.
have also declined to make an order restraining development from occurring on
the land. Even if the application for cancellation
had merit, I do not consider
that it would have been appropriate to make an order in the circumstances of
this case. There is little
prospect that the development would have proceeded in
any tangible way before this matter could be decided and the relevant factors
would not weigh in favour of restraining the applicant in this way.
have set out the basis of this decision below.
The preliminary hearing
proceedings were listed for a preliminary hearing to consider the following
To consider the
applications have been made under an
appropriate section of the PE Act;
To consider
whether, having regard to section 89(3) of the PE Act, the requests to cancel
Permit 798/24 were made as soon as practicable
after the applicants had notice
of the facts relied upon in support of the request;
To consider
whether applications P813/2025 and P818/2025 can be heard and determined
together under section 82(1)(b) of the
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 1987
(Vic) (‘VCAT Act’);
To consider the
requests for an order to stop development under section 93 of the PE Act; and
To consider the
future conduct of applications P813/2025 and P818/2025.
addition, as there were statements of grounds filed by other parties in each
proceeding, the Tribunal heard from those parties
and considered whether each of
those parties should be joined to the proceedings.
submissions filed prior to the hearing on behalf of St Edmond’s JV
indicated that the consequence of a finding that the
Tribunal lacked
was that the matter should be struck
out. The basis for this submission was set
out in its pre-filed submissions and all those present at the practice day
hearing agreed
that they were in a position to respond to those arguments.
the commencement of the hearing Mr O’Conner on behalf of St Edmonds JV
indicated that Ms Cottrell could attend the hearing
to give evidence and be
cross-examined on the affidavit she had prepared in relation to the giving of
notice of the application.
No party sought to cross-examine her or suggest that
her affidavit was factually incorrect. I have accepted her affidavit as an
record of what occurred.
the hearing Lance Bryant, Gemma Bryce, Paola Modernal and Lindsay-Jane Barnard
made submissions about their experience of receiving
notice and their response
to the application. Lance Bryant and Gemma Bryce presented emails and documents
which were said to represent
the experience of others who were not present and
did not seek to become parties.
have considered the material submitted comprising emails and responses to
questions from the applicants from people who did not
attend the hearing nor
seek to be joined to it. A table prepared by Lance Bryant indicates that 11
people either received notification
close to the date for submitting a Statement
of Grounds or responded to him saying that they did not receive notice at all.
have accepted at a general level that some people received notification close to
the date for submission of statements of grounds
and I do not exclude the
possibility that some people who did not seek to be joined to the application
may not have received the
notification material at all although I cannot form a
view as to why that would be. The material is further complicated by the fact
that Lance Bryant regards himself as not having received notice despite
receiving the documents required and submitting a statement
of grounds within
This is because he
understands that he received the documents from the Council and not from St
Edmonds JV.
findings on this issue are not material to my conclusion in this case in view of
my findings that the PE Act requires that
the relevant letters are posted rather
than requiring receipt. I have based my assessment on the most favourable
version to the applicants
of the facts presented to me.
BACKGROUND TO THE PROCEEDINGS
events relevant to the issue of the Permit and these applications
What happened
20 December 2024
The application for Permit 798/24 was lodged with the Council for use and
development of land at 4 – 12 St Edmonds Road, Prahran.
The application was advertised by sending notice to adjoining owners and
occupiers and placing two signs on the
10 June 2025
The Council issued a Notice of Decision to Refuse a Planning Permit.
11 June 2025
St Edmonds JV lodged an application under section 77 of the PE Act
requesting the Tribunal to review the Council’s refusal to
grant a permit.
(‘P537/2025’).
23 June 2025
The Tribunal issued orders in P537/2025 which required (amongst other
matters) that St Edmonds JV give notice to any referral authority
person who lodged a written objection to the grant of the permit (‘23 June
Tribunal Orders’).
7 July 2025
Letters were sent to those identified by the Council as being required to
be served with the
application.
9 July 2025
A statement of service was filed with the Tribunal indicating that notice
had been given.
9 July 2025
Paola Modernel and Justyn Winter received notice of the application. Paola
Modernel indicated that they decided to focus on other
matters and not to object
to this development. She was later surprised to learn from another developer
with whom Justin Winter had
met learn that this development had been
10 July 2025
This is the date by which St Edmonds JV was required to give notice of the
application to every person who lodged a written objection
to the grant of the
The Tribunal’s order commences:
24 July 2025
Lance Bryant received notification of the application on 24 July
He says he received it in an
envelope from Stonnington City Council posted on 21 July 2025. The Council says
it has no record of
sending any such letter. He has not retained the envelope
but made a note on the covering letter to this effect in the following
(taken from the top of the letter covering the package of information):
24 July 2025
Lance Bryant lodged a statement of grounds in proceeding P537/2025 and
indicated that he would not attend the hearing and would not
become a party. He
referred to the date on which he received notification of the application in his
statement of grounds in respect
of that application. He did not request any
particular action be taken in response to the date of notification.
His statement of grounds includes the following:
He sets out his bases for objection and concludes:
Lance Bryant says he had booked a holiday prior to receiving notice but
after 10 July 2025 and could not attend the compulsory conference.
His statement of grounds did not seek that the Tribunal take any action in
respect of the date on which he received the material.
He indicated that he did
not want to be a party and would not attend the hearing as follows:
In the application to cancel the Permit Lance Bryant identifies himself as
‘objector not notified’.
Lance Bryant says he rang Kellie Burns and UpCo but was not satisfied by
her response. He felt she was only interested in knowing
that he had received
the notice not in the fact that he had little time to respond.
Lance Bryant says he thought that other objectors would attend the
compulsory conference.
24 July 2025
Lindsay-Jane Barnard also says she received notice on this day although she
does not recall any details of the envelope or postage
date of the letter. She
says she regrets not acting more quickly and being overwhelmed by the process.
She says she did not take
further action like those others who did not put in
statements of grounds after receiving notice.
24 July 2025
Gemma Bryce also says she received the notification material on this date.
She says she worked full time and rang VCAT on the day
the statement of grounds
was due. She says she formed the view from that conversation that she would have
to have ‘exceptional
circumstances’ to put in a late statement of
grounds. She did not keep a note of what exactly she was told. She had tried to
get advice regarding the matter before then but did not get her application in
on the final day nor further pursue the matter at
that time as it ‘seemed
very difficult’.
She considered that the developer ought to have accessed the
objectors’ email addresses from the Council website and that this
have meant that service would have been received.
25 July 2025
The notification package was forwarded to the owners’ corporation for
distribution to other owners.
28 July 2025
Statements of Grounds were due in accordance with the Tribunal’s
order of 23 June 2025.
19 August 2025
The date of the compulsory conference set down in accordance with the
Tribunal’s orders of 23 June 2025.
28 August 2025
Tribunal order directs that a permit issue in accordance with and agreement
between the Council and St Edmonds JV at the compulsory
conference. A permit was
directed to issue for:
7 September 2025
Lance Bryant says he found out that an agreement has been reached between
St Edmonds JV and the Council and that permit would issue.
9 September 2025?
Permit was issued at the direction of the parties following agreement at
the compulsory conference.
10 September 2025
Gemma Bryce applied for cancellation of the Permit and for an order to stop
development.
11 September 2025
Lance Bryant applied to the Tribunal for cancelation of the Permit, and for
an order to stop development.
RELEVANT LEGISLATION
have set out here the
Planning and Environment Act 1987
(Vic.) (‘PE
Act’) relevant to applications to cancel or amend a permit as well as
application for orders to stop development
which are most relevant to the
discussion below.
are the grounds for cancellation or amendment of permits?
(1) The Tribunal may cancel or amend any permit if it considers that there has
(a) a material mis-statement or concealment of fact in relation to the
application for the permit; or
(b) any substantial failure to comply with the conditions of the permit; or
(c) any material mistake in relation to the grant of the permit; or
(d) any material change of circumstances which has occurred since the grant of
the permit; or
(e) any failure to give notice in accordance with this Act; or
(f) any failure to comply with section 55, 61(2) or 62(1).
(3) The Tribunal may cancel or amend a permit at the request of—
(a) the responsible authority; or
(b) any person under section 89; or
(c) a referral authority; or
(d) the owner or occupier of the land concerned; or
(e) any person who is entitled to use or develop the land concerned.
Without limiting the powers of the Tribunal, the Tribunal may, under
this section, cancel or amend a permit that has been issued at
its direction.
89 Request for cancellation or amendment
(1) Any person who objected or would have been entitled to object to the issue
of a permit may ask the Tribunal to cancel or amend
the permit if—
(a) the person believes that the person should have been given notice of the
application for the permit and was not given that
(b) the person believes that the person has been adversely affected by—
(i) a material mis-statement or concealment of fact in relation to the
application for the permit; or
(ii) any substantial failure to comply with the conditions of the permit; or
(iii) any material mistake in relation to the grant of the permit.
(2) The request must be made in writing in accordance with the regulations.
(3) The Tribunal may refuse to consider a request under this section or section
87 unless it is satisfied that the request has been
made as soon as practicable
after the person making it had notice of the facts relied upon in support of the
by Tribunal
(1) The Tribunal must give the following persons a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the hearing of any request—
(a) the responsible authority;
(b) the owner and the occupier of the land concerned;
(c) any person who asked for the cancellation or amendment of the permit under
section 87;
Determination
by Tribunal
(3) The Tribunal must not direct a responsible authority to cancel or amend a
permit on a request under section 89(1) unless it is
satisfied that—
(a) in the case of a request under section 89(1)(a) the person—
(i) could not reasonably be expected to have been aware of the application for
the permit in time to lodge an objection under Division
(ii) was substantially disadvantaged by the issue of the permit; and
(b) in the case of a request under section 89(1)(b), the person was
substantially disadvantaged by the matter set out in the request;
(c) it would be just and fair in the circumstances to do so.
to applications for permits
(1) Any person who may be affected by the grant of the permit may object to the
grant of a permit.
(1A) If the permit would allow the removal or variation of a registered
restrictive covenant or if anything authorised by the permit
would result in a
breach of a registered restrictive covenant, an owner or occupier of any land
benefited by the covenant is deemed
to be a person affected by the grant of the
(2) An objection must be made to the responsible authority in writing stating
the reasons for the objection and stating how the objector
would be affected by
the grant of the permit.
(2A) The responsible authority may reject an objection which it considers has
been made primarily to secure or maintain a direct
or indirect commercial
advantage for the objector.
(2B) If an objection has been rejected under subsection (2A) this Act
applies as if the objection had not been made.
(3) If a number of persons make one objection, they may give the responsible
authority the name and address of the person to whom
the responsible authority
is to give notice of the decision.
83A Objectors entitled to notice
(1) A person who objected to the grant of a permit under section 57 is entitled
to notice of an application by the applicant for
the permit for review of—
(a) a decision refusing to grant the permit; or
(b) a failure to grant the permit; or
(c) a decision imposing a condition on the permit.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a person if under a planning scheme the
person is not entitled to apply to the Tribunal under
section 82 for a review of
a decision to grant the permit.
and service of orders
(1) Unless this Act or the regulations authorise or require a notice or order to
be given in any other way, every notice or order
which this Act authorises or
requires a planning authority or responsible authority to give to or serve on
the owner or the occupier
of any land must be addressed to the owner or to the
occupier of the land and—
(2) Unless this Act or the regulations authorise or require a notice or order
to be given in any other way, a notice or order may
also be served by post by
prepaid letter addressed to the owner or occupier, and in proving service it is
sufficient to prove that
the notice or order was addressed to the usual or
last-known place of residence or of business of the owner or occupier and was
into the post.
(3) A notice or order under this Act may be addressed by the description of
"the owner" or "the occupier" of the land (naming it)
What does the Council say?
Council says that there is no basis for the applications. There is no suggestion
that the applicants were not notified of the
original permit application.
position is summarised in paragraph 2 of its submissions to the preliminary
hearing as follows:
Council’s submissions set out details of the notice given of the original
application under section 52 of the PE Act. There
is no dispute that notice of
application for permit was given nor that the applicants objected.
Council say there is no material mistake or concealment of fact and that the
applicants ought to have done more when they received
notification to lodge
their applications for review on time, or to raise their concerns with the
says a stop order is inappropriate as little has happened since the Permit was
What does St Edmonds JV say?
Edmonds JV relies upon the affidavit of Jacqueline Cottrell date 8 October 2025
(‘Cottrell affidavit’) who says:
(i) On 30 June 2025, UpCo received the list of objectors from Millicent
Baddeley, on behalf of Stonnington City Council;
(ii) On 4 July 2025, UpCo received an updated list of objectors from Jasmine
Baldock of Stonnington City Council;
(iii) On 7 July 2025, she prepared the letters to the objectors as required by
Order 3 in the Initiating Orders;
(iv) She typed and printed the address labels for each objector on the list,
then put them in the envelopes, ensuring they matched
the list provided by
(v) At approximately, 1:00pm on 7 July 2025, she posted the letters at the post
office across from the UpCo office at 3/401 St Kilda
Road, VCAT Melbourne, 55
King Street, MELBOURNE VIC 3000; and
(vi) On 9 July 2025, she completed a Statement of Service and electronically
filed the Statement of Service with the Tribunal, by
sending it to
admin@courts.vic.gov.au.
to the Cottrell affidavit were copies of the various documents referred to in
author of the Cottrell affidavit was available to give evidence at the hearing
but no one present required her to do so or wished
to cross-examine her as to
the contents of her affidavit. No one asserted that she had not posted the
letters as set out in her affidavit
or challenged her evidence. I accept her
evidence that the relevant letters were posted on 7 July 2025.
Edmonds JV addresses the requirements of the PE Act and says that:
(i) There is no basis to conclude any objectors have standing to bring an
application to cancel or amend the application;
(ii) That it concedes the applications for cancellation were made in a timely
manner after the Permit was issued;
(iii) The applications are not brought under the correct section of the PE Act
because there is no failure to give notice of the
application;
(iv) It does not object to the Tribunal amending the application so that it is
made under section 87(1)(e) of the PE Act which provides
The Tribunal may cancel or amend any permit if it
considers that there has been a failure to give notice in accordance with this
(v) While this ground of application is theoretically available, the applicants
would need to prove that there was a basis to conclude
that there had been a
failure to give notice in accordance with the PE Act;
(vi) They would also need to show that they are a person to whom section
89(1)(b)(iii) applies where the PE Act provides that
any person who objected
... to the issue of a permit may ask the Tribunal to cancel or amend the permit
(b) the person believes that the person has been adversely affected by
(iii) a material mistake in relation to the grant of the permit.
(vii) The applicant would also need to show how they were adversely affected by
a material mistake in relation to the grant of the
permit and that it is just
and fair in the circumstances to cancel the permit.
(viii) Fundamentally, St Edmonds JV says that the application must ‘fall
at the first hurdle’ because there has been
no failure to give notice in
accordance with the PE Act.
(ix) The applicants do not have standing to bring the application and it says
that there is no basis for the applications to be
(x) It also says that it has various other arguments about whether it would be
just and fair to amend or cancel the permit which
it says are primarily for a
final hearing if the Tribunal considers that there is a basis to consider the
application.
(xi) It accepts that negotiating the sections of the PE Act is not easy but that
there is ultimately no material mistake upon which
to found the applications
Bryant received the application and did lodge a statement of grounds;
was in fact given to both applicants which complied with the Tribunal’s
of the applicants in fact were in fact given notice and some 26 days prior to
the compulsory conference.
says that on this basis, the application should be summarily dismissed under
section 75(1) of the VCAT Act.
Do the applicants have standing to request cancellation of
the permit?
are a limited number of categories of persons who may apply to cancel a permit
as set out in section 89(3) of the PE Act:
(3) The Tribunal may cancel or amend a permit at the request of—
(a) the responsible authority; or
(b) any person under section 89; or
(c) a referral authority; or
(d) the owner or occupier of the land concerned; or
(e) any person who is entitled to use or develop the land concerned.
only category into which the applicants may fall is ‘any person under
section 89’ of the PE Act. Section 89(1) of
the PE Act relevantly
(1) Any person who objected or would have been entitled to object to the issue
of a permit may ask the Tribunal to cancel or amend
the permit if—
(a) the person believes that the person should have been given notice of the
application for the permit and was not given that notice;
(b) the person believes that the person has been adversely affected by—
(i) a material mis-statement or concealment of fact in relation to the
application for the permit; or
(ii) any substantial failure to comply with the conditions of the permit; or
(iii) any material mistake in relation to the grant of the permit.
of the applicants are people who would have been entitled to object to the issue
of a permit.
89(1)(a) of the PE Act applies to the giving of notice of the original permit.
In this circumstance subsection (a) does not
apply because notice of the permit
application was given and each of the applicants had notice and did in fact
object. This is not
in dispute. It follows that no application can be made under
section 89(1)(a) of the PE Act.
(b) requires a person to be adversely affected by one of 3
circumstances:
(i) A material mis-statement or concealment of fact;
(ii) A substantial failure to comply with the conditions of the permit;
(iii) A material mistake in relation to the permit.
circumstances in (ii) do not apply as there is no failure to comply with the
conditions of the recently issued permit alleged.
applicants do not precisely articulate the mistake or material mis-statement
which they say has been made in respect of the grant
of the permit but all agree
that their complaints relate to the alleged defects in the notice of the
Tribunal application made by
St Edmonds JV. This complaint relates to the
receipt of notice rather than the giving of notice.
complaint does not fall within the scope of a material mis-statement or
concealment of fact in relation to the application for
the permit as set out in
only potential basis for the applicants to have standing to bring the
application is that there was a material mistake in relation
to the grant of a
permit under section 87(b)(iii) of the PE Act. Again, that mistake is not
clearly defined but relates to the giving
of notice. At its highest the alleged
mistake would be that people were in the words of the applicants ‘not
given notice’
or alternatively received notification too late to
participate in the hearing (or not at all).
the reasons elaborated upon below I do not consider that there was any material
mistake because:
of the application was in fact given in accordance with the Tribunal’s
orders of 23 June 2025;
if, contrary to my view, (i) were not sufficient to conclude this question, if
the applicants had wished to make a complaint
notification, they had the opportunity to raise this with the Tribunal and
request procedural orders
to address this;
Bryant did refer to late receipt of the application material but did not request
an adjournment or to otherwise participate
in the compulsory conference other
than by having his statement of grounds
considered;
existence of other people who had chosen not to bring their circumstances to the
attention of the Tribunal in any formal way,
is not a ‘mistake’ but
a consequence of not acting on this information. Had this been formally raised
and, for example
an adjournment sought on the basis that someone who wanted to
participate in a particular manner could not, the Tribunal could at
have considered such a request. No evidence was provided of such a request being
made prior to the matter being concluded
before the Tribunal.
the reasons set out below I find that notice of the application to the Tribunal
by the St Edmonds JV of the application for review
of the Council’s notice
of refusal to grant a permit was given in accordance with the Act.
the extent that there was a complaint that the documents had been received late
- that matter was explicitly brought to the Tribunal’s
attention in the
statement of grounds filed by Mr Bryant. He did not seek any particular orders
from the Tribunal as a result of
the date on which he had received the
follows that none of the applicants have standing to make the applications.
analysis is interrelated with whether there is any available basis to make an
order which I have addressed next.
Is there an available basis to make an order under section
addition to proving that a person has standing to make an application they must
also prove that there is a basis upon which the
application can be made. The
available bases are set out in section 87(1) of the PE Act as follows:
(a) a material mis-statement or concealment of fact in relation to the
application for the permit; or
(b) any substantial failure to comply with the conditions of the permit; or
(c) any material mistake in relation to the grant of the permit; or
(d) any material change of circumstances which has occurred since the grant of
the permit; or
(e) any failure to give notice in accordance with this Act; or
(f) any failure to comply with section 55, 61(2) or 62(1).
set out above, the applicants do not specifically assert and I have not
identified any mis-statement, concealment or material mistake
in relation to the
grant of the permit identified by the circumstances of notification relied upon
by the applicants. Nor does 87(1)(a)
of the PE Act apply as this relates to
notification of the original permit application.
is a separate basis for making an application which most resembles the matters
sought to be agitated by the applicants. This
is section 87(1)(e) of the PE Act.
This is available where a failure to give notice in accordance with the Act has
occurred. I have
considered whether the application has a prospect of success
under this section. St Edmonds JV does not object to me amending the
application
in order to consider this issue despite this not being expressly stated in the
applications.
is no dispute that the applicants were entitled to be given notice of St Edmond
JV’s application pursuant to section 83A
of the PE Act which
(1) A person who objected to the grant of a permit under section 57 is entitled
to notice of an application by the applicant for
the permit for review of—
(a) a decision refusing to grant the permit; or
Tribunal’s orders required this notice to be given by 10 July 2025. The
Cottrell affidavit states the letters were posted
before that date.
requirement for giving notice under the PE Act is set out in section 145(2) of
the PE Act:
Unless this Act or the regulations authorise or require a notice or order to be
given in any other way, a notice or order may also
be served by post by prepaid
letter addressed to the owner or occupier, and in proving service it is
sufficient to prove that the
notice or order was addressed to the usual or
last-known place of residence or of business of the owner or occupier and was
Cottrell affidavit deposes that service was affected in accordance with this
requirement of the PE Act. It was in fact sent 3
days prior to the due date
specified in the Tribunal’s orders.
Modernel submitted at the hearing that she received notice on the 9 July 2025
which corroborates the sending of letters as set
out in the Cottrell affidavit.
145(b) of the PE Act sets out what is required to prove service. That is that
the letters were put in the post in the appropriate
form not that they are
received. That is, it is the posting not the receipt which is required by the PE
Act to effect service.
the position submitted by Lance Bryant that the letter he received was in fact
sent to him later by the Council does not
affect the analysis as to whether
service has been proved. Notice to him was still given under the PE Act by the
posting of the letters
- whether or not it was
Gemma Bryce says that she did receive notification although she does not recall
any details of the envelope in which it
was received. She says she received the
documents on 24 July 2025 and did not submit a statement of grounds on the day
on 28 July 2025. She says she rang the Tribunal and was told that
there would be additional requirements for applications submitted
after the due
date. She says this dissuaded her from lodging a late application. She also did
not submit it via the Tribunal website
at any time on the day it was due (or
after that date).
am unable to form the view that notice was not given in accordance with the PE
Act, even though I accept that copies of the relevant
documents were received by
them later than would have been expected.
am not required to interrogate the circumstances surrounding the receipt of each
item of mail. This is consistent with the operation
of the PE Act. If the
Tribunal were required to interrogate the circumstances and fate of every item
of correspondence sent to notify
people of planning applications including
whether the person served had actually taken delivery of notification given by
would significantly impair that ability to make decisions. As Mr
Bryant rightly said at the hearing he does not know whether his
neighbours check
their mailboxes and nor could the Tribunal.
findings are consistent with those of DP Gibson in
relevant that the ground in section 87(1)(e) refers only to a failure to
notice. It does not refer to failure to
would be most unfair to a permit holder if a permit could be cancelled or
amended at the request of a third party when
all the procedures specified under
the Act relating to the issue of the permit had been complied with simply on the
basis that, for
some reason, the notice given did not come to the attention of
the objector even though it was sent.
find that service has been affected in accordance with the requirements of the
follows that the applications sought to be made by the applicants cannot
note that it is, perhaps unfortunate, that each of the applicants who are now
dissatisfied with the agreement made by the Council,
did not more fully
ventilate their concerns before the compulsory conference or even before the
Tribunal gave effect to the agreement
and directed that a permit issue. There
are procedures available for requesting adjournments and practice day hearings
to raise such
matters with the Tribunal.
does not however, lead to a conclusion that there is a basis for the Permit to
be cancelled or amended under the PE Act or the
review process
recommenced.
Were the applications made as soon as possible?
St Edmonds JV rightly concedes, the applications were made as soon as
practicable after those making the applications had notice
of the facts relied
upon in support of the request. Both applications were made less than 2 days
after the permit issued.
there was a basis for the applications in these proceedings, they would not be
precluded by section 89(3) of the PE Act by reason
of any delay on the part of
the applicants.
Should the matter be struck out under section 75(1) of the
view of the findings I have made, I have decided that the matters should be
summarily dismissed under section 75(1) of the VCAT
Act as both applications are
misconceived.
applicable principles were succinctly summarised in
Axicom Pty Ltd
For a proceeding to be summarily dismissed:
the proceeding
must be obviously unsustainable in fact or in law, can on no reasonable view
justify relief, or must be bound to fail,
the power to
order summary dismissal should be exercised with great care and should never be
exercised unless it is clear that there
is no real question to be tried. Indeed,
it must be ‘very clear’ that the proceeding is ‘absolutely
the power should
not be invoked where all that is shown is that, on the material currently before
VCAT, the applicant may fail adduce
evidence substantiating an essential element
of the complaint.
a proceeding
should not be summarily dismissed if the ultimate fate of the proceeding depends
upon disputed questions of fact that
could be established by evidence yet to be
adduced or tested.
the respondent
to a proceeding bears the persuasive burden of showing ‘that the complaint
is undoubtedly hopeless’.
the present case, I have formed the view that that the case is undoubtedly
hopeless. The case brought by the applicants under section
87(1)(a) of the PE
Act is unsustainable. Even if it were amended to take in other subsections of
section 87(1) and particularly section
87(1)(e) of the PE Act it is doomed to
fail because notice of the application to the Tribunal was given in accordance
with the PE
follows that both proceedings P813/2025 and P818/2025 will be
Application for an order to stop development.
applications include an application to the Tribunal to make an order under
section 93 of the PE Act restraining St Edmonds JV
from acting in accordance
with the Permit. Section 93 of the PE Act states:
to stop development
(1) The Tribunal may, if it considers it appropriate, order that pending the
hearing of a request no development other than that
specified in the order is to
be carried out or continued on the land.
(1A) Before making an order, the Tribunal must consider whether the person
making the request should give any undertaking as to damages.
(2) The responsible authority must give notice of the order without delay to the
persons and in the manner the Tribunal directs or
(if no direction is given) as
are prescribed.
(3) Any person to whom the notice is given who fails to comply with the notice
is guilty of an offence.
Bryant says that he requested this order because if he were permitted to
‘re-run’ the permit application proceeding
he did not want the
building to be half built before that was considered. In particular he did not
want that to be used as a reason
not to cancel or amend the permit or to dictate
the outcome of the decision making process.
relevant factors for making a stop order have been likened to the considerations
relevant to making an interim enforcement order
and summarised as follows by DP
60 Martin Close Developments Pty Ltd v
effect of not granting the stop order;
irreparable damage would occur to the applicant if the stop order is not
effect the stop order would have on the respondents;
there is a prima facie case for the making of a stop order;
if a prima facie case is established, are there other considerations that would
make the granting of a stop order unjust;
the applicant has given an undertaking as to
the Tribunal should hear from any other person.
decline to make such an order because:
have found that the applications are misconceived and have dismissed them;
physical works are proposed to occur in accordance with the permit in the short
term as there are a number of preconditions to
commencement in the Permit
requiring detailed reports, and amended plans to be prepared and submitted to
the Council;
undertaking as to damages had been offered which would have weighed against
making the order;
action taken by the St Edmonds JV would have been taken in the knowledge of the
applications and would have been at its own risk.
concern expressed by Lance Bryant would not have formed a sufficient basis for
such an order as the Tribunal frequently considers
applications for approval or
works completed or partially completed. These are considered in accordance with
established principles
which offer no advantage to the applicant when an
existing or partially constructed building is considered.
Applications to join the proceedings
applications have been made to join the proceedings. I have addressed these
briefly as I heard from Paola Modernel and Lyndsay-Jane
Barnard at the hearing.
In view of my decision to strike the proceedings out I have not joined any
further parties. Had the proceedings
not been struck out I would have joined
Lyndsay-Jane Barnard and Kyle Biller but would not have joined Paola Modernel or
Justyn Winter.
Paola Modernel and Justyn Winter
Modernel attended the hearing on behalf of herself and Justyn Winter. She
explained that they had both been served with the
application on 9 July 2025.
She said that they were involved in opposing a different application and did not
think this one would
be approved.
would like to be involved in the proceedings if it goes ahead because she
opposes the permit being issued and would like to be
Edmonds JV opposes this application saying that there is no possible basis for
the application to cancel a permit as these people
clearly received notice
within time and have no standing to make an application.
agree with the submissions of St Edmonds JV. I would not have granted this
application to join as it is apparent from the discussion
above that there is no
basis upon which they could have standing to bring an application. Having
received notification of the application
with more than 21 days to lodge a
statement of grounds and having chosen not to do so, does not demonstrate any
basis for making
an application to cancel a Permit resulting from a process in
which they chose not to take part.
have declined to join Paola Mordernel and Justyn Winter.
Lyndsay-Jane Barnard and Kyle Biller
Lynday-Jane
Barnard and Kyle Biller seek to be joined to Gemma Bryce’s application
saying that she only found out about the
VCAT application on 24 July 2025 and
did not have enough time to prepare and lodge her grounds for objection.
Edmonds JV say that they accept that Lyndsay-Jane Barnard is in the same
position as Gemma Bryce and do not oppose her being joined
as a party to the
proceedings if they are not struck out.
I not struck out the application I would have joined them as I agree that they
are in the same position as Gemma Bryce as people
whose interests were
Had there been a basis
for Gemma Bryce’s application to be made, that would also have applied to
the circumstances, I have not joined them because I have struck out both
proceedings.
Hearing dates vacated
orders reflect the reasons set out here. In addition, I have vacated the dates
set down of the hearing of the matters.
Sarah Porritt
The submissions and evidence
of the parties, any supporting exhibits given at the hearing, and the statements
of grounds filed;
have all been considered in the determination of the
proceeding. In accordance with the practice of the Tribunal, not all of this
material will be cited or referred to in these reasons.
I note that the Tribunal has
previously found where a person alleges failure to give notice to an owner or
occupier who was not
one of the applicants for cancellation the person
requesting the application does not have standing to make that request relying
on the failure of notification to others. See
Strathbogie
[2021] VCAT 1274
to [93]. This is also consistent with
the findings of DP Bisucci in
Merri-bek CC
[2023] VCAT
The delegate’s report
for records that notice was given under section 52(2) of the PE Act and no party
disputed that proposition
at the hearing.
See affidavit of Jacqueline
Cottrell (Urban Planning Collective).
Per email from Ms Bryce and
her written and oral submissions.
See paragraph Lance
Bryant’s submissions.
All parties and people
attending the hearing confirmed that they had come ready to address this and the
other arguments raised in
the submissions made on behalf of St Edmonds JV.
If this is not correct and it
were alleged that there was a material misstatement about service, I would
reject that proposition
on the basis of the uncontradicted affidavit sworn by Ms
Cottrell. The fact that at least one person had received notice close to
state for filing the Statement of Grounds was a matter of which the Tribunal was
made aware by Lance’s Bryant’s statement
of grounds.
I note that have a statement
of grounds considered is different from requiring that the grounds not be
upheld. There is not basis
to conclude that this was not taken into account at
the compulsory conference and nor do I have any evidence of what has occurred
beyond the observations of the Tribunal member recorded in the orders directing
the permit to issue.
This finding alone is
sufficient to dispose of both proceedings.
He did in fact receive
notification of what was in the letters and lodged a Statement of Grounds.
[2007] VCAT 121.
[2020] VCAT 190
[2022] VCAT 627
No undertaking as to
damages was offered in this case.
In accordance with section
60 of the PE Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (8.46 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter