URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VMHRB/2008/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
08-133 [2008] VMHRB 3 (26 February 2008)
In the Appeal of P
An involuntary patient
Kingston Centre
[2008] VMHRB 3
Date of Hearing:
26 February
Board Members
Ms A Murphy
Dr B Taylor
Section 14 –
Mental Health Act 1986
Charter of Human
Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
– limitations on
rights– cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
P was an 80 year old woman who was an involuntary patient at Kingston Centre
diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia who had been an
involuntary patient since
1998. P told the Board that she had lodged an appeal against her involuntary
status because Dr P was prolonging
a private vendetta. P also told the Board
that she was having a two-weekly injection but that she didn’t want it
because she
believes it is prone to giving people strokes, heart trouble and
Parkinson’s Disease. She doesn’t believe that she suffers
has ever suffered from, a mental illness and would definitely not take the
injections or oral medication if she had a choice.
Dr P told the Board that he had known P since 1990 and that he had treated
her constantly since that time, with the exception of one
six-month period. He
said that he believed that she suffered from paranoid schizophrenia and was
concerned that her symptoms were
not in remission. Although not raised by the
parties, the Board considered that P’s matter engaged human rights
protected by
the Charter and was mindful of the need to consider the provisions
of the Charter when applying the provisions of the Act. In the
view, the human right most directly engaged by P’s circumstances was the
right to protection from cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment
(section 10
(1) P met all of the criteria in
of the Act.
(2) P was also explicit in both her appeal and her evidence that she did not
consent to the medical treatment that she has received.
The Board acknowledged
that P’s views on these matters were sincere and strongly held, and
accepted that she suffers considerable
distress as a result of her ongoing
involuntary treatment.
(3) The issue for the Board in these circumstances was to consider in its
application of the
criteria whether the limits imposed by the
community treatment order on P’s right to protection from cruel, inhuman
or degrading
treatment and, more specifically, medical treatment to which she
did not consent, were reasonable and demonstrably justified in
democratic society based on human dignity, equality and freedom.
(4) Having considered the matters set out in
section 7(2)
of the Charter, the
Board concluded that the purpose of the limitation of P’s human rights by
the use of a community treatment
order in this instance was to protect P from
further deterioration of her mental health and the consequent deterioration of
physical health and significant social relationships. The Board’s
view was that the severity and longevity of P’s illness
(which it has
found renders her incapable of giving (or refusing to give) informed consent to
her treatment), together with the
significant risks to her mental and physical
health and significant social relationships, make it reasonable to limit
human rights in this instance.
(5) Most relevantly, the Board considered that it was consistent with the
limitations expressed in
section 7(2)
to limit P’s right not to be
subjected to medical treatment without her full, free and informed consent.
Appeal against involuntary status - appeal dismissed.
Date of Decision: 26 February 2008
MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE
DETERMINATION
Kingston Centre
REFERENCE NO:
DATE OF HEARING:
26 February 2008
PATIENT'S INITIALS:
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Decision of the authorised psychiatrist made under
Mental Health
") that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary patient
subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD:
Legal Member: Ms A Murphy
Community Member: Ms V McCutcheon
Psychiatrist Member: Dr B Taylor
ATTENDANCES:
At the hearing of the Board on 26 February 2008:
Doctor: Dr P
DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD:
The Board was satisfied that the continued treatment of P as an involuntary
patient subject to a community treatment order was necessary.
The Board therefore confirmed the community treatment order. The appeal of P
was therefore dismissed.
DATE OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
26 February 2008
EFFECT OF THE BOARD'S DECISION:
That P continues to be treated as an involuntary patient subject to a
community treatment order.
INFORMATION CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD:
on Involuntary Status dated 21 February 2008 prepared by Dr P and presented to
Plan of P dated 13 August 2007, prepared by Dr P and presented to the Board.
4. Oral evidence at the hearing.
5. Appeal of P, dated 15 October 2007.
, if the Board is satisfied that a person subject to a community
treatment order does not satisfy the criteria specified in
, the Board must
discharge the person from the community treatment order. Therefore, the Board
considered:
P appear to be mentally ill; and
P 's mental illness require immediate treatment and can that treatment be
obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment of P subject to a
community treatment order necessary for her health
or safety (whether to prevent
a deterioration in her physical or mental condition or otherwise) or for the
protection of members
of the public; and
P refused or is she unable to consent to the necessary treatment for the mental
illness; and
P receive adequate treatment for the mental illness in a manner less restrictive
of her freedom of decision and action?
, the Board must review the patient’s treatment
plan to determine whether:
authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing, or revising
the plan (as the case may be); and
plan is capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
P is an 80 year old woman who is an involuntary patient at Kingston Centre
diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia who has been an involuntary
patient since
1998. She was most recently admitted to hospital in July 2007 after refusing to
allow her case manager to administer
her injection and has had previous
admissions in 1986 and 1998. The matter came before the Board by way of an
appeal lodged by P
on 15 October 2007. The basis of the appeal was stated
“Dr P is prolonging the interference of a private vendetta –
also the private vendetta ended 10 years ago – after
18 years of
persecution, I have no respect whatsoever for Dr P. I find him to be a power
hungry dictator lacking a conscience –
he is forcing unjust injections
into me – being 80 years of age I would appreciate my last few years in
peace, free from P
– as for P, he is more to be pitied.”
The appeal was accompanied by a letter of the same date which expanded on the
matters raised in the appeal.
Evidence of P
P told the Board that she had lodged the appeal
because Dr P was prolonging a private vendetta. She said he didn’t listen
her because he was conspiring with Mrs R, the wife of a doctor with whom P
had had an affair many years earlier. P told the Board
that the affair had
lasted for forty years and that Mrs R had set her private detectives onto P.
These detectives used to enter
her house, steal her private papers, jewellery
and all manner of other things. They also used to take her clothes and return
in a different size. P told the Board that she went to the police about
this in desperation twenty four years ago but that the police
had referred her
Mental Health Act
. They sent her to Larundel where she came into
P told the Board that she has lived in her flat in Brighton for thirty four
years. She said that Mrs R’s private detectives
entered her flat using
magnet keys and that she had changed the locks on her flat in Brighton four
times before the locksmith showed
her how the magnet keys are used. She thinks
Mrs R’s detectives stopped entering the house and taking things about ten
ago but that the police also had magnet keys and used them to try and get
into her flat in Brighton in November 2006. On that occasion
they used the
magnet key to open the security door but she had bolted her inside door so they
kicked it down and dragged her down
the stairs. P told the Board that she
thought that this was the last time that anyone had used the magnet keys to
enter her flat.
P told the Board that she is currently having a two weekly injection but that
she didn’t want it because she believes it is
prone to giving people
strokes, heart trouble and Parkinson’s. She doesn’t believe that
she suffers from or has ever
suffered from a mental illness and would definitely
not take the injections or oral medication if she had a choice.
In response to Dr P’s evidence, P told the Board that the matter was
simply a private vendetta and she had no signs of any mental
illness. The
so-called symptoms were simply that she had spoken the truth about her affair
twenty three years ago. In response
to a question from the Board, P said that
Dr P was probably conspiring with Mrs R, who wanted revenge for her husband 40
She thinks this must be so because Dr P knows things about P and Mrs
R that P hadn’t told him, so she thinks he must have
learned these from
Mrs R. She said that she didn’t know how recently Dr P had spoken to Mrs
R or whether Mrs R was even still
alive given that she would now be over 85
In response to a question from the Board as to whether she had sought a
second opinion, P said that since she had been in the mental
health system she
had only seen doctors that Dr P had spoken to first and she thought that he had
turned their minds against her
beforehand. She said that she had gone to see
Professor O and told him that it was all a private vendetta and he had said that
too bad but she still needed treatment. She had also gone to see Dr M who
had been quite pleasant and had written a report saying
nothing against her. In
response to a question from the Board as to whether she might feel more
comfortable accepting treatment
from another doctor such as her GP, she said
that she only saw her general practitioner when there was something wrong with
she wouldn’t feel more confident accepting her injections from him
because she doesn’t need them. She doesn’t
believe she has symptoms
as described by Dr P and she is positive that she doesn’t have a mental
illness or any symptoms of
one. P said that she didn’t get depressed or
distressed as claimed by Dr P, but only felt angry.
P told the Board that she saw Dr P about once in six
months and a case manager came in every fortnight and simply gave her an
and left. A lot of her friends have died recently, at least eight in
the last few years. She sees her daughter J quite a lot and
she is very good to
her. She disagrees with Dr P that there is any financial risk and told the
Board it was her money to spend as
she wished and her daughter supported her in
this. She has an investment property in Wagga and she went up there a number of
ago because somebody told her that if she left the state she could get
away from mental health services.
Evidence of Dr P
Dr P told the Board that he had known P since 1990
and that he had treated her constantly since that time, with the exception of
six month period. He said that he believed that she suffered from paranoid
schizophrenia and was concerned that her symptoms were
not in remission. Dr P
said although P had told the Board that morning that she did not believe anyone
had tried to use the magnet
keys since November 2006, more recent file notes
indicated that she still believed they were being used to enter her house and he
believed her evidence before the Board at the hearing showed that P was still
actively symptomatic and not completely treated.
Dr P told the Board that he believed that if P did not continue to receive
treatment, her symptoms would deteriorate which would cause
increasing distress
to her. Dr P acknowledged the distress P now suffered as a result of receiving
involuntary treatment but considered
that her distress would be significantly
higher if she did not receive treatment. Dr P also stated that he considered
that any risk
posed by P was solely to herself but that this risk was quite high
given her ongoing symptoms which were held at bay by the medication.
that he thought that she remained well because she was receiving treatment and
that the result of her ceasing treatment
would be that she would suffer
psychiatric distress and the consequences of her becoming unwell again which may
also include a deterioration
of her physical health. In Dr P’s view the
degree of the problem was evident in the fact that she had tried to move to New
South Wales to escape treatment and that she had felt the need to contact police
because of her belief that her home was being invaded.
In his experience it
would not be usual for symptoms of that kind of intensity to be remitted and he
expected that they would return
without treatment.
If this occurred he would expect her delusions to become more prominent, for
example that people were entering her flat and removing
things, and the
persecution ideation would persist. He would be concerned that she may try to
act on her delusions by trying to
known if Mrs R was still alive. He thought if she became non-compliant that she
need to be readmitted to hospital to be stabilised on medication and this
would be far more distressing for her. He considered that
she had been able to
stay out of hospital in recent years because she was receiving treatment.
Dr P told the Board that P had prepared very well for her retirement and had
managed to maintain two investment properties. In the
past there had been
considerable financial risk to P as a result of her illness, although this had
been largely mitigated more recently
by her daughter exercising a power of
attorney over P’s finances. Recently P was legally represented before the
her daughter had agreed to pay the costs of that legal
representation.
In conclusion Dr P told the Board that P’s illness was very well
encapsulated and when treated affected only a small part of
her life, however in
his view it could very easily spread to other areas if she became acutely unwell
Other evidence
The Board noted the contents of P’s clinical
file which contained relevant evidence.
In order to be satisfied that the continued treatment of a person as an
involuntary patient subject to a community treatment order
is necessary, the
Board must be satisfied that the criteria in
have been met.
The Board considered each of the criteria in turn.
Does P appear to be mentally ill?
Section 8(1A)
"Subject to sub-section (2), a person is mentally ill if he or she has a
mental illness, being a medical condition that is characterised
by a significant
disturbance of thought, mood, perception or memory."
The Board has considered the exclusionary criteria in
and has decided
that these were not relevant in this case.
The Board accepted the medical evidence of Dr P that P has suffered from a
psychotic disorder diagnosed as paranoid schizophrenia
for over twenty years.
It was clear to the Board from P’s own evidence that she continues to have
delusional beliefs to the
effect that people had repeatedly entered her home
using magnet keys. Although P told the Board that she did not think this had
happened since November 2006, the Board was satisfied that P remained firmly of
the view that these events had taken place in the
In relation to her beliefs as to her past relationship with a doctor and his
wife and the consequent series of home invasions, the
Board notes Dr P’s
view as set out in his report to the effect that these beliefs form part of her
delusional ideas in contrast
to P’s strongly held view that the events
took place exactly as she described. The Board makes no finding on the issue
considers that the thoughts and beliefs of P based on the documented history
suggested there were significant delusional themes involved.
P also stated that she had seen two other psychiatrists for second opinions
although she considered that Dr P had turned those doctors’
beforehand. The Board notes that the reports of those psychiatrists were not
available to it at the hearing.
On that basis, the Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Does P's mental illness require immediate treatment and can
that treatment be obtained by making P subject to a community treatment
The word "treatment" is defined in
as follows:
"treatment", in relation to a mental disorder, means things done in the
course of the exercise of professional skills to-
(a) remedy the mental disorder; or
(b) lessen its ill-effects or the pain and suffering which it causes.
The Board was satisfied that P’s beliefs were such that even with
medication and ongoing treatment, they remain fixed although
relatively mild and
have an ongoing effect on P. The Board was satisfied that immediate treatment
was required and that it could
be obtained by making P subject to a community
treatment order.
On that basis, the Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Because of P’s mental illness, is involuntary treatment
of P subject to a community treatment order necessary for her health
(whether to prevent a deterioration in her physical or mental condition or
otherwise) or for the protection of members
of the public?
The Board considered that the involuntary treatment of P was necessary to
prevent a deterioration of her own mental condition and
that without continuing
treatment P’s condition was likely to deteriorate. The Board accepted Dr
P’s evidence that if
this occurred he would expect her delusions to become
more prominent and the persecution ideation to persist, which might require
to be readmitted to hospital and stabilised on medication. The Board was
mindful also of P’s age and was concerned that
should relapse occur, it
might be expected to be severe and to take considerable time to stabilise. In
his report Dr P also expressed
concern that if P became unwell, she may begin to
challenge her daughter’s decisions as to her finances and that this would
be distressing and place an unnecessary strain on an otherwise important family
relationship.
Although Dr P expressed a concern that if P became non-compliant and relapsed
she might try to contact Mrs R again, the Board did
not understand him to be
expressing a view that P was a risk to anyone but herself and the Board was
satisfied that P posed no risk
On that basis, the Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Has P refused or is she unable to consent to the necessary
treatment for the mental illness?
P was emphatic in her evidence to the Board and stated on a number of
occasions during the hearing that she did not consider that
she had a mental
illness. The Board notes from Dr P’s evidence and the clinical file that
this is in accordance with her views
expressed over a long period of time. P
also told the Board that she would not continue taking treatment of any kind if
her choice and that it would not make a difference if that treatment was
prescribed by another doctor such as her general practitioner.
On the basis of this evidence, the Board was satisfied that P had little if
any understanding of the nature of her illness and was
therefore unable to give
informed consent for the necessary treatment.
On that basis, the Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Is P unable to receive adequate treatment for the mental
illness in a manner less restrictive of her freedom of decision and
P was very clear at the hearing that her wish was to receive no treatment at
all. When the Board attempted to explore alternative
mechanisms for that
treatment to be delivered, for example via her general practitioner, P indicated
that she would not voluntarily
accept treatment from anyone at all because she
did not have a mental illness and did not need it.
Dr P’s report states in part that P seems not to be able to recognise
that the decision to treat her involuntarily “has
been made on the
collective but independent opinions of a range of people from medical and
non-medical backgrounds in a range of
settings and across multiple times. She
continues to insist that she will not co-operate with treatment as she does not
that she has a mental illness and considers this an invasion of her
In the Board’s view, all of the evidence supports a conclusion that P
would not accept any treatment for her illness if she
were not required to by
law and that therefore she is not able to receive adequate treatment in a manner
less restrictive of her
freedom of decision and action.
The Board was satisfied that this criterion was met.
Review of Treatment Plan
In reviewing a patient’s treatment plan, the
Board must be satisfied that the requirements of
met. The Board considered each of the requirements in turn.
Section 35A(1)(a)
Has the authorised psychiatrist complied with
in making, reviewing
or revising the plan (as the case may be)?
Section 19A(2)
(2) In preparing, reviewing and revising a treatment plan for a patient, the
authorised psychiatrist must take into account—
(a) the wishes of the patient, as far as they can be ascertained; and
(b) unless the patient objects, the wishes of any guardian, family member or
primary carer who is involved in providing ongoing care
or support to the
patient; and
(c) whether the treatment to be carried out is only to promote and maintain
the patient's health or well-being; and
(d) any beneficial alternative treatments available; and
(e) the nature and degree of any significant risks associated with the
treatment or any alternative treatment; and
(f) any prescribed matters.
(3) The treatment plan for a patient who is detained in an approved mental
health service must contain an outline of the treatment
the patient is to
(4) The treatment plan for a patient who is subject to a community treatment
order or restricted community treatment order must contain
or specify—
(a) an outline of the treatment the patient is to receive; and
(b) the authorised psychiatrist or delegate of the authorised psychiatrist
who is to monitor the patient's treatment ("monitoring
psychiatrist"); and
(c) the registered medical practitioner who is to supervise the patient's
treatment ("supervising medical practitioner"); and
(d) the patient's case manager; and
(e) the place at which the patient is to receive treatment; and
(f) the times at which the patient is required to attend to receive
treatment; and
(g) the intervals at which the supervising medical practitioner must submit a
written report concerning the patient's treatment to
the monitoring
psychiatrist.
(5) A treatment plan may contain anything else the authorised psychiatrist
thinks appropriate.
(6) The authorised psychiatrist must ensure
(a) the patient is given a copy of his or her treatment plan and any
revisions to it; and
(b) the treatment plan is discussed with the patient by a registered medical
practitioner, the patient's case manager or any member
of a prescribed class of
The Board considered the treatment plan prepared by Dr P dated 13 August
2007. The plan noted the diagnosis of schizophrenia and
that P was currently
receiving risperdal consta 25mg fortnightly. The treatment plan contains an
outline of the treatment received
by P. The Board noted that the plan was
signed by the clinician but not the patient but was satisfied that P’s
strong resistance
to treatment of any kind was the reason for this. The Board
noted that the treatment plan did not identify a nominated carer for
the Board also noted that Dr P’s report and evidence indicated that P
receives great support from her daughter
J and that while the service has
context of seeking advice
over her mother taking holidays overseas. Dr P stated
that as J was her mother’s main support, he had not attempted to engage
her as an advocate for her mother receiving treatment. The Board was generally
satisfied that the requirements of
section 19A(2)
were met. The Board noted
that the treatment plan specified the relevant members of the treating team and
the service and complies
with sub-section 19A(4).
The Board was satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has complied with
in making, reviewing or revising the plan, notwithstanding that P remains
strongly opposed to the treatment set out in the plan.
Section 35A(1)(b)
Is the plan capable of being implemented by the approved mental health
The Board was satisfied that the treatment plan was capable of and was being
implemented by the mental health service.
Therefore, the Board was satisfied that the authorised psychiatrist has
complied with
in making, reviewing or revising the plan, and the plan is
capable of being implemented by the approved mental health service.
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
(“the Charter”) came into operation on 1 January 2007. Division 3
of the Charter places obligations on bodies interpreting statutory
provisions which are relevant to the Board’s jurisdiction
Mental Health Act
”). Division 4 of
similarly places obligations on public authorities to act in a way that is
compatible with human rights. Divisions 3 and 4 of
of the Charter came
into operation on 1 January 2008.
Specifically, Division 3 of
of the Charter requires the interpretation
of all statutory provisions in a way that is compatible with human rights, so
is possible to do so consistently with the purpose of those
provisions. Although not raised by the parties, the Board considered
P’s matter engaged human rights protected by the Charter and was mindful
of the need to consider the provisions of the
Charter when applying the
provisions of the
. In the Board’s view, the human right most directly
engaged by P’s circumstances was the right to protection from cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment
(section 10
The protection of human rights in the Charter is not absolute.
Section 7(2)
sets out the limitations of the Charter rights:
7(2). A human right may be subject under law only to such reasonable limits
as can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic
society based on human
dignity, equality and freedom, and taking into account all relevant factors
(a) the nature of the right;
(b) the importance of the purpose of the limitation; and
(c) the nature and extent of the limitation; and
(d) the relationship between the limitation and its purpose; and
(e) any less restrictive means reasonably available to achieve the purpose that
the limitation seeks to achieve.
In this context the Board considered P’s right to
protection from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
10. A person must not be –
(b) treated or punished in a cruel, inhuman or degrading way; or
(c) subjected to medical or scientific experimentation or treatment without
his or her full, free and informed consent.
P stated in her appeal she stated that she considered herself to be the
subject of a personal vendetta and persecution over a long
period of time. She
was also explicit in both her appeal and her evidence that she did not consent
to the medical treatment that
she has received. The Board acknowledged that
P’s views on these matters were sincere and strongly held, and accepted
she suffers considerable distress as a result of her ongoing involuntary
The issue for the Board in these circumstances is to consider in its
application of the
criteria whether the limits imposed by the
community treatment order on P’s right to protection from cruel, inhuman
or degrading
treatment and more specifically, medical treatment to which she did
not consent, were reasonable and demonstrably justified in a
free and democratic
society based on human dignity, equality and freedom.
Having considered the matters set out in
section 7(2)
of the Charter, the
Board concludes that the purpose of the limitation of P’s human rights by
the use of a community treatment
order in this instance is to protect P from
further deterioration of her mental health and the consequent deterioration of
her physical
health and significant social relationships. The Board’s
view is that the severity and longevity of P’s illness (which
it has found
renders her incapable of giving (or refusing to give) informed consent to her
treatment), together with the significant
risks to her mental and physical
health and significant social relationships, make it reasonable to limit
P’s human rights
in this instance. Most relevantly, the Board considered
that it was consistent with the limitations expressed in
section 7(2)
P’s right not to be subjected to medical treatment without her full, free
and informed consent.
The Board considered that the limitations imposed by the community treatment
order were reasonable and justified and optimised the
likelihood that P would
remain free from further involuntary hospitalisation, a regime far more
restrictive on P’s human rights
than that to which she is currently
subject. In reaching this conclusion the Board gave particular consideration to
section 7(2)(e)
and was satisfied that given P’s explicit and long
standing refusal to accept either her diagnosis or the treatment prescribed,
there was no less restrictive means reasonably available to achieve that
As a result, as all the
criteria were met and the treatment required
for P can be obtained through her being subject to a community treatment order,
Board made the determination set out on page 1.
Dated the 13
day of March 2008
FOR THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW BOARD
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (141 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter